                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DOES THE MARKET VALUE VALUE-ADDED? EVIDENCE FROM HOUSING
  PRICES AFTER A PUBLIC RELEASE OF SCHOOL AND TEACHER VALUE-ADDED

                                        Scott A. Imberman
                                       Michael F. Lovenheim

                                        Working Paper 19157
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19157


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2013




We would like to thank seminar participants at the AEA Annual Meetings, the APPAM Fall Meetings,
CES-Ifo, Duke, Georgetown and the University of Michigan along with Julie Cullen, Susanna Loeb,
Stephen Machin, Steven Rivkin, Guido Schwerdt, Gary Solon, and Kevin Stange for helpful comments
and suggestions. We would also like to thank the Los Angeles County Tax Assessor’s Office, the Los
Angeles Times, the Los Angeles Unified School District, and Richard Buddin for providing us the
data and for their assistance with the data. Finally, we would like to thank Margaret O’Rourke and
Michael Naretta for excellent research assistance on this project. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Scott A. Imberman and Michael F. Lovenheim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Does the Market Value Value-Added? Evidence from Housing Prices After a Public Release
of School and Teacher Value-Added
Scott A. Imberman and Michael F. Lovenheim
NBER Working Paper No. 19157
June 2013
JEL No. H75,I21,R21

                                              ABSTRACT

Value-added data are an increasingly common evaluation tool for schools and teachers. Many school
districts have adopted these methods and released the results publicly. In this paper, we study the release
of value-added data in Los Angeles by the Los Angeles Times newspaper to identify how measured
value-added is capitalized into housing prices. This analysis is the first in the school valuation literature
to examine property value responses to a value-added information shock, which is of interest as this
measure is less correlated with demographics than typical school quality measures. Unique to this
setting as well is the release of both school and teacher-level value-added data, which allows us to
examine how property values respond to both types of information. Using a difference-in-differences
methodology surrounding the release, we find that neither school nor teacher value-added scores are
capitalized into home prices. Our results suggest that, despite the contentiousness following these data
releases, homeowners do not consider value-added models as currently constructed to be a relevant
school quality measure on the margin.


Scott A. Imberman
Michigan State University
486 W. Circle Drive
110 Marshall-Adams Hall
East Lansing, MI 48824-1038
and NBER
imberman@msu.edu

Michael F. Lovenheim
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Cornell University
135 Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
mfl55@cornell.edu
1         Introduction

The push to expand test-based accountability in US K-12 education has led to a signiﬁcant rise

in the amount of information available to the public about school quality. Such information
typically consists of school-wide average test scores, which reﬂect many factors aside from
the ability of schools to produce test score gains. Furthermore, information on individual
teachers’ performance largely has been kept private. As a result, recently there has been a
growing interest in providing results of teacher and school “value-added” (VA) assessments to
the public. A number of school districts, such as Los Angeles, Houston, and New York City,
have released such information, either voluntarily or by court order. Ideally, such measures

isolate the teachers’ and schools’ contributions to a student’s achievement by removing the

inﬂuences of other observed and unobserved factors. This information thus provides new data
to parents and homeowners on the local schools’ and teachers’ contribution to test score growth.
However, to the extent that there is noise and bias embedded in value-added measures, release

of this information has the potential to distort parental decisions about where to live as well as

school staﬃng decisions. Furthermore, because value-added information typically comes from

a complex statistical model, it is unclear how it is interpreted by parents. With more and
more school districts and states providing value-added data to parents and local communities,

understanding the extent to which these communities value this information is of primary policy

importance. It also is important for school administrators and policy makers to understand the
impact of value-added on land values as capitalization of value-added could aﬀect the tax-base
for school districts.
        In this paper, we examine whether value-added information that is released to the public
is capitalized into home prices. We make two contributions to the literature. First, to our
knowledge, there has been very little work done examining how parents value the value-added
data generated by schools.1 Due to the increasing prevalence of value-added information and the
likelihood that such information will continue to be released to local communities, estimating
the extent to which value-added aﬀects property values is of importance in its own right.
    1
    Jacob and Lefgren (2007) ﬁnd that parents do value teachers who raise achievement, while Fiva and
Kirkebøen (2011) analyze the impact of a value-added release in Norway.


                                                 1
       The second contribution of this analysis is to the school valuation literature. A large set of
prior work examines how average test score diﬀerences across schools are capitalized into home

prices (Bayer, Ferreira and McMillan, 2007; Kane, Riegg and Staiger, 2006; Figlio and Lucas,
2004; Black, 1999). Most of these analyses use boundary discontinuity methods at school
attendance zone boundaries, comparing diﬀerences in home values across school boundaries
with diﬀerent test scores.2 The results from these studies tend to ﬁnd that a one standard
deviation diﬀerence in test scores is associated with two to ﬁve percent higher property values.
However, a drawback of using average test scores to measure school quality is that they are
highly correlated with the composition of schools and neighborhoods. Indeed, both Bayer,

Ferreira and McMillan (2007) and Kane, Riegg and Staiger (2006) show that neighborhood and
housing characteristics change at school boundaries due to endogenous parental sorting, and the

estimated eﬀects of test scores on home prices is reduced signiﬁcantly in these studies once they
control for neighborhood characteristics. These ﬁndings suggest that part of the capitalization

of test scores into property values is due to the high value placed on the composition of school

and neighborhood peers rather than on the school’s ability to educate students.3
       In order to isolate the capitalization of school quality as it relates to the production of learn-

ing, a school quality measure that is less related to demographic characteristics than are test
score levels is needed. Value-added represents such a measure, as it typically is generated using

statistical models that control for students’ prior test history and observable characterisitcs.4

As we demonstrate, the value-added scores in our study are much more weakly correlated with

student characteristics than are test score levels, and most of the information contained in these
   2
     See Black and Machin (2011) for a comprehensive review of this literature. Much international work also
uses this method, such as Gibbons and Machin (2003, 2006) and Gibbons, Machin and Silva (2013) in England,
Fack and Grenet (2010) in France and Davidoﬀ and Leigh (2008) in Australia.
   3
     Cellini, Ferreira and Rothstein (2010) show that investments in school facilities are highly valued by local
communities. These results are consistent with residents placing signiﬁcant value on non-learning aspects of
schools.
   4
     This is done in a few diﬀerent ways. Some models simply control for lagged achievement and/or student
demographics and calculate residuals. Other more complex models include student ﬁxed-eﬀects or Bayesian
smoothers. See Guarino, Reckase and Wooldridge (2012), Rothstein (2010), and Kane and Staiger (2008) for
discussions of the beneﬁts and drawbacks of such models. We also note that value-added models have come
under considerable scrutiny on statistical grounds, suggesting value-added models may yield a very noisy, and
possibly biased, signal of school or teacher quality (Rothstein, 2010). Nonetheless, recent research has argued
that if done correctly, value-added methods can produce accurate measures of teacher and school quality (Kane
and Staiger, 2008; Chetty, Friedman and Rockoﬀ, 2011; Kane et al., 2013).



                                                       2
estimates was not predictable using observable school characteristics before the VA estimates
were published. Thus, our results provide new information about valuation of a school quality

indicator that provides previously unknown information about a school or teacher’s contribution
to test score growth rather than information about the demographic makeup of the school.
       While some prior work has shown that property values are unresponsive to value-added
as calculated by the researcher (e.g., Dills, 2004; Downes and Zabel, 2002; Brasington, 1999;
Haurin and Brasington, 2006),5 parents and homeowners do not have direct access to this
information. It is thus unlikely they would respond to it because the information is not salient.
In contrast, we study a unique and unanticipated release of value-added information for schools

in the Los Angeles Uniﬁed School District (LAUSD). The value-added measures were easily
available and widely discussed in local and national news outlets, making them highly salient

to home buyers and local residents. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst analysis to identify the
responsiveness of home prices to the release of this type of school quality information in the

United States.6

       The information experiment that forms the basis for our study began in August 2010, when

the Los Angeles Times (LAT) published average value-added estimates for 470 elementary

schools as well as individual value-added estimates for 6,000 third through ﬁfth grade teachers
in LAUSD. In April 2011, LAUSD released their own value-added estimates, and in May 2011

the LAT updated their estimates to reﬂect the receipt of additional data. Prior to the initial
release, California already provided information on the eﬀectiveness of LAUSD schools through

published passing rates on the California Standards Tests and Academic Performance Index

(API) scores. The API scores are based on average school performance on standardized exams
and thus provide a summary measure of school-average test score levels. When the LA Times
released the value-added data, they also provided information about API scores and passing
rates on the same web page. Although these were already publicly available, the LA Times
   5
     Gibbons, Machin and Silva (2013) is the only study of which we are aware whose results suggest that test
score levels and value-added are similarly valued.
   6
     The only other paper in the literature to examine housing market responses to public value-added informa-
tion is in Norway. Fiva and Kirkebøen (2011) study the release of VA information in Oslo in 2005 and ﬁnd that
housing prices increased as a function of this value-added information, but only for a couple months post-release.
The myriad diﬀerences in housing markets and the public schooling environments between the US and Norway
make it diﬃcult to generalize their ﬁndings to the US context, however.


                                                        3
intervention potentially increased public awareness of these scores.
   Using home sales data we obtained from the LA County Assessor’s Oﬃce from April 2009

through September 2011, we estimate diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences models that identify how home
prices change after the release of each set of value-added data as a function of the value-
added scores. We ﬁnd no evidence that the composition of home sales changed due to the
information release, nor do we observe any change in foreclosure rates or diﬀerential pre-release
trends as a function of value-added, which supports the use of our empirical methodology.
Furthermore, using boundary discontinuity methods, we show that API scores are similarly
capitalized into home prices as has been reported in other studies. We ﬁnd no evidence, however,

that value-added information is valued by local residents: the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimates
are universally small, are not statistically diﬀerent from zero, and are suﬃciently precise that

we can rule out all but very small positive eﬀects.
   Unlike previous work on school quality valuation, we are able to examine how within-school

variation in teacher quality is capitalized into property values, rather than just the school-level

mean. It could be the case that home prices react more to the presence of a set of very good

or very bad teachers, which school-level value-added can miss. We identify how home prices

change as a function of the standard deviation of teacher value-added and the proportion of
teachers in each school in each quintile of the value-added distribution. Our estimates are

inconsistent with any home price response to the distribution of estimated teacher quality.
Finally, we examine several potential sources of heterogeneity and ﬁnd suggestive evidence that

value-added information is more highly valued in lower SES schools.
   Overall, our results indicate that value-added information, as presently constructed, is not
valued by local communities. One potential conclusion that could be drawn from our estimates
is that marginal homebuyers do not value the aspect of school quality that is embedded in
value-added, namely the ability of schools and teachers to raise test scores. Alternatively, the
public could ignore value-added information due to its statistical complexity as well as the
uncertainty amongst the research community as to the accuracy of these measures.

   Our ﬁndings have important implications for the release of these data more broadly. Typi-
cally, the public release of value-added is contentious, with teacher groups arguing value-added

                                                4
is ﬂawed and uninformative and with community advocates arguing that people have a right
to know this information. Our results suggest that in their current form, the public does not

respond to value-added information, and that while this information may not be causing the
distortions about which the opponents of publishing value-added data worry, they also are
not being valued as relevant school quality information that constitutes the main reason for
publishing these data.




2         The Los Angeles Times and LAUSD Value-Added Re-
          leases

        In 2010, the Los Angeles Times newspaper acquired individual testing records of elementary
students in Los Angeles Uniﬁed School District via a public information request. The achieve-

ment scores were linked to teachers so that a teacher and school value-added analysis could

be conducted. The LA Times hired Dr. Richard Buddin to conduct the statistical analysis.

Details on the methodology can be found in Buddin (2010), but the basic strategy is to use a

linear regression model with teacher ﬁxed eﬀects to calculate teacher value-added. Teacher ﬁxed
eﬀects are replaced with school ﬁxed eﬀects to calculate school value-added. All models use

data from the 2002-2003 through the 2008-2009 school years and control for lagged test scores

and student characteristics. The use of several years of data has the beneﬁt of increasing the
precision of the value-added estimates relative to using only one year of recent data. Following
completion of the analysis, the newspaper wrote a series of articles explaining the methodology
and other issues in LAUSD throughout the month of August 2010 as a lead in to the release
of the data in a simpliﬁed form on August 26, 2010. The value-added data were presented
through an online database and could be accessed by anyone with a computer without charge
or registration.7 The database was searchable by school and teacher name and people also
could access information through various links oﬀ of the main web page.
    7
    The current version of the database can be accessed at http://projects.latimes.com/value-added/. The web
portal is similar to the one that was available in August 2010 but now provides information for more teachers
and more detail on the value-added measures. In most cases, one can access the original August 2010 release
through links on the teacher and school web pages.



                                                     5
       Figure 1 shows an example of how the information was presented for a given school. Schools
were categorized as “least eﬀective,” “less eﬀective,” “average,” “more eﬀective,” and “most ef-

fective,” which refer to the quintiles of the value-added score distribution for LAUSD. However,
as Figure 1 demonstrates, the black diamond shows each school’s exact location in the distri-
bution, providing parents with the ability to easily estimate the school’s percentile. Although
value-added scores were generated separately for math and reading, the LA Times based their
categorization on the mean of the two scores. The ﬁgure also shows the location of the school’s
API percentile. Although the API information was publicly available prior to August 2010, it
was more diﬃcult to ﬁnd and was not accompanied by the heightened media attention that

accompanied the value-added release. Thus, for many people, this API information could have
been new. The value-added rank was not available in any form prior to August 2010. Finally,

the web page provided passing rates on the math and English exams for each school, which was
also publicly available prior to the value-added release. To keep our estimating equation simple,

in our analyses we will assume that any response to the LA Times reprinting the passing rates

will be reﬂected in responses to API.8
       A critical question underlying our analysis is whether LA residents knew about the release

of this information and how to access these data. There is substantial evidence to indicate that
residents were well-informed about the LA Times database. First, the Los Angeles Times is

the largest newspaper in Southern California and the fourth largest in the country by daily

weekday circulation, with 616,575 copies according to the Audit Bureau of Circulations. The

existence of the database was widely reported in the newspaper: from August 2010 to May
2011, a total of 37 articles or editorials were written about the database, public response to the
database, or value-added issues more generally. Given the high level of circulation of the paper,
the attention paid to this issue by the LA Times likely reached many residents. Further, the
release of the value-added data was mentioned in other outlets, such as the New York Times,
National Public Radio, the Washington Post, ABC News, CBS News, CNN and Fox News. It
also received much radio and television attention in the LA area in both English and Spanish,
   8
    This assumption is sensible because API scores are calculated almost entirely through using these test pass
rates.



                                                      6
which is of particular importance for the Spanish-speaking population that is less likely to read
the LA Times but for whom radio and television are dominant sources of news.9

       Second, the LAUSD teachers’ union and the national American Federation of Teachers were
highly vocal in their opposition to the public release of the data. This culminated in a series
of highly publicized and widely covered protests of the LA Times by teachers. Furthermore,
US Secretary of Education Arne Duncan spoke about the value-added measures expressing his
support. This indicates that news-makers were discussing the issue and gave it substantial
media exposure. According to the LA Times, by late afternoon on the initial date of the
release there were over 230,000 page views of the website for the database (Song, 2010). The

article points out that this is an unusually large volume of views given that traﬃc tends to
be higher during the week and provides prima facia evidence that the value-added release was

well-publicized and known to a large number of residents.10
       The initial August 2010 data release was followed up with two more information releases. In

April 2010, LAUSD provided its own school-level (but not teacher-level) value-added measure

called Achievement Growth over Time (AGT). Then, in May 2011, the LA Times updated the

value-added results on its webpage to include another year of data, more teachers and some

minor changes in the value-added methodology.11 While we estimate the eﬀect of all three
releases, our focus is on the information provided by the LA Times for a few reasons. One is

that the LA Times uses a more econometrically sound value-added model. As discussed above,
their model controls for lagged achievement and includes multiple years of data. Guarino,

Reckase and Wooldridge (2012) argue that models like this (which they call “dynamic ordinary
   9
     Some examples of Spanish language coverage include a story on Channel 22 on
Nov.        8, 2010 covering a protest of the value-added after a teacher committed suicide
(http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RWKR8Ch06wY), a story covering an earlier protest on Channel
62 (http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n1iNXtyPlRk), and a story on Univision 34 discussing LAUSD’s own
value-added measures (http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=05dE0xLdpu8).
  10
     Due to the prevalence of the Internet in 2010, the penetration of this information in Los Angeles likely
was at least as large as in Florida when they ﬁrst released school report card information in the late 1990s.
Figlio and Lucas (2004) show that the Florida information release, which was less contentious, had less publicity
surrounding it, and occurred in a period in which information was more diﬃcult to obtain, had large eﬀects on
property values.
  11
     Details on the May 2011 LA Times methodology can be found in Buddin (2011). For this release, the
LA Times also gave people the option to see how value-added scores changed using variations in methodology
through an interactive program on the website. Since it is likely that most people who accessed the database
did not attempt to compare diﬀerent methods, we only use the value-added scores directly published on the
website by the LA Times in our data.


                                                       7
least squares”) are the most accurate. The LAUSD model, on the other hand, predicts student
achievement growth from observable characteristics using one year of data, after which the

diﬀerences between predicted and actual achievement are averaged together across all students
in a school.12 While the LA Times methodology may be more appealing to researchers, we
acknowledge that this does not necessarily indicate that parents believed it more.

      Second, the initial LA Times release was seven months prior to the LAUSD release. Thus,
there was more time for that information to be absorbed by the public. If there is any substantial
lag in the timing of when prices respond, our data – which end in September 2011 – will only be
able to pick up eﬀects of the initial release. Third, there was substantial discussion of the LA
Times release in the news and responses by education organizations. The subsequent LAUSD
release, however, elicited much less press coverage. Fourth, LAUSD did not release teacher

value-added. While this will not necessarily matter for housing prices if parents value only
the mean value-added in a school (a possibility that we test for below), the availability of the

teacher information may have led more parents to seek out the LA Times information than the

LAUSD information. Finally, it is easier to access the LA Times information. While both are

available on the web, to access the LAUSD data people need to navigate through a series of

links on the LAUSD website.
      Despite our focus on the LA Times releases, we also will include estimates of the impacts of

the LAUSD release in our regressions. Hence, it is interesting to note that the correlation

between both of the LA Times releases and the LAUSD value-added scores are very low.

Figure 2 presents comparisons of the three school-level value-added measures using scatter
plots with each school as an observation. The top left panel shows that the percentiles of
the 2010 LA Times value-added are highly correlated with the 2011 LA Times value-added,
with a correlation coeﬃcient of 0.74. However, each of the LA Times value-added measures
are very weakly correlated with the LAUSD measure - the correlation coeﬃcients are 0.15 and
0.39 for the August and May releases, respectively. This likely reﬂects the diﬀerences in the
methodology described above and the amount of data used.
 12
      Details on the LAUSD methodology can be found at http://portal.battelleforkids.org/BFK/LAUSD/FAQ.html.




                                                    8
3        Data

To assess the impact of the value-added data release on property values, we combine data from

several sources. First, we use home price sales data from the Los Angeles County Assessor’s
Oﬃce (LACAO). The data contain the most recent sale price of most homes in LA County as of
October, 2011, which in addition to LAUSD encompasses 75 other school districts. We restrict
our data to include all residential sales in LAUSD that occurred between April 1, 2009 and
September 30, 2011.13 From LACAO, we also obtained parcel-speciﬁc property maps, which
we overlay with the school zone maps provided to us by LAUSD to link properties to school
zones.14 The property sales data additionally contain information on the dates of the three

most recent sales, the square footage of the house, the number of bedrooms and bathrooms, the

number of units and the age of the house that we will use to control for any potential changes
in the composition of sales that are correlated with value-added information.
       To remove outliers, we drop all properties with sale prices above $1.5 million (5% of house-

holds) and limit our sample to properties in elementary school zones in Los Angeles Uniﬁed

School District that received value-added scores in the August 2010 release. About 25% of the

residential properties in the data do not have a sale price listed. Usually, these are property
transfers between relatives or inheritances.15 Hence, we limit our sample to those sales that

have “document reason code” of “A,” which denotes that it is a “good transfer” of property.

After making this restriction, only 7% of observations are missing sale prices. For these ob-

servations, we impute sales prices using the combined assessed land and improvement values
of the property. For observations that have all three measures recorded, the correlation be-
tween actual sale price and the imputed sale price is 0.89, indicating that the imputation is a
very close approximation to the actual market value. Furthermore, we know of no reason why
  13
     Given that the value-added information only varies across schools within LAUSD, the addition of school
ﬁxed eﬀects leaves little to be gained from adding the rest of LA County. Indeed, speciﬁcations using home price
sales from all of the county, setting value-added percentiles equal to zero outside of LAUSD and controlling for
school district ﬁxed eﬀects, provides almost identical results.
  14
     The school zones are for the 2011-2012 school year.
  15
     California allows relatives to transfer property to each other without a reassessment of the home’s value for
property tax purposes. Due to property tax caps, this rule creates large incentives for within-family property
transfers in California, and hence there are a lot of such transactions in the data. Because these transfers do
not reﬂect market prices, we do not include them in our analysis.



                                                        9
the accuracy of the imputation procedure should be correlated with value-added information,
which supports the validity of this method. Nonetheless, in Section 5, we provide results with-

out imputed values and show they are very similar. Our ﬁnal analysis data set contains 62,977
sales.
       We obtained the exact value-added score for each school directly from Richard Buddin, and
the April 2011 LA Times school value-added data as well as the August 2010 teacher-level
value-added data were provided to us by the LA Times. The LAUSD value-added information
was collected directly from Battelle for Kids, with whom LAUSD partnered to generate the
value-added measures.16 The value-added data were combined with school-by-academic-year

data on API scores, school-average racial composition, percent on free and reduced price lunch,
percent disabled, percent gifted and talented, average parental education levels, and enrollment.

These covariates, which are available through the California Department of Education, control
for possible correlations between value-added information and underlying demographic trends

in each school. To maintain consistency with the LA Times value-added data, we convert both

the LAUSD value-added scores and API scores into percentile rankings within LAUSD.
       We also link each property to its Census tract characteristics from the 2005-2009 American

Communities Survey (ACS). Given the strong correlation between test scores and demographic
characteristics as well as the evidence of sorting by families in response to cross-sectional dif-

ferences in test scores (Bayer, Ferreira and McMillan, 2007; Kane, Riegg and Staiger, 2006), it

is important to control, to the extent possible, for diﬀerences in the demographic and socioe-

conomic makeup of neighborhoods as they relate to observed school quality. A full listing of
variables used in our controls can be found in the notes to Table 5.
       Summary statistics of some key analysis variables are shown in Table 1. The table presents
means and standard deviations for the full sample as well as for the sample above and below
the median value-added score for the 2010 LA Times release. On average, home sales in
LAUSD are in Census tracts that are about 50% black and Hispanic,17 but the schools these
properties are zoned to are 73% black and Hispanic, with the diﬀerence ostensibly due to
  16
   The data are available at http://portal.battelleforkids.org/BFK/LAUSD/Home.html.
  17
   Note that since the ACS counts Hispanic as a separate category from race, some of the black and white
populations are also counted as Hispanic.


                                                  10
enrollments in private, charter and magnet schools. The schools in our data set also have a
large proportion of free and reduced price lunch students. The second two columns of Table 1

show that value-added is not completely uncorrelated with school or census tract demographics,
although housing characteristics are balanced across columns. The higher value-added areas
have a lower minority share, higher property values, a more educated populace and have higher
API scores. These correlations could be driven by the fact that better schools are indeed located
in the higher socioeconomic areas, or they could be an indication that the value-added models
used do not fully account for underlying diﬀerences across students.
       Figure 3 shows that, despite the diﬀerences shown in Table 1, value-added is far less cor-

related with student demographic makeup than API scores. The ﬁgure presents the non-
free/reduced-price (FRP) lunch rate, API percentile (within LAUSD) and value-added per-

centile for each elementary school in LAUSD. The boundaries denote the attendance zone for
each school. As expected, API percentiles, which are based on test score proﬁciency rates,

map closely to poverty rates. High-poverty (low non-FRP lunch) schools tend to have lower

API scores. While this relationship remains when replacing API with value-added, it is far

less robust. There are many schools, particularly in the eastern and northern sections of the

district, where API scores are low but value-added scores are high. Similarly, some schools with
high API scores have low value-added scores. Figure 4 further illustrates this point. It provides

scatter plots of API percentiles versus value-added percentiles for each of the three value-added
measures. While there is a positive relationship between value-added and test score levels,18

it is quite weak - the average correlation between the measures of school quality is only 0.45.

As seen in Figure 3, there are a number of schools which, based on API, are at the top of
the distribution but according to the value-added measure are at the bottom, and vice-versa.
For example, Wilbur Avenue Elementary had an API percentile of 91 in 2009 but an initial
value-added percentile of 13. On the other end of the spectrum, Broadous Elementary had an
API percentile of 5 but a value-added percentile of 97.
       The fact the API rank and value-added rank are only weakly related to each other does
  18
    A linear regression of the August 2010 LA Times value-added percentile on API percentile provides an
estimate of 0.43 (standard error 0.04) but an R-squared of only 0.19.



                                                  11
not mean that the value-added information provided by the LA Times was new information.
It is possible that each of these measures could be predicted based on existing observable char-

acteristics of the school. In Table 2, we examine this issue directly, by predicting API, the
percentile from the ﬁrst LA Times value-added release, and the LAUSD value-added percentile
as a function of school observables in the pre-release period. Column (1) shows the results for
API percentile, and as expected, with an R2 of 0.71, school demographics explain a substantial
amount of the variation. In contrast, as shown in column (2), the value-added estimates are
much more weakly correlated with school demographics. Only two of the estimates are statis-
tically signiﬁcant at the 5% level, and the R2 is only 0.22. In Column (3), we add overall API

and each student subgroup’s API scores as regressors to the model. The R2 remains low at only
0.29. Thus, more than 70% of the value-added variation is unpredictable from the observable

characteristics of the school, including test score levels. Further, in Columns (5) and (6) we see
that these observables do an even poorer job of predicting the LAUSD value-added rank, with

R2 s of 0.03 and 0.25 with and without including overall and by-category API as regressors,

respectively.
    Table 2 and Figures 3-4 show that the value-added data released to the public by the LA

Times and LAUSD contained new and unique information about school quality that was not
simply a measure of the school composition or prior test scores. Our identiﬁcation exploits this

new information by identifying the impact of value-added on housing prices conditional on API

along with many other observable characteristics of schools and neighborhoods. Since these

characteristics are observable to homeowners as well, we are able to identify the impact of this
new information given the information set that already exists.



4     Empirical Strategy

Our main empirical strategy is to estimate diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence models that compare changes
in property values surrounding the information releases as a function of value-added rank condi-
tional on observable school and neighborhood characteristics, including API. Since value-added
only was released for elementary schools, we ignore middle and high school zones. Our main


                                               12
empirical model is of the following form:


              Yist = β0 + β1 V ALAT
                                st
                                    P ooled
                                            + β2 V ALAU
                                                    st
                                                        SD
                                                           + β3 AP Ist + β4 AP Ist × P ostt

                       +Xst Γ + Hi Φ + λt + γs + ϵist ,                                                  (1)


where Yist is the log sale price of property i in elementary school zone s in month t. The key
explanatory variable of interest is V ALAT
                                       st
                                           P ooled
                                                   , which is a combination of the two LA Times
value-added measures. This variable is set equal to zero prior to the ﬁrst release in September,
2010, is set equal to the value-added percentile in the ﬁrst release from September 2010 to April

2011, and thereafter equals the value-added percentile provided in the May 2011 LA Times’
updated release. Pooling the two releases together makes the estimates easier to interpret.

Nonetheless, it is possible that the impact of value-added may diﬀer across both the ﬁrst and

second releases. Thus, we also estimated models with a separate variable that equals zero

prior to each release and to that particular release’s value-added percentile thereafter. As these

results were very similar to those found in the pooled model, we do not show them here. They
are available by request.
       While our focus is on the LA Times value-added, it is nonetheless important to account for

the LAUSD value-added scores and the fact that the LA Times published API scores on the

same web page as value-added scores. Hence, we include in equation (1) V ALAU
                                                                          st
                                                                              SD
                                                                                 , which equals
zero prior to April 2011 and the LAUSD calculated value-added percentile thereafter. We also

allow for the eﬀect of API to vary post-September 2010. Our inclusion of school ﬁxed-eﬀects
in the model (γs ) implies that the coeﬃcients on the V A and AP I ∗ P ost variables represent
the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence estimate of the eﬀect of the value-added or API information release
on property values.19 In order to account for the fact that there are multiple sales per school
zone, all estimates are accompanied by standard errors that are clustered at the school level.
       Equation (1) also includes an extensive set of controls to account for any confounding eﬀects
driven by the correlation between value-added and school demographic or housing characteris-
  19
    Note that unlike API, which changes each year, each value-added release provides a single value for each
school, and thus main eﬀects are removed by the school ﬁxed eﬀects. In models that do not include school ﬁxed
eﬀects, main eﬀects are included as controls.



                                                     13
tics. The vector X contains the set of school observables discussed above, including two lags of
API, within-LAUSD API percentile rank in the given year, and the decile of the school’s API

in comparison to other “similar” schools, as deﬁned by the California Department of Educa-
tion.20 The vector H is the set of house-speciﬁc characteristics and Census tract characteristics
discussed above that further control for local demographic diﬀerences that are correlated with
value-added and for any changes in the types of houses being sold as a function of value-added
when each release occurs. Equation (1) contains both month-by-year ﬁxed eﬀects(λt ) and school
ﬁxed eﬀects (γs ) as well, so all parameters are identiﬁed oﬀ of within-school changes in home
prices over time and control for any general shocks to home prices in LAUSD in each month,

including seasonal changes.
      There are two main assumptions underlying identiﬁcation of the value-added parameters.

First, the model assumes that home prices were not trending diﬀerentially by value-added prior
to each of the data releases. Using the panel nature of our data, we can test for such diﬀerential

trends directly in an event-study framework. In Figure 5, we present estimates of the eﬀect

of each value-added and API release, where V ALAT
                                              st
                                                  P ooled
                                                          and V ALAU
                                                                 st
                                                                     SD
                                                                        are interacted with a

series of indicator variables for time relative to the August 2010 LA Times release. Note that all

of the estimates shown in this ﬁgure are from a single regression, and in this particular model
V ALAT
   st
       P ooled
               is set equal to the initial value-added percentile from the August 2010 release for

all periods prior to September 2010. The top two panels of Figure 5 show no evidence of a

pre-release trend in home prices as a function of LAT or LAUSD value-added. The estimates

exhibit a fair amount of noise, but home prices are relatively ﬂat as a function of future value-
added rank in the pre-treatment period. Thus, there are no clear pre-treatment trends for
either information release that would bias our estimates. For API, while there appears to be
a slight downward trend in earlier months, it is not statistically diﬀerent from zero and by 7
months prior to the release, property values ﬂatten as a function of API.
      Figure 5 also previews the main empirical ﬁnding of this analysis: home prices do not
change as a function of value-added or API post-release. However, these estimates are relatively
imprecise, as the estimates in Figure 5 are demanding of the data. We thus favor the more
 20
      Models that also control for student subgroup speciﬁc API provide similar results to baseline.


                                                        14
parametric model given by equation (1). Nonetheless, Figure 5 demonstrates that pooling the
estimates over each post-release period does not mask any time-varying treatment eﬀects.

       The second main identiﬁcation assumption required by equation (1) is that the value-added
percentile, conditional on school characteristics, is not correlated with unobserved character-
istics of households that could aﬀect prices. While this assumption is diﬃcult to test, given
the rich set of observable information we have about the homes sold, examining how these
observables shift as a function of value-added will provide some insight into the veracity of this
assumption. Thus, in Table 3, we show estimates in which we use neighborhood characteristics,
school demographics and housing characteristics as dependent variables in regressions akin to

equation (1) but only including API percentiles, time ﬁxed eﬀects and school ﬁxed eﬀects as
controls.21 Each column in the table comes from a separate regression, and each estimate shows

how the observable characteristic changes as a function of value-added percentile after the LA
Times data releases. Overall, the results in Table 3 provide little support for any demographic

or housing type changes that could seriously impact our estimates. There are 58 estimates of

housing and neighborhood characteristics in the table, one that is signiﬁcant at the 5% level

or higher and four more that are signiﬁcant at the 10% level. While clearly these variables

are not independent, if they were we would expect to falsely reject the null at the 10% level
six times.22 Furthermore, the estimates, even when signiﬁcant, are small. For example, a 10

percentage point increase in LA Times value-added post-release is associated with a decrease
in the percent of households with children of 0.04 percentage points, which is a very small

eﬀect relative to the mean of 32%. Additionally, the signs of the estimates do not suggest any

particular patterns that could cause a systematic bias in either direction.
       Another concern is that the release of a value-added score may induce changes in the number
of homes sold in a school catchment area. Since we only observe prices of homes that are sold,
we may understate the magnitude of the eﬀect if having a lower value-added reduces the number
  21
     The school characteristics estimates in Panel C use data aggregated to the school-year level. Since we do
not have a full year of data after the second LA Times release, we examine only the ﬁrst LA Times value-added
estimates in Panel C.
  22
     While not shown in the table, the estimates for the LAUSD value-added measure are signiﬁcant at the 10%
or higher level seven times and the estimates for API*post are signiﬁcant at the 10% or higher level for only
two variables. The former is slightly more than would be expected by random chance and thus provides some
additional justiﬁcation for focusing on the LA Times release. These results are available by request.


                                                     15
of homes sold and this reduction comes from the bottom of the price distribution. To test this
hypothesis, we estimate a version of equation (1) in which we aggregate the data to the school-

month level and use the total number of sales or the total number of sales with a valid sales
price in each school-month as the dependent variable.23 We ﬁnd little evidence of a change
in the number of sales. The estimate of the eﬀect of LA Times value-added on total sales24
is -0.0066 with a standard error of 0.0051. Taken at face value, this would suggest that a 10
percentile increase in value-added only reduces monthly sales by 0.07 oﬀ of a mean of 8.4. For
sales with price data, the estimate is -0.0043 with a standard error of 0.0025. Estimates for
LAUSD value-added are smaller and close to zero.

       The value-added releases we study come at a time of high volatility in the housing market,
as home prices declined during this period throughout most of the United States. In the Los

Angeles, MSA prices declined by 4.5%.25 This was also a period with a large number of foreclo-
sures in Los Angeles. If foreclosure rates are correlated with the value-added releases, it could

bias our home price estimates because foreclosures tend to be sold at below market value. In

order to provide some evidence on this potential source of bias, we use the number of foreclo-

sures in each month and zip code in LAUSD that were collected by the RAND Corporation.26

We aggregate prices to the school-month level and use the zipcode-level data to approximate
the number of foreclosures in the school catchment area in each month. The resulting esti-

mates show little evidence of a correlation between value-added post-release and the number of
foreclosures. None of the estimates for any of the three data releases is statistically signiﬁcant.

The estimate on the pooled LA Times release is only 0.003 (0.009), which indicates that a 10

percentile value-added increase post-release increases the number of monthly foreclosures in a
school zone by 0.03, oﬀ of a mean of 5.7. Overall, the estimates described above along with
those provided in Table 3 and Figure 5 provide support for our identiﬁcation strategy.
  23
      We include mean Census tract characteristics of properties sold in a school zone and school characteristics
but do not control for aggregate individual property characteristics as these may be endogenous in this regression.
   24
      Our data only cover the three most recent sales of a property. Thus, our measure of total sales will be
slightly underestimated.
   25
      This calculation comes from the Federal Housing Finance Agency’s seasonally adjusted home price index.
Note that this decline was smaller than the 7% rate for the US as a whole during this period.
   26
      These data are available at http://ca.rand.org/stats/economics/foreclose.html.




                                                        16
5     Results

5.1    Relationship Between House Prices and API

Before presenting the main diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimates, it is important to establish that
some measures of school quality are indeed valued by LA residents. Whether public school
quality, or public school characteristics more generally, are capitalized into home prices in Los
Angeles is not obvious, as LAUSD has an active school choice system in which students can
enroll in their non-neighborhood school. There also is a large charter school and private school
presence in the District. Thus, any ﬁnding that property values do not respond to value-added
information could be driven by a general lack of association between local school characteristics

and property values. Nonetheless, there are a few reasons to believe that this is not a major

concern in the Los Angeles context. First of all, the open-enrollment program is small relative to

the size of the district. In 2010-2011, only 9,500 seats were available district-wide, accounting for

at most 1.5% of the district’s 671,000 students. Second, while LAUSD has a number of magnet
programs, they are highly sought after and oversubscribed, hence admission to a desired magnet

is far from guaranteed. Third, Los Angeles is a very large city with notorious traﬃc problems

and poor public transportation, making it diﬃcult for parents to send their children to schools

any substantial distance from home.
    To further address this issue, we estimate boundary ﬁxed eﬀects models using pre-release

data from April 2009 to August 2010 in which API percentile is the dependent variable. This
model is similar to the one used in Black (1999) as well as in the subsequent other boundary

ﬁxed eﬀects analyses in the literature (Black and Machin, 2011) and allows us to establish
whether average test scores are valued in LA as they have been shown to be in other areas.
    Panel A of Table 4 contains the pre-release boundary ﬁxed eﬀects results, comparing home
prices within 0.1 mile of elementary attendance zone boundaries. In column (1), which includes
no other controls, properties just over the border from a school with a higher API rank are
worth substantially more. For ease of exposition, all estimates are multiplied by 100, so a 10
percentage point increase in API rank is associated with a 4.5% increase in home values. In
column (2), we control for housing characteristics, which have little impact on the estimates.

                                                 17
However, controlling for school demographics in column (3) signiﬁcantly reduces this associa-
tion. This result is not surprising given the ﬁndings in Bayer, Ferreira and McMillan (2007) and

Kane, Riegg and Staiger (2006). Nonetheless, in column (3), we ﬁnd a 10 percentage point in-
crease in API rank is correlated with a statistically signiﬁcant 1.3% increase in property values.
This estimate is roughly equivalent in magnitude to those in Black (1999) and Bayer, Ferreira
and McMillan (2007). Thus, this school characteristic appears to be similarly valued in Los
Angeles as in the areas studied in these previous analyses (Massachusetts and San Francisco,
respectively). It remains unclear, however, whether the capitalization of API scores is driven
by valuation of schools’ contribution to learning or by valuation of neighborhood or school

composition that is correlated with API levels.27 Our analysis of capitalization of value-added
information is designed to provide insight into resolving this question, which is very diﬃcult to

do without a school quality measure that is not highly correlated with student demographics.
       In order to underscore the fact that, conditional on achievement levels, value-added is weakly

correlated with student demographics and is diﬃcult to predict with pre-release observables,

the remaining columns of Panel A test whether value-added information is capitalized into

property values prior to their release. If parents know which schools are the highest value-

added from reputation or from factors we cannot observe, the value-added releases should not
provide additional information about school quality. In columns (4) and (5) of Table 4, we

estimate the same boundary ﬁxed eﬀects model as in column (3) but using the ﬁrst release of
LAT value-added and the LAUSD value-added as explanatory variables. Since all of the sales

data used in Panel A of Table 4 are from pre-August-2010, these models test whether future

information about value-added is already capitalized into home prices. In column (4), there
is a positive relationship between the LA Times value-added and property value diﬀerences
across boundaries. However, some of this eﬀect is likely due to the correlation, however weak,
between LA Times value-added and API. As a result, when we add API percentile as a control
  27
    Ideally one would also like to control for neighborhood characteristics. However, typically the boundary areas
in LAUSD are smaller than Census tracts, leaving most boundary areas entirely within a single tract. When we
control for Census tract observables, the API coeﬃcient becomes smaller and no longer is statistically signiﬁcant.
This suggests that either the main aspect of API that is capitalized into property values is neighborhood
composition or that including our set of neighborhood controls leaves too little variation for identifying the role
of API.



                                                        18
in column (5), the relationship between value-added and test scores becomes smaller and is
no longer statistically signiﬁcant. The magnitudes of the value-added estimates also are very

small. However, the API estimate is almost identical to that found in column (3), suggesting
that the capitalization of API scores is not being driven by value-added information and that
any information contained in the LA Times and LAUSD value-added estimates are not already
capitalized into home prices prior to August 2010.

   In Panel B of Table 4 we conduct the same analysis using data from after the initial release
of LATimes value-added. This analysis allows us to see whether the relationship between API
and housing prices was muted by the value-added release. If anything, however, the opposite
occurs. The relationship between API and housing prices becomes stronger - the estimate
in column (3) essentially doubles in the post-period. The post and pre-period estimates are

signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from each other. The reason for this increase is not clear, although it
may be indicative of a recovery in the housing market that allows for prices to respond more

to school quality information. Thus it is interesting and consistent with our diﬀerence-in-

diﬀerences results below that there remains no relationship between VA and house prices in

the post-period after conditioning on API and demographic controls in a boundary ﬁxed-eﬀects

model.


5.2      Diﬀerence-in-Diﬀerence Estimates

Table 5 presents the baseline estimates from equation (1). In each column, we add controls

sequentially in order to observe the eﬀects of the controls on the estimates. All estimates are
multiplied by 100 so they show the eﬀect of a 100 percentile increase in value-added on home
prices post-release. In column (1), we included no controls other than those shown in the table,
API score, API percentile, lagged and twice lagged API score, and school rank compared to
‘similar’ schools in California as determined by the California Department of Education. There
is a positive but statistically insigniﬁcant relationship between the LA Times value-added and
home prices post-release. When we add school and month ﬁxed eﬀects, however, the LA Times
estimate turns negative and marginally signiﬁcant. Nonetheless, as we add additional controls



                                              19
the point estimates attenuate and become insigniﬁcant. Similarly, we ﬁnd no statistically
signiﬁcant impacts of the LAUSD value-added release nor the LA Times publication of API

scores on housing price. The latter result is perhaps unsurprising because, as previously noted,
API scores were available to the public prior to the LA Times publication and thus should only
be capitalized into housing prices if people were unaware of them.

   In interpreting our results, we focus on our preferred estimates in column (6). The point
estimate of -0.027 on the LA Times value-added score implies that a 10 percentile increase in
value-added reduces housing prices by 0.3%, but it is not statistically signiﬁcant. Thus it is
useful to consider how large of a positive eﬀect on housing prices can be ruled out. The upper
bound of the 95% conﬁdence interval for a 10 percentile increase in value-added is 0.10. This
is a very small estimate. To put it in perspective, suppose we were to increase a school’s value-

added by 50 percentiles, which is equivalent to taking the lowest ranking school and making it
an average school or taking an average school and making it the highest ranking school. The

upper bound implies that this would generate, at most, a 0.5% increase in housing values.

   Column (7) of Table 5 provides further evidence that value-added information does not

aﬀect property values. In this column, we provide results from a model similar to those used

in Table 4 that restricts to properties within 0.1 miles of a school zone boundary and includes
boundary ﬁxed eﬀects. Thus, the estimates are identiﬁed oﬀ of changes in property values

between properties on either side of a given attendance zone boundary when the value-added
data are released. Table 4 shows that home prices do not vary systematically across borders

with value-added in the pre-period, and the results from column (7) indicate that they do not

change across these borders in response to the release of value-added information either.
   As discussed above, a unique feature of the LA Times information release was that it
included both school-average value-added and value-added rankings for over 6000 teachers in
LAUSD. We now examine whether property values respond to variation in teacher quality,
which is the ﬁrst evidence in the literature on this question.
   In column (1) of Table 6, we add the standard deviation of the value-added scores across
teachers in each school interacted with the timing of the initial LA Times release to the model.
If high-quality teachers are disproportionately valued (or if low-quality teachers have a dispro-

                                               20
portionately negative valuation), then a higher standard deviation will lead to higher (lower)
property values conditional on school-wide value-added. The estimate on the standard devi-

ation of teacher value-added is negative, but it is not statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from
zero at conventional levels. It also is small in absolute value, pointing to a decline in property
values of only 0.006% for a one point increase in the standard deviation of teacher value-added.

   In column (2), we interact the proportion of teachers in each quintile of the value-added
distribution with being in the post-August 2010 period. Again, we see little evidence that
having a higher proportion of teachers with high value-added leads to higher property values,
nor does a high proportion of low VA teachers reduce property values. This result is surprising,
given the strong correlation between teacher quality and student academic achievement as well
as future earnings (Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain, 2005; Rockoﬀ, 2004; Chetty, Friedman and

Rockoﬀ, 2011). However, we note that it could be sensible to ignore teacher value-added scores
if there is a signiﬁcant amount of teacher turnover from year to year.

   The remaining columns of Table 6 present estimates based on alternatives to the modeling

assumptions we make. In column (3), we use sale levels instead of logs. The estimates, once

converted back to percentage terms relative to baseline, are very similar to those in Table 5. In

column (4), we average across all value-added measures in case the public follows a simple rule
of thumb when assessing the multiple measures and takes the mean. We ﬁnd no evidence for

this hypothesis, as the point estimate is negative and not statistically diﬀerent from zero. In the
next two columns, we examine estimates separately for homes with more than two bedrooms

and two or fewer bedrooms, since the former type of home is more likely to house families

with children. Although the point estimates for the homes with more than two bedrooms are
larger than those for homes with two or fewer bedrooms, with the exception of a negative
estimate on AP I × P ost for less than two bedrooms, none of the estimates is statistically
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero at even the 10% level and they remain small. Thus, the value-
added information does not inﬂuence property values even among the homes that are most
likely to have children in them.
   As previously discussed, it is possible that if a neighborhood has fewer school choice options
there would be more capitalization of the local school’s quality. To test this hypothesis, in

                                                21
column (7) we interact the value-added score with the number of charter schools within a one
mile radius of the property. We ﬁnd no evidence that the capitalization of value-added varies

with the number of charter schools nearby. Results were similar using a two mile radius. Finally,
in column (8) we test whether what matters is the size of the relative information shock rather
than the value-added score itself. To do this, we replace our value-added measures with the
diﬀerence between the value-added percentile and the school’s 2009-10 API percentile. As with
V ALAT
   st
       P ooled
               and V ALAU
                      st
                          SD
                             , these measures are set equal to zero prior to the relevant value-
added release. We ﬁnd little to indicate that a larger positive shock generates larger increases
in housing prices.

   In Table 7, we present a series of robustness checks that allow us to assess the sensitivity of
our main results and conclusions. In column (1) we do not control for lagged API, as changes

in API may be correlated with value-added. Our estimates are unchanged by excluding these
controls. In column (2) we drop the 7% of the sales data that are imputed (see Section 3). We

then exclude properties with more than 8 bedrooms in column (3), which either are very large

homes or are multiple unit dwellings. We alternatively exclude properties over 5,000 square

feet in column (4) and drop multiple unit properties in column (5). In each of these cases, the

estimates are quantitatively and qualitatively similar to our baseline results. In columns (6)
and (7), we allow for there to be lags between when the information is released and when it

impacts the housing market. We allow for both 3 and 6 month lags, setting the value-added to
zero in ﬁrst 3 and 6 months post-release, respectively. We continue to ﬁnd no eﬀect of value-

added information on property values, although there is some weak evidence of a small impact

from making API information more salient. Finally, in column (8) we limit our analysis to the
period before LAUSD released their value-added measure and the second LA Times release.
In this model, only the initial LA Times value-added data is known and there is no risk of
“contamination” of our estimates from the additional releases. The results are very similar to
the baseline estimates. Taken together, the results from Table 7 suggest that our ﬁndings are
not being driven by outliers, the manner in which we measure home prices, or by the timing of
the treatment.
   Although there is no average eﬀect of value-added information on property values, the extent

                                               22
of capitalization could vary among diﬀerent types of schools or among diﬀerent populations.
We now turn to an examination of several potential sources of heterogeneity in value-added

capitalization. In Figure 6, we present estimates broken down by observable characteristics of
the school: 2009 within-LAUSD API quintile, median pre-release home price quintile, percent
free and reduced price lunch, percent black, percent Hispanic, and percent white. Although the
precision of the estimates varies somewhat, the point estimates are universally small in absolute
value and are only statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero at the ﬁve percent level in two
cases (out of 45 estimates).
   Nonetheless, it is worth noting that the estimate for the bottom quintile of pre-release

sale prices, which is positive, is statistically signiﬁcantly larger than the estimate for the top
quintile, which is negative. Indeed, the estimates in the second panel do show a small but

notable negative gradient in prior house prices, suggesting that lower-priced neighborhoods are
more aﬀected by value-added. Percent free/reduced-price lunch and percent Hispanic show

similar patterns, and the bottom and top quintiles are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent in both cases.

Given that all three of these measures are correlated with socioeconomic status, these ﬁgures

provide some evidence that - to the extent the value-added scores are capitalized - the impact

is larger in lower-income neighborhoods.
   The last row of Figure 6 provides insight into two potential criticisms of using housing prices

as our outcome measure. The ﬁrst panel addresses concerns that many neighborhoods in Los

Angeles have high rates of private schooling and thus are likely to be less sensitive to the quality

of the local public school. We show estimates that are interacted with the private schooling
rate in the Census tract of each property as estimated by the American Communities Survey.
The mean private schooling rate in our sample is 20%, with a standard deviation of 31%. The
estimates show little diﬀerence in capitalization by private schooling rate. In the second panel
of the last row, we measure variation by owner-occupancy rates, also calculated from the ACS.
The concern here is that in neighborhoods with low owner-occupancy rates, sale prices may be
less sensitive to school quality. The mean of this measure is 50.1%, with a standard deviation
of 23.3%. Once again, we see little evidence of heterogeneity along this margin.



                                                23
6        Alternative Mechanisms

Our preferred interpretation of the results is that homeowners place, at most, a negligible

valuation on value-added information as currently constructed. Since value-added models, by
design, seek to measure school and teacher contributions to learning, the results presented thus
far suggest this aspect of school quality is not highly valued on the margin. Another possibility
is that parents value the ability of schools to improve student performance, but they do not
believe the value-added information provided to them due to controversies over their accuracy.
However, there are several other possible mechanisms driving our results other than parents
not valuing the component of school quality measured by value-added. In this section, we

discuss these alternative mechanisms and provide evidence that our preferred interpretation of

the empirical results is most consistent with the data.
       First, as discussed above, our analysis takes place in a time period just after an historic
housing market decline that was accompanied by signiﬁcant rigidities in the housing market.

It could be the case that such rigidities aﬀect the capitalization of new information. If so,

our estimates still would identify the eﬀect of the LA Times and LAUSD information releases,

but the external validity of our results would be more limited. We note that there currently
is no evidence in the literature that capitalization is responsive to housing market rigidities.

In addition, it is possible that when home prices decline, people become more sensitive to the

characteristics of the home they are purchasing because concerns about resale value may be
more salient.
       Nonetheless, trends in home prices in LA suggest that the market was not especially rigid.
The Case-Shiller Home Price Index for Greater Los Angeles shows that housing prices in Los
Angeles reached their trough in mid 2009 and had increased 9% by the time of the release
in September 2010. Afterwards, prices remained roughly steady through our study period.28
Further, news reports at the time indicated that the housing market was recovering.29 Finally,
we note that the most severe problems in the Southern California housing market were in the
  28
     These housing price data were retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2011/05/31/business/economy/case-
shiller-index.html
  29
     See, for example, Los Angeles Times on May 19, 2010; Orange County Register on July 27, 2010; and Los
Angeles Times on July 13, 2011.


                                                   24
“Inland Empire” region far to the east of Los Angeles. Thus, while the market was still sluggish,
it appears that many of the rigidities that were present in Los Angeles during the crash had

dissipated by the time of our study.
   Another important piece of evidence that our results are unlikely to be due to housing
market rigidities is from the results in Panel B of Table 4 that show the relationship between
API and housing prices increases in the post-release period. This is in stark contrast to the
non-responsiveness of home prices to information on value-added rank. If a rigid housing
market is driving the latter result, it is unlikely one would observe the former result as well.
Furthermore, the estimates in both panels of Table 4 show that API scores are highly value by

the housing market over this time period, and the magnitude of these eﬀects is consistent with
other research. So LA during our study period does not appear to be less responsive to school

quality in general than has been found in prior research in other locations.
   Second, it is possible that parents and homeowners dismiss the value-added information

because it comes from a complex statistical model and/or because they received several, often

conﬂicting pieces of information regarding value-added rank. While we acknowledge that par-

ents may not have examined the details of the empirical models used to generate the value-added

results, Figure 1 shows that the information was presented in a very clear and non-technical
manner. Thus, it is unlikely that the information itself confused the public. It also could be

the case that the school district and teachers attempted to discredit the value-added results. If
such a campaign were responsible for our null results, though, it does not explain why parents

are unresponsive to LAUSD’s own value-added measure.
   Nonetheless, there is a compelling argument that the release of multiple, conﬂicting measures
of school quality caused homeowners to dismiss the information altogether. If this were so, the
value-added rank information should have been capitalized more when the rankings agreed
with each other. To investigate this possibility, in Table 8 we estimate a version of our baseline
model in which we include an interaction between the LAUSD and LA Times rankings (column
1) and another model where we interact the value-added scores with the absolute diﬀerence
between the scores (column 2). We split the LA Times rankings into two variables based on
release date in order ensure that the interaction estimate is only inﬂuenced by sales after both

                                               25
the LATimes and LAUSD release their VA measures. In both cases, the interaction estimates
are insigniﬁcant and small. Thus, these results are inconsistent with a story in which conﬂicting

school quality measures cause homeowners to ignore this information, since they ignore it even
when the information is consistent. Furthermore, we note that there was a period of seven
months (September 2010 - March 2011) during which the only value-added data available was
that from the initial LA Times release. We ﬁnd no evidence of increased property values during
this period, which supports the argument that confusion over conﬂicting VA estimates are not
driving our results.
   Another concern is that the value-added data are based oﬀ of historical information - the

calculations published in the LA Times use data from 2002-2003 through 2008-2009. Using
this longer time span of data has the beneﬁt of making the value-added estimates more stable

and reliable, but if schools are changing rapidly, then the yearly API scores might be a better
contemporaneous measure of school quality than value-added. However, there is very little

evidence that schools are changing rapidly over time, at least as measured by API scores. An

anova analysis shows the intra-school correlation in API rank to be 0.93, and the standard

deviation within a school is only 9 percentiles (versus 32 percentiles overall). Furthermore, the

LAUSD data are based oﬀ of one year of recent data. While this feature makes them much
more noisy, if the data lags associated with the LA Times estimates made them irrelevant for

housing prices, there still should have been a capitalization eﬀect of the LAUSD value-added
information. Together, these pieces of evidence suggest that the lagged data used in the LA

Times VA measures are not the reason the housing market does not respond to this information.
   Finally, as discussed above, low salience of the value-added release information could pre-
clude markets from reacting. However, as documented in Section 2, coverage of these releases
was extensive and was pervasive on all media outlets in LA at the time. The unfortunate suicide
by a teacher in reaction to her value-added rank only intensiﬁed this media coverage. That
Figlio and Lucas (2004) ﬁnd large capitalization eﬀects of school information in a time period
in which information was more diﬃcult to access and in an environment where the information
received less press attention suggests our results are not being driven by low salience of the
value-added information.

                                               26
7     Conclusion

School districts across the country have begun to use value-added methodologies to evaluate

teachers and schools. Although only a few large districts have released these results publicly,
it is likely that more will in the future. Thus, it is important to understand whether and
how this information is valued by local residents. Furthermore, value-added measures provide
information about school quality that is less correlated with the school demographic makeup
than are test score levels. Identifying how value-added information in particular is capitalized
into housing prices therefore can lend new insight into the valuation of school quality that
research focusing on test score levels as a school quality measure cannot.

    This paper is one of the ﬁrst to examine how publicly released school and teacher value-
added information is capitalized into property values. We exploit a series of information releases

about value-added by the Los Angeles Times and the Los Angeles Uniﬁed School District,
which provided local residents with value-added rankings of all elementary schools and over

6,000 teachers in the LA Uniﬁed School District. Using housing sales data from the LA County

Assessor’s Oﬃce, we estimate diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences models that show how home prices change

as a function of value-added after each data release. Across myriad speciﬁcations and variations
in modeling choices and data assumptions, we show that property values do not respond to

released value-added information. Our estimates are suﬃciently precise to rule out all but very

small positive eﬀects on average. However, using boundary discontinuity methods, we ﬁnd that

achievement diﬀerences across schools are capitalized into home prices, which indicates that
school quality as measured test scores is valued by Los Angeles residents.
    Unique to our study in the school valuation literature is the ability to examine home price
eﬀects based on teacher quality information. Similar to the school-level results, though, we ﬁnd
that property values are unresponsive to the within-school variance in teacher value-added.
Nonetheless, we do ﬁnd that, although they are generally not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero
individually, estimates that vary by low and high socio-economic status are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
from each other, indicating that the impact of value-added on housing prices has a small but
negative gradient with SES.


                                               27
   Our estimates diﬀer substantially from previous literature on school valuation that uses test
score levels as a measure of school quality. This literature typically has found an eﬀect on

the order of 2 to 5 percent higher housing prices for each standard deviation increase in test
scores (Black, 1999; Bayer, Ferrreira and McMillan, 2007; Gibbons, Machin and Silva, 2009).
Nonetheless, previous work examining how property values respond to researcher-calculated
school value-added or changes in school test scores have ﬁndings similar to our own (Black and
Machin, 2011), but those studies are distinct from ours as they implicitly assume that home
buyers make the same calculations from available data. Thus, the fact that property values
do not respond to these school quality measures could be due to a lack of awareness of this

information.
   The previous analysis most similar to this paper is Figlio and Lucas (2004), which examines

the eﬀect of property values from the public release of “school report cards.” They ﬁnd releasing
this information leads to large property value increases in the higher-performing districts. There

are several potential explanations for why our results diﬀer from theirs. First, the school report

cards in their study are based on test score levels, which are highly correlated with other

aspects of schools, such as demographic composition. Even though demographic data was

already available to the public, property values may be responding to the repackaging of that
information into a simple and intuitive form rather than what the public perceived to be the

school’s quality, per se. Second, the type of information contained in the Florida school report
cards already was available to LAUSD residents in the form of API scores. The value-added

information releases we study provide school quality data on top of this pre-existing information.

Property values may respond less to these measures because the information shock about school
quality is smaller or because the computational complexity of the value-added models, as well
as the associated statistical noise in the estimates, render them uninformative for the marginal
home buyer.
   That we ﬁnd no eﬀect of school or teacher value-added information on home prices suggests
these school quality measures are not valued by local residents, at least on the margin. This is
a surprising result, given the strong relationship found in other studies between these measures
and student academic and future labor market success (Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain, 2005;

                                               28
Chetty, Friedman and Rockoﬀ, 2011) as well as the contentiousness that tends to accompany
the release of value-added data. In some sense, however, the heightened controversy could have

driven the public to ignore the value-added. Not only did the public debate and the widespread
coverage of the LA Times’ release in the media likely increase awareness of these methods, it
also probably made the public more aware of the ﬂaws in these measures. Thus, the public may
be rationally waiting for the research community to decide on what value-added measures are
accurate before changing behavior in response to them. As a result, while value-added scores
will undoubtedly be generated by more and more school districts and will be disseminated to the
public in the near future, the evidence presented here suggests that in the current environment

homeowners and parents do not value value-added as a relevant measure of school quality.




                                              29
References
[1] Bayer, Patrick, Fernando Ferreira and Robert McMillan. 2007. “A Uniﬁed Framework
    for Measuring Preferences for Schools and Neighborhoods.” Journal of Political Economy
    115(4): 588-638.

[2] Black, Sandra. 1999. “Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary Edu-
    cation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(2): 577-599.

[3] Black, Sandra E. and Stephen Machin. 2011. “Housing Valuations of School Performance”
    in Eric A. Hanushek, Stephen Machin and Ludger Woessmann (Eds.) Handbook of the
    Economics of Education, Volume 3. North-Holland: Amsterdam.

[4] Brasington, David M. 1999. “Which Measures of School Quality Does the Housing Market
    Value?” Journal of Real Estate Research 118(3): 395-413.

[5] Brasington, David and Donald R. Haurin. 2006. “Educational Outcomes and House Values:
    A Test of the Value Added Approach.” Journal of Regional Science 46(2): 245268.

[6] Buddin, Richard. 2010. “How Eﬀective are Los Angeles Elementary Teachers and Schools?”
    MPRA Working Paper No. 27366: http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/27366/.

[7] Buddin, Richard. 2011. “Measuring Teacher and School Eﬀectiveness at Improv-
    ing Student Achievement in Los Anageles Elementary Schools.” Available at
    http://documents.latimes.com/buddin-white-paper-20110507/.

[8] Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman and Jonah E. Rockoﬀ. 2011. “The Long-Term Impacts of
    Teachers: Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood.” NBER Working
    Paper No. 17699.

[9] Cellini, Stephanie Riegg, Fernando Ferreira and Jesse Rothstein. 2010. “The Value of School
    Facility Investments: Evidence from a Dynamic Regression Discontinuity Design.” The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(1): 215-261.

[10] Davidoﬀ, Ian and Andrew Leigh. 2008. “How Much Do Public Schools Really Cost? Esti-
    mating the Relationship Between House Prices and School Quality.” The Economic Record
    84(265): 193-206.

[11] Dills, Angela K. 2004. “Do Parents Value Changes in Test Scores? High Stakes Testing in
    Texas.” Contributions to Economic Analysis and Policy 3(1): Article 10.

[12] Downes, Thomas A. and Jeﬀrey E. Zabel. 2002. “The Impact of School Characteristics on
    House Prices: Chicago 1987-1991.” Journal of Urban Economics 52(1): 1-25.

[13] Fack, Gabrielle and Julien Grenet. 2010. “When do Better Schools Raise Housing Prices?
    Evidence from Paris Public and Private Schools.” Journal of Public Economics 94(1-2):
    59-77.

[14] Figlio, David N. and Maurice E. Lucas. 2004. “What’s in a Grade? School Report Cards
    and the Housing Market.” American Economic Review 94(3): 591-604.



                                              30
[15] Fiva, Jon H. and Lars J. Kirkebøen. 2011. “Information Shocks and the Dynamics of the
    Housing Market.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 113(3): 525-552.

[16] Gibbons, Stephen, Stephen Machin and Olmo Silva. 2013. “Valuing School Quality Using
    Boundary Discontinuities .” Journal of Urban Economics 75(1): 15-28.

[17] Gibbons, Steve and Stephen Machin. 2003. “Valuing English Primary Schools.” Journal
    of Urban Economics 53(2): 197219.

[18] Gibbons, Steve and Stephen Machin. 2006. “Paying for Primary Schools: Admissions
    Constraints, School Popularity or Congestion.” Economic Journal 116(510): 7792.

[19] Guarino, Cassandra M., Mark D. Reckase, and Jeﬀrey M. Wooldridge. 2012. “Can Value-
    Added Measures of Teacher Performance Be Trusted?” IZA Discussion Paper No. 6602.

[20] Jacob, Brian and Lars Lefgren. 2007. ”What Do Parents Value in Education? An Em-
    pirical Investigation of Parents’ Revealed Preferences for Teachers.” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 122(4): 1603-37.

[21] Kane, Thomas J. and Douglas O. Staiger. 2008. “Estimating Teacher Impacts on Student
    Achievement: An Experimental Evaluation.” NBER Working Paper No. 14607.

[22] Kane, Thomas J., Daniel F. McCaﬀrey, Trey Miller and Douglas O. Staiger. 2013.
    “Have We Identiﬁed Eﬀective Teachers?     Validating Measures of Eﬀective Teach-
    ing Using Random Assignment.” MET Project Research Paper. Available online at
    http://www.eric.ed.gov/PDFS/ED540959.pdf. Last Accessed 6/13/2013.

[23] Kane, Thomas J., Stephanie K. Riegg and Douglas O. Staiger. 2006. “School Quality,
    Neighborhoods, and Housing Prices.” American Law and Economic Review 8(2): 183-212.

[24] Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek and John F. Kain. 2005. “Teachers, Schools, and
    Academic Achievement.” Econometrica 73(2): 417-458.

[25] Rockoﬀ, Jonah E. 2004. “The Impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement:
    Evidence from Panel Data.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 94(2):
    247-252.

[26] Rothstein, Jesse. 2010. “Teacher Quality in Educational Production: Tracking, Decay, and
    Student Achievement.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(1): 175-214.

[27] Song, Jason. 2010. “Teachers Blast L.A. Times for Releasing Eﬀectiveness Rankings.” Los
    Angeles Times. August, 30.




                                             31
Figure 1: Example of Information Displayed in LATimes Database




                              32
                                                                             Figure 2: Comparisons of the Three Value-Added Measures




                                                         100
                                                                                                                                                                                                          100




                                                 80
                                                                                                                                                                                                  80




                                        60
                                                                                                                                                                                         60




                               40
                                                                                                                                                                                40




                   20
                                                                                                                                                                    20




              Percentiles of August 2010 LAT Value−Added
                                                                                                                                                               Percentiles of August 2010 LAT Value−Added




                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                               0   20             40           60           80                                        100                                                       0   20             40            60          80   100
                                                                     Percentiles of May 2011 LAT Value−Added                                                                                                        Percentiles of April 2011 LAUSD Value−Added




                                                                                                                                100




33
                                                                                            20          40      60       80
                                                                                        Percentiles of May 2011 LAT Value−Added
                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                      0   20             40            60          80                                           100
                                                                                                                                          Percentiles of April 2011 LAUSD Value−Added


     Percentile ranking amongst LAUSD elementary schools using the three value-added scores. Each dot is a single elementary school.
                             Figure 3: API, Free/Reduced-Price Lunch, and Value-Added by Elementary School




        Percent Not Eligible for
     Free or Reduced-Price Lunch                   Quintiles of API                   Quintiles of Value-Added
              (2009-2010)                           (2009-2010)                          (August 10, 2010)
                  0 - 20                                     1                                     1
                  21 - 40                                    2                                     2
                  41 - 60                                    3                                     3




34
                  61 - 80                                    4                                     4
                  81 - 100                                   5                                     5
                                                                  Figure 4: API Percentile vs. Value-Added Percentile




                             100
                                                                                                                                                100




                                         80
                                                                                                                                                            80




                                60
                                                                                                                                                   60




                    40
                                                                                                                                       40




              Percentiles of 2009−10 API
                                                                                                                                 Percentiles of 2009−10 API




                             20
                                                                                                                                                20




                             0
                                                                                                                                                0
                                              0   20              40           60           80                          100                                      0   20            40           60           80   100
                                                   Percentiles of August 2010 LAT Value−Added                                                                             Percentiles of LAUSD Value−Added




                                                                                       100




35
                                                                              40          60       80
                                                                        Percentiles of 2009−10 API
                                                                                       20
                                                                                       0
                                                                                                        0   20             40           60           80                          100
                                                                                                              Percentiles of May 2011 LAT Value−Added


     Percentile ranking amongst LAUSD elementary schools using 2009-10 API versus percentile rankings and the three value-added scores. Each dot is a
     single elementary school.
                                       Figure 5: Eﬀect of Value-Added Information on Log Sales Price by Month of Sale

                                                    LATimes Release                                                                                                    LAUSD Release




                           .002
                                                                                                                                     .003  .002




                                   0
                                                                                                                                .001




                     Impact Estimate
                                                                                                                           Impact Estimate




                  −.002
                                                                                                                                     0
                                                         Initial Release in Aug 2010
                                                                                                                                                                                           Release in Apr 2011




                                                                                                                                     −.001
                                                                                              Update Release in May 2011




                           −.004
                                       −15   −10       −5            0                             5          10                                  −15       −10       −5            0           5          10
                                                   Month (0 is September 2010)                                                                                    Month (0 is September 2010)


                                                                                                                   API Release




                                                                           .004




36
                                                                        0        .002
                                                                 Impact Estimate
                                                                           −.002
                                                                                                                      Release in Aug 2010




                                                                           −.004
                                                                                        −15            −10        −5            0                       5         10
                                                                                                              Month (0 is September 2010)


     The estimates in all panels come from a single regression and show the impact of an increase in value-added percentile on log sale price by month, using
     each quality measure. The second LA Times value-added ranking replaces the ﬁrst in month 8. Controls include school ﬁxed-eﬀects, month of sale
     indicators, API percentile, API, two years of lagged API, the California DOE similar school rank and the following: Housing characteristic controls - the
     number of bedrooms, bathrooms and units in the home, square footage, and year built; School characteristic controls - percent of students of each race,
     percent free lunch, percent gifted, percent English language learners, percent disabled, and parent education levels; Neighborhood characteristic controls
     at the census tract level - percents of the population who are adult, minor, senior, foreign born, of each race, speak a language other than English, and who
     lived in the same house one year prior, the percent of adults who are married, institutionalized, veterans, of each education level, in the labor force, and
     unemployed, percent of households vacant and owner-occupied, average household size, family size, commute time and household income, the percent of
     households with children, single-parent families, receiving social security, receiving cash public assistance, and receiving food stamps and the poverty rate.
     Housing characteristics are also interacted with a linear time trend. The dotted lines are the bounds of the 95% conﬁdence intervals that are calculated
     using standard errors clustered at the school level.
                                                    Figure 6: Heterogeneity in the Estimated Eﬀect of LA Times Value-Added on Log Sale Price

                                                    by 2009 API Quintile                                               by Median Pre−Release Sale Price Quintile                                  by % Eligible for Free/Reduced−Price Lunch in School




                                                                                                       .002
                                                                                                                                                                                     .001




                   .002
                                                                                                                                                                                     .0005




                                                                                                            .001




                    .001
                                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                0




        0
                                                                                                                                                                            −.0005




      Impact Estimate
                                                                                              Impact Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                           Impact Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                     −.001




                   −.001
                                                                                                       −.001
                                                                                                                                                                                     −.0015
                                  0            20              40              60        80                        1          2                3                 4    5                           0           20             40               60    80
                                                      API percentile in 2009                                                        Median Sale Price Qunitile                                                              % FRP


                                                    by % Black in School                                                          by % Hispanic in School                                                          by % White in School




                   .002
                                                                                                                                                                                     .001




                                                                                                       .001
                                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                       .0005




                           .001
                                                                                                         0




                   0
                                                                                                                                                                               −.001




           Impact Estimate
                                                                                              Impact Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                           Impact Estimate




                                                                                              −.0005




      −.001
                                                                                                                                                                                     −.002




                                                                                                       −.001




37
                   −.002
                                                                                                                                                                                     −.003




                                                                                                       −.0015
                                  0            20             40               60        80                        0         20               40                 60   80                          0           20             40               60    80
                                                            % Black                                                                          % Hisp                                                                        % White


                                      by % of Enrolled K−12 in Tract in Private School                                                                                                                 by % of Housing in Tract Owner−Occupied




                   .004
                                                                                                                                                                                     .002




                      .002
                                                                                                                                                                                           .001




             0
                                                                                                                                                                                  0




      Impact Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                           Impact Estimate




                   −.002
                                                                                                                                                                                     −.001




                   −.004
                                                                                                                                                                                     −.002




                                  0            20               40             60        80                                                                                                       0           20               40              60   80
                                                       % in Private School                                                                                                                                     % of Housing Units Owner−Occupied


      The value-added variable uses the LA Times value-added percentile from the August 2010 release until May 2011, at which point the variable is replaced with
     the value-added percentile from the May 2011 (2nd ) release. Similar measures for the LAUSD value-added are included in the regressions but are not shown.
     Controls include school ﬁxed-eﬀects, month of sale indicators, API, two years of lagged API, the California DOE similar school rank and the following: Housing
     characteristic controls - the number of bedrooms, bathrooms and units in the home, square footage, and year built; School characteristic controls - percent
     of students of each race, percent free lunch, percent gifted, percent English language learners, percent disabled, and parent education levels; Neighborhood
     characteristic controls at the census tract level - percents of the population who are adult, minor, senior, foreign born, of each race, speak a language other
     than English, and who lived in the same house one year prior, the percent of adults who are married, institutionalized, veterans, of each education level, in
     the labor force, and unemployed, percent of households vacant and owner-occupied, average household size, family size, commute time and household income,
     the percent of households with children, single-parent families, receiving social security, receiving cash public assistance, and receiving food stamps and the
     poverty rate. Housing characteristics are also interacted with a linear time trend. The dotted lines are the bounds of the 95% conﬁdence intervals that are
     calculated using standard errors clustered at the school level.
                  Table 1: Summary Statistics of Main Analysis Variables

                                                             LAT Aug VA Percentile      LAT Aug VA Percentile
Characteristic                                 All Schools          ≥ 50                       < 50

Key Regression Variables
Sale Price                                       406,975             448,656                    357,156
                                                (259,887)           (278,007)                  (226,722)
LAT Value-Added Percentile (Aug, 2010)             52.6                75.8                       25.1
                                                  (29.0)              (14.6)                     (13.8)
LAT Value-Added Percentile (May, 2011)             49.3                66.5                       29.0
                                                  (29.5)              (24.6)                     (20.5)
LAUSD Value-Added Percentile (Apr, 2011)           49.1                52.8                       44.8
                                                  (28.4)              (27.7)                     (28.6)
API Percentile (2009-10)                           55.0                65.3                       43.0
                                                  (29.2)              (25.7)                    (28.4)
Characteristics of Census Tract of Property
% White                                           53.3                 59.8                        45.5
                                                 (21.5)               (19.6)                      (21.1)
% Black                                           10.5                  6.1                        15.6
                                                 (16.5)                 (9)                       (21.3)
% Hispanic                                        43.0                 37.8                        49.1
                                                 (29.2)               (28.9)                      (28.3)
% of Adults with No HS                            10.0                  8.3                        12.0
                                                  (7.1)                (6.6)                       (7.1)
% of Adults with HS Degree                        20.2                 19.1                        21.5
                                                  (7.6)                (7.6)                       (7.3)
% of Adults with Bachelor Degree                  20.2                 23.1                        16.8
                                                 (12.6)               (12.3)                      (12.1)
Median Household Income                          62,820               69,056                     55,420
                                                (30,150)             (31,729)                   (26,309)
School Characteristics
% Black                                            12.7                  9.4                      16.5
                                                  (17.2)               (11.8)                    (21.3)
% Hispanic                                         61.5                 57.0                      66.7
                                                  (29.5)               (30.8)                    (26.9)
% Eligible for Free/Reduced-Price Lunch            72.0                 64.2                      81.3
                                                  (29.4)               (31.5)                    (23.5)
% Gifted                                           11.7                 14.0                       8.9
                                                   (8.7)                (9.4)                     (6.7)
% English Language Learner                         28.9                 26.3                      32.0
                                                  (17.1)               (17.2)                    (16.6)
% Special Education                                12.3                 12.4                      12.2
                                                   (4.0)                (4.1)                     (3.8)
Enrollment                                        417.6                397.1                     441.8
                                                 (166.3)              (164.5)                   (165.3)
Property Characteristics
# of Beds                                          2.9                  2.8                       2.9
                                                  (1.8)                (1.7)                     (2.0)
# of Baths                                         2.1                  2.1                       2.1
                                                  (1.7)                (1.5)                     (1.8)
Square Footage                                    1573                 1571                      1575
                                                 (2159)               (1032)                    (2989)
Observations                                     62,977               34,177                     28,800
  The sample is split based on the percentile ranking from the ﬁrst value-added release by the LA Times in August,
  2010. Standard deviations are shown in parentheses.
                                                    38
Table 2: Predictability of API and Value-Added Using Observable School
         Characteristics

                                 (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)
 Dependent Variable →           API      LAT 1st VA    LAT 1st VA     LAUSD VA      LAUSD VA
                            Percentile    Percentile    Percentile     Percentile    Percentile
 % Black                    -0.559***      -0.452*        -0.134         0.179         0.322
                              (0.101)      (0.260)       (0.182)        (0.215)       (0.211)
 % Hispanic                    -0.069       0.084         0.076          0.205         -0.060
                              (0.095)      (0.239)       (0.174)        (0.214)       (0.267)
 % Asian/Pac Islander       0.328***         0.520        0.153          -0.049        0.099
                              (0.085)      (0.329)       (0.205)        (0.203)       (0.332)
 % FRP                         -0.070       -0.026        0.047          0.302        0.562**
                              (0.113)      (0.187)       (0.225)        (0.187)       (0.237)
 % Gifted                   0.655***       0.561**        0.263         0.598*         0.183
                              (0.166)      (0.274)       (0.316)        (0.334)       (0.327)
 % ELL                      -0.541***        0.153       0.354*          -0.080        0.327
                              (0.112)      (0.178)       (0.184)        (0.200)       (0.201)
 % Special Ed                 -0.441*       0.140         0.555          0.598       1.369***
                              (0.239)      (0.391)       (0.489)        (0.393)       (0.454)
 Enrollment                  -0.011**       -0.010        0.000          0.012         -0.454
                              (0.006)      (0.009)       (0.009)        (0.010)       (0.010)
 % Parents HS Grad             0.041        0.086         -0.362         -0.362        -0.281
                              (0.139)      (0.191)       (0.243)        (0.243)       (0.208)
 % Parents Some College       0.356**       0.052         -0.376         -0.376        -0.391
                              (0.155)      (0.227)       (0.288)        (0.243)       (0.272)
 % Parents Bachelors           0.320        0.378         0.202          0.202         -0.134
                              (0.202)      (0.301)       (0.354)        (0.354)       (0.339)
 % Parents Graduate            0.107        0.332         0.221          0.221         -0.149
                              (0.173)      (0.273)       (0.364)        (0.364)       (0.387)
 API Percentile                                           0.214                        0.322
                                                         (0.210)                      (0.211)
 Observations                  397           397            397           397            397
 R-squared                    0.706         0.216          0.294         0.038          0.251
 All measures are for the 2009-10 school-year. Columns 3 and 5 also include API scores for the
following subgroups: black, Hispanic, white, Filipino, Asian, Paciﬁc Islander, Native American,
disadvantaged, special education, and English Language Learners. Values for groups that were
too small for API scores to be provided are set equal to zero and an indicator for that measure
being missing is set equal to one. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.***,** and * indicate
signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.




                                               39
                                    Table 3: Eﬀect of Value-Added on Demographic and Housing Characteristics
      Note: Estimates are multiplied by 100 for ease of presentation.
      Panel A: Census Tract Characteristics of Property
                    (1)         (2)               (3)              (4)           (5)         (6)            (7)       (8)            (9)             (10)         (11)
                    %           %                 Median           %             %           %              % Pac     % Other        % Mult          % Hisp       % Institu-
                    Children    Senior            Age              Male          Black       Asian          Island    Race           Race                         tionalized
      Pooled LAT -0.14          0.20              0.14             -0.11*        0.16        -0.18          -0.01     -0.03          -0.02           -0.13        -0.00
      VA Pctl       (0.10)      (0.12)            (0.12)           (0.06)        (0.22)      (0.19)         (0.01)    (0.19)         (0.02)          (0.33)       (0.04)
                     (12)        (13)              (14)            (15)          (16)        (17)           (18)      (19)           (20)            (21)         (22)
                     % HH w/     % Single Male     % Single Fem    % HH w        Avg HH      Avg Family     %         % Owner        % Male          % Fem        Fertility
                     Kids        w/ Kids           w/ Kids         Seniors       Size        Size           Vacant    Occupied       Married         Married      Rate
      Pooled LAT     -0.39**     -0.03             -0.12           0.22          -0.00       -0.00          -0.03     0.36           0.21            -0.11        0.19
      VA Pctl        (0.19)      (0.02)            (0.08)          (0.19)        (0.01)      (0.01)         (0.10)    (0.56)         (0.24)          (0.29)       (0.73)
                     (23)        (24)              (25)            (26)          (27)        (28)           (29)      (30)           (31)            (32)
                     % No        %                 % Some          %             %           %              %         % Same         % Born          % English
                     HS          HS                College         Associate     Bachelor    Graduate       Veteran   House 1Yr      in USA          Speaker
      Pooled LAT     -0.07       -0.04             0.07            0.02          0.22        -0.00          0.08      0.06           -0.04           0.04
      VA Pctl        (0.11)      (0.17)            (0.13)          (0.09)        (0.21)      (0.15)         (0.07)    (0.24)         (0.23)          (0.36)
                     (33)        (34)              (35)            (36)          (37)        (38)           (39)      (40)           (41)            (42)
                     LFP         Unemp             % Commute       Mean          Mean HH     % On           % On      % On           % On            Poverty
                     Rate        Rate              Public Trans    Commute       Income      Social Sec     SSI       Cash Assist    Food Stamps     Rate




40
      Pooled LAT     0.30*       -0.01             -0.10           0.02          667         0.18           -0.06     -0.02          -0.02           -0.21
      VA Pctl        (0.16)      (0.09)            (0.18)          (0.09)        (626)       (0.21)         (0.11)    (0.08)         (0.11)          (0.22)
      Panel B: Property Characteristics
                    (43)        (44)               (45)            (46)          (47)
                    Mean #      Mean Age           Mean #          Mean #        Mean
                    Units       of Structure       Bedrooms        Bathrooms     Sq Ft
      Pooled LAT 0.11*          -1.67              0.08            0.03          74
      VA Pctl       (0.06)      (1.11)             (0.05)          (0.06)        (61)
      Panel C: School Characteristics
                    (48)        (49)               (50)            (51)          (52)        (53)           (54)      (55)           (56)            (57)         (58)
                    % Black     % Hisp             % Asian         % FRP         % Gifted    % ELL          %Spec     Enroll         % Parent        % Parent     % Parent
                                                                   Lunch                                    Ed                       HS Grad         Some Col     BA
      1st LAT        0.11        0.04              0.71*           -0.03         0.23        -1.17          -0.36     8.33           -0.10           -0.24        -0.14
      VA Pctl        (0.50)      (0.57)            (0.39)          (1.11)        (0.63)      (0.86)         (0.49)    (10.43)        (0.84)          (0.82)       (0.65)
      Each cell is a separate regression. The data cover April 2009 through September 2011. Observations for all Census Tract characteristics are 62,997. For property
     characteristics, the sample sizes are 60,631, 60,855, 60,345, and 61,004 for # of units, age of property, # of bedrooms, # of bathrooms and square-footage, respectively.
     For school characteristics, there are 1,189 school-year observations. The pooled LA Times value-added variable uses the value-added percentile from the August 2010
     release until May 2011, at which point the variable is replaced with the VA percentile from the May 2011 (2nd ) release. All regressions include API, API*post, school
     and month ﬁxed-eﬀects. Standard errors clustered at the school level are in parentheses.***,** and * indicate signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.
     Table 4: School-Zone Boundary Fixed-Eﬀects Estimates of Impact of
              API on Ln(Sale Price) - 0.1 Mile Buﬀer

      Note: Estimates for all models are multiplied by 100 for ease of presentation.
      Independent Variable   (1)      (2)       (3)        (4)                         (5)
                Panel A: Before LA Times VA Release (August 2010)
      API Percentile                 0.449*** 0.411*** 0.133***                     0.132***
                                     (0.048)  (0.041)  (0.044)                      (0.048)
      LAT 1st VA Percentile                                                 0.053* 0.030
                                                                            (0.031) (0.032)
      LAUSD VA Percentile                                                   -0.012 -0.029
                                                                            (0.026) (0.027)
      Observations                   25,316       25,316       25,316       25,316     25,316
                    Panel B: After LA Times VA Release (August 2010)
      API Percentile                 0.602*** 0.525*** 0.265***                     0.285***
                                     (0.056)  (0.049)  (0.064)                      (0.068)




41
      LAT 1st VA Percentile                                                 0.033   -0.002
                                                                            (0.034) (0.036)
      LAUSD VA Percentile                                                   0.006   -0.033
                                                                            (0.031) (0.031)
      Observations                   18,398       18,398       18,398       18,398     18,398
      Housing Characteristics N                   Y            Y            Y          Y
      School Characteristics  N                   N            Y            Y          Y
      All regressions include month and boundary ﬁxed-eﬀects. Each column comes from a separate
     regression that uses sales from April 2009 to August 2010 (Panel A) and September 2010 to
     September 2011 (Panel B). School characteristics include percent of students of each race,
     percent free lunch, percent gifted, percent English language learners, percent disabled, and
     parent education levels. Housing characteristic controls include the number of bedrooms,
     bathrooms and units in the home, square footage, and year built. Housing characteristics are
     also interacted with a linear time trend. Standard errors clustered at the school level are in
     parentheses.***,** and * indicate signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.
          Table 5: Eﬀect of Value-Added Information on Log Sale Prices

 Note: Estimates are multiplied by 100 for ease of presentation.
 Independent Variable ↓                (1)      (2)       (3)           (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)
 LAT VA Percentile                   0.023     0.025    -0.042*       -0.030    -0.029    -0.027    -0.014
 × Post Aug 2010                    (0.046) (0.047) (0.023)          (0.020)   (0.020)   (0.019)   (0.021)
 LAUSD VA Percentile                 0.002    -0.011     0.001        0.004      0.003     0.011    -0.029
 × Post Mar 2011                    (0.021) (0.039) (0.028)          (0.028)   (0.027)   (0.025)   (0.023)
 API Percentile                      -0.049   -0.049     0.000        -0.013    -0.009    -0.013    -0.005
 × Post Aug 2010                    (0.040) (0.038) (0.023)          (0.025)   (0.026)   (0.025)   (0.028)
 Observations                         62,977    62,977      62,977   62,977    62,977    62,977     43,714

 Month of Sale                           N         Y          Y        Y         Y          Y         Y
 Housing Characteristics                 N         N          N        Y         Y          Y         Y
 School Characteristics                  N         N          N        N         Y          Y         Y
 Neighborhood Characteristics            N         N          N        N         N          Y         Y
 School Fixed-Eﬀects                     N         N          Y        Y         Y          Y         Y
 Boundary Fixed-Eﬀects (0.1 mi)          N         N          N        N         N          N         Y
 The data cover April 2009 through September 2011 and are at the property sale level. The pooled
LA Times value-added variable uses the value-added percentile from the August 2010 release until May
2011 at which point the variable is replaced with the VA percentile from the May 2011 (2nd ) release.
All regressions include school and month ﬁxed-eﬀects along with controls for API, two years of lagged
API, API percentile, and the school’s rank relative to comparison schools deﬁned by the California DOE.
School characteristics include, percent of students of each race, percent free lunch, percent gifted, percent
English language learners, percent disabled, and parent education levels. Neighborhood characteristic
controls are at the census tract level and include percents of the population who are adult, minor, senior,
foreign born, of each race, speak a language other than English, and who lived in the same house one year
prior, the percent of adults who are married, institutionalized, veterans, of each education level, in the
labor force, and unemployed, percent of households vacant and owner-occupied, average household size,
family size, commute time and household income, the percent of households with children, single-parent
families, receiving social security, receiving cash public assistance, and receiving food stamps and the
poverty rate. Housing characteristic controls include the number of bedrooms, bathrooms and units in
the home, square footage, and year built. Housing characteristics are also interacted with a linear time
trend. School-average value added measures are included as controls in column (1). Standard errors
clustered at the school level are in parentheses. ***,** and * indicate signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5% and 10%
levels, respectively.




                                                       42
                                Table 6: Eﬀect of Value-Added Information on Log Sale Prices - Alternative Models

                              Note: Estimates for all models except (3) are multiplied by 100 for ease of presentation.
                                 Include Std Dev             Include % of            Use Sale     Use Avg VA         ≤2            >2         Interact with # of       Relative
                              of Current Teacher VA Teachers in VA Quintile Price Levels                         Bedrooms        Bedrooms     Charters w/in 1 Mi     Info Shock
                                       (1)                        (2)                  (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)               (7)                (8)
      LAT Pooled VA Pctl                -0.027                     -0.022                -35.5                         -0.017       0.006            -0.033
      × Post Aug 2010                  (0.020)                    (0.023)               (63.8)                        (0.020)      (0.014)          (0.021)
      LAUSD VA Pctl                     0.014                      0.015                 72.4                          0.003        0.030            0.009
      × Post Mar 2011                  (0.025)                    (0.026)               (69.7)                        (0.024)      (0.019)          (0.025)
      API Pctl                          -0.007                     -0.003                -98.7          -0.013       -0.053**       -0.027           -0.008
      × Post Aug 2010                  (0.026)                    (0.026)               (91.6)         (0.025)        (0.023)      (0.021)          (0.026)
      LAT Teacher VA                    -0.006
      Standard Deviation               (0.085)
      LAT Teacher VA                                                -0.5
      % in 2nd Quintile                                            (4.4)
      LAT Teacher VA                                                3.2
      % in 3rd Quintile                                            (4.5)
      LAT Teacher VA                                                -3.2
      % in 4th Quintile                                            (4.4)
      LAT Teacher VA                                                -0.4
      % in 5th Quintile                                            (5.6)




43
      Average Across                                                                                    -0.018
      All VA Measures                                                                                  (0.019)
      # of Charters                                                                                                                                   -0.113
      Within 1 Mile                                                                                                                                  (0.552)
      LAT VA ×                                                                                                                                        0.014
      Charters w/in 1 Mi                                                                                                                             (0.015)
      LAT Minus                                                                                                                                                         -0.016
      API                                                                                                                                                              (0.019)
      LAUSD Minus                                                                                                                                                      -0.030*
      API                                                                                                                                                              (0.018)
      Observations                     61,534                     61,534                62,977         62,977         23,280       37,065            62,977             62,977
      The data cover April 2009 through September 2011 and are at the property sale level. The pooled LA Times value-added variable uses the value-added percentile from
     the August 2010 release until May 2011 at which point the variable is replaced with the VA percentile from the May 2011 (2nd ) release. LAT Teacher Value-Added
     uses value-added scores from the Aug 2010 release for teachers working in a given school in 2009-10. All regressions include school and month ﬁxed-eﬀects along with
     controls for API, two years of lagged API, API percentile, and the school’s rank relative to comparison schools deﬁned by the California Department of Education.
     School characteristics include, % of students of each race, % free lunch, % gifted, % English language learners, % disabled, and parent education levels. Neighborhood
     characteristic controls are at the census tract level and include % of the population who are adult, minor, senior, foreign born, of each race, speak a language other
     than English, and who lived in the same house one year prior, the % of adults who are married, institutionalized, veterans, of each education level, in the labor force,
     and unemployed, % of households vacant and owner-occupied, average household size, family size, commute time and household income, the percent of households with
     children, single-parent families, receiving social security, receiving cash public assistance, and receiving food stamps and the poverty rate. Housing characteristic controls
     include the number of bedrooms, bathrooms and units in the home, square footage, and year built. Housing characteristics are also interacted with a linear time trend.
     Standard errors clustered at the school level are in parentheses.***,** and * indicate signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.
              Table 7: Eﬀect of Value-Added Information on Log Sale Prices - Speciﬁcation Checks

                              Note: Estimates for all models are multiplied by 100 for ease of presentation.
                              Exclude                          Drop             Drop            Drop                              Limit to
                              Lagged Drop Imputed Properties w/ Properties w/ Multi-Unit 3 Month                      6 Month      Before
                                API           VA         > 8 Bedrooms        > 5000 sf      Properties      Lead         Lead    April 2011
                                 (1)          (2)               (3)              (4)             (5)         (6)          (7)        (8)
      LAT Pooled VA Pctl       -0.031       -0.025           -0.033*          -0.033*          -0.015      -0.009       -0.011     -0.028
      × Post Aug 2010         (0.019)      (0.019)           (0.019)          (0.018)         (0.013)     (0.020)      (0.019)    (0.023)
      LAUSD VA Pctl             0.021       0.009             0.011            0.013           0.006       0.011
      × Post Mar 2011         (0.024)      (0.023)           (0.025)          (0.025)         (0.016)     (0.035)
      API Pctl                 -0.011       -0.009            -0.009           -0.009         -0.030*      0.011       0.044*       -0.034
      × Post Aug 2010         (0.025)      (0.025)           (0.023)          (0.022)         (0.016)     (0.021)      (0.026)     (0.031)
      Observations             62,977        58,398           62,359            62,256         55,557       62,977     62,977       51,337
      The data cover April 2009 through September 2011 and are at the property sale level. The pooled LA Times value-added variable uses
     the value-added percentile from the August 2010 release until May 2011 at which point the variable is replaced with the VA percentile
     from the May 2011 (2nd ) release. LAT Teacher Value-Added uses value-added scores from the Aug 2010 release for teachers working
     in a givn school in 2009-10. All regressions include school and month ﬁxed-eﬀects along with controls for API, two years of lagged
     API, API percentile, and the school’s rank relative to comparison schools deﬁned by the California Department of Education. School
     characteristics include, percent of students of each race, percent free lunch, percent gifted, percent English language learners, percent
     disabled, and parent education levels. Neighborhood characteristic controls are at the census tract level and include percents of the




44
     population who are adult, minor, senior, foreign born, of each race, speak a language other than English, and who lived in the same
     house one year prior, the percent of adults who are married, institutionalized, veterans, of each education level, in the labor force,
     and unemployed, percent of households vacant and owner-occupied, average household size, family size, commute time and household
     income, the percent of households with children, single-parent families, receiving social security, receiving cash public assistance, and
     receiving food stamps and the poverty rate. Housing characteristic controls include the number of bedrooms, bathrooms and units in
     the home, square footage, and year built. Housing characteristics are also interacted with a linear time trend. Standard errors clustered
     at the school level are in parentheses.***,** and * indicate signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.
Table 8: Eﬀect of Value-Added Information on Log Sale
         Prices - Interactions Between VA Measures

 Note: Estimates for all models are multiplied by 100 for ease of presentation.
                                 (1)                       (2)
 LAT VA Percentile            -0.047**                   -0.047**
 × Aug 2010 to Mar 2011        (0.024)                   (0.024)
 LAT VA Percentile              -0.052                    -0.064
 × Post Mar 2011               (0.043)                   (0.053)
 LAUSD VA Percentile            -0.052                    0.038
 × Post Mar 2011               (0.044)                   (0.053)
 LAT × LAUSD                   0.0010
                              (0.0007)
 Abs(LAT minus LAUSD)                                      -0.129
                                                          (0.096)
 LAT ×                                                     0.0019
 Abs(LAT minus LAUSD)                                    (0.0013)
 LAUSD ×                                                  -0.0002
 Abs(LAT minus LAUSD)                                    (0.0012)
 API Percentile                 -0.010                     -0.011
 × Post Aug 2010               (0.025)                    (0.025)
 Observations                  62,977                      62,977
 The data cover April 2009 through September 2011 and are at the property
sale level. The pooled LA Times value-added variable uses the value-added per-
centile from the August 2010 release until May 2011 at which point the variable
is replaced with the VA percentile from the May 2011 (2nd ) release. All regres-
sions include school and month ﬁxed-eﬀects along with controls for API, two
years of lagged API, API percentile, and the school’s rank relative to comparison
schools deﬁned by the California Department of Education. School character-
istics include, % of students of each race, % free lunch, % gifted, % English
language learners, % disabled, and parent education levels. Neighborhood char-
acteristic controls are at the census tract level and include % of the population
who are adult, minor, senior, foreign born, of each race, speak a language other
than English, and who lived in the same house one year prior, the % of adults
who are married, institutionalized, veterans, of each education level, in the la-
bor force, and unemployed, % of households vacant and owner-occupied, average
household size, family size, commute time and household income, the percent
of households with children, single-parent families, receiving social security, re-
ceiving cash public assistance, and receiving food stamps and the poverty rate.
Housing characteristic controls include the number of bedrooms, bathrooms and
units in the home, square footage, and year built. Housing characteristics are
also interacted with a linear time trend. Standard errors clustered at the school
level are in parentheses.***,** and * indicate signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5% and 10%
levels, respectively.




                                         45
