                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     CONCENTRATION IN MORTGAGE LENDING, REFINANCING ACTIVITY AND
                          MORTGAGE RATES

                                         David S. Scharfstein
                                           Adi Sunderam

                                        Working Paper 19156
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19156


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2013




We are grateful to Zahi Ben-David, Scott Frame, Andreas Fuster, Ed Golding, David Lucca, Amit
Seru, Jeremy Stein, Amir Sufi, and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
Harvard University, the NBER Corporate Finance Spring Meetings, and the UCLA/FRB - San Francisco
Conference on Ho using and the Macroeconomy for helpful comments and suggestions. We thank
Freddie Mac for data and Toomas Laarits for excellent research assistance. We also thank the Harvard
Business School Division of Research for financial support. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by David S. Scharfstein and Adi Sunderam. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Concentration in Mortgage Lending, Refinancing Activity and Mortgage Rates
David S. Scharfstein and Adi Sunderam
NBER Working Paper No. 19156
June 2013
JEL No. E44,E52,G21,G23,L85

                                                ABSTRACT

We present evidence that high concentration in local mortgage lending reduces the sensitivity of mortgage
rates and refinancing activity to mortgage-backed security (MBS) yields. A decrease in MBS yields
is typically associated with greater refinancing activity and lower rates on new mortgages. However,
this effect is dampened in counties with concentrated mortgage markets. We isolate the direct effect
of mortgage market concentration and rule out alternative explanations based on borrower, loan, and
collateral characteristics in two ways. First, we use a matching procedure to compare high- and low-concentration
counties that are very similar on observable characteristics and find similar results. Second, we examine
counties where concentration in mortgage lending is increased by bank mergers. We show that within
a given county, sensitivities to MBS yields decrease after a concentration-increasing merger. Our results
suggest that the strength of the housing channel of monetary policy transmission varies in both the
time series and the cross section. In the cross section, increasing concentration by one standard deviation
reduces the overall impact of a decline in MBS yields by approximately 50%. In the time series, a
decrease in MBS yields today has a 40% smaller effect on the average county than it would have had
in the 1990s because of higher concentration today.


David S. Scharfstein
Harvard Business School
Baker 239
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
dscharfstein@hbs.edu

Adi Sunderam
Baker Library 245
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
asunderam@hbs.edu
   I.      Introduction

        Housing is a critical channel for the transmission of monetary policy to the real economy.
As shown by Bernanke and Gertler (1995), residential investment is the component of GDP that
responds most strongly and immediately to monetary policy shocks. In addition, housing is an
important channel through which monetary policy affects consumption. An easing of monetary
policy allows households to refinance their mortgages at lower rates, reducing payments from
borrowers to lenders. If borrowers have higher marginal propensities to consume than lenders, as
would be the case if borrowers are more liquidity constrained, then refinancing should boost
aggregate consumption in the presence of frictions. Indeed, refinancing is probably the most
direct way in which monetary policy increases the disposable cash flow of liquidity-constrained
households (Hurst and Stafford 2004).

        Using monetary policy to support housing credit has been an increasing focus of the
Federal Reserve in recent years. In particular, the Federal Reserve’s purchases of mortgage-
backed securities (MBS) in successive rounds of quantitative easing have had the explicit goal of
supporting the housing market. One of the aims of quantitative easing was to lower mortgage
rates by reducing financing costs for mortgage lenders (Bernanke 2009, 2012). However, it has
been argued that the efficacy of this policy has been hampered by the high indebtedness of many
households (Eggertson and Krugman, 2012; Mian, Rao, and Sufi, 2012). “Underwater”
households whose mortgage balances exceed the values of their homes have been unable to
refinance, potentially reducing the impact of low interest rates on the economy. Others have
noted that the reduction in MBS yields from quantitative easing has only been partially passed
through to borrowers, leading to historically high values of the so-called “primary-secondary
spread” – the spread between mortgage rates and MBS yields (Dudley, 2012). Fuster, et al.
(2012) consider a number of explanations for the increase in spreads, including greater costs of
originating mortgages, capacity constraints, and market concentration, but conclude that the
increase remains a puzzle.

        In this paper, we explore in more detail whether market power in mortgage lending can
explain a significant amount of the increase in the primary-secondary spread and thereby impede
the transmission of monetary policy to the housing sector. We build on the literature in industrial
organization that argues that cost “pass-through” is lower in concentrated markets than in


                                                 1
competitive markets – when production costs fall, prices fall less in concentrated markets than
they do in competitive markets because producers use their market power to capture larger
profits (e.g., Rotemberg and Saloner, 1987). In the context of mortgage lending, this suggests
that when the Federal Reserve lowers interest rates, mortgage rates will fall less in concentrated
mortgage markets than in competitive mortgage markets. This could dampen the effects of
monetary policy in such markets.

         Evidence from the aggregate time series is broadly consistent with the idea that
concentration in mortgage lending impacts mortgage rates. As shown in Figure 1, concentration
in the mortgage lending industry increased substantially between 1994 and 2011. Figure 2 shows
the average primary-secondary spread calculated as the difference between the mortgage rate
paid by borrowers and the yield on MBS for conforming loans guaranteed by the government-
sponsored entity (GSE) Freddie Mac. 1 The yield on Freddie Mac MBS is the amount paid to
investors in the securities, which are used to finance the mortgages. Thus, the spread is a
measure of the revenue going to mortgage originators and servicers. The spread rose
substantially from 1994 to 2011. Moreover, as shown in Figure 3, the spread is highly correlated
with mortgage market concentration. The correlation is 66% in levels and 59% in changes, so the
correlation does not simply reflect the fact that both series have a positive time trend.

         Recent trends are one reason that market power has not received much scrutiny as an
explanation for rising primary-secondary spreads. Most recently, the spread spiked in 2011-2012
though concentration in mortgage lending has not increased since 2010 (Avery, et al., 2012 and
Fuster, et al., 2012).2 These recent trends are misleading for two reasons. First, they focus on the
market share of the top ten lenders at the national level. However, evidence suggests that a
significant part of competition in mortgage lending takes place at the local level, and at the local
level concentration is rising due to increased geographic segmentation of mortgage lending.3

1
 Specifically, Figure 2 shows the time series of the borrowing rate reported in Freddie Mac’s Weekly Primary
Mortgage Market Survey minus the yield on current coupon Freddie Mac MBS minus the average guarantee fee
charged by Freddie Mac on its loans.
2
  Fuster, et. al. (2012) also argue that the higher fees charged by the GSEs for their guarantees cannot account for the
rise in spreads.
3
  To see this, suppose there are two identical counties where two lenders each have a 50% market share. Then the
average county market share and the aggregate share of each lender is 50%. However, if each lender concentrates in
a different county, the average county-level share can go to 100% while their aggregate shares remain at 50%.


                                                           2
Second, as we discuss below, in the presence of capacity constraints, the effects of increased
concentration would be most clearly revealed when MBS yields fall. Thus, the time series
correlation between spreads and concentration may understate the true relationship. In this paper,
we use panel data to examine the effects of mortgage market concentration at the county level.
Rather than focus on the level of the spread between mortgage rates and MBS yields, we instead
study the relationship between concentration and the pass-through from MBS yields to mortgage
rates. We provide evidence that increases in mortgage market concentration are associated with
decreased pass-through at the county level.

       Using the yield on GSE-guaranteed MBS as a proxy for the costs of mortgage financing,
we find that mortgage rates are less sensitive to costs in concentrated mortgage markets. A
decrease in MBS yields that reduces mortgage rates by 100 basis points (bps) in the mean county
reduces rates only 73 bps in a county with concentration one standard deviation (18%) above the
mean. Moreover, when MBS yields fall, the quantity of refinancing increases in the aggregate.
However, the quantity of refinancing increases 35% less in the high-concentration county
relative to the average county. The effects on mortgage rates and the quantity of refinancing
compound each other. In a high-concentration county, fewer borrowers refinance, meaning that
fewer households see their mortgage rates reduced at all. And of the borrowers that do refinance,
the rates they are paying fall less on average. The magnitude of the combined effect is
substantial: monetary policy transmission through the mortgage market has approximately half
the impact in the high-concentration county relative to the average county.

       Our estimates also suggest that increases in the concentration of mortgage lending can
explain a substantial fraction of the rise in the primary-secondary spread. Extrapolating from our
results, the 250 bps decline in MBS yields since the onset of the financial crisis should translate
into a 150 bps reduction in mortgage rates given the current level of concentration. This implies
that the decline in MBS yields should be associated with an approximately 100 bps increase in
the primary-secondary spread – roughly the magnitude of the increase observed by Fuster, et al.
(2012). Our estimates suggest that if the concentration of mortgage lending were instead at the




                                                 3
lower levels observed in the 1990s, the same decline in MBS yields would have resulted in a
40% smaller increase in the spread – an increase in the spread of 60 bps rather than 100 bps.4

         Of course, mortgage market concentration is not randomly assigned, so it is difficult to
ascribe causality to these results. We attempt to address endogeneity concerns in a variety of
ways. First, our basic results are robust to a battery of controls including county and time fixed
effects, population, wages, house prices, and mortgage characteristics. Moreover, we control for
the interaction of changes in MBS yields with these characteristics. Thus, our results show that
market concentration reduces the sensitivity of mortgage rates to MBS yields even after
controlling for the possibility that this sensitivity can vary with county characteristics. Second,
we use a matching procedure to ensure that the counties we study are similar on observable
dimensions. This does not affect the results.

         Third, we use bank mergers as an instrument for mortgage market concentration.
Specifically, we examine a sample of counties where mortgage lending concentration is
increased by bank mergers, but the counties in the sample were not the key motivation for the
merger. In particular, we focus on counties where the banks involved in a merger are important,
but the county itself makes up only a small fraction of the banks’ operations. Mergers increase
the concentration of mortgage lending in such counties. However, because the county makes up a
small fraction of each of the bank’s operations, it is unlikely that the county was an important
driver of the merger. In this sample of counties, we show that the sensitivity of refinancing and
mortgage rates to MBS yields falls after the merger, consistent with the idea that increased
concentration causes less pass-through. The exclusion restriction here is that bank mergers affect
the sensitivity of refinancing and mortgage rates to MBS yields within a county only through
their effect on market concentration in that county. For the exclusion restriction to be violated, it
would have to be the case that bank mergers are anticipating changing county characteristics that
explain our results, which seems unlikely.

         Finally, using data on bank profits and employment, we provide evidence consistent with
the market power mechanism being behind the lower pass-through of MBS yields into mortgage
rates. Interest and fee income from real estate loans, reported in the Call Reports banks file with

4
 Guarantee fees charged by the GSEs have also increased in recent years, but Fuster et al. (2012) argue that this
accounts for a relatively small part of the increase in the primary-secondary spread.


                                                          4
the Federal Reserve, is typically positively correlated with MBS yields because interest income
falls when yields fall. However, we show that interest and fee income is less sensitive to MBS
yields in high-concentration counties. This suggests that banks in concentrated mortgage markets
are able to use their market power to protect their profits when MBS yields fall. Similarly,
employment in real estate credit is typically negatively correlated with MBS yields; as MBS
yields fall originators hire more workers to process mortgage applications, or there is entry in
mortgage origination. However, the sensitivity is less negative (i.e., lower in absolute terms) in
high-concentration counties, meaning that in such counties originators expand hiring less
aggressively in response to a decline in MBS yields, or there is less entry. Thus, while it is true
that capacity constraints limit mortgage origination, these capacity constraints are endogenous to
the degree of competition in the market. In all, the evidence is consistent with the idea that
mortgage market concentration decreases the transmission of monetary policy to the housing
sector.

          Our results have both time series and the cross-sectional implications for the
effectiveness of monetary policy. Specifically, the impact of monetary policy could be
decreasing over time due to the increase in average mortgage market concentration documented
in Figure 1. In addition, even in the absence of a time series trend, monetary policy could have
different impacts across counties due to cross sectional variation in mortgage concentration
across counties.

          The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II gives some relevant
background on the mortgage market, and Section III presents a brief model to motivate our
empirics. Section IV describes the data, and Section V presents the main results. Section VI
concludes.

   II.       Background
          A. The Conforming Mortgage Market

          We begin with a brief review of the structure of the mortgage market. Our analysis
focuses on prime, conforming loans, which are eligible for credit guarantees from the
government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Such mortgages may
be put into MBS pools guaranteed by the GSEs. The GSEs guarantee investors in these MBS that



                                                   5
they will not suffer credit losses. If a mortgage in a GSE-guaranteed pool defaults, the GSE
immediately purchases the mortgage out of the pool at par, paying MBS investors the
outstanding balance of the mortgage. Thus, investors in GSE MBS bear no credit risk. In return
for their guarantee, the GSE charges investors a guarantee fee. In addition to the fees charged by
the GSEs, borrowers also pay mortgage lenders origination and servicing fees (see Figure 4 for a
graphical depiction).

           Conforming mortgages must meet certain qualifying characteristics. For instance, their
sizes must be below the so-called conforming loan limit, which is set by the Federal Housing
Finance Agency. In addition, borrowers eligible for conforming mortgages must have credit
(FICO) scores above 620 and the mortgages must meet basic GSE guidelines in terms of loan-to-
value ratios (LTVs) and documentation.

           An important fact for our empirical analysis is that GSE guarantee fees do not vary
geographically. Indeed, until 2008 the GSEs charged a given lender the same guarantee fee for
any loan they guaranteed, regardless of borrower (e.g., income, FICO), mortgage (e.g., LTV,
loan type), and collateral (e.g., home value) characteristics.5 In 2008 the GSEs began to charge
fees that vary by FICO score, LTV, and loan type, but do not vary by geography or any other
borrower characteristics.6 Thus, for the loans we focus on in our analysis, the only two
dimensions of credit quality that should materially affect rates on GSE-guaranteed mortgages are
FICO and LTV.7,8




5
    However, there is some relative minor variation in fees charged across lenders.
6
 Fannie Mae publishes their guarantee fee matrix online at: https://www.fanniemae.com/content/pricing/llpa-
matrix.pdf
7
 Loan type does not affect our analysis of mortgage rates because we restrict our sample to 30-year fixed rate, full
documentation loans.
8
  Other determinants of credit quality may have a small effect on the rates of GSE-guaranteed mortgages due to
prepayment risk. When a GSE-guaranteed mortgage defaults, the GSEs immediately pay investors the remaining
principal and accrued interest. From an investor’s perspective, it is as though the loan prepays. If defaults correlate
with the stochastic discount factor, which is likely, this risk will be priced by investors. However, since prepayments
induced by default are much smaller than prepayments induced by falling mortgage rates, this effect will be very
small.


                                                            6
           B. Definition of the Local Mortgage Market

           A key assumption underlying our empirical analysis is that competition in the mortgage
market is local. Specifically, we are assuming that county-level measures of concentration are
good proxies for the degree of competition in a local mortgage market. The advent of Internet-
based search platforms like Bankrate.com and LendingTree.com has certainly improved the
ability of borrowers to search for the best mortgage terms. However, there is substantial evidence
that many borrowers still shop locally for their mortgages. Analyzing data from the Survey of
Consumer Finances, Amel, Kennickell, and Moore (2008) find that the median household lived
within four miles of its primary financial institution in 2004. They find that 25% of households
obtained mortgages from this primary financial institution, while over 50% of households
obtained mortgages from an institution less than 25 miles away.

           Moreover, borrowers report that they exert little effort in shopping around for lower
mortgage rates. According to Lacko and Pappalardo (2007), in a survey conducted by the Federal
Trade Commission, the average borrower considered only two loans while shopping.9 Thus, it is
likely that local competition has effects on the local mortgage market. Competition could affect
loan terms like rates and points charged upfront, but could also manifest itself in other ways. For
instance, lenders may advertise more in more competitive markets, leading to greater borrower
awareness of lower mortgage rates and increased refinancing activity. Indeed, Gurun, Matvos,
and Seru (2013) find evidence that local advertising affects consumer mortgage choices,
suggesting that local competition is important.

    III.      Model
    We now briefly present a simple model of mortgage market competition. The model is meant
to motivate our empirical analysis, and to show that many of the results we find in the data can
be obtained in a simple model where differences in market competition are the driving force. The
model features Cournot competition with capacity constraints and delivers three main results.
First, the pass-through of MBS yields to mortgage rates is larger in markets with more competing
lenders. Second, pass-through is asymmetric; mortgage rates fall less when MBS yields fall than



9
  Aubusel (1990) documents the impact of this kind of consumer behavior on the effective level of competition in
the credit card market.


                                                        7
they rise when MBS yields rise. Third, this asymmetry disappears as there are more competing
lenders in the market.
     We assume linear demand for mortgages so that

                                                    p (Q ) = a − bQ

where p(Q) is the mortgage rate corresponding to demand of Q in the local area given this rate.
The linear demand assumption can be motivated by assuming that there are fixed costs to
refinancing and pre-existing mortgage rates are uniformly distributed.10 Each mortgage
originator is assumed to have pre-existing production capacity q . When production is below the
pre-existing capacity, the only costs of mortgage production are the costs of funding the loan,
given by the MBS yield, r. Thus, we are effectively normalizing other production costs
associated with mortgage origination to zero given that production is below pre-existing
capacity. However, if a lender wishes to produce more than its pre-existing capacity, it has
increasing, convex production costs, which capture the idea that it is costly to produce above
some capacity. For instance, one could think of these convex costs as capturing loan officer
overtime, strain on back-office capabilities, and other short-run costs of very high production.
Formally, production costs are given by

                                                 ⎧      rq                 if q ≤ q
                                                 ⎪
                                       C ( q ) = ⎨    1                2
                                                            (
                                                 ⎪rq + c q − q
                                                 ⎩    2
                                                                    )       if q > q

We assume Cournot competition,11 so firms solve the following maximization problem

                                               max q p (Q ) q − C ( q ) .



10
  In particular, suppose that borrowers have existing mortgages and that the rates on their mortgages, p0, are
uniformly distributed on the interval [x-Δ/2,x+Δ/2]. Refinancing is desirable if the new rate, p, plus transaction
costs, k, are less than the old rate, p0. Thus, the quantity of refinancing, Q, is equal to M[1-(p+k)/ Δ], where M is a
measure of the size of the market (e.g. population). We can therefore write the demand function, p(Q) = a – bQ,
where a=Δ-k and b = Δ/M.
11
  While it is more natural to model mortgage market competition as Bertrand, as argued by Kreps and Scheinkman
(1983), Bertrand competition with capacity constraints is similar to Cournot competition under certain conditions.
Furthermore, the model is merely meant to be illustrative, and Cournot competition simplifies the analysis
considerably.


                                                            8
We solve for the symmetric Nash equilibrium, labeling optimal production of individual lenders
q* and total equilibrium production Q* = nq*.




Proposition 1. Total equilibrium production depends on the MBS yield r and is given by

                                                      *
                                                ⎧ Qlow  ( r ) if r ≥ r
                                                ⎪
                                                ⎪
                                     Q* ( r ) = ⎨ Q            r ∈ ⎣⎡ r , r ⎦⎤
                                                ⎪ *
                                                ⎪⎩Qhigh ( r ) if r < r

where

                        *
                       Qlow (r) =
                                    (a − r ) N , Q = N q , Q         *
                                                                            (r) =
                                                                                      (a − r ) N
                                                                     high
                                    b ( N +1)                                       b ( N +1) + c

and

                             r = a − q (b ( N + 1) + c ) , r = a − qb ( N + 1) .

Proof. All proofs are given in the Appendix.

   The equilibrium depends on the MBS yield r. When the MBS yield is high, the demand for
loans will be low and can be met using existing capacity. In contrast, if MBS yields are low,
demand will be high, and lenders will add capacity to meet this demand. For intermediate values
of MBS yields, the increase in marginal cost associated with adding capacity is too large and
firms operate exactly at capacity.

   We can now study pass-through, the sensitivity of prices and quantities to changes in MBS
yields, in each region of the equilibrium. Since we are interested in the behavior of pass-through
as the number of competing lenders changes, it is useful to normalize pre-existing capacity so
that it is fixed at the industry level. Specifically, let q = Q / N where Q is aggregate industry
capacity. Thus, as we vary N, aggregate industry capacity is fixed but is distributed among a
larger number of lenders. Note that this normalization implies that both r and r approach a − bQ
as N grows large; as the industry becomes very competitive, the range of MBS yields where
lenders operate exactly at capacity vanishes.


                                                          9
     The following proposition describes the aggregate sensitivities of quantities and prices to
changes in MBS yields.

Proposition 2. Mortgage quantities rise when MBS yields fall: ∂Q* / ∂r < 0 . In addition,

                                                      ( )
mortgage rates fall when MBS yields fall: ∂P Q* / ∂r > 0. Finally, these sensitivities are larger

                                                                             ( )
in magnitude when there are more lenders: ∂ 2Q* / ∂r ∂N < 0 , ∂ 2 P Q* / ∂r∂N > 0.


     When MBS yields fall, the marginal cost of lending falls. Therefore, lenders produce more
mortgages, and the market clearing price is lower. This is true even in the region of the
parameter space where lenders must add more capacity. If MBS yields are low enough, the
demand for mortgages will be high enough that it is worthwhile for lenders to add capacity. As
the number of lenders increases, each has less effective market power, so more of the benefit of
low MBS yields is passed on to borrowers. 12

     Finally, the model delivers asymmetric pass through, as the following proposition describes.

Proposition 3. Pass-through is asymmetric. Mortgage rates are more sensitive to MBS yields
                          *
when yields are high: ∂P Qlow (     )    *
                              / ∂r > ∂P Qhigh   (      )
                                              / ∂r . Similarly, quantities are more sensitive to
                                   *            *
MBS yields when yields are high: ∂Qlow / ∂r > ∂Qhigh / ∂r . This difference vanishes as the
number of lenders grows large.

     The pass-through of changes in MBS yields is larger when yields are high and pre-existing
capacity can be used to satisfy demand. When MBS yields are lower, additional capacity must be
added to meet demand. The additional costs of adding capacity mean that mortgage rates do not
fall as much as MBS yields fall. However, with more lenders, this asymmetry vanishes. Each
lender makes a small capacity adjustment, leading to a large increase in aggregate capacity.

     The model, while simple, serves to motivate our empirical analysis, and shows that the
intuitive link between pass through and market competition can be formalized. Moreover, the
model underscores the link between industry capacity constraints and mortgage market

12
  It is worth noting that low pass-through can be a symptom of high market power, but it need not be (Bulow and
Pfleiderer, 1983). The model is meant for illustrative purposes and the results are sensitive to functional form
assumptions. Ultimately the relationship between pass-through and market power is an empirical question.


                                                        10
competition. It shows that while capacity constraints may be related to high spreads, the full
impact of the capacity constraints is related to the degree of competition. In markets with few
lenders, lenders will be reluctant to add capacity to meet increased demand for mortgages.

     IV.      Data

           The data in the paper come primarily from two sources. The first is the loan application
register data required by the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) of 1975. The data contain
every loan application made in the United States to lenders above a certain size threshold. Of
primary interest in this paper, the data contain information on whether the loan application was
for a refinancing or a new home purchase, whether the loan application was granted, a lender
identifier, as well as loan characteristics including year, county, dollar amount, and borrower
income. We construct an annual, county-level sample using this data over 1994-2011.13
Summary statistics for the sample of HMDA data we use are shown in Table 1 Panel A.
Unfortunately, the data lack information on mortgage rates as well as FICO scores and loan-to-
value ratios, which play a critical role in determining rates (Rajan, Seru, and Vig, 2012).

           Since the HMDA database includes lender identifiers, we can use it to construct county-
level measures of competition in mortgage lending. The measure of concentration we use in all
our baseline specifications is the share of each county’s market served by the top 4 lenders in the
county. Figure 1 shows the time series of nation-wide top 4 concentration as well as the time
series of the average county-level top 4 concentration. Our results are robust to using other
measures of concentration such as the Herfindahl-Hirschman index (HHI). Appendix Table 1
shows our main results using HHI. While these measures of concentration are surely imperfect
proxies for the level of local competition, the empirics require only that they capture some of the
variation in local competition.

           To supplement the HMDA data, we use aggregates from the CoreLogic loan level
servicing database. This database contains information on all the loans (including loans
guaranteed by the GSEs) from a set of servicers that have data-sharing agreements with


13
  The HMDA data are available back to 1990, but we focus on the 1994-2011 period for two reasons. First, because
of changing reporting requirements, the number of counties with reporting institutions varies by more than 10%
from year to year prior to 1994. Second, the FDIC deposits data we use later in the paper starts in 1994. We obtain
similar results if we use the full 1990-2011 sample.


                                                        11
CoreLogic. All large servicers are included, and loan volumes in the database range from 30-
50% of loan volumes in HMDA. The data we work with are monthly aggregates at the county
level for prime, full documentation, 30-year fixed-rate loans. The sample runs from 2000-2011,
and the data contain mortgage rates, FICO scores, and LTVs.

            We supplement these data sources with county-level population and wage statistics from
the Census Bureau. In addition, we obtain historical yields on current coupon Fannie Mae MBS
from Bloomberg.

       V.       Results
            A. Baseline Results: Quantity of Refinancings

            We now turn to the results. We begin by examining the frequency of refinancing in the
HMDA sample. For each county, we measure refinancing activity by the number of mortgages
refinanced in a given year, normalized by the county’s population in that year.14 We regress the
change in this measure on the change in 30-year Fannie Mae current coupon MBS yields over
that year, county-level top 4 concentration lagged one year, and the interaction of the two.15
Formally, we run:

               ⎛ Refi ⎞
             Δ ⎜      ⎟ = α + β1 ⋅ ΔMBS Yieldt + β 2 ⋅ Top 4i ,t + β3 ⋅ ΔMBS Yieldt × Top 4i ,t + ε i ,t .
               ⎝ Pop ⎠i ,t

The coefficient of interest is β3, which measures the difference in sensitivities to MBS yields,
between high and low concentration counties.

            Table 2 Panel A shows the results. The first column shows that a 100 bps decrease in
MBS yields (for reference, the standard deviation of MBS yields is 60 bps) increases the quantity
of refinancing per person by 0.8% (percentage points) in a county with an average level of
mortgage market concentration (46.4%). Relative to the standard deviation of refinancing per
person of 1.2%, this is a large effect. Consistent with the predictions of the model in Section III,
the positive coefficient on the interaction of MBS yields and concentration implies that higher
14
     Similar results are obtained using dollar loan volume, rather than the number of refinancings.
15
  The current coupon MBS yield is meant to represent the yield on newly issued MBS. It is derived from prices in
the forward market for GSE MBS, called the to-be-announced or TBA market, on MBS to be delivered in the
current month.


                                                            12
mortgage market concentration mitigates this effect. A one standard deviation increase in
concentration (17.6%) decreases the effect of MBS yields by 35% (=.016 * 17.6%/0.8). The
second column shows that the effects are stronger once we add county and year fixed effects.
The time fixed effects show that the results are not simply due to changes in the sensitivity of
refinancing to MBS yields over time. Our results are unchanged when we isolate the cross-
sectional variation in our data. Similarly, the third column shows that our results are equally
strong if we restrict the sample to the period before the financial crisis, 1994-2006.

         The fourth column shows that the lower sensitivity of refinancing per person to changes
in MBS yields in high-concentration counties is particularly strong at times when MBS yields are
falling. It is well known that in many markets prices fall more slowly in response to cost
decreases than they rise in response to cost increases (Peltzman, 2000). As the model in Section
III demonstrated, asymmetric pass-through can be a symptom of market power. Indeed, many
studies in macroeconomics and industrial organization take asymmetric pass-through as a sign of
market power (e.g., Blinder, 1994; Blinder et al., 1998; Borenstein, Cameron, and Gilbert, 1997;
Chenes, 2010; Jackson, 1997; Hannan and Berger, 1992; Karrenbrock, 1991; Neumark and
Sharpe, 1992).

         The remaining columns show that the results are robust to a battery of additional controls
including county-level population, average wages, loan size, loan-to-income ratios,16 and house
price appreciation.17 In addition, Panel B of Table 2 shows that the results are robust to
controlling for the interaction of changes in MBS yields with these characteristics. It is
reassuring to note that the coefficients across specifications and controls are remarkably
consistent. While these specifications cannot completely account for unobservable differences
between counties, they do suggest that our results are not driven by a variety of observable
county characteristics. Though we control for population in the regressions, the analysis still
equal-weights counties, raising the possibility that our results are driven by small, low-
population counties. Appendix Table 2 shows that this is not the case. Our main results are
16
   The loan-to-income ratios used here are from HMDA, and thus reflect the ratio of mortgage debt to income for
mortgage borrowers. As shown in Table 4 below, our results are also robust on controlling for the ratio of total debt
to income at the county level, which is studied Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2012).
17
  Our house price data is from Zillow and is restricted to a limited number of MSAs starting in 1996, which
explains the sharp decrease in the number of observations. The smaller drops in observations in the earlier columns
reflect data missing in HMDA.


                                                         13
robust to weighting the sample by population and excluding counties with populations below the
median or mean for a given year.

        Finally, Panel C of Table 2 shows that that our results are not driven by differences in
homeownership rates between high- and low-concentration counties. Specifically, it could be the
case that high-concentration counties have low homeownership rates, and thus simply have less
scope for variation in refinancings per person since renters do not refinance. To address this
concern, Panel C displays the same specifications as Panel B but uses as the dependent variable
the change in refinancing normalized by owner-occupied housing units. We obtain county-level
data on housing units from the Census Bureau’s American Community Survey, which provides
this information annually for counties with populations over 65,000.18 The results are very
similar to those in Panel B. Refinancings per owner-occupied housing unit increase when MBS
yields fall, and the effect is smaller in high-concentration counties. Thus, differences in
homeownership rates across counties cannot account for our results.

        An additional concern with our results could be that our concentration measures are
proxying for the type of lender, and different types of lenders have different sensitivities to MBS
yields. In particular, it is possible that small localized lenders are more likely to hold loans on
their balance sheet rather than securitize them (Loutskina and Strahan, 2011). This could make
their refinancing behavior less sensitive to MBS yields. Thus, if small, localized lenders do a
larger share of the refinancing in more concentrated markets, it is possible that our measures of
concentration are proxying for the behavior of these localized lenders. Panel A of Table 3
documents that small, localized lenders do, in fact, have a larger share of refinancing in more
concentrated markets. In this table, we regress the share of refinancings originated by small
lenders on our top 4 concentration measure. In the first column, for example, the refinancing
share of small lenders is defined as the share of lenders operating in fewer than 10 counties,
while in the second column it is the share of lenders that operate in fewer than 50 counties. The
table shows that smaller lenders generally have a larger share in counties where concentration is
high.

18
  The ACS data begins in 2005. We backfill the number of owner-occupied housing units in each county for years
before 2005, assuming the owner-occupancy rate is constant in earlier years. This preserves the cross-sectional
variation in rates across counties, which is the most important dimension of variation in the data. The annual
autocorrelation of county-level owner-occupancy rates is 0.96, so assuming a constant rate within a county is a
reasonable assumption.


                                                       14
       Panel B of Table 3 shows, however, that lenders respond to local mortgage market
conditions the same way, whether they are localized or not. Each column runs the baseline
specification from Table 2 but restricts the sample to lenders that operate in the number of
counties given by the column header. For instance, the first column restricts the sample to loans
made by lenders operating in fewer than 10 counties, and the second column restricts the samples
to loans made by lenders that operate in 10 or more counties. We rescale the dependent variable
by the national market share of the lenders in the sample to make the coefficients comparable to
those in the Table 2. Thus, the coefficients can be interpreted as the sensitivity of refinancing to
MBS yields, assuming all refinancings in the country were done by the lenders in our restricted
sample. For instance, the first column of Table 3 shows the sensitivity of refinancing to MBS
yields, assuming all refinancing was performed by lenders than operate in fewer than 10
counties. The results in Panel B of Table 2 are uniform across lender types. Refinancings
originated by both small and large lenders are less sensitive to MBS yields in more concentrated
markets. Panel C of Table 3 shows that these results are unaffected by year fixed effects. Thus,
while smaller lenders do have a larger market share in more concentrated counties, the results
cannot be explained by the lower sensitivity of their refinancing behavior to MBS yields.

       B. Baseline Results: Mortgage Rates

       We next turn to the behavior of mortgage rates in the CoreLogic data. For each county-
month, we take the average rate on prime, full-documentation, and 30-year fixed-rate loans. We
restrict the sample to county-months with at least 5 loans, average FICO scores greater than 620,
and average LTVs between 50 and 101. We regress the change in rates on the change in 30-year
Fannie Mae current coupon MBS yields over the month, county-level top-4 concentration lagged
one year, and the interaction of the two. Formally, we run:

          ΔRatei ,t = α + β1 ⋅ ΔMBS Yieldt + β 2 ⋅ Top 4i ,t + β3 ⋅ ΔMBS Yield t × Top 4i ,t + ε i ,t .

Again, the coefficient of interest is β3, which measures the difference in sensitivities to MBS
yields, between high- and low-concentration counties.

       Table 4 Panel A shows the results. The first column shows that a 100 bps decrease in
MBS yields is associated with a 40 bps decrease in mortgage rates for borrowers in a county with



                                                      15
an average level of mortgage market concentration. This is substantially less than a one-for-one
relationship because of timing issues at the monthly level. Specifically, mortgages originated in a
given month may have been agreed upon and locked in borrowing rates up to 6 weeks before the
formal closing date. We obtain magnitudes closer to one-for-one for the average county if we
aggregate the data up to the county-quarter or county-year level. However, the differential
sensitivity between high- and low-concentration counties, which is our main focus, is unaffected
by such time aggregation. For robustness, Appendix Table 3 presents the same results as Table 4
but using data aggregated up to the county-quarter level.

           Consistent with the model’s predictions, the coefficient on the interaction between MBS
yields and concentration implies that high concentration reduces the pass-through of MBS yields
to borrowers. A one standard deviation increase in concentration decreases the effect of MBS
yields on mortgage rates by 27% (=.626 * 17.4%/40%). The second column in Table 4 Panel A
adds county and year fixed effects, indicating that results are not driven solely by aggregate time
trends or by fixed differences across counties. The third column shows that results persist when
we restrict the sample to the pre-crisis period, 2000-2006. Though mortgage market
concentration has grown substantially over recent years, the results we document here are not
solely driven by the period during and after the financial crisis. The fourth column shows that the
low sensitivity of mortgage rates to changes in MBS yields in high-concentration counties is
particularly strong at times when MBS yields are falling. As discussed above, asymmetric pass-
through can be a symptom of market power.19 The statistical evidence is somewhat weaker here
than in Table 2 because our mortgage rate data has a shorter time dimension (2000-2011) than
our refinancing quantity data (1994-2011).

           The remaining columns of Table 4 Panel A show that the results are robust to controlling
for changes in LTV, changes in FICO, and house price appreciation. Panel B of Table 4 shows
that the results are also robust to controlling for the interaction of changes in MBS yields with
these characteristics. Again, it is reassuring to note that the coefficients across specifications and
controls are remarkably consistent.




19
     Kahn, Pennacchi, and Sopranzetti (2005) document asymmetric pass-through in rates on personal loans.


                                                         16
           Unfortunately, our data does not contain information on up-front points, fees, and closing
costs. Thus, our results essentially assume that these costs do not covary negatively with market
concentration. If fees were lower in high-concentration areas, this may offset the smaller
sensitivity to MBS yields we find in those counties. In untabulated results using data from the
Monthly Interest Rate Survey (MIRS) conducted by the Federal Housing Finance Agency, we
find that fees are on average higher in high-concentration counties, not lower. Moreover, fees are
equally sensitive to MBS yields in high- and low-concentration counties.

           C. Assessing Magnitudes

           What is the total economic magnitude of the effects of market concentration we are
finding? There are two different ways to answer this question. First, we can assess the relative
effect across counties. Note that the effect of concentration on mortgage rates compounds with
the effect on refinancing. In a high-concentration county, fewer borrowers refinance, meaning
that fewer households see their mortgage rates reduced at all. And of the borrowers that do
refinance, the rates they pay fall less on average. The results in Table 2 imply that a decrease in
MBS yields has a 35% smaller effect on the quantity of refinancing in a county with
concentration one standard deviation above the mean than in a county with average
concentration. For the households that do refinance, the results in Table 4 show that a decrease in
MBS yields has a 27% smaller effect on mortgage rates in the high-concentration county. Taken
together, these imply that a decrease in MBS yields has a roughly 50% smaller effect in the high-
concentration county.20

           Table 5 provides a second way to assess the economic magnitude of our results. We can
compare the effects of mortgage market concentration to the effects of various proxies for
borrower credit quality. In general, having low credit quality can impede refinancing. For
instance, Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2012) present evidence that high indebtedness has been an
impediment to refinancing in the aftermath of the financial crisis.21 In the first four columns, we
examine effects on the quantity of refinancings. The first column compares the effect of
mortgage concentration to the effect of borrower loan-to-income (LTI) ratios. These LTIs are

20
  The frequency of refinancing is only 65% as high in the high-concentration county, and each refinancing reduces
rates 73% as much. Thus the total effect is only 65%x73% = 48% as large in the high-concentration county.
21
     Caplin and Tracy (1997) study the impact of refinancing constraints in earlier recessions.


                                                            17
from HMDA and thus reflect the ratio of mortgage debt to income for mortgage borrowers. The
results show that over the full sample, the average level of LTI within a county had no effect on
refinancing, while the interaction of LTI and MBS yields is negative. When MBS yields fall,
borrowers are more likely to refinance in counties that have high LTIs. This is presumably
because borrowers with high LTIs have a stronger incentive to refinance when MBS yields fall.
The coefficients imply that a one standard deviation increase in market concentration reduces the
sensitivity of refinancing to MBS yields as much as a 0.49 (= .014 * 17.6%/.005) decline in LTI,
which corresponds to slightly more than one standard deviation of LTI.

         The second column of Table 5 restricts the sample to the financial crisis period, 2007-
2011. Now we see that the level of LTI has a negative effect on refinancing, consistent with
Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2012). However, the interaction of MBS yields and LTI is still negative,
implying that borrowers in high LTI areas are more likely to refinance when MBS yields fall.
One interpretation of these results taken together is that many borrowers are underwater and
cannot refinance in counties with high indebtedness. However, borrowers in those counties who
are not underwater have strong incentives to refinance when MBS yields fall. The coefficient on
the level of LTI implies that a one standard deviation increase in LTI in the crisis period
decreases refinancings per capita by 0.1% (percentage points). A one standard deviation increase
in concentration reduces the effect of a 100 bps drop in MBS yields by a similar amount in this
specification. However, note that because LTI changes slowly within county, its effect on
refinancings cumulates over several years. In contrast, a decline in MBS yields is a one-time
event.

         The third and fourth columns of Table 5 repeat the same exercise, but use a different
measure of indebtedness. Specifically, we use county-level data on the ratio of total debt, not just
mortgage debt, to income (DTI) in 2007, as in Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2012). These specifications
lack county fixed effects because we only have a single county-level observation for total debt-
to-income. However, the coefficients and economic magnitudes are similar to those we obtained
using LTIs from HMDA.

         The final two columns of Table 5 examine the sensitivity of mortgage rates to changes in
credit quality. The columns show that a one standard deviation increase in county-average LTV
among mortgage borrowers in the CoreLogic dataset decreases mortgage rates by 5 bps. A one


                                                 18
standard deviation decrease in FICO has a similar effect.22 A one standard deviation increase in
concentration reduces the effect of a 100 bps drop in MBS yields by about twice as much.

        D. Discussion of Endogeneity Concerns

        While the results above are quite robust to a variety of controls, one might still be
concerned that market concentration is just a proxying for some other endogenous relationship,
rather than directly causing the observed effects through market power. That is, one may worry
that our results are driven by unobservable differences between counties along dimensions other
than mortgage market concentration. Of course, all our baseline specifications include county
fixed effects, which absorb the average effect of any unobservable characteristics on changes in
refinancings and mortgage rates. However, unobservable characteristics could still affect the
sensitivities of the variables to MBS yields.

        There are two broad types of confounds one may be concerned about. The first is
confounds based on loan characteristics. For instance, as discussed above, low credit quality can
impede refinancing when MBS yields fall. If high market concentration is correlated with poor
credit quality, then households in high concentration counties may have trouble refinancing
when MBS yields fall. However, as shown in Table 4 of the Appendix, we generally find that
high concentration is associated with high, not low, credit quality. Moreover, our controls for
county-level FICOs, LTVs, and house price appreciation in our results on mortgage rates (Table
3) should absorb such factors. Recall that our analysis focuses on conforming loans, which are
eligible for GSE guarantees. Since GSE guarantee fees depend on only FICO scores, LTVs, and
year of origination, controlling for these factors should absorb all priced differences in credit
quality between conforming loans. Thus, any differences in the response of mortgage rates to
MBS yields should not be driven by differences in the credit quality of loans in high- versus low-
concentration counties. Indeed, as shown in Table 5, our results are robust to controlling for the
measure of county-level indebtedness used by Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2012). Moreover, our results
are equally strong if we restrict our sample to the years before the financial crisis – before the
problems with high indebtedness emerged. Nonetheless, one may still be concerned that our
controls only absorb linear effects of observable characteristics. Therefore, in the next section we

22
  The relationships between rates and FICO scores and rates and LTVs are substantially stronger in levels than in
differences. For example, in levels, a one standard deviation decrease in FICO increases rates by about 25 bps.


                                                        19
use a matching procedure to ensure that our results are comparing counties that are very similar
on observables.

         The second type of confound that may raise concerns is based on demographic
characteristics. Demographic characteristics are known to be correlated with household financial
decisions (Campbell, 2006). Again, to the extent that such confounding demographic
characteristics are observable, our controls are likely to absorb them. Nevertheless, there could
be important borrower characteristics not fully captured by our controls. In general, the response
of prices to costs depends on the curvature of the demand function as well as market structure
(Dornbusch, 1987; Knetter, 1989; Bergin and Feenstra, 2001; Atkeson and Burstein, 2008). If
market structure is correlated with local characteristics that impact the curvature of the demand
function, our results may reflect differences in characteristics rather than market power.23 For
instance, borrower sophistication is difficult to measure, and it could be the case that borrowers
in high-concentration counties are less sophisticated than those in low-concentration counties.
Thus, they could be slower to refinance when MBS yields fall and search less intensively for the
best mortgage rate, leading us to observe less variation in borrowing rates as yields fall.
However, it seems likely that such borrowers are more profitable from the lender perspective;
unsophisticated borrowers who do not search for the best deal are likely to pay excessively high
fees to originators. Thus, their presence would encourage more entry in the mortgage market and
lower market concentration. For borrower sophistication to drive our results, it would have to be
the case that unsophisticated borrowers are more costly to serve, so that fewer lenders enter areas
where they predominate.

         To address concerns about demographic confounds, in Section IV.F we examine
variation in mortgage market concentration within a given county induced by bank mergers that
are unlikely to be related to county characteristics. That is, we examine changes in mortgage
market concentration in counties that are essentially an unintended consequence of a bank
merger. Our results continue to hold when we restrict our attention to this merger-related


23
  A growing literature, including Goldberg and Hellerstein (2008, 2013), Hellerstein (2006), Nakamura and Zerom
(2010), has used structural models to study the pass-through of changes in exchange rates to local prices. These
studies are interested in decomposing in full all sources of incomplete pass-through, and therefore require structural
models. In contrast, we are interested in simply identifying that market power is an important source of incomplete
pass-through, so a reduced form approach is adequate (Goldberg and Knetter 1997).


                                                          20
variation in mortgage market concentration. Assuming that county characteristics are not
simultaneously changing, this suggests that we are indeed isolating the effect of market power.

       E. Addressing Endogeneity Concerns: Matched Samples

       In this section, we try to address the endogeneity concerns discussed above by employing
a matching procedure to ensure that we are comparing counties that are very similar along
observable dimensions. We start with the HMDA data. For each year, we try to match each
county with high concentration (above median for the year) to a county with low concentration
along a variety of dimensions. We match to the county that is closest along those dimensions as
measured by the Mahalobnis metric, which weights the distance between two counties along a
given dimension by the inverse variance, properly accounting for the covariances between
dimensions (Imbens, 2004; Rubin and Thomas, 1992). Matching along many dimensions can
result in a nearest match that is poor along each individual dimension. Therefore, to ensure that
each match is high quality, we require that each match is within 1/3 of a standard deviation along
each dimension. We then run our baseline specifications in each matched sample.

       The results for the HMDA sample are in Table 6 Panel A. The first two columns match
on county population and average wages. The second two columns match on population, average
wages, LTI, and loan size. The final two columns match on population, average wages, LTI, loan
size, and house prices. Appendix Table 5 Panel A shows the quality of the matches along each
dimension for each matched sample. While some differences remain when only matching on
county population and wages, there are no statistically or economically significant differences in
the other matched samples.

       The results in Table 6 Panel A show that we obtain very similar results to the baseline in
Table 2 when we use the matched samples. High mortgage market concentration is associated
with a lower sensitivity of refinancings per capita to MBS yields, and the effect is particularly
strong when MBS yields are falling.

       The results for the CoreLogic sample are in Table 6 Panel B. The first two columns
match on county population and average wages. The second two columns match on population,
average wages, FICO, and LTV. The final two columns match on population, average wages,
FICO, LTV, and house prices. Appendix Table 3 Panel B shows the quality of the matches along


                                                 21
each dimension for each matched sample. As with the HMDA data sample, in the CoreLogic
data some differences remain when only matching on county population and wages, but there are
no statistically or economically significant differences in the other matched samples.

        The results in Table 6 Panel B show that we obtain very similar results to the baseline in
Table 4 when we use the matched samples. High mortgage market concentration is associated
with a lower sensitivity of mortgage rates to MBS yields. There is some evidence that the effect
is particularly strong when MBS yields are falling, though it is not consistent across samples.

        F. Addressing Endogeneity Concerns: Bank Mergers

        Our second attempt to address endogeneity concerns uses bank mergers to create
variation in mortgage market concentration that is plausibly unrelated to county characteristics.
Using the FDIC’s Summary of Deposits to identify the county-level locations of bank operations,
we construct a sample of counties affected by bank mergers, where the counties in the sample
were not the key motivation for the merger.24 Specifically, we focus on counties where the banks
involved in the merger each have a relatively large market share as measured by the fraction of
the total deposits in the county. This means that the merger is likely to have an effect on
mortgage market concentration. However, we also require that the county is not a large part of
the bank’s total business; the county must contain only a small fraction of the bank’s total
deposits. This helps to ensure that the characteristics of the county were not a key driver of the
merger.25 Within the sample, we examine how the sensitivity of refinancings and mortgage rates
to MBS yields changes after the merger takes place.

        Table 7 present the results for two such merger samples. Panel A presents our baseline
sample of counties, where a bank involved in a merger makes up more than 15% of the total




24
  We must measure the impact of bank mergers using deposits, not mortgage loans, because we cannot link bank
identifiers to HMDA identifiers before 2000.
25
  Dafny, Duggan, and Ramanarayanan (2012) take a somewhat similar approach in studying the effects of health
insurer mergers.



                                                      22
deposits in the county, but the county itself makes up no more than 2% of the bank’s total
deposits.26 In the first column, we examine the effect of mergers on concentration:

                                     Top 4i ,t = α t + β ⋅ Post Mergeri ,t + ε i ,t .

The results show that each merger is associated with an increase in mortgage market
concentration of 3.1%. To the extent that we think of mergers as an instrument in this context,
the instrument is relevant. Note that while the effect is statistically significant, it is small relative
to the total variation we observe in concentration in the full sample.

        We then use mergers as an instrument for concentration. Specifically, we run

           " Refi %                                             
          Δ$      ' = α + β1 ⋅ ΔMBS Yieldt + β2 ⋅Top 4i,t + β3 ⋅ ΔMBS Yieldt × Top 4i,t + εi,t ,
           # Pop &i,t

                              
where the hats on Top 4i,t and ΔMBS Yieldt ×Top 4i,t indicate that those variables are

instrumented for using the post-merger indicator and the post-merger indicator interacted with
the change in MBS yields. Note that only counties that experience a merger that meets the
criteria discussed above are in the sample. This means that the coefficients are essentially
identified off the timing of the mergers, not the cross-sectional differences in concentration
across counties. Moreover, the second stage exercise contains county fixed effects. Thus, the
estimates can be interpreted as showing that the sensitivity of refinancings to MBS yields
decreases within a given county after a merger that increases mortgage market concentration.

        The results show that the sensitivity of refinancings to MBS yields decreases with top 4
concentration when instrumented by the post-merger indicator. The sensitivity of refinancings to
MBS yields decreases after a merger at the same time that mortgage market concentration is
increasing. Note that the magnitudes of the coefficients are larger here than in Tables 2 and 3.
                                    
The reason is that the fitted value Top 4i,t has less variation than the raw variable Top 4i ,t .

                         
Therefore, ΔMBS Yieldt x Top 4i,t is more collinear with ΔMBS Yieldt than is


26
  The cutoffs capture 25% of bank-counties along each dimension. Specifically, 25% of bank shares of total county
deposit are above 15%, and 25% of county shares of total bank deposits are below 2%.


                                                         23
ΔMBS Yieldt × Top 4i ,t . However, the economic magnitudes are similar to those in our earlier

results. A 100 bps decrease in MBS yields is associated with a 1.2% increase in refinancings in
the average county but only a 0.78% increase in a county with concentration one standard
deviation above the mean. Thus, there is a 35% smaller increase in refinancings in the high-
concentration county.

        The remaining columns of Table 7 show the analogous results for changes in mortgage
rates. Here, the lower power of the instrument comes into play. While the results show that the
sensitivity of mortgage rates to MBS yields decreases with concentration as instrumented by the
post-merger indicators, the results are not statistically significant.

        Panel B of Table 7 presents the results for our second merger sample. Here the sample
consists of counties where a bank involved in a merger makes up more than 30% of the total
deposits in the county, but the county itself makes up no more than 1% of the bank’s total
deposits. This is a more stringent requirement, and therefore the sample in Panel B is much
smaller than our first merger sample.

        While we have far fewer observations, the benefit of studying this smaller sample is that
the instrument is stronger. The first column of Panel B shows that the effect of a merger on
mortgage market concentration is just as strong in this sample, both economically and
statistically, as it is in the first sample. However, given that the sample is much smaller, this
means that mergers are a strong instrument in this sample. As argued by Staiger and Stock
(1997), F-statistics are a good measure of the power of a set of instruments. The F-statistic of the
post-merger dummy in the first sample (Panel A of Table 6) is 12.7, relatively close to Staiger
and Stock’s minimum recommended value of 10. The F-statistic of the post-merger dummy in
the second sample (Panel B) is 19.3, indicating that the instrument is stronger here.

        The results in Panel B of Table 7 show that high mortgage market concentration is
associated with lower sensitivities to MBS yields. As in Panel A, the results are statistically
significant for the number of refinancings. Unlike in Panel A, the results in Panel B are also
statistically significant for mortgage rates, reflecting the stronger instrument.




                                                  24
        Does our bank merger instrument satisfy the exclusion restriction? The exclusion
restriction in this case is that bank mergers affect the sensitivity of refinancings and mortgage
rates to MBS yields within a county only through their effect on market concentration in that
county. Of course, bank mergers are not random. However, for the exclusion restriction to be
violated, it would have to be the case that bank mergers are anticipating changing county
characteristics that explain our results. For instance, if the alternative is that our results reflect
high mortgage market concentration in counties with unsophisticated borrowers, bank mergers
would have to anticipate declining sophistication within a county. This seems unlikely.
Moreover, in Appendix Table 7 we show that observable characteristics do not change within a
county after the merger. The table also shows characteristics of the counties in the merger
samples relative to those excluded. Counties in the first sample are somewhat larger than
average, but counties in the second sample are similar to the average county in our full sample.

        G. Corroborating Evidence

        Finally, we examine non-mortgage data for corroborating evidence of the mechanism.
We first analyze the behavior of bank fees and interest income on real estate loans, which is
obtained from the Call Reports. If market power in mortgage lending were really driving our
results, one might expect that the revenues of lenders would be less sensitive to mortgage rates in
high-concentration areas. Lenders in such areas, facing little competition, would have little
incentive to offer lower rates when MBS yields fall and thus would be able to keep their
revenues high.

        To examine this prediction, we restrict the sample to banks completely located in one
county according to the FDIC’s Summary of Deposits. This ensures that we are picking up
variation in local, county-level conditions. The first two columns of Table 8 show the results. A
100 bps decrease in MBS yields is associated with a 5.9% decrease in fee and interest income on
real estate loans. However, this effect is mitigated in higher-concentration counties.

        Next we examine employment in real estate credit, which we obtain from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages. Again, if market power in
mortgage lending were really driving our results, one might expect that the employment by
lenders in high concentration areas would be less sensitive to mortgage rates. As the model in



                                                   25
Section III demonstrates, lenders in such areas, facing little competition, would have little
incentive to increase their staff in response to increased demand. They could instead force
borrowers wishing to refinance to wait for their staff to become available without fear of losing
those borrowers to competitors. The last two columns of Table 8 show the results. Decreases in
MBS yields are associated with increases in real estate credit employment, but again this effect is
mitigated in higher-concentration counties.

   VI.      Conclusion

         We present evidence that high concentration in local mortgage lending reduces the
sensitivity of mortgage rates and refinancing activity to MBS yields. A decrease in MBS yields is
typically associated with greater refinancing activity and lower rates on new mortgages.
However, this effect is dampened in counties with concentrated mortgage markets. Our estimates
suggest that the impact of a 100 bps decrease in MBS yields is only half as large in a county with
mortgage market concentration one standard deviation above the mean as it is in a county with
average concentration.

         We isolate the direct effect of mortgage market concentration and rule out alternative
explanations based on borrower, loan, and collateral characteristics in two ways. First, we use a
matching procedure to compare high- and low-concentration counties that are very similar on
observable characteristics and find similar results. Second, we examine counties where
concentration in mortgage lending is increased by bank mergers. We show that within a given
county sensitivities to MBS yields decrease after a concentration-increasing merger. Finally, we
provide corroborating evidence based on banks’ interest and fee income on real estate loans and
employment in real estate credit that is consistent with the idea that we are isolating the effect of
mortgage concentration.

         Our results suggest that the effectiveness of housing as a monetary policy transmission
channel varies in both the time series and the cross section. Our baseline estimates suggest that
the impact on local housing markets of the fall in MBS yields induced by a monetary easing
varies substantially across counties. Moreover, given that the average county-level mortgage
market concentration has risen over time, the impact of monetary policy on housing may have
fallen substantially on average. Figure 1 shows that average concentration rose approximately



                                                 26
11% between 1997 and 2011. Extrapolating from our estimates, this suggests that the impact of a
100 bps drop in MBS yields in 2011 was 40% smaller than it would have been in 1997.




                                              27
Appendix

Proof of Proposition 1. If we are below q , each firm has first order condition

                                             0 = a − bQ − bq − r.

In a symmetric equilibrium we have Q = Nq which implies that

                                                            a−r
                                               q*low =              .
                                                         b ( N + 1)

When we are above q , the first order condition is

                                          0 = a − bQ − bq − r − cq.

In a symmetric equilibrium this implies that

                                                             a−r
                                             q*high =                  .
                                                        b ( N + 1) + c

       To find the bounds on r, we can plug in to find the values of r that yield q in each of
these expressions:

                                                            a−r
                                          q = q*low =               and
                                                         b ( N + 1)

                                                              a−r
                                          q = q*high =                  .
                                                         b ( N + 1) + c

Proof of Proposition 2. Differentiating gives the pass-through result:
                                                             *
                            *
                          ∂Qlow       −N                   ∂Qhigh             −N
                                =            < 0,                    =                  < 0.
                           ∂r     b ( N + 1)                 ∂r          b ( N + 1) + c

Differentiating with respect to N gives the change with the number of lenders

                     ∂ 2Qlow
                         *
                               −1                         ∂ 2Qhigh
                                                              *
                                                                             − (b + c )
                             =        < 0,                           =                        <0
                     ∂r∂N b ( N + 1)2                      ∂r∂N          (b ( N + 1) + c )
                                                                                          2



                                      *
                             *
                           ∂Qlow   ∂Qhigh    1
Proof of Proposition 3.          ,        → − as N → ∞ .
                            ∂r      ∂r       b



                                                          28
References

Amel, D., Kennickell, A., Moore, B., 2008. Banking market definition: evidence from the survey
      of consumer finances. Unpublished working paper. Finance & Economic Discussion
      Series, U.S. Federal Reserve Board.

Atkeson, A., Burstein, A., 2008. Pricing-to-market, trade costs, and international relative prices.
      American Economic Review 98, 1998-2031.

Ausubel, L., 1990. The failure of competition in the credit card market. The American Economic
      Review 81, 50–81.

Avery, R., Bhutta, N., Brevoort, K., Canner, G., 2012. The mortgage market in 2011: highlights
       from the data reported under the home mortgage disclosure act. Federal Reserve Bulletin.

Bergin, P., Feenstra, R., 2001. Pricing-to-market, staggered contracts and real exchange rate
       persistence. Journal of International Economics 54, 333-359.

Bernanke, B., 2009. Reflections on a year in crisis. Remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of
      Kansas City's Annual Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming.

Bernanke, B., 2012. Challenges in housing and mortgage markets. Remarks at the Operation
      HOPE Global Financial Dignity Summit, Atlanta, Georgia.

Bernanke, B., Gertler, M., 1995. Inside the black box: the credit channel of monetary policy
      transmission. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, 27-48.

Blinder, A., 1994. On Sticky Prices: Academic Theories Meet the Real World. In: Mankiw, N.
       (Ed.), Monetary Policy. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 117-154.

Blinder, A., Canetti, E., Lebow, D., Rudd, J., 1998. Asking about Prices: A New Approach to
       Understanding Price Stickiness. Sage Foundation, New York.

Borenstein, S., Cameron, A., Gilbert, R., 1997. Do gasoline prices respond asymmetrically to
       crude oil price changes? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 305-339.

Bulow, J., Pfleiderer, P., 1983. A note on the effect of cost changes on prices. Journal of Political
      Economy 91, 182-185.

Caplin, Freeman, and Tracy (1997), “Collateral Damage: How Refinancing Constraints
       Exacerbate Regional Recessions, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 496-516, 1997.

Campbell, J., . Household finance. Journal of Finance 61, 1553-1604.




                                                 29
Dafny, L., Duggan, M., Ramanarayanan, S., 2012. Paying a premium on your premium?
       Consolidation in the US health insurance industry. American Economic Review 102,
       1161-85.

Dornbusch, R., 1987. Exchange rates and prices. American Economic Review, 77, 93-106.

Dudley, W., 2012. The recovery and monetary policy. Remarks at the National Association for
      Business Economics Annual Meeting, New York City.

Eggerttson, G., Krugman, P., 2012. Debt, deleveraging, and the liquidity trap: a Fisher-Minsky
       Koo approach. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 1469-1513.

Fuster, A., Goodman, L., Lucca, D., Madar, L., Molloy, L., Willen, P., 2012. The rising gap
        between primary and secondary mortgage rates. Unpublished working paper. Federal
        Reserve Bank of New York.

Goldberg, P., Hellerstein, R., 2013. A structural approach to identifying the sources of local
      currency price stability. Review of Economic Studies 80, 175-210.

Goldberg, P., Hellerstein, R., 2008. A structural approach to explaining incomplete exchange
      rate pass-through and pricing-to-market. American Economic Review 98, 423-29.

Goldberg, P., Knetter, M., 1997. Goods prices and exchange rates: what have we learned?
      Journal of Economic Literature 35, 1243-73.

Gurun, U., Matvos, G., Seru, A., 2013. Advertising expensive mortgages. Unpublished
       working paper. University of Chicago.

Hannan and Berger (1991), “The Rigidity of Prices: Evidence from the Banking Industry” The
      American Economic Review , Vol. 81, No. 4 (Sep., 1991), pp. 938-945.

Hellerstein, R., 2006. A decomposition of the sources of incomplete cross-border transmission:
       the case of beer. Unpublished working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Hurst, E., Stafford, F., 2004. Home is where the equity is: liquidity constraints, refinancing
       and consumption. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 36, 985-1014.

Imbens, G., 2004. Nonparametric estimation of average treatment effects under exogeneity: a
      review. Review of Economics and Statistics 86, 4-29.

Jackson, W., 1997. Market structure and the speed of price adjustments: evidence of non-
       monotonicity. Review of Industrial Organization 12, 37-57.

Karrenbrock, J., 1991. The behavior of retail gasoline prices: symmetric or not? Federal
      Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 73, 19-29.



                                                30
Kahn, C., Pennacchi, G., Sopranzetti, B., 2005. Bank consolidation and the dynamics of
       consumer loan interest rates. Journal of Business 78, 99-133.

Knetter, M., 1989. Price discrimination by U.S. and German exporters. American Economic
       Review 79, 198-210.

Kreps, D., Scheinkman, J., 1983. Quantity precommitment and Bertrand competition yield
       cournot outcomes. The Bell Journal of Economics 14, 326-337.

Lacko, J., Pappalardo, J., 2007. Improving consumer mortgage disclosures. Bureau of
       Economics Staff Report, USA Federal Trade Commission.

Loutskina, E. Strahan, P., 2011. Informed and uninformed investment in housing: The
       downside of diversification. Review of Financial Studies 24, 1447-1480.

Mian, A., Rao, K., Sufi, A., 2012. Household balance sheets, consumption, and the economic
       slump. Unpublished working paper. University of Chicago.

Nakamura, E., Zerom, D., 2010. Accounting for incomplete pass-through. Review of Economic
     Studies 77, 1192-1230.

Neumark, D., Sharpe, S., 1992. Market structure and the nature of price rigidity: evidence from
     the market for consumer deposits. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 657-80.

Peltzman, S., 2000. Prices rise faster than they fall. Journal of Political Economy 108, 466-502.

Rajan, U., Seru, A., Vig, V., 2012. The failure of models that predict failure: distance,
       incentives and defaults. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Rubin, D., Thomas, N., 1992. Affinely invariant matching methods with ellipsoidal
       distributions. Annals of Statistics 20, 1079-1093.

Rotemberg, J., Saloner, G., 1987. The relative rigidity of monopoly pricing. The American
      Economic Review 77, 917-926.

Staiger, D., Stock, J., 1997. Instrumental variables regression with weak instruments.
        Econometrica 65, 557-586.




                                                 31
                                          National Top 4 Concentration




                           .3
                           .25
                   Top 4
                           .2
                           .15
                           .1




                                 1995           2000                2005               2010
                                                          year




                                        County-level Top 4 Concentration
                           .4
                           .35
                   Top 4
                           .3
                           .25
                           .2




                                 1995           2000                2005               2010
                                                          year



                                                Figure 1
                                 Mortgage Market Concentration in HMDA

This figure shows top 4 mortgage market share at the national level (top) and the value-weighted average of county-
level top 4 share (bottom) in data from the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act.




                                                        32
                                             Primary-Secondary Spread




                               80
                               60
                Spread (bps)

                               40
                               20




                                    1995        2000             2005               2010
                                                        year



                                                   Figure 2
                                           Primary-Secondary Spread

This figure shows the average rate charged to borrowers whose mortgages are guaranteed by Freddie Mac minus the
yield on current coupon Freddie Mac MBS minus Freddie Mac’s average fee for guaranteed mortgages.




                                                       33
                                                                  Primary-Secondary Spread vs Top4, Levels




                                                   80
                                                   60
                                    Spread (bps)

                                                   40
                                                   20




                                                         .2             .25          .3           .35              .4
                                                                                    Top 4




                                                                 Primary-Secondary Spread vs Top4, Changes
                                                   20
                                                   10
           Change in Spread (bps)



                                                   0
                                                   -10
                                                   -20




                                                          -.05                       0                       .05
                                                                                Change in Top 4



                                      Figure 3
       Primary-Secondary Spread vs. Market Concentration in Levels and Changes

This figure plots the relationship between primary-secondary spread and the value-weight average of county-level
top 4 mortgage market share. The top figure shows the relationship in levels and the bottom shows it in changes.




                                                                                   34
                                                 Figure 4
                                     Description of Mortgage Market

This figure shows a simplified schematic of the conforming mortgage market. Households pay the primary mortgage
rate, while investors in mortgage-backed securities (MBS) receive the secondary yield. The government sponsored
entities, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, charge a guarantee fee in return for insuring MBS investors from default risk.
The mortgage originator and servicer charge fees for originating and servicing the loan.




                                                        35
                                                                        Table 1
                                                                    Summary Statistics
This table presents summary statistics for the two samples used in the paper. Panel A presents summary statistics for
the HMDA data, which runs annually from 1994-2011. The unit of observation is county-year. Refi/Population is
the number of refinancings in a given county-year in HMDA divided by the population of that county in that year
obtained from the Census.	   ∆Refi/Pop is the change in this ratio within the county from year t to year t+1. ln(Wage)
is the log average weekly wage in the county-year from the BLS’s Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages.
ln(Population) is the log population from the Census. ln(LoanSize) is the log loan size in HMDA in thousands.
ln(Price) is the log average price in the county from Zillow. LTI is the loan-to-income ratio calculated for borrowers
in HMDA. Top 4 is the share of the top 4 mortgage originators in each county in HMDA. ∆MBS Yield is the change
in the current-coupon Fannie Mae 30-year FRM MBS yield from year t to year t+1 from Bloomberg. Panel B
presents summary statistics for the CoreLogic data, which runs monthly from 2000-2011.The unit of observation is
county-month, and averages across all prime, conforming, fixed rate, full documentation loan in CoreLogic with
FICO > 620 and LTV between 50 and 101. The sample is restricted to county-months with at least 5 such loans.
Rate is the average mortgage rate reported, FICO is the credit score, and LTV is the loan-to-value ratio. ln(Price) is
the log average price in the county from Zillow. Top 4 is the share of the top 4 mortgage originators in each county
in HMDA. ∆MBS Yield is the change in the current-coupon Fannie Mae 30-year FRM MBS yield from month t to
month t+1 from Bloomberg. ∆Rate is the change in average mortgage rate from month t to month t+1.




            	                                	                               Panel	  A:	  HMDA	  Sample	  
                                                            N	               Mean	      Std	  Dev	     Min	                 Max	  
            	  
            Refi/Population	                 	         52384	              0.014	          0.012	           0.000	       0.178	  
            ln(Wage)	                        	         52377	              6.310	          0.256	           5.231	       8.370	  
            ln(Population)	                  	         52384	           10.280	            1.397	           6.043	      16.107	  
            ln(LoanSize)	                    	         52384	              4.505	          0.477	           1.099	       7.285	  
            ln(Price)	                       	          8070	           11.914	            0.508	           9.425	      13.721	  
            LTI	                             	         52365	              1.678	          0.450	           0.650	       3.374	  
            Top	  4	                        	         52384	              0.465	          0.176	           0.118	       1.000	  
            ∆MBS	  Yield	                   	         52384	           -­‐0.234	          0.594	        -­‐1.301	       0.856	  
            ∆Refi/Pop	                       	         52384	              0.000	          0.009	        -­‐0.111	       0.082	  
                                              	  

                   	                  	                                   Panel	  B:	  CoreLogic	  Sample	  
                                                       N	             Mean	              Std	  Dev	      Min	            Max	  
                   	  
                   Rate	              	            38068	               6.117	            0.918	          3.834	        10.263	  
                   FICO	              	            38068	           702.89	              22.91	       620.14	          805.00	  
                   LTV	               	            38068	             85.82	               7.01	        50.43	         100.74	  
                   ln(Price)	         	            30566	            12.098	              0.472	          9.405	        13.525	  
                   Top	  4	          	            38068	               0.284	            0.072	          0.135	         0.565	  
                   ∆MBS	  Yield	     	            38068	            -­‐0.027	            0.244	       -­‐1.206	         0.649	  
                   ∆Rate	             	            38068	            -­‐0.026	            0.217	       -­‐1.920	         1.707	  
                                       	  



                                                                               36
                                                                              Table 2
                                                                   Refinancing and Concentration

This table presents regressions of the form:

                   ⎛ Refi ⎞
                 Δ ⎜      ⎟ = α + β1 ⋅ ΔMBS Yieldt + β 2 ⋅ Top 4i ,t −1 + β3 ⋅ ΔMBS Yieldt × Top 4i ,t −1 + ε i ,t .
                   ⎝ Pop ⎠i ,t

The county-level sample runs annually 1994-2011. Refi/Pop is the number of refinancings divided by the
population; Top 4 is the share of the top 4 mortgage originators; ∆MBS Yield is the change in the Fannie Mae 30-
year FRM MBS yield; ln(Wage) is the log average weekly wage; ln(Population) is the log population; ln(LoanSize)
is the log loan size in thousands; ln(Price) is the log average price; LTI is the loan-to-income ratio in HMDA. In
Panel A the second column reports the specification for the full sample, while the third column restricts the sample
to the years before the financial crisis, 1994-2006. Panel B reports specifications with a variety of additional
controls. Standard errors are clustered by county and year, and t-statistics are reported in the brackets.

 	                                                         	                                          Panel	  A:	  Basic	  Results	  
 ∆	  MBS	  Yieldt	                                 -­‐0.015	                              	  
                                                      [-­‐4.20]	           	                	             	                  	              	              	  
 	   MBS	  Yield	  t	  x	  Top4i,t-­‐1	  
 ∆	                                                   0.016	              	  
                                                                         0.019	           0.022	           	                  	              	              	  
                                                       [3.67]	          [4.65]	          [5.33]	          	                  	              	              	  
                             +
 	   MBS	  Yield) 	  x	  Top4i,t-­‐1	                                                                   	                  	              	              	  
 (∆	                                                                                          	         0.004	             0.004	         0.004	         0.008	  
                                                            	               	                	         [0.87]	            [0.93]	        [0.91]	        [0.88]	  
 	  (∆	  MBS	  Yield)-­‐	  x	  Top4i,t-­‐1	           	               	                	         0.026	             0.026	          0.026	         0.027	  
                                                         	                 	                 	         [4.56]	            [4.59]	         [4.58]	        [2.63]	  
 	  Top	  4i,t-­‐1	                                   	  
                                                      0.004	               	  
                                                                         0.001	           0.001	        0.004	             0.004	           0.004	         0.006	  
                                                      [1.26]	           [0.23]	          [0.07]	       [1.00]	            [0.98]	         [1.00]	        [1.10]	  
 	   ln(Wagei,t)	  
 ∆	                                                                                           	                               0	                0	        -­‐0.007	  
                                                          	                	                 	            	               [0.23]	         [0.25]	       [-­‐1.27]	  
 	  ∆	  ln(Populationi,t)	                             	                	                 	            	               0.018	           0.018	         0.103	  
                                                          	                	                 	            	               [2.00]	         [2.00]	        [2.25]	  
 	   ln(LoanSizei,t)	  
 ∆	                                                      	                	                 	            	                               -­‐0.001	      -­‐0.005	  
                                                          	                	                 	            	                  	           [-­‐0.97]	     [-­‐1.08]	  
 	   LTIi,t	  
 ∆	                                                      	                	                 	            	                  	                0	          0.002	  
                                                          	                	                 	            	                  	            [0.61]	        [1.12]	  
 	  ∆	  ln(Pricei,t)	                                  	                	                 	            	                  	                             0.013	  
                                                          	                	                 	            	                  	              	            [2.82]	  
 	  
 R  2	                                                   	  
                                                        0.33	              	  
                                                                         0.534	           0.544	           	  
                                                                                                           0.54	                	  
                                                                                                                              0.541	            	  
                                                                                                                                              0.541	           0.779	  
 N	                                                  52384	            52384	           36774	        52384	            52384	          52384	            7542	  
 County	  FE	                                         N	                Y	                Y	           Y	                Y	              Y	                Y	  
 Year	  FE	                                           N	                Y	                Y	           Y	                Y	              Y	                Y	  




                                                                                      37
	                                                                       Panel	  B:	  Additional	  Controls	  
∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	  x	  Top4i,t-­‐1	     0.019	       0.019	                   0.021	            0.015	          0.015	  
                                                 [4.65]	      [4.71]	                  [3.28]	           [2.94]	         [2.98]	  
	  Top	  4i,t-­‐1	                            0.001	        0.001	                   0.002	          -­‐0.005	       -­‐0.003	  
                                                 [0.23]	      [0.22]	                  [0.38]	          [-­‐0.89]	      [-­‐0.58]	  
	   ln(Wagei,t)	  
∆	                                                             0.001	                 -­‐0.007	                          -­‐0.001	  
                                                    	         [0.40]	                 [-­‐1.26]	                	       [-­‐0.35]	  
	   ln(Populationi,t)	  
∆	                                                 	          0.021	                   0.104	                  	         0.065	  
                                                    	         [2.09]	                  [2.26]	                  	        [2.65]	  
	  ∆	  ln(LoanSizei,t)	                          	        -­‐0.001	                -­‐0.005	                 	         0.007	  
                                                    	        [-­‐0.92]	               [-­‐1.08]	                	        [2.41]	  
	   LTIi,t	  
∆	                                                 	             0	                    0.002	                  	       -­‐0.002	  
                                                    	         [0.02]	                  [1.10]	                  	       [-­‐0.90]	  
	   ln(Pricei,t)	  
∆	                                                 	                                    0.013	                  	         0.013	  
                                                    	              	                   [2.84]	                  	        [3.11]	  
	  ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	  	                    	              	                                             	  
                                                                                                             0.002	          0.002	  
	  	  	  	  x	  ln(Populationi,t-­‐1)	        	              	                        	            [3.86]	         [3.92]	  
∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                            	              	                        	           -­‐0.002	       -­‐0.001	  
	  	  	  	  x	  ln(Wagei,t-­‐1)	              	              	                        	           [-­‐0.85]	      [-­‐0.39]	  
∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                            	              	                        	             0.004	          0.004	  
	  	  	  	  x	  LTIi,t-­‐1	                   	              	                        	            [2.20]	         [2.05]	  
∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                            	              	                        	           -­‐0.003	       -­‐0.004	  
	  	  	  	  x	  ln(LoanSizei,t-­‐1)	          	              	                        	           [-­‐1.23]	      [-­‐1.49]	  
∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                            	              	                        	              -­‐0.01	        -­‐0.01	  
	  	  	  	  	  x	  ln(Pricei,t-­‐1)	         	              	                        	           [-­‐3.26]	      [-­‐3.29]	  
ln(Wagei,t-­‐1)	                                   	              	                        	             0.001	        -­‐0.003	  
                                                    	              	                        	            [0.31]	        [-­‐1.14]	  
	  ln(Populationi,t-­‐1)	                         	              	                        	           -­‐0.005	       -­‐0.001	  
                                                    	              	                        	           [-­‐1.20]	      [-­‐0.19]	  
	  
ln(LoanSize i,t-­‐1)	                              	              	                        	                  0	         0.005	  
                                                    	              	                        	           [-­‐0.06]	       [1.15]	  
	   	  i,t-­‐1	  
LTI                                                 	              	                        	           -­‐0.003	       -­‐0.003	  
                                                    	              	                        	           [-­‐1.54]	      [-­‐1.48]	  
	  ln(Pricei,t-­‐1)	                              	              	                        	           -­‐0.003	       -­‐0.003	  
                                                    	              	                        	           [-­‐0.95]	      [-­‐1.05]	  
	  R2	                                            	  
                                                 0.534	            	  
                                                                0.536	                       	  
                                                                                          0.779	            0.813	          0.821	  
N	                                              52384	      52384	                7542	                    7542	          7542	  
County	  FE	                                     Y	          Y	                    Y	                       Y	               Y	  
Year	  FE	                                       Y	          Y	                    Y	                       Y	               Y	  




                                                                  38
	                                                          Panel	  C:	  Refinancings/Owner-­‐Occupied	  Housing	  Units	  
∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	  x	  Top4i,t-­‐1	     0.078	               0.077	           0.064	        0.036	                   0.035	  
                                                 [3.15]	              [3.24]	          [2.71]	       [3.09]	                  [3.11]	  
	  Top	  4i,t-­‐1	                            0.009	                 0.01	           0.011	      -­‐0.027	                   -­‐0.02	  
                                                 [0.49]	              [0.52]	          [0.55]	      [-­‐1.31]	               [-­‐1.07]	  
	   ln(Wagei,t)	  
∆	                                                                   -­‐0.014	        -­‐0.035	                               -­‐0.007	  
                                                     	               [-­‐0.70]	       [-­‐1.44]	           	                 [-­‐0.55]	  
	   ln(Populationi,t)	  
∆	                                                  	                 0.116	           0.441	             	                   0.256	  
                                                     	                [1.46]	          [2.37]	             	                  [3.18]	  
	  ∆	  ln(LoanSizei,t)	                           	               -­‐0.016	        -­‐0.022	            	                   0.023	  
                                                     	               [-­‐0.97]	       [-­‐1.16]	           	                  [2.05]	  
	   LTIi,t	  
∆	                                                  	                  0.01	           0.012	             	                 -­‐0.004	  
                                                     	                [1.27]	          [1.19]	             	                 [-­‐0.48]	  
	   ln(Pricei,t)	  
∆	                                                  	                                   0.054	             	                      0.05	  
                                                     	                      	          [2.53]	             	                  [2.69]	  
	  ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	  	                     	                      	                               	  
                                                                                                         0.003	                   0.003	  
	  	  	  	  x	  ln(Populationi,t-­‐1)	         	                      	               	        [1.81]	                  [1.76]	  
∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                             	                      	               	       -­‐0.007	                -­‐0.003	  
	  	  	  	  x	  ln(Wagei,t-­‐1)	               	                      	               	       [-­‐0.83]	               [-­‐0.35]	  
∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                             	                      	               	         0.008	                   0.007	  
	  	  	  	  x	  LTIi,t-­‐1	                    	                      	               	        [0.94]	                  [0.83]	  
∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                             	                      	               	       -­‐0.014	                -­‐0.016	  
	  	  	  	  x	  ln(LoanSizei,t-­‐1)	           	                      	               	       [-­‐1.02]	               [-­‐1.28]	  
∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                             	                      	               	       -­‐0.035	                -­‐0.035	  
	  	  	  	  	  x	  ln(Pricei,t-­‐1)	          	                      	               	       [-­‐2.94]	               [-­‐2.96]	  
ln(Wagei,t-­‐1)	                                    	                      	               	         0.007	                 -­‐0.009	  
                                                     	                      	               	        [0.52]	                 [-­‐0.76]	  
	  ln(Populationi,t-­‐1)	                          	                      	               	       -­‐0.019	                -­‐0.002	  
                                                     	                      	               	       [-­‐1.07]	               [-­‐0.15]	  
	  
ln(LoanSize i,t-­‐1)	                               	                      	               	       -­‐0.001	                  0.018	  
                                                     	                      	               	       [-­‐0.07]	                [0.88]	  
	   	  i,t-­‐1	  
LTI                                                  	                      	               	       -­‐0.018	                -­‐0.018	  
                                                     	                      	               	       [-­‐1.87]	               [-­‐1.61]	  
	  ln(Pricei,t-­‐1)	                               	                      	               	       -­‐0.013	                -­‐0.011	  
                                                     	                      	               	       [-­‐0.90]	               [-­‐1.06]	  
	  R2	                                             	  
                                                  0.74	                     	  
                                                                        0.743	               	  
                                                                                          0.796	        0.833	                   0.841	  
N	                                              12444	              12444	              6603	         6603	                    6603	  
County	  FE	                                      Y	                     Y	              Y	             Y	                        Y	  
Year	  FE	                                        Y	                     Y	              Y	             Y	                        Y	  




                                                                        39
                                                                                            Table 3
                                                                                       Lender Breakdown

This table examines the behavior of different types of lenders. Panel A shows the relationship between top 4
concentration and the market share of lenders that operate in the number of counties shown in the column heading.
Panels B and C present regressions of the form:

                  ⎛ Refi ⎞
                Δ ⎜      ⎟ = α + β1 ⋅ ΔMBS Yieldt + β 2 ⋅ Top 4i ,t −1 + β3 ⋅ ΔMBS Yieldt × Top 4i ,t −1 + ε i ,t ,
                  ⎝ Pop ⎠i ,t

restricting the sample to lenders that operate in the number of counties shown in the column heading. For instance,
the first column examines refinancing mortgages originated by lenders that operate in less than 10 counties. In each
column we rescale by the national market share of the type of lender we are focusing on. The county-level sample
runs annually 1994-2011. Refi/Pop is the number of refinancings divided by the population; Top 4 is the share of the
top 4 mortgage originators; ∆MBS Yield is the change in the Fannie Mae 30-year FRM MBS yield. Standard errors
are clustered by county and year, and t-statistics are reported in the brackets.

 	                                                                                           Panel	  A:	  Lender	  Types	  and	  Top	  4	  
                                                           <	  10	                             <	  50	                       <	  250	                                <	  500	  
 	  
 Top4   i,t-­‐1	                                     -­‐0.081	                                    0.197	                               0.299	                          0.226	  
 	                                                   [-­‐8.63]	                                  [11.98]	                             [20.46]	                        [15.72]	  
 R2	                                                   0.021	                                     0.051	                               0.122	                          0.076	  
 N	                                                     3141	                                     3141	                                3141	                           3141	  




 	                                                                                                     Panel	  B:	  Without	  Year	  FE	  
                                             <	  10	                   ≥	  10	        <	  50	         ≥	  50	       <	  250	           ≥	  250	      <	  500	          ≥	  500	  
 	   MBS	  Yield	  t	  
 ∆	                                       -­‐0.017	               -­‐0.015	          -­‐0.015	            -­‐0.015	        -­‐0.015	       -­‐0.015	      -­‐0.015	         -­‐0.015	  
                                           [-­‐4.60]	              [-­‐4.07]	         [-­‐3.87]	           [-­‐4.12]	       [-­‐3.99]	      [-­‐4.17]	     [-­‐3.94]	        [-­‐4.21]	  
 	  ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	  x	  	      0.018	                  0.016	             0.011	               0.017	           0.011	          0.018	         0.012	            0.018	  
 	  	  	  	  Top4i,t-­‐1	              [3.66]	                 [3.58]	            [2.54]	              [3.75]	          [2.93]	         [3.91]	        [3.02]	           [3.96]	  
 Top4i,t-­‐1	                               0.001	                  0.004	                0	                0.005	           0.002	          0.005	         0.002	            0.005	  
 	                                         [0.31]	                 [1.17]	            [0.10]	              [1.38]	          [0.38]	         [1.51]	        [0.47]	           [1.53]	  
 R2	                                      -­‐0.016	                 0.282	             0.081	               0.275	           0.164	          0.263	         0.185	            0.254	  
 N	                                       52384	                  52384	             52384	               52384	           52384	          52384	         52384	            52384	  
 County	  FE	                                 Y	                      Y	                 Y	                   Y	               Y	              Y	             Y	                Y	  
 Year	  FE	                                   N	                      N	                 N	                   N	               N	              N	             N	                N	  




                                                                                                         40
	                                                                                   Panel	  C:	  With	  Year	  FE	  
                                        <	  10	      ≥	  10	       <	  50	        ≥	  50	       <	  250	         ≥	  250	     <	  500	      ≥	  500	  
	   MBS	  Yield	  t	  x	  	  
∆	                                    0.021	        0.019	         0.014	              0.02	          0.014	          0.021	        0.015	        0.021	  
	  	  	  	  Top4i,t-­‐1	          [4.24]	       [4.62]	        [3.77]	            [4.70]	         [4.58]	         [4.76]	       [4.82]	       [4.76]	  
Top4i,t-­‐1	                         -­‐0.005	      0.001	        -­‐0.007	           0.003	         -­‐0.004	        0.004	       -­‐0.003	      0.003	  
	                                    [-­‐0.59]	     [0.31]	       [-­‐0.93]	          [0.62]	        [-­‐0.70]	       [0.89]	      [-­‐0.49]	     [0.88]	  
R2	                                    0.005	       0.528	          0.178	            0.514	           0.328	         0.491	         0.374	       0.473	  
N	                                   52384	         52384	        52384	              52384	         52384	           52384	       52384	         52384	  
County	  FE	                             Y	           Y	              Y	                Y	               Y	             Y	             Y	           Y	  
Year	  FE	                               Y	           Y	              Y	                Y	               Y	             Y	             Y	           Y	  




                                                                                     41
                                                                        Table 4
                                                            Mortgage Rates and Concentration

This table presents regressions of the form:

                ΔRatei ,t = α + β1 ⋅ ΔMBS Yieldt + β 2 ⋅ Top 4i ,t + β3 ⋅ ΔMBS Yield t × Top 4i ,t + ε i ,t .

The county-level sample runs monthly 2000-2011. Top 4 is the share of the top 4 mortgage originators; ∆MBS Yield
is the change in the Fannie Mae 30-year FRM MBS yield; ln(Wage) is the log average weekly wage; ln(Population)
is the log population; Rate is the average mortgage rate reported in CoreLogic, FICO is the credit score, and LTV is
the loan-to-value ratio; ln(Price) is the log average price. Standard errors are clustered by county and month, and t-
statistics are reported in the brackets. In Panel A, the second column reports the specification for the full sample,
while the third column restricts the sample to the years before the financial crisis, 2000-2006. Panel B reports
specifications with a variety of additional controls.




       	                                                                                     Panel	  A:	  Baseline	  Results	  
       ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                                 0.679	         0.655	           0.696	              	             0.641	         0.647	  
                                                               [7.87]	        [7.26]	          [5.38]	              	            [7.30]	        [7.36]	  
       	   MBS	  Yield	  t	  x	  Top4i,t-­‐1	  
       ∆	                                                    -­‐0.626	      -­‐0.564	        -­‐0.584	             	           -­‐0.549	      -­‐0.577	  
                                                              [-­‐2.75]	     [-­‐2.37]	       [-­‐1.68]	            	          [-­‐2.37]	      [-­‐2.46]	  
       	  (∆	  MBS	  Yield)+	                                   	              	                  	          0.612	               	              	  
       	                                                           	              	                  	          [3.96]	              	              	  
                                    -­‐
       (∆	  MBS	  Yield) 	                                       	              	                  	          0.693	               	              	  
       	                                                           	              	                  	          [3.71]	              	              	  
                                    +
       (∆	  MBS	  Yield) 	  x	  Top4i,t-­‐1	                                                       	         -­‐0.352	             	              	  
                                                                    	              	                  	         [-­‐0.84]	            	              	  
       	  (∆	  MBS	  Yield)-­‐	  x	  Top4i,t-­‐1	             	              	                  	         -­‐0.762	             	                	  
                                                                   	              	                   	         [-­‐1.55]	            	                	  
       	  Top	  4i,t-­‐1	                                       	  
                                                              -­‐0.057	           	  
                                                                              -­‐0.001	          -­‐0.011	          -­‐0.04	     -­‐0.002	         -­‐0.01	  
                                                              [-­‐0.96]	     [-­‐0.09]	         [-­‐0.74]	      [-­‐0.52]	      [-­‐0.10]	     [-­‐0.37]	  
       	   LTVi,t	  
       ∆	                                                                                              	                            0.004	         0.004	  
                                                                  	              	                    	             	            [3.34]	        [3.14]	  
       	   FICOi,t	  
       ∆	                                                        	              	                    	             	           -­‐0.002	      -­‐0.002	  
                                                                  	              	                    	             	           [-­‐9.09]	     [-­‐8.51]	  
       	  ∆	  ln(Pricei,t)	                                    	              	                    	             	                 	          0.409	  
                                                                  	              	                    	             	                 	         [1.47]	  
       	   2	  
       R                                                          	  
                                                               0.318	            	  
                                                                               0.317	              0.242	            	  
                                                                                                                    0.314	           0.345	            0.36	  
       N	                                                    38068	         38068	             22575	          38068	          38068	         30560	  
       County	  FE	                                           N	             Y	                    Y	           Y	                 Y	               Y	  
       Year	  FE	                                             N	             Y	                    Y	           Y	                 Y	               Y	  




                                                                                           42
	                                                              Panel	  B:	  Additional	  Controls	                    	  
∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                               1.126	                     1.729	            1.978	          1.843	  
                                                      [1.96]	                    [1.62]	           [1.70]	         [1.64]	  
	   MBS	  Yield	  t	  x	  Top4i,t-­‐1	  
∆	                                                  -­‐0.563	                  -­‐0.469	         -­‐0.512	         -­‐0.53	  
                                                     [-­‐2.44]	                [-­‐2.54]	         [-­‐2.60]	      [-­‐2.70]	  
	   MBS	  Yield	  t	  	  
∆	                                                  -­‐0.008	                  -­‐0.017	            -­‐0.01	     -­‐0.011	  
	  	  	  	  	  x	  ln(Populationi,t-­‐1)	     [-­‐0.49]	                [-­‐1.35]	         [-­‐0.79]	      [-­‐0.93]	  
∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                             -­‐0.056	                     -­‐0.04	       -­‐0.039	       -­‐0.042	  
	  	  	  	  	  x	  ln(Wagei,t-­‐1)	           [-­‐0.53]	                [-­‐0.48]	         [-­‐0.61]	      [-­‐0.67]	  
∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                                                         -­‐0.004	         -­‐0.005	       -­‐0.004	  
	  	  	  	  	  x	  LTVi,t-­‐1	                      	                   [-­‐1.57]	         [-­‐1.41]	      [-­‐1.29]	  
∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                                   	                           0	                0	             0	  
	  	  	  	  	  x	  FICOi,t-­‐1	                     	                   [-­‐0.45]	         [-­‐0.10]	      [-­‐0.03]	  
∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                                   	                                       -­‐0.041	       -­‐0.033	  
	  	  	  	  	  x	  ln(Pricei,t-­‐1)	                	                            	         [-­‐1.17]	      [-­‐0.95]	  
Top	  4i,t-­‐1	                                          	  
                                                     -­‐0.001	                          	  
                                                                                   0.018	          -­‐0.004	       -­‐0.003	  
                                                     [-­‐0.06]	                  [0.89]	          [-­‐0.12]	      [-­‐0.11]	  
	  
ln(Population i,t-­‐1)	                             -­‐0.011	                    0.007	            0.027	          0.008	  
                                                     [-­‐0.30]	                  [0.17]	           [0.77]	         [0.30]	  
	  
ln(Wage i,t-­‐1)	                                     0.013	                        0.01	          0.041	              0	  
                                                      [0.28]	                    [0.19]	           [0.84]	         [0.01]	  
	  LTVi,t	                                                                     -­‐0.002	         -­‐0.002	             0	  
                                                           	                   [-­‐1.68]	         [-­‐1.66]	       [0.01]	  
	  
FICO i,t	                                                 	                      0.001	            0.001	              0	  
	                                                         	                     [5.83]	           [5.35]	         [0.67]	  
ln(Pricei,t)	                                             	                                       -­‐0.015	         0.005	  
                                                           	                            	         [-­‐0.80]	       [0.28]	  
	   ln(Wagei,t)	  
∆	                                                        	                            	                 	         0.916	  
	                                                         	                            	                 	        [0.73]	  
∆	  ln(Populationi,t)	                                   	                            	                 	       -­‐0.411	  
	                                                         	                            	                 	       [-­‐1.61]	  
∆	  LTVi,t	                                              	                            	                 	         0.004	  
	                                                         	                            	                 	        [2.76]	  
∆	  FICOi,t	                                             	                            	                 	       -­‐0.002	  
	                                                         	                            	                 	       [-­‐7.07]	  
∆	  ln(Pricei,t)	                                        	                            	                 	         0.444	  
	                                                         	                            	                 	        [1.61]	  
R2	                                                   0.317	                     0.328	            0.342	          0.361	  
N	                                                  38068	                     38068	            30560	          30560	  
County	  FE	                                            Y	                           Y	                Y	             Y	  
Year	  FE	                                              Y	                           Y	                Y	             Y	  




                                                                   43
                                                                    Table 5
                                                             Assessing Magnitudes

This table reports specifications to help assess the economic magnitudes of our results. The column headings show
the dependent variable. The first four columns present results for the quantity of refinancings in the HMDA sample,
county-level annual data. The first and third columns use the full sample 1994-2011, while the second and fourth
columns restrict attention to the crisis period 2007-2011. Refi/Pop is the number of refinancings divided by the
population; Top 4 is the share of the top 4 mortgage originators; ∆MBS Yield is the change in the Fannie Mae 30-
year FRM MBS yield; LTI is the mortgage loan-to-income ratio in HMDA; DTI-MS is the total debt-to-income ratio
in 2006 used by Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2012). The last two columns present results for mortgage rates in the
CoreLogic sample, county-level monthly data 2000-2011. FICO is the credit score, and LTV is the loan-to-value
ratio




           	                                                         ∆	  Refi/Popi,t	                                  ∆	  Ratei,t	  
           ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                                                                                  0.654	         0.636	  
                                                     	              	               	              	            [7.35]	        [7.27]	  
           	   MBS	  Yield	  t	  	  
           ∆	                                       	  
                                                  0.014	            	  
                                                                  0.007	             	  
                                                                                   0.011	            	  
                                                                                                   0.007	         -­‐0.572	      -­‐0.538	  
           	  	  	  	  x	  Top4i,t-­‐1	      [4.22]	        [5.74]	        [4.92]	        [4.24]	        [-­‐2.45]	   [-­‐2.34]	  
           ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	               -­‐0.005	      -­‐0.005	  
           	  	  	  	  x	  LTIi,t-­‐1	      [-­‐3.34]	     [-­‐5.93]	            	              	              	              	  
           LTI	  i,t-­‐1	                            0	        -­‐0.002	             	              	              	              	  
           	                                     [-­‐0.54]	     [-­‐2.37]	            	              	              	               	  
           ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                     	              	         -­‐0.006	      -­‐0.004	            	               	  
           	  	  	  	  x	  DTI-­‐MSi	             	              	         [-­‐3.99]	     [-­‐5.29]	           	               	  
           DTI-­‐MS	  i	                              	              	         -­‐0.001	      -­‐0.003	            	               	  
           	                                           	              	         [-­‐1.30]	     [-­‐3.43]	           	               	  
           ∆LTVi,t-­‐1	                                	              	               	              	         0.007	               	  
           	                                           	              	               	              	         [5.74]	              	  
           ∆FICOi,t-­‐1	                               	              	               	              	              	         -­‐0.002	  
           	                                           	              	               	              	              	        [-­‐12.11]	  
           Top	  4i,t-­‐1	                           0	          0.002	          0.001	         0.003	       -­‐0.002	       -­‐0.005	  
           	                                      [0.06]	        [1.35]	         [0.71]	        [1.61]	       [-­‐0.07]	      [-­‐0.14]	  
           R2	                                     0.553	         0.393	          0.672	         0.525	         0.331	           0.34	  
           N	                                    52335	         15586	          35431	         11095	         38068	          38068	  
           County	  FE	                              Y	             Y	              N	             N	             Y	              Y	  
           Year	  FE	                                Y	             Y	              Y	             Y	             Y	              Y	  




                                                                              44
                                                                               Table 6
                                                                           Matched Samples

This table presents results for matched samples. The column headings report the variables that we match on to
construct the matched samples. In Panel A, we present results for the quantity of refinancings in the HMDA sample,
county-level annual data 1994-2011. The dependent variable is ∆Refi/Pop and is the change in the number of
refinancings divided by the population. Standard errors are clustered by county and year, and t-statistics are reported
in the brackets. In Panel B, we present results for mortgage rates in the CoreLogic sample, monthly data 2000-2011.
The dependent variable is ∆Rate. Top 4 is the share of the top 4 mortgage originators; ∆MBS Yield is the change in
the Fannie Mae 30-year FRM MBS yield. Standard errors are clustered by county and month, and t-statistics are
reported in the brackets.




       	                                                                                    Panel	  A:	  HMDA	  Sample	  
                                                                                                Wage,	  Pop,	  LTI,	         Wage,	  Pop,	  LTI,	  
       	                                                          Wage,	  Pop	                     Loan	  Size	               Size,	  Price	  
       ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	  x	  Top4	  i,t-­‐1	       0.012	            	            0.006	                 	      0.010	                	  
                                                              [4.73]	           	            [4.78]	                	      [1.93]	               	  
       	   MBS	  Yield)+	  xTop4	  i,t-­‐1	  
       (∆	                                                       	         0.002	                  	        0.002	                          -­‐0.004	  
                                                                  	         [0.91]	                 	        [1.01]	             	          [-­‐0.57]	  
                                   -­‐
       	  (∆	  MBS	  Yield) 	  x	  Top4	  i,t-­‐1	                                                                            	  	  
                                                                             0.016	                            0.008	                          0.016	  
                                                                 	          [4.35]	               	          [3.92]	            	           [2.05]	  
       	  Top	  4i,t-­‐1	                                     	  
                                                              0.002	        0.004	               0	  	      0.001	          0.002	         0.007	  
                                                              [0.98]	       [2.04]	           [0.19]	        [1.27]	         [0.75]	        [1.37]	  
       	  R2	                                               0.493	        0.495	            0.536	         0.537	          0.803	          0.803	  
       N	                                                    36443	        36443	            28431	         28431	          2067	           2067	  
       Year	  FE	                                             Y	            Y	                Y	             Y	              Y	              Y	  




                                                                                        45
	                                                                                        Panel	  B:	  CoreLogic	  Sample	  
                                                                                               Wage,	  Pop,	  FICO,	            Wage,	  Pop,	  FICO,	  
	                                                               Wage,	  Pop	                            LTV	                             LTV,	  Price	  
∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                                   0.626	                            0.631	                               0.687	  
                                                          [8.30]	                 	         [8.96]	                     	      [9.91]	                    	  
	  Top	  4i,t-­‐1	                                    -­‐0.005	                	  
                                                                           -­‐0.018	         0.041	                      	  
                                                                                                                     0.007	        0.021	                    	  
                                                                                                                                                        -­‐0.009	  
                                                         [-­‐0.20]	      [-­‐0.29]	         [1.53]	              [0.09]	       [0.47]	             [-­‐0.13]	  
	  ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	  x	  Top4	  i,t-­‐1	     -­‐0.418	                	         -­‐0.45	                    	     -­‐0.659	                   	  
	                                                       [-­‐2.28]	               	        [-­‐2.41]	                   	     [-­‐3.21]	                  	  
(∆	  MBS	  Yield)+	                                         	            0.624	                	               0.582	            	                0.664	  
	                                                             	           [4.03]	                	              [4.19]	            	               [4.84]	  
(∆	  MBS	  Yield)-­‐	                                                        0.62	                               0.677	                              0.717	  
                                                               	           [4.16]	                	              [4.35]	            	               [5.26]	  
	  (∆	  MBS	  Yield)+	  xTop4	  i,t-­‐1	                 	          -­‐0.322	               	             -­‐0.244	           	              -­‐0.484	  
                                                               	         [-­‐0.82]	               	             [-­‐0.64]	          	              [-­‐1.21]	  
	  (∆	  MBS	  Yield)-­‐	  x	  Top4	  i,t-­‐1	           	             -­‐0.49	             	                -­‐0.64	         	              -­‐0.854	  
                                                               	         [-­‐1.35]	               	             [-­‐1.52]	          	              [-­‐2.18]	  
	  R2	                                                       	  
                                                           0.312	           0.312	                	  
                                                                                              0.363	                0.363	            	  
                                                                                                                                    0.382	               0.382	  
N	                                                      26263	           26263	            11313	             11313	              3418	             3418	  
Year	  FE	                                               Y	               Y	                Y	                 Y	                  Y	                Y	  




                                                                                      46
                                                                          Table 7
                                                                       Merger Sample

This table reports results where we use bank mergers as an instrument for concentration. We examine bank mergers
where the bank makes up a large fraction (>15% in Panel A, >30% in Panel B) of deposits in a county, but the
county is only a small fraction (<2% in Panel A, <1% in Panel B) of the bank’s deposit base. We examine the effect
of the merger on the county’s mortgage market concentration in the first column:

                                                 Top 4i ,t = α t + β ⋅ Post Mergeri ,t + ε i ,t .

We then use the fitted value from first column in the remaining columns to examine the effect of concentration on
refinancings and rates:

                     " Refi %                                                           
                    Δ$      ' = α + β1 ⋅ ΔMBS Yieldt + β2 ⋅Top 4i,t + β3 ⋅ ΔMBS Yieldt × Top 4i,t + εi,t .
                     # Pop &i,t

The column headings show the dependent variable. Top 4 is the share of the top 4 mortgage originators; ∆MBS
Yield is the change in the Fannie Mae 30-year FRM MBS yield. The columns with refinancings as the dependent
variable are run yearly 1994-2011, and standard errors are clustered by county and year with t-statistics reported in
brackets. The columns with rates as the dependent variable are run monthly 2000-2011, and standard errors are
clustered by county and month with t-statistics reported in brackets.




 	                                                                          Panel	  A:	  Baseline	  Merger	  Sample	  
 	                                              Top	  4	  i,t	                     ∆	  Refi/Popi,t	                                ∆	  Ratei,t	  
 Post	  Mergeri,t	                               0.031	  
                                                  [2.98]	                      	                             	               	                                	  
 	  ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                                                  	  
                                                                          -­‐0.118	                           	  	        	  
                                                                                                                          0.704	                              	  
                                                                                                                                                            0.677	  
                                                          	              [-­‐2.12]	                          	         [1.60]	                          [1.60]	  
 	  Top
        4 	                                             	  
              i,t                                                         0.025	                      0.013	            0.142	                           0.146	  
                                                          	              [0.64]	                     [0.69]	           [0.61]	                          [0.17]	  
 	   MBS	  Yield	  t	  x	   Top
 ∆	                                4i,t 	              	  
                                                                          0.251	                      0.135	            -­‐0.649	                        -­‐0.589	  
                                                          	              [1.94]	                     [4.05]	           [-­‐0.46]	                       [-­‐0.44]	  
 	  R2	                                             	  
                                                   0.239	                0.318	                      0.557	            0.311	                           0.315	  
 N	                                              32063	                 32063	                      32063	            24419	                           24419	  
 County	  FE	                                         N	                   Y	                             Y	             Y	                               Y	  
 Year	  FE	                                           Y	                   N	                             Y	             N	                               Y	  




                                                                               47
	                                                                         Panel	  B:	  Restrictive	  Merger	  Sample	  
	                                                  Top	  4	  i,t	                  ∆	  Refi/Popi,t	                                ∆	  Ratei,t	  
Post	  Mergeri,t	                                   0.021	  
                                                     [2.71]	                   	                             	               	                                	  
	  ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                                                   	  
                                                                          -­‐0.105	                           	  	         	  
                                                                                                                            1.01	                              	  
                                                                                                                                                              1.01	  
                                                             	           [-­‐2.66]	                          	         [2.67]	                          [2.69]	  
	  Top
       4 	                                                 	  
             i,t                                                          -­‐0.115	                    0.03	             0.185	                          -­‐0.001	  
                                                             	           [-­‐2.15]	                  [0.71]	           [0.26]	                          [-­‐0.00]	  
	  ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	  x	   Top
                                       4i,t 	              	  
                                                                          0.211	                      0.263	            -­‐1.702	                        -­‐1.713	  
                                                             	           [2.41]	                     [1.04]	           [-­‐1.76]	                       [-­‐1.68]	  
	  R2	                                                 	  
                                                      0.318	             0.349	                        0.6	             0.297	                           0.299	  
N	                                                   5566	               5566	                       5566	             3555	                            3555	  
County	  FE	                                             N	                Y	                             Y	             Y	                               Y	  
Year	  FE	                                               Y	                N	                             Y	             N	                               Y	  




                                                                               48
                                                         Table 8
                                     Bank Profits and Real Estate Credit Employment

This table reports results on bank profits and employment. The column headings show the dependent variable. The
first two columns of this table examine the relationship between concentration and loan and fee income on real
estate loans for banks exclusively located in a single county. The second two columns examine the relationship
between concentration and real estate credit employment. ∆ ln(LoanIncome) is the change in interest and fee income
from real estate loans averaged across single-county banks in each county from the Call Reports; Top 4 is the share
of the top 4 mortgage originators; ∆MBS Yield is the change in the Fannie Mae 30-year FRM MBS yield; ∆ ln(RE
Employment) is the change in employment in real estate credit, and ∆ ln(Employment) is the change in total
employment. The county-level sample runs annually 1994-2011 and standard errors are clustered by county and year
with t-statistics in brackets.




               	                                               ∆	  ln(LoanIncomei,t)	             ∆	  ln(RE	  Employmenti,t)	  
               ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                         0.059	                    	         -­‐0.223	               	  
                                                                [1.21]	                   	         [-­‐6.40]	              	  
               	  ∆	  MBS	  Yield 	  x	  Top4 	           -­‐0.043	           -­‐0.053	        0.313	           0.327	  
                                    	  t         	  i,t-­‐1

                                                                [-­‐0.83]	          [-­‐2.04]	       [3.91]	          [3.88]	  
               	  ∆	  ln(Employment )                                                                1.255	           0.496	  
                                     i,t 	  
                                                                      	                   	          [3.03]	          [2.32]	  
               	  Top	  4 	                                     	  
                                                                0.091	                  	  
                                                                                      0.186	         -­‐0.097	          -­‐0.17	  
                           i,t-­‐1

                                                                [1.48]	             [6.11]	         [-­‐0.83]	        [-­‐2.44]	  
               	  R2	                                         0.006	               0.031	          0.003	           0.054	  
               N	                                              27824	              27824	           11002	           11002	  
               County	  FE	                                       Y	                  Y	              Y	                Y	  
               Year	  FE	                                         N	                  Y	              N	                Y	  




                                                                                49
                                                               Appendix Table 1
                                                       Using HHI to Measure Concentration

This table presents regressions of the form:

                    ⎛ Refi ⎞
                  Δ ⎜      ⎟ = α + β1 ⋅ ΔMBS Yieldt + β 2 ⋅ Top 4i ,t −1 + β3 ⋅ ΔMBS Yieldt × Top 4i ,t −1 + ε i ,t
                    ⎝ Pop ⎠i ,t

and

                      ΔRatei ,t = α + β1 ⋅ ΔMBS Yieldt + β 2 ⋅ Top 4i ,t + β3 ⋅ ΔMBS Yield t × Top 4i ,t + ε i ,t .

The column headings show the dependent variable. HHI is the Herfindahl-Hirshmann index of concentration (the
sum of market shares squared) among mortgage originators; ∆MBS Yield is the change in the Fannie Mae 30-year
FRM MBS yield. The columns with refinancings as the dependent variable are run yearly 1994-2011, and standard
errors are clustered by county and year with t-statistics reported in brackets. The columns with rates as the
dependent variable are run monthly 2000-2011, and standard errors are clustered by county and month with t-
statistics reported in brackets.

 	                                                                   ∆	  Refi/Popi,t	                                  ∆	  Ratei,t	  
 ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                             -­‐0.01	                                             0.592	         0.577	  
                                                     [-­‐4.51]	            	                   	       [10.00]	        [9.34]	              	  
 	  ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	  x	  HHIi,t-­‐1	      0.025	               	  
                                                                         0.031	                 	       -­‐2.632	      -­‐2.367	             	  
                                                     [4.10]	            [5.27]	                	       [-­‐2.49]	     [-­‐2.18]	            	  
 	  (∆	  MBS	  Yield)+	                                	                                    	                                              	  
                                                                                                                                              0.564	  
                                                                              	                 	             	               	          [5.50]	  
 	  (∆	  MBS	  Yield)-­‐	                              	  	             	                 	             	               	           0.59	  
                                                                              	                	              	               	          [4.64]	  
                               +
 	   MBS	  Yield) 	  x	  HHIi,t-­‐1	                  	  	             	                	              	               	  
 (∆	                                                                                        0.009	                                         -­‐1.464	  
                                                                              	             [1.36]	           	               	          [-­‐0.79]	  
 	  (∆	  MBS	  Yield)-­‐	  x	  HHIi,t-­‐1	           	  	             	             0.039	            	               	          -­‐3.278	  
                                                                            	               [5.05]	          	              	            [-­‐1.45]	  
 	  HHIi,t-­‐1	                                       	  
                                                     0.006	                	  
                                                                         0.003	             0.005	           	  
                                                                                                          -­‐0.274	           	  
                                                                                                                            0.027	             -­‐0.14	  
                                                     [1.47]	            [0.61]	            [1.27]	     [-­‐0.98]	      [0.37]	          [-­‐0.41]	  
 	  R2	                                            0.318	             0.517	              0.52	      0.318	          0.317	           0.317	  
 N	                                                 52384	             52384	             52384	      38068	          38068	           38068	  
 County	  FE	                                        N	                 Y	                  Y	         N	              Y	               Y	  
 Year	  FE	                                          N	                 Y	                  Y	         N	              Y	               Y	  




                                                                                        50
                                                           Appendix Table 2
                                                   Weighting the Sample by Population

This table presents regressions of the form:

                 ⎛ Refi ⎞
               Δ ⎜      ⎟ = α + β1 ⋅ ΔMBS Yieldt + β 2 ⋅ Top 4i ,t −1 + β3 ⋅ ΔMBS Yieldt × Top 4i ,t −1 + ε i ,t
                 ⎝ Pop ⎠i ,t

and

                     ΔRatei ,t = α + β1 ⋅ ΔMBS Yieldt + β 2 ⋅ Top 4i ,t + β3 ⋅ ΔMBS Yield t × Top 4i ,t + ε i ,t .

The column headings show the dependent variable. The subheadings indicate whether (i) each county is weighted by
its population; (ii) the sample is restricted to counties with population above the median in a given year; or (iii) the
sample is restricted to counties with population above the mean in a given year. Top 4 is the share of the top 4
mortgage originators; ∆MBS Yield is the change in the Fannie Mae 30-year FRM MBS yield. The columns with
refinancings as the dependent variable are run yearly 1994-2011, and standard errors are clustered by county and
year with t-statistics reported in brackets. The columns with rates as the dependent variable are run monthly 2000-
2011, and standard errors are clustered by county and month with t-statistics reported in brackets.

 	                                         	                 	                        	                 	               	                	  
 	                                                    ∆	  Refi/Popi,t	                                             ∆	  Ratei,t	  
                                        Pop	               Pop	  >	             Pop	  >	  	      Pop	           Pop	  >	        Pop	  >	  	  
                                       Weight	          Median	                  Mean	             Weight	        Median	           Mean	  
 	   MBS	  Yield	  t	  x	  	  
 ∆	                                   0.023	            0.021	                  0.017	              -­‐0.67	      -­‐0.662	         -­‐0.68	  
 	  	  	  	  Top4i,t-­‐1	         [4.13]	           [4.26]	                 [2.90]	           [-­‐2.46]	      [-­‐2.44]	       [-­‐2.44]	  
 ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                                                                               0.674	           0.67	          0.669	  
                                           	                 	                      	               [6.68]	         [6.77]	          [6.46]	  
 	  
 Top4 i,t-­‐1	                            	  
                                        0.005	               	  
                                                           0.003	                    	  
                                                                                   0.005	            -­‐0.003	       -­‐0.008	             0	  
                                       [0.99]	           [0.63]	                 [0.98]	           [-­‐0.13]	      [-­‐0.32]	        [0.00]	  
 	  R2	                              0.722	            0.661	                  0.758	              0.336	          0.349	            0.34	  
 N	                                   52384	            26609	                   9875	            38068	          19022	           11748	  
 County	  FE	                           Y	                Y	                      Y	                   Y	             Y	               Y	  
 Year	  FE	                             Y	                Y	                      Y	                   Y	             Y	               Y	  




                                                                              51
                                                              Appendix Table 3
                                                    Mortgage Rates and Concentration, Lags

This table presents regressions of the form:

            ΔRatei ,t = α + β1 ⋅ ΔMBS Yieldt + β 2 ⋅ Top 4i ,t + β3 ⋅ ΔMBS Yield t × Top 4i ,t + ε i ,t .

The county-level sample runs quarterly 2000-2011. Top 4 is the share of the top 4 mortgage originators; ∆MBS
Yield is the change in the Fannie Mae 30-year FRM MBS yield; ln(Wage) is the log average weekly wage;
ln(Population) is the log population; Rate is the average mortgage rate reported in CoreLogic, FICO is the credit
score, and LTV is the loan-to-value ratio; ln(Price) is the log average price. Standard errors are clustered by county
and quarter, and t-statistics are reported in the brackets. The second column reports the specification for the full
sample, while the third column restricts the sample to the years before the financial crisis, 2000-2006.

          ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                                    0.68	         0.663	         0.679	         0.651	         0.661	  
                                                                    [8.46]	        [7.69]	        [5.64]	        [7.63]	        [7.70]	  
          	  ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t-­‐1	                           0.082	         0.065	         0.138	         0.055	         0.055	  
                                                                    [1.13]	        [0.82]	        [1.37]	        [0.71]	        [0.69]	  
          	   MBS	  Yield	  t-­‐2	  
          ∆	                                                        0.112	         0.096	         0.068	         0.093	         0.093	  
                                                                    [1.32]	        [1.18]	        [0.86]	        [1.12]	        [1.08]	  
          	  ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t-­‐3	                           0.013	       -­‐0.002	        0.011	       -­‐0.003	           0	  
                                                                    [0.20]	       [-­‐0.03]	      [0.11]	       [-­‐0.04]	      [0.00]	  
          	   MBS	  Yield	  t	  x	  Top4i,t-­‐1	  
          ∆	                                                      -­‐0.647	      -­‐0.588	      -­‐0.563	        -­‐0.58	     -­‐0.622	  
                                                                   [-­‐3.13]	     [-­‐2.64]	     [-­‐1.69]	     [-­‐2.63]	     [-­‐2.79]	  
          ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	  -­‐1	  x	  Top4i,t-­‐1	     -­‐0.028	        0.037	       -­‐0.074	          0.06	        0.088	  
                                                                   [-­‐0.13]	      [0.17]	       [-­‐0.25]	      [0.27]	        [0.39]	  
          ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	  -­‐2	  x	  Top4i,t-­‐1	     -­‐0.151	      -­‐0.099	      -­‐0.058	      -­‐0.095	      -­‐0.097	  
                                                                   [-­‐0.73]	     [-­‐0.49]	     [-­‐0.25]	     [-­‐0.46]	     [-­‐0.46]	  
          ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	  -­‐3	  x	  Top4i,t-­‐1	       0.043	         0.108	       -­‐0.054	        0.102	         0.097	  
                                                                    [0.25]	        [0.56]	       [-­‐0.18]	      [0.53]	        [0.49]	  
          Top	  4i,t-­‐1	            	                          -­‐0.051	        0.001	       -­‐0.014	        0.003	       -­‐0.006	  
                                                                   [-­‐0.91]	      [0.03]	       [-­‐0.42]	      [0.12]	       [-­‐0.21]	  
          	  ∆	  LTVi,t	                                                                                          0.004	         0.004	  
                                                                         	            	              	           [2.95]	        [2.76]	  
          	   FICOi,t	  
          ∆	                                                            	            	              	          -­‐0.002	      -­‐0.002	  
                                                                         	            	              	          [-­‐8.73]	     [-­‐8.08]	  
          	  ∆	  ln(Pricei,t)	                                        	            	              	                            0.229	  
                                                                                       	              	              	           [0.95]	  
          	  
          R  2	                                                      	  
                                                                   0.341	             	  
                                                                                    0.339	            	  
                                                                                                     0.26	            	  
                                                                                                                    0.366	          0.381	  
          N	                                                      36902	         36902	         21431	         36902	         29648	  
          County	  FE	                                             Y	             Y	             Y	             Y	                Y	  
          Year	  FE	                                               Y	             Y	             Y	             Y	                Y	  




                                                                                      52
                                                          Appendix Table 4
                                              Mortgage Rates and Concentration, Quarterly

This table presents regressions of the form:

                ΔRatei ,t = α + β1 ⋅ ΔMBS Yieldt + β 2 ⋅ Top 4i ,t + β3 ⋅ ΔMBS Yield t × Top 4i ,t + ε i ,t .

The county-level sample runs quarterly 2000-2011. Top 4 is the share of the top 4 mortgage originators; ∆MBS
Yield is the change in the Fannie Mae 30-year FRM MBS yield; ln(Wage) is the log average weekly wage;
ln(Population) is the log population; Rate is the average mortgage rate reported in CoreLogic, FICO is the credit
score, and LTV is the loan-to-value ratio; ln(Price) is the log average price. Standard errors are clustered by county
and quarter, and t-statistics are reported in the brackets. The second column reports the specification for the full
sample, while the third column restricts the sample to the years before the financial crisis, 2000-2006.

        ∆	  MBS	  Yield	  t	                               1.189	         1.106	              1	              	          0.984	         1.025	  
                                                             [10.15]	       [11.36]	          [9.19]	             	         [9.44]	        [8.49]	  
        	   MBS	  Yield	  t	  x	  Top4i,t-­‐1	  
        ∆	                                                  -­‐1.365	      -­‐1.089	        -­‐0.018	            	        -­‐1.008	      -­‐1.193	  
                                                             [-­‐4.15]	     [-­‐4.39]	       [-­‐0.05]	           	        [-­‐4.25]	     [-­‐3.96]	  
        	  (∆	  MBS	  Yield)+	                                 	              	                	        0.875	               	              	  
        	                                                         	              	                	        [4.39]	              	              	  
                                     -­‐
        (∆	  MBS	  Yield) 	                                     	              	                	        1.238	               	              	  
        	                                                         	              	                	        [6.03]	              	              	  
                                     +
        (∆	  MBS	  Yield) 	  x	  Top4i,t-­‐1	                                                   	        -­‐0.771	            	              	  
                                                                   	              	                	        [-­‐1.38]	           	              	  
        	  (∆	  MBS	  Yield)-­‐	  x	  Top4i,t-­‐1	           	              	                	        -­‐1.262	            	              	  
                                                                  	              	                 	        [-­‐2.56]	           	              	  
        	  Top	  4i,t-­‐1	                                     	  
                                                             -­‐0.254	           	  
                                                                             -­‐0.141	        -­‐0.034	      -­‐0.214	      -­‐0.147	      -­‐0.188	  
                                                             [-­‐2.21]	     [-­‐1.74]	       [-­‐0.41]	     [-­‐1.38]	     [-­‐1.88]	     [-­‐1.93]	  
        	   LTVi,t	  
        ∆	                                                                                          	                          0.005	         0.005	  
                                                                 	              	                  	            	           [2.28]	        [2.37]	  
        	   FICOi,t	  
        ∆	                                                      	              	                  	            	          -­‐0.004	      -­‐0.004	  
                                                                 	              	                  	            	          [-­‐4.32]	     [-­‐3.93]	  
        	  ∆	  ln(Pricei,t)	                                  	              	                  	            	                	        -­‐0.052	  
                                                                 	              	                  	            	                	        [-­‐0.27]	  
        	   2	  
        R                                                        	  
                                                              0.775	            	  
                                                                              0.784	            0.769	           	  
                                                                                                                0.788	          0.814	         0.829	  
        N	                                                  10703	         10703	              6201	       10703	         10703	            8228	  
        County	  FE	                                         N	             Y	                  Y	          Y	                Y	             Y	  
        Year	  FE	                                           N	             Y	                  Y	          Y	                Y	             Y	  




                                                                                          53
                                           Appendix Table 5
                                     Loan Quality and Concentration

This table reports the raw correlations between measures of loan quality and concentration in the data. The column
headings show the dependent variable. The dependent variables across columns are (i) DTI, the ratio of mortgage
debt to income for borrowers in HMDA, (ii) DTI-MS, the total debt to income for each county as calculated by
Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2012), (iii) FICO scores from CoreLogic, and (iv) LTVs from CoreLogic. The samples in the
first two columns run annually 1994-2011, while the samples in the second two columns run monthly 2000-2011.
Standard errors are clustered by county, and t-statistics are reported in the brackets.




                   	                  DTI	  i,t	     DTI-­‐MS	  i,t	     FICOi,t	      LTVi,t	  
                   Top	  4i,t	      -­‐1.033	          -­‐1.609	          25.712	      -­‐0.765	  
                                     [-­‐35.23]	        [-­‐26.14]	         [1.82]	      [-­‐0.15]	  
                   R2	       	      0.273	              0.138	            0.239	       0.267	  
                   N	                52384	             37657	             38068	       38068	  
                   Year	  FE	            Y	                 Y	                Y	           Y	  




                                                              54
                                               Appendix Table 6
                                        Match Quality for Matched Samples

This table reports the quality of the matches for the matched samples used in Table 5 in the main text. Each entry in
the table reports the coefficient from running a regression of the specified variable on an indicator for whether the
observation in the matched sample is from a high-concentration county. t-statistics clustered by county are reported
in the brackets.




         	                                               Panel	  A:	  HMDA	  Matched	  Samples	  
         	                   Wage,	  Pop	                    Wage,	  Pop,	  Size,	  DTI	   Wage,	  Pop,	  Size,	  DTI,	  Price	  
       Top	  4	           0.178	     [44.32]	                       0.151	       [37.37]	                   0.087	     [15.16]	  
    Refi/Pop	           -­‐0.003	     [-­‐6.56]	                           0	     [1.03]	                 -­‐0.001	     [-­‐1.26]	  
 ln(Population)	        -­‐0.011	     [-­‐0.34]	                  -­‐0.029	       [-­‐1.36]	              -­‐0.005	     [-­‐0.09]	  
    ln(Wage)	           -­‐0.001	     [-­‐0.19]	                  -­‐0.004	       [-­‐0.88]	              -­‐0.003	     [-­‐0.32]	  
     ln(Price)	         -­‐0.132	     [-­‐1.63]	                  -­‐0.002	       [-­‐0.03]	              -­‐0.009	     [-­‐0.38]	  
  ln(LoanSize)	         -­‐0.192	     [-­‐14.60]	                    -­‐0.01	     [-­‐1.48]	              -­‐0.008	     [-­‐0.46]	  
        LTI	            -­‐0.221	     [-­‐11.52]	                 -­‐0.009	       [-­‐1.28]	              -­‐0.008	     [-­‐0.44]	  




            	                                           Panel	  B:	  CoreLogic	  Matched	  Samples	  
            	                  Wage,	  Pop	                   Wage,	  Pop,	  FICO,	  LTV	      Wage,	  Pop,	  FICO,	  LTV,	  Price	  
       Top	  4	             0.08	   [15.78]	                        0.081	   [15.16]	                    0.076	   [10.35]	  
        Rate	              0.003	   [0.07]	                          0.014	   [0.34]	                      0.014	   [0.22]	  
  ln(Population)	          0.002	   [0.03]	                         -­‐0.006	   [-­‐0.11]	               -­‐0.011	   [-­‐0.14]	  
     ln(Wage)	                    0	   [0.01]	                      -­‐0.002	   [-­‐0.17]	               -­‐0.004	   [-­‐0.28]	  
     ln(Price)	            0.043	   [0.85]	                         -­‐0.009	   [-­‐0.21]	                 0.005	   [0.14]	  
       FICO	               3.664	   [2.44]	                          0.138	   [0.13]	                      0.284	   [0.18]	  
        LTV	              -­‐0.676	   [-­‐1.45]	                     0.003	   [0.01]	                      -­‐0.08	   [-­‐0.16]	  




                                                                  55
                                                      Appendix Table 7
                                                 Merger Sample Characteristics

This table reports characteristics of the counties used in the merger sample results reported in Table 7 of the main
text. Panels A and C report the coefficient from running a regression of the specified variable on an indicator for
whether the county is in the first merger sample and whether the county is in the second (more restrictive) merger
sample, respectively. Panels B and D report the coefficient from running a regression of the specified variable on a
post-merger indicator for counties in the first merger sample and the second (more restrictive) merger sample,
respectively. t-statistics clustered by county are reported in the brackets.




 	                                           Panel	  A:	  Characteristics	  of	  Counties	  in	  First	  Merger	  Sample	  
                                ln(Pop)	      ln(Price)	       ln(Wage)	          ln(Loan	  Size)	       LTI	                 LTV	                  FICO	  
 	  
 Merger	  Samplei	             0.599	        -­‐0.103	         0.049	                0.124	           0.107	               -­‐0.964	              -­‐0.801	  
                                [11.29]	       [-­‐2.12]	        [6.79]	              [10.22]	          [7.36]	              [-­‐6.44]	             [-­‐1.41]	  
 	   2
 R 	                            0.043	         0.008	           0.015	                0.032	           0.018	               0.013	                     0	  
 N	                             3120	           530	            3120	                 3120	             3120	                3120	                  3120	  




 	                                Panel	  B:	  Post-­‐Merger	  Characteristics	  of	  Counties	  in	  First	  Merger	  Sample	  
                             Δln(Pop)	   Δln(Wage)	   Δln(Price)	   Δln(Loan	  Size)	                       LTI	        LTV	         FICO	  
 	  Post	  Mergeri,t	       0.001	           -­‐0.001	           -­‐0.016	               0.006	             -­‐0.002	                 0.23	                  4.587	  
                              [1.25]	           [-­‐0.71]	         [-­‐2.48]	               [1.96]	            [-­‐0.18]	            [1.25]	                [6.71]	  
 	  R 	  
        2
                               0.349	            0.074	             0.448	                   0.06	                  0.23	             0.338	                    0.158	  
 N	                          32063	            32063	               5540	                 32063	              32063	                24419	                 24419	  
 County	  FE	                   Y	                Y	                  Y	                     Y	                     Y	                     Y	                    Y	  
 Year	  FE	                     Y	                Y	                  Y	                     Y	                     Y	                     Y	                    Y	  




                                                                          56
	                                                Panel	  C:	  Characteristics	  of	  Counties	  in	  Second	  Merger	  Sample	  
                                  ln(Pop)	         ln(Price)	       ln(Wage)	          ln(Loan	  Size)	         LTI	          LTV	         FICO	  
	  Merger	  Sample                0.027	            -­‐0.04	         0.006	               0.122	             0.157	        0.149	         1.886	  
                     i	  

                                    [0.41]	          [-­‐0.86]	        [0.61]	              [6.74]	            [8.19]	       [0.50]	        [1.87]	  
	  R2	                                  0	         -­‐0.001	             0	               0.013	             0.016	            0	            0	  
N	                                  3120	             530	            3120	                 3120	             3120	          3120	         3120	  




	                                Panel	  D:	  Post-­‐Merger	  Characteristics	  of	  Counties	  in	  Second	  Merger	  Sample	  
                             Δln(Pop)	   Δln(Wage)	   Δln(Price)	   Δln(Loan	  Size)	                       LTI	      LTV	      FICO	  
	  Post	  Mergeri,t	        0.001	                 0	             -­‐0.018	             -­‐0.005	          -­‐0.077	      -­‐0.377	        0.6	  
                              [0.53]	             [-­‐0.42]	         [-­‐1.28]	            [-­‐0.95]	         [-­‐1.86]	     [-­‐0.76]	     [0.28]	  
	  R 	  
       2
                               0.151	             0.041	              0.569	               0.091	              0.444	        0.649	         0.526	  
N	                            5566	               5566	               992	                 5566	              5566	          3555	         3555	  
County	  FE	                    Y	                  Y	                 Y	                    Y	                 Y	             Y	            Y	  
Year	  FE	                      Y	                  Y	                 Y	                    Y	                 Y	             Y	            Y	  




                                                                           57
