NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PIRACY AND COPYRIGHT ENFORCEMENT MECHANISMS
Brett Danaher
Michael D. Smith
Rahul Telang
Working Paper 19150
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19150
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2013

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19150.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Brett Danaher, Michael D. Smith, and Rahul Telang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Piracy and Copyright Enforcement Mechanisms
Brett Danaher, Michael D. Smith, and Rahul Telang
NBER Working Paper No. 19150
June 2013
JEL No. D69,L1,L11,L8,L82,M31,O30
ABSTRACT
Much debate exists around the impact that illegal file sharing may have on the creative industries.
Similarly, opinions differ regarding whether the producers of artistic works should be forced to accept
any weakening of intellectual property rights resulting from illegal file sharing, or if governments
should intervene to protect these rights. This chapter seeks to inform these questions by outlining what
we do and do not know from existing academic research.
We first discuss whether filesharing displaces sales of media goods and then discuss whether such
displacement will lead to reduced incentives to produce new creative works. We continue by summarizing
recent findings on what businesses can do to compete with piracy and the effectiveness of anti-piracy
interventions on encouraging consumers to migrate from illegal to legal consumption channels. We
conclude by demonstrating that without additional empirical evidence, it will be difficult to determine
the socially optimal set of strategies and government copyright policies in the digital era.
Brett Danaher
Wellesley College
bdanaher@wellesley.edu
Michael D. Smith
Carnegie Mellon University
mds@cmu.edu

Rahul Telang
Carnegie Mellon University
rtelang@andrew.cmu.edu

1. Introduction	  
The	   goal	   of	   this	   chapter	   is	   to	   analyze	   what	   the	   academic	   literature	   says	   about	   piracy’s	  
impact	  on	  the	  media	  industries	  and	  on	  society,	  and	  to	  analyze	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  various	  
industry	   and	   government	   efforts	   to	   respond	   to	   the	   threat	   of	   piracy.	   Our	   discussion	  
proceeds	   in	   two	   main	   sections.	   In	   the	   first	   section	   we	   analyze	   what	   the	   academic	   literature	  
says	  about	  the	  impact	  of	  piracy	  on	  sales	  and	  on	  creative	  incentives.	  In	  the	  second	  section	  
we	   review	   the	   academic	   literature	   regarding	   the	   effectiveness	   of	   various	   industry	   and	  
government	  initiatives	  to	  address	  piracy.	  
We	   draw	   several	   conclusions	   in	   our	   analysis.	   First,	   our	   analysis	   of	   the	   literature	   suggests	  
that	  piracy	  represents	  a	  significant	  threat	  to	  media	  sales:	  The	  vast	  majority	  of	  studies	  in	  the	  
academic	   literature	   find	   that	   piracy	   results	   in	   statistically	   and	   economically	   significant	  
harm	   to	   media	   sales.	   Second,	   we	   conclude	   that,	   while	   the	   academic	   literature	   is	   only	  
beginning	  to	  analyze	  the	  broader	  social	  implications	  of	  piracy,	  a	  strong	  economic	  argument	  
can	  be	  made	  that	  reduced	  sales	  from	  piracy	  will,	  ceteris	  paribus,	  reduce	  incentives	  for	  the	  
development	   of	   new	   creative	   works,	   and	   that	   reduced	   incentives	   are	   likely	   to	   reduce	  
overall	   social	   welfare.	   Finally,	   we	   conclude	   that	   there	   are	   a	   variety	   of	   measures	   that	   the	  
creative	  industries	  and	  governments	  can	  use	  to	  reduce	  the	  threat	  from	  piracy.	  
2. Piracy	  and	  Social	  Welfare	  
One	  can’t	  analyze	  how	  governments	  and	  industries	  should	  respond	  to	  piracy	  without	  first	  
analyzing	   whether	   there	   is	   a	   need	   to	   respond.	   In	   this	   section	   our	   goal	   is	   to	   review	   the	  
academic	  literature	  on	  two	  important	  questions:	  
1. Does	  piracy	  harm	  media	  sales?	  
2. Does	  piracy	  impact	  the	  incentives	  to	  create	  media	  content?	  
Answers	   to	   these	   questions	   are	   critical	   to	   policy-­‐makers	   and	   industry	   decision-­‐makers	  
because	   if	   piracy	   does	   not	   reduce	   media	   sales	   it	   could	   easily	   be	   viewed	   as	   a	   socially	  

1	  

beneficial	  activity	  that	  provides	  access	  to	  consumers	  who	  otherwise	  wouldn’t	  have	  paid	  for	  
content	  without	  cannibalizing	  sales	  from	  consumers	  who	  are	  paying	  for	  content.	  	  
If	   piracy	   does	   harm	   sales	   of	   media	   content,	   the	   next	   logical	   question	   is	   whether	   this	  
reduction	  in	  revenue	  reduces	  the	  incentives	  to	  creators	  to	  produce	  content.	  In	  this	  regard,	  
even	   if	   piracy	   reduces	   legitimate	   sales,	   if	   it	   does	   not	   harm	   the	   incentives	   of	   creators	   one	  
could	  potentially	  view	  piracy	  simply	  as	  a	  wealth	  transfer	  from	  content	  creators	  to	  content	  
consumers	   with	   no	   net	   reduction	   in	   overall	   social	   welfare,	   and	   possibly	   as	   socially	  
beneficial	  by	  virtue	  of	  eliminating	  the	  deadweight	  loss	  from	  consumers	  whose	  willingness	  
to	  pay	  is	  below	  the	  market	  price.	  
2.1 Does	  Piracy	  Harm	  Sales?	  
In	   this	   section	   we	   analyze	   what	   the	   academic	   literatures	   in	   economics,	   marketing,	   and	  
information	  systems	  can	  tell	  us	  about	  how	  piracy	  impacts	  sales	  of	  media	  products.	  Within	  
these	   literatures,	   we	   have	   chosen	   to	   focus	   on	   empirical	   studies	   of	   the	   impact	   of	   piracy	  
because,	   while	   there	   are	   a	   variety	   of	   analytic	   models	   proposing	   theories	   of	   how	   piracy	  
might	  impact	  sales,1	  we	  believe	  that	  the	  true	  test	  of	  these	  theories	  starts	  with	  data.	  
Based	   on	   our	   review	   of	   the	   empirical	   literature	   we	   conclude	   that,	   while	  some	   papers	   in	   the	  
literature	   find	   no	   evidence	   of	   harm,	   the	   vast	   majority	   of	   the	   literature	   (particularly	   the	  
literature	  published	  in	  top	  peer	  reviewed	  journals)	  finds	  evidence	  that	  piracy	  harms	  media	  
sales.	  
In	  the	  remainder	  of	  this	  section	  we	  first	  discuss	  our	  philosophy	  in	  evaluating	  the	  literature.	  
We	   then	   present	   a	   high-­‐level	   overview	   of	   the	   statistical	   challenges	   associated	   with	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1	  See	  Peitz	  and	  Waelbroeck	  (2004)	  for	  a	  review	  of	  the	  analytic/theoretical	  literature	  on	  the	  impact	  of	  piracy.	  

Within	  this	  literature,	  Chellappa	  and	  Shivendu	  (2005)	  propose	  a	  model	  whereby	  consumers	  may	  pirate	  
products	  as	  a	  “sampling”	  strategy	  —	  using	  the	  pirated	  content	  to	  learn	  more	  about	  the	  true	  value	  of	  the	  
content	  and	  then	  using	  that	  information	  to	  decide	  whether	  to	  buy	  the	  content.	  Similarly,	  Conner	  and	  Rumelt	  
(1991)	  and	  Takeyama	  (1994)	  propose	  a	  theory	  of	  network	  effects	  whereby	  the	  piracy	  of	  media	  products	  by	  a	  
portion	  of	  the	  market	  might	  increase	  the	  value	  to	  other	  participants	  in	  the	  market.	  Finally,	  some	  have	  argued	  
that	  indirect	  appropriability,	  a	  term	  coined	  by	  Liebowitz	  (1985),	  might	  mitigate	  the	  impact	  of	  media	  piracy	  by	  
increasing	  the	  value	  of	  the	  initial	  purchase:	  i.e.,	  if	  I	  can	  make	  a	  copy	  for	  my	  friend,	  I	  might	  be	  willing	  to	  pay	  
more	  for	  the	  initial	  product.	  As	  noted	  by	  Liebowitz	  (2008a),	  absent	  empirical	  validation	  serious	  questions	  can	  
be	  raised	  regarding	  whether	  any	  of	  these	  theories	  hold	  in	  actual	  markets.	  This	  is	  why	  we	  have	  focused	  our	  
analysis	  on	  what	  the	  data	  actually	  say.	  

2	  

measuring	  the	  impact	  of	  piracy,	  and	  then	  summarize	  the	  three	  main	  methods	  used	  in	  the	  
literature	   for	   addressing	   these	   challenges.	   Finally	   we	   discuss	   the	   specific	   findings	   of	   the	  
major	  papers	  in	  the	  literature	  as	  they	  pertain	  to	  the	  impact	  of	  piracy	  on	  music	  sales	  and	  on	  
motion	   picture	   sales.	   We	   focus	   on	   music	   and	   motion	   picture	   sales	   because	   these	   are	   the	  
media	  categories	  that	  are	  most	  commonly	  addressed	  in	  the	  piracy	  literature.	  Whether	  the	  
results	  observed	  for	  music	  and	  motion	  picture	  content	  extend	  to	  other	  product	  categories	  
such	  as	  books	  and	  video	  games,	  remains	  an	  open,	  and	  important,	  question.	  
Epistemology	  and	  Social	  Science:	  	  
One	   of	   us	   (Smith)	   once	   heard	   a	   physics	   professor	   say	   that,	   outside	   of	   pure	   mathematics,	  
there	   is	   no	   such	   thing	   as	   a	   “proof”	   in	   the	   physical	   sciences.	   Instead,	   the	   physical	   sciences	  
must	  deal	  with	  knowledge	  on	  the	  level	  of	  what	  is	  the	  most	  reasonable	  explanation	  for	  the	  
observed	  data.	  
If	  this	  is	  true	  for	  the	  physical	  sciences,	  it	  is	  certainly	  true	  of	  the	  social	  sciences	  where	  the	  
observed	  data	  are	  noisier,	  more	  incomplete,	  and	  subject	  to	  the	  vagaries	  of	  human	  behavior.	  
As	   such,	   we	   believe	   that	   evaluations	   of	   the	   literature	   should	   start	   with	   the	   recognition	   that	  
there	   is	   no	   such	   thing	   as	   a	   perfect	   or	   completely	   conclusive	   paper.	   Each	   paper	   has	   flaws,	  
limitations,	   and	   areas	   that	   could	   be	   improved	   with	   better	   data	   or	   different	   methods.	  
Because	  of	  this,	  we	  believe	  that	  when	  evaluating	  “what	  the	  literature	  says,”	  one	  should	  start	  
by	   first	   analyzing	   what	   each	   individual	   paper	   finds,	   but	   then	   one	   should	   take	   a	   step	   back	  
and	   draw	   overall	   conclusions	   based	   on	   what	   the	   totality	   of	   the	   literature	   says.	   We	   try	   to	  
follow	  this	  approach	  in	  the	  discussion	  that	  follows.	  
Methodological	  Approaches:	  
A	  naive	  approach	  one	  might	  take	  to	  estimating	  the	  impact	  of	  piracy	  is	  to	  use	  data	  on	  sales	  
of	   individual	   products,	   say	   movies,	   and	   measures	   of	   piracy	   levels	   for	   those	   movies.	   One	  
could	  then	  run	  the	  following	  regression	  in	  an	  attempt	  to	  measure	  how	  piracy	  impacts	  sales:	  

Sit = Xitδ + Pit β + εit 	  

(1)	  

3	  

where	   Sit	   represents	   the	   sales	   of	   movie	   i	   at	   time	   t,	   X	   represents	   a	   matrix	   of	   variables,	  
possibly	   including	   fixed	   effects	   for	   each	   movie	   and	   each	   time	   period	   or	   control	   variables,	  
and	  where	  Pit	  represents	  piracy	  levels	  on	  movie	  i	  at	  time	  t.	  In	  this	  specification,	  the	  impact	  
of	  piracy	  on	  sales	  would	  be	  given	  by	  the	  β	  coefficient.	  
The	   problem	   with	   this	   approach	   is	   that	   there	   exist	   variables	   that	   are	   not	   included	   in	   the	  
regression	   but	   still	   affect	   variables	   on	   both	   the	   left-­‐hand	   (independent)	   and	   right-­‐hand	  
(dependent)	   sides	   of	   the	   regression.	   In	   this	   specific	   case,	   one	   might	   expect	   that	   the	  
popularity	  of	  a	  movie	  (which	  is	  unobserved)	  would	  impact	  both	  the	  likelihood	  that	  it	  will	  
be	  pirated	  and	  the	  likelihood	  that	  it	  will	  sell.	  In	  a	  situation	  like	  this,	  where	  missing	  variables	  
affect	   both	   the	   independent	   and	   dependent	   variables	   in	   a	   regression,	   the	   affected	  
dependent	   variables	   are	  referred	   to	   as	   being	   “endogenous,”	   and	   it	   is	   well	   known	   that	   the	  
resulting	  regression	  coefficients	  will	  be	  inaccurate	  (biased).	  	  
Indeed,	   in	   the	   specific	   case	   described	   above,	   if	   one	   regresses	   the	   sales	   of	   individual	   movies	  
onto	   the	   piracy	   levels	   of	   those	   movies,	   one	   is	   very	   likely	   to	   see	   a	   positive	   coefficient	   on	  
piracy.	   If	   the	   model	   were	   correct,	   the	   interpretation	   of	   this	   coefficient	   would	   be	   that	  
increased	   piracy	   helps	   sales.	   However,	   as	   noted	   above,	   in	   this	   case	   one	   cannot	   make	   that	  
interpretation	  because	  of	  the	  bias	  introduced	  by	  the	  unobserved	  variables.	  
Helberger,	  Huygen,	  and	  van	  Eijk	  (2009)	  represent	  a	  potential	  “real-­‐world”	  example	  of	  this	  
error.	  The	  authors	  survey	  1,500	  media	  customers	  and	  pirates	  in	  the	  Netherlands	  regarding	  
their	  purchasing	  and	  piracy	  behavior.	  They	  find	  that	  media	  pirates	  purchase	  as	  many	  CDs	  
as	  non-­‐pirates	  do.	  In	  a	  section	  titled	  “downloading	  and	  buying	  as	  complementary	  activities”	  
they	  conclude	  from	  this	  observation	  that	  “[d]ownloading	  need	  not	  be	  a	  threat	  to	  purchases	  
of	  physical	  formats:	  it	  would	  seem	  that	  for	  Dutch	  consumers	  these	  go	  together”	  (p.	  75).	  The	  
problem	  with	  this	  conclusion	  is	  that	  it	  ignores	  a	  potential	  endogeneity	  problem:	  If	  there	  are	  
unobserved	  characteristics	  of	  consumers	  (say	  their	  interest	  in	  music)	  that	  might	  influence	  
both	  a	  consumer’s	  propensity	  to	  pirate	  and	  their	  propensity	  to	  purchase,	  then	  one	  cannot	  
conclude	  anything	  about	  a	  survey	  that	  finds	  that	  pirates	  purchase	  as	  much	  as	  non-­‐pirates	  

4	  

do.	  Put	  another	  way:	  while	  pirates	  might	  purchase	  as	  much	  as	  non-­‐pirates	  do,	  we	  have	  no	  
way	  of	  knowing	  how	  much	  these	  pirates	  would	  have	  purchased	  if	  piracy	  weren’t	  available.2	  
Below,	   we	   review	   the	   four	   major	   methodologies	   used	   in	   the	   academic	   literature	   to	   address	  
this	   endogeneity	   problem	   either	   directly	   (in	   the	   case	   of	   product-­‐level	   data	   using	   natural	  
experiments	  and	  instrumental	  variables	  approaches)	  or	  indirectly	  (using	  country-­‐	  or	  city-­‐
level	  data	  or	  survey	  data).	  
Product-­‐Level	   Analysis	   Using	   Natural	   Experiments:	   Controlled	   experiments	   are	   the	  
“gold	   standard”	   of	   social	   science	   research.	   For	   example,	   a	   controlled	   experiment	   to	   analyze	  
the	   impact	   of	   piracy	   on	   sales	   might	   involve	   obtaining	   a	   random	   sample	   of	   10,000	   or	   so	  
consumers,	   randomly	   assigning	   half	   of	   them	   to	   a	   treatment	   group	   that	   must	   stop	   using	  
Internet	   piracy	   for	   a	   period	   of	   time,	   and	   then	   comparing	   the	   purchase	   behavior	   of	   the	  
treatment	  group	  to	  the	  control	  group	  of	  customers	  who	  are	  still	  able	  to	  access	  piracy.	  This	  
approach	   would	   not	   suffer	   from	   the	   endogeneity	   problem	   described	   above	   because	   the	  
decision	  about	  which	  consumers’	  behavior	  is	  left	  unchanged	  (control	  group)	  and	  which	  are	  
no	   longer	   allowed	   to	   pirate	   (treatment	   group)	   is	   unrelated	   to	   the	   dependent	   variable	  
(media	  sales).	  
The	  problem	  with	  this	  approach,	  of	  course,	  is	  that	  it	  is	  very	  difficult	  both	  in	  terms	  of	  effort	  
and	  money,	  and	  thus	  it	  is	  not	  surprising	  that	  there	  are	  no	  papers	  in	  the	  literature	  that	  we	  
are	  aware	  of	  that	  use	  controlled	  experiments	  to	  study	  piracy.	  
However,	  an	  analogous	  approach	  to	  the	  pure	  experiment	  described	  above	  involves	  using	  a	  
“natural	  experiment”	  where	  a	  treatment	  is	  applied	  to	  one	  group	  of	  consumers	  and	  where	  
the	   researcher	   can	   find	   another	   group	   of	   similar	   consumers	   who	   are	   unaffected	   by	   this	  
change	   to	   serve	   as	   the	   control	   group.	   We	   have	   used	   this	   approach	   in	  several	   of	   our	   papers.	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

2	  Another	  concern	  with	  this	  paper	  is	  that	  the	  authors	  conclude	  that	  even	  though	  piracy	  reduces	  sales,	  

increased	  piracy	  represents	  a	  net	  welfare	  gain	  to	  Dutch	  society.	  They	  reach	  this	  conclusion	  by	  viewing	  piracy	  
as	  a	  welfare	  transfer	  from	  artists	  to	  consumers	  and	  noting	  that	  by	  reducing	  the	  cost	  of	  content	  to	  zero,	  piracy	  
eliminates	  the	  deadweight	  loss	  from	  consumers	  whose	  utility	  for	  the	  music	  was	  below	  the	  market	  price.	  The	  
problem	  with	  this	  conclusion	  is	  that	  it	  takes	  music	  production	  as	  a	  given.	  As	  we	  discuss	  in	  more	  detail	  below,	  
if	  piracy	  reduces	  rents	  available	  to	  artists,	  and	  if	  artists	  were	  to	  produce	  less	  music	  (or	  lower	  quality	  music)	  
as	  a	  result,	  then	  total	  social	  welfare	  could	  decline.	  

5	  

Danaher	   et	   al.	   (2010)	   use	   NBC’s	   decision	   to	   remove	   its	   content	   from	   iTunes	   as	   a	   natural	  
experiment	  and	  compare	  piracy	  levels	  and	  sales	  for	  NBC	  content	  (the	  treatment	  group)	  to	  
ABC,	  CBS,	  and	  FOX	  content	  (the	  control	  group).	  Similarly,	  Danaher	  et	  al.	  (2013)	  use	  ABC’s	  
decision	  to	  add	  its	  content	  to	  Hulu	  as	  a	  natural	  experiment	  and	  compare	  piracy	  levels	  for	  
ABC	  content	  (treatment)	  to	  NBC,	  CBS,	  and	  FOX	  content	  (control).	  Likewise,	  Danaher	  et	  al.	  
(2013)	   use	   the	   “HADOPI”	   graduated	   response	   law	   in	   France	   as	   a	   natural	   experiment	   and	  
compare	  music	  sales	  by	  French	  customers	  (treatment)	  to	  sales	  in	  a	  set	  of	  other	  European	  
countries	   (control).	   Finally,	   Danaher	   and	   Smith	   (2013)	   use	   the	   shutdown	   of	   the	   site	  
megaupload.com	   has	   an	   experiment	   of	   sorts,	   analyzing	   how	   the	   impact	   of	   this	   shutdown	  
varies	  across	  countries	  with	  different	  levels	  of	  pre-­‐shutdown	  usage.	  
The	  challenge	  with	  this	  approach	  is	  finding	  a	  suitable	  control	  group	  (one	  that	  has	  similar	  
characteristics	   to	   the	   treatment	   group	   prior	   to	   the	   event),	   and	   finding	   an	   event	   that	   is	   both	  
exogenous	  (i.e.,	  is	  not	  driven	  by	  the	  dependent	  variable)	  and	  is	  sufficiently	  discrete	  that	  one	  
can	  observe	  changes	  “before”	  and	  “after”	  it	  took	  effect.	  
Product-­‐Level	   Analysis	   Using	   Instrumental	   Variables:	   The	   instrumental	   variables	  
approach	   is	   similar	   to	   the	   “natural	   experiment”	   approach	   in	   that	   the	   researcher	   needs	   to	  
find	   a	   variable	   that	   is	   correlated	   with	   the	   endogenous	   dependent	   variable	   (e.g.,	   piracy)	  
without	  being	  correlated	  with	  the	  independent	  variable	  (legal	  consumption).	  	  
Oberholzer-­‐Gee	  and	  Strumpf	  (2007)	  (a	  paper	  we	  discuss	  in	  more	  detail	  below)	  apply	  this	  
approach	  by	  using	  the	  number	  of	  German	  secondary	  school	  students	  who	  are	  on	  vacation	  
in	  a	  particular	   week	   as	   an	   instrument	   for	   the	   ease	   of	   piracy	   among	   U.S.	   citizens.	   For	   this	   to	  
work,	  German	  holidays	  must	  affect	  the	  ease	  of	  piracy	  in	  the	  U.S.	  (which	  the	  authors	  argue	  
occurs	  because	  many	  music	  file	  sharers	  are	  German	  students	  and	  because	  German	  students	  
are	   more	   likely	   to	   share	   files	   when	   they	   are	   not	   in	   school),	   and	   German	   school	   holidays	  
must	  be	  otherwise	  uncorrelated	  with	  U.S.	  music	  sales.	  	  
In	   addition	   to	   the	   Oberholzer-­‐Gee	   and	   Strumpf	   paper,	   Zentner	   (2006)	   and	   Rob	   and	  
Waldfogel	   (2006)	   have	   used	   consumers’	   Internet	   sophistication	   and	   the	   availability	   of	  
broadband	   as	   instruments	   for	   piracy.	   However,	   because	   of	   the	   difficulty	   in	   finding	   a	  

6	  

variable	  that	  is	  both	  correlated	  with	  the	  endogenous	  dependent	  variable	  and	  not	  directly	  
correlated	  with	  the	  independent	  variable,	  beyond	  these	  papers	  there	  have	  been	  relatively	  
few	  piracy-­‐related	  papers	  that	  have	  used	  the	  Instrumental	  Variables	  approach.	  
City-­‐	   or	   Country-­‐Level	   Data:	   The	  third	  main	  approach	  used	  in	  the	  empirical	  literature	  is	  
to	   compare	   sales	   levels	   across	   different	   geographical	   markets	   (typically	   either	   countries	   or	  
cities).	   The	   basic	   idea	   of	   this	   approach	   is	   that	   after	   controlling	   for	   differences	   in	   the	  
demographic	   characteristics	   of	   each	   region,	   changes	   in	   the	   dependent	   variable	   (typically	  
broadband	  Internet	  penetration)	  can	  be	  treated	  as	  an	  experiment,	  and	  the	  researcher	  can	  
statistically	   compare	   the	   change	   in	   sales	   resulting	   from	   this	   experiment	   for	   a	   treatment	  
group	  (those	  regions	  where	  broadband	  Internet	  penetration	  increased)	  to	  a	  control	  group	  
(regions	  where	  there	  was	  no	  change	  in	  broadband	  Internet	  penetration).	  	  
Examples	   of	   this	   approach	   include	   Hui	   and	   Png	   (2003),	   Pietz	   and	   Waelbroeck	   (2004),	  
Zentner	   (2009),	   Zentner	   (2012)	   for	   country-­‐level	   data;	   and	   Liebowitz	   (2008b),	   Zentner	  
(2006)	  and	  Smith	  and	  Telang	  (2010)	  for	  city-­‐level	  data.	  
The	   main	   challenge	   of	   this	   approach	   is	   ensuring	   that	   the	   observed	   changes	   (for	   example	  
changes	  in	  the	  propensity	  to	  adopt	  broadband	  Internet)	  are	  properly	  controlled	  for	  by	  the	  
demographic	   characteristics	   of	   the	   region	   or	   by	   other	   control	   variables	   available	   to	   the	  
researcher.	  For	  example,	  if	  there	  were	  unobserved	  characteristics	  of	  regions	  that	  were	  both	  
driving	   Internet	   adoption	   and	   were	   driving	   media	   sales,	   and	   that	   weren’t	   captured	   by	  
observable	   demographic	   characteristics,	   the	   resulting	   coefficients	   would	   have	   similar	  
endogeneity	   bias	   to	   those	   described	   above.	   A	   related	   challenge	   is	   that	   while	   broadband	  
Internet	   access	   can	   stimulate	   piracy,	   it	   can	   also	   influence	   users	   in	   many	   different	   ways	   (for	  
example	  provide	  users	  with	  other	  entertainment	  options)	  that	  can	  affect	  media	  sales.	  	  
Individual-­‐Level	  (Survey)	  Data:	  A	  final	  category	  of	  papers	  use	  surveys	  of	  small	  relatively	  
homogeneous	   samples	   of	   consumers,	   for	   example,	   college	   students	   taking	   an	   economics	  
class	  (Waldfogel	  (2009,	  2010),	  Rob	  and	  Waldfogel	  (2006,	  2007),	  Bai	  and	  Waldfogel	  (2012)).	  
In	  this	  approach,	  the	  researchers	  use	  the	  homogeneity	  of	  the	  sample,	  along	  with	  observed	  
demographic	   and	   psychographic	   characteristics	   to	   control	   for	   unobserved	   correlation	   with	  

7	  

the	   dependent	   variable.	   The	   main	   interpretation	   challenges	   with	   this	   approach	   are	   (1)	   that	  
the	  resulting	  conclusions	  are,	  of	  necessity,	  tied	  to	  the	  chosen	  sample	  and	  (2)	  that	  the	  stated	  
behavior	   of	   individuals	   can	   be	   systematically	   affected	   by	   both	   inaccurate	   recall	   and	   by	  
obfuscation.	  The	  first	  challenge	  means	  that,	  in	  the	  case	  of	  the	  Waldfogel	  papers	  cited	  above	  
where	   the	   surveys	   are	   obtained	   from	   college	   students,	   it	   is	   difficult	   to	   generalize	   any	  
results	   beyond	   college	   students.	   The	   second	   challenge	   may	   affect	   survey	   data	   to	   the	   extent	  
that	  consumers	  systematically	  over-­‐	  or	  under-­‐estimate	  their	  actual	  purchase	  behavior,	   or	  
intentionally	  obfuscate	  the	  impact	  of	  piracy	  on	  sales	  behavior.	  
The	  Impact	  of	  Piracy	  on	  Music	  Sales:	  
One	   piece	   of	   anecdotal	   evidence	   for	   why	   piracy	   may	   have	   harmed	   music	   sales	   revolves	  
around	  the	  decline	  in	  sales	  in	  the	  music	  industry	  shortly	  after	  the	  introduction	  of	  Napster	  
in	   1999	   (Figure	   1).	   Unfortunately,	   using	   this	   data	   alone	   one	   can’t	   tell	   what	   music	   sales	  
levels	  would	  have	  been	  in	  the	  absence	  of	  Napster,	  or	  how	  much	  of	  the	  observed	  decline	  in	  
sales	   can	   be	   explained	   by	   piracy	   versus	   other	   unrelated	   causes.	   Answering	   these	   questions	  
requires	  some	  of	  the	  statistical	  techniques	  discussed	  above.	  
Figure	  1:	  Global	  Music	  Sales	  (1990-­‐2003)	  

	  
Source:	  Zentner	  (2006),	  p.	  64	  

8	  

	  
Below	   we	   review	   the	   major	   academic	   papers	   that	   have	   looked	   at	   the	   impact	   of	   piracy	   on	  
music	   sales.	   While	   the	   vast	   majority	   of	   these	   studies	   have	   found	   some	   harm	   from	   piracy,	  
one	  of	  the	  earliest	  and	  most	  prominent	  studies	  found	  no	  evidence	  of	  harm	  from	  piracy,	  and	  
we	  start	  our	  discussion	  with	  that	  paper.	  
Oberholzer-­‐Gee	  and	  Strumpf:	  The	   Oberholzer-­‐Gee	   and	   Strumpf	   (2007)	   paper	   is	   not	   only	  
one	  of	  the	  first	  papers	  in	  the	  economics	  literature	  to	  look	  at	  the	  impact	  of	  piracy	  on	  sales,	  it	  
was	  also	  published	  as	  the	  “lead	  article”	  in	  the	  Journal	  of	  Political	  Economy,	  one	  of	  the	  most	  
well	   respected	   journals	   in	   the	   economics	   literature.	   Because	   of	   this,	   it	   is	   one	   of	   the	   most	  
cited	  papers	  on	  the	  impact	  of	  piracy	  on	  sales.	  
In	  the	  paper,	  the	  authors	  analyze	  data	  from	  the	  latter	  part	  of	  2002.	  Their	  data	  include	  U.S.	  
piracy	   downloads	   by	   album	   (collected	   from	   two	   large	   OpenNap	   servers)	   and	   U.S.	   album	  
sales.	  To	  address	  the	  endogeneity	  problem	  described	  above,	  Oberholzer-­‐Gee	  and	  Strumpf	  
use	  the	  number	  of	  German	  secondary	  school	  students	  who	  are	  on	  vacation	  in	  a	  particular	  
week.	  The	  authors	  argue	  that	  German	  school	  vacations	  are	  an	  appropriate	  instrument	  for	  
the	  ease	  of	  piracy	  in	  the	  U.S.	  because	  German	  users	  provide	  one	  out	  of	  every	  six	  files	  that	  
are	   downloaded	   by	   U.S.	   users,	   and	   because	   during	   school	   vacations	   there	   are	   more	   files	  
shared	   by	   German	   users	   (students	   have	   more	   time	   to	   spend	   online	   sharing	   files).	   After	  
using	  this	  instrument,	  Oberholzer-­‐Gee	  and	  Strumpf	  find	  that	  file	  sharing	  has	  a	  statistically	  
insignificant	  impact	  on	  music	  purchases.	  
On	   one	   hand,	   we	   believe	   the	   authors	   deserve	   “full	   marks”	   for	   being	   the	   first	   to	   address	   a	  
very	  interesting	  question,	  for	  using	  a	  very	  creative	  combination	  of	  datasets	  to	  answer	  the	  
question,	   for	   being	   the	   first	   to	   think	   carefully	   about	   how	   to	   measure	   piracy	   levels	   using	  
data	   from	   pirate	   networks,	   and	   finally	   for	   developing	   a	   creative	   instrument	   to	   break	   the	  
endogeneity	  problem	  in	  the	  data.	  
However,	  there	  have	  also	  been	  some	  significant	  concerns	  raised	  about	  their	  methods.	  The	  
most	   forceful	   objections	   have	   been	   raised	   by	   Stan	   Liebowitz	   (e.g.,	   Liebowitz	   2007,	  
Liebowitz	   2010).	   Liebowitz’s	   main	   critique	   of	   the	   Oberholzer-­‐Gee	   and	   Strumpf’s	   work	  
focuses	   on	   the	   appropriateness	   of	   their	   chosen	   instrumental	   variable.	   Specifically,	   as	   noted	  
9	  

above,	   for	   this	   instrument	   to	   do	   its	   job	   it	   must	   be	   correlated	   with	   the	   ease	   of	   file	   sharing	   in	  
the	   U.S.,	   and	   uncorrelated	   with	   U.S.	   sales.	   Liebowitz	   (2010)	   argues	   that	   it	   fails	   in	   both	  
respects.	   Specifically,	   Liebowitz	   (2010,	   p.	   3)	   argues	   that	   German	   school	   holidays	   are	  
negatively	   correlated	   with	   U.S.	   sales,	   primarily	   through	   a	   correlation	   with	   the	   Christmas	  
holiday	  season.	  	  
Liebowitz	  also	  argues	  that	  the	  Oberholzer-­‐Gee	  and	  Strumpf	  data	  likely	  overstate	  the	  impact	  
of	   German	   users	   on	   U.S.-­‐based	   downloads.	   Specifically,	   Liebowitz	   observes	   that	  
Oberholzer-­‐Gee	  and	  Strumpf’s	  estimate	  indicate	  that	  a	  one	  standard	  deviation	  increase	  in	  
German	  students	  on	  school	  vacation	  (an	  increase	  of	  3.6	  million	  students)	  would	  predict	  a	  
50%	   increase	   in	   American	   file	   sharing	   (an	   increase	   of	   about	   2.2	   million	   downloads).	  
Liebowitz	   argues	   that	   this	   predicted	   increase	   is	   unreasonably	   large,	   so	   large	   that	   in	   any	  
weeks	  where	   no	   German	   schools	   kids	   were	   on	   vacation	   (which	   occurs	   in	   7	   out	   of	   17	   weeks	  
in	  the	  Oberholzer-­‐Gee	  and	  Strumpf	  data),	  that	  all	  U.S.	  file	  sharing	  should	  fall	  to	  zero.	  	  
Liebowitz	   is	   certainly	   the	   most	   forceful,	   but	   is	   not	   the	   only	   academic	   to	   express	  
reservations	   about	   Oberholzer-­‐Gee	   and	   Strumpf’s	   work.	   Rob	   and	   Waldfogel	   (2006)	   also	  
critique	   Oberholzer-­‐Gee	   and	   Strumpf’s	   for	   relying	   on	   the	   contemporaneous	   relationship	  
between	   piracy	   and	   sales	   (does	   piracy	   in	   a	   particular	   week	   reduce	   sales	   in	   that	   same	  
week?)	   as	   opposed	   to	   focusing	   on	   the	   impact	   of	   piracy	   over	   a	   longer	   time	   horizon,	   and	  also	  
expresses	   concern	   about	   the	   use	   of	   piracy	   and	   sales	   data	   whose	   correlation	   likely	   biases	  
the	  results	  toward	  finding	  no	  effect.	  
In	  short,	  while	  we	  emphasize	  that	  Oberholzer-­‐Gee	  and	  Strumpf	  deserve	  credit	  for	  writing	  
the	   first	   major	   paper	   on	   this	   question	   and	   for	   doing	   so	   using	   an	   innovative	   dataset	   and	  
innovative	  methods,	  one	  may	  wish	  to	  view	  their	  result	  relative	  to	  the	  large	  number	  of	  more	  
recent	  papers,	  and	  more	  recent	  datasets,	  finding	  a	  strong	  and	  significant	  impact	  of	  piracy	  
on	  music	  sales.	  We	  review	  this	  literature	  below.	  
Other	  Papers:	  In	   addition	   to	   the	   Oberholzer-­‐Gee	   and	   Strumpf	   paper,	   there	   are	   three	   other	  
academic	   papers	   we	   are	   aware	   of	   that	   find	   no	   evidence	   that	   piracy	   harms	   sales.	   First,	  
Boorstin	  (2004),	  in	  his	  undergraduate	  thesis	  at	  Princeton	  University,	  used	  census	  data	  on	  

10	  

the	  number	  of	  individuals	  in	  each	  city	  with	  and	  without	  broadband	  Internet	  access	  in	  1998,	  
2000,	   and	   2002	   and	   combined	   this	   data	   with	   CD	   sales	   data	   for	   the	   same	   metro	   areas.	  
However,	   while	   Boorstin	   finds	   no	   negative	   effect	   of	   broadband	   Internet	   penetration	   on	  
music	  sales,	  Liebowitz	  (2005)	  uses	  the	  same	  dataset	  used	  by	  Boorstin	  and	  argues	  that	  after	  
controlling	  for	  demographic	  characteristics	  at	  a	  city	  level	  (which	  might	  influence	  Internet	  
adoption),	   and	   after	   adding	   year-­‐level	   fixed	   effects,	   the	   results	   show	   that	   piracy	   harms	  
sales.	  
Andersen	   and	   Frenz	   (2010)	   also	   find	   no	   evidence	   of	   harm	   from	   file	   sharing	   after	   analyzing	  
the	   results	   of	   survey	   responses	   from	   Canadian	   file	   sharers	   taken	   in	   2006.	   However,	   in	   a	  
recent	   paper,	   Barker	   and	   Maloney	   (2012)	   find	   the	   opposite	   result	   in	   this	   dataset	   after	  
correcting	   for	   two	   “fundamental	   errors”	   in	   the	   econometric	   analysis	   in	   Andersen	   and	  
Frenz’s.	   The	   first	   major	   change	   made	   by	   Barker	   and	   Maloney	   is	   restoring	   over	   400	  
respondents	  to	  the	  analysis.	  Andersen	  and	  Frenz	  exclude	  over	  400	  individuals	  from	  their	  
analysis	  (about	  20%	  of	  their	  sample)	  because	  they	  did	  not	  purchase	  CDs	  in	  2005,	  arguing	  
that	   these	   consumers	   “may	   never	   have	   been	   active	   in	   CD	   purchasing.”	   Barker	   and	   Maloney	  
note	  that	  since	  the	  survey	  data	  include	  both	  CDs	  sales	  in	  2005	  and	  2004,	  one	  can	  partially	  
test	  this	  assumption	  (a	  test	  that	  Andersen	  and	  Frenz	  surprisingly	  did	  not	  conduct).	  And	  in	  
fact	   that	   nearly	   a	   third	   of	   the	   excluded	   respondents	   had	   purchased	   CDs	   in	   2004	   even	  
though	   they	   did	   not	   purchase	   in	   2005.	   Barker	   and	   Maloney	   suggest	   that	   many	   of	   these	  
consumers	   who	   stopped	   purchasing	   CDs	   may	   be	   exactly	   the	   sort	   of	   customers	   whose	  
purchases	   were	   most	   affected	   by	   the	   availability	   of	   piracy.	   Second,	   Barker	   and	   Maloney	  
specify	  a	  system	  of	  both	  CD	  and	  P2P	  demand,	  an	  econometric	  change	  that	  partially	  controls	  
for	   potential	   endogeneity	   problems	   from	   unobservable	   consumer-­‐level	   characteristics	   that	  
may	  drive	  both	  CD	  and	  P2P	  demand.	  After	  making	  these	  changes	  Barker	  and	  Maloney	  find	  
that	  the	  Canadian	  data	  actually	  reflects	  a	  strong	  and	  consistent	  negative	  impact	  of	  piracy	  on	  
sales.	  
Hammond	  (2012)	  is	  the	  third	  paper	  we	  are	  aware	  of	  that	  finds	  no	  harm	  from	  file	  sharing	  
on	  music	  sales,	  albeit	  in	  a	  nuanced	  way.	  Hammond’s	  analysis	  occurs	  in	  the	  context	  of	  pre-­‐
release	   leaks	   of	   CDs,	   with	   data	   obtained	   from	   a	   private	   tracker	   site	   specializing	   in	   pre-­‐

11	  

release	   file	   sharing.	   Hammond	   finds	   that	   additional	   downloads	   of	   an	   album	   already	  
available	   on	   pre-­‐release	   piracy	   sites	   causes	   no	   statistical	   change	   in	   post-­‐release	   sales.	  
However,	   Hammond	   notes	   that	   this	   result	   doesn’t	   contradict	   the	   “well-­‐documented	   fact	  
that	  file	  sharing	  is	  harmful	  to	  the	  music	  industry	  (p.	  1).”	  Rather	  it	  suggests	  that	  given	  the	  
presence	  of	  rampant	  piracy,	  additional	  piracy	  is	  not	  harmful	  to	  an	  individual	  artist.	  
With	  the	  exception	  of	  these	  papers,	  all	  of	  the	  other	  papers	  we	  are	  aware	  of	  in	  the	  literature	  
find	  that	  music	  piracy	  has	  harmed	  sales.	  We	  review	  these	  papers	  briefly	  below.	  
In	  the	  context	  of	  survey	  data,	  Zentner	  (2006)	  uses	  a	  sample	  of	  15,000	  people	  in	  2001	  and	  
2002	   and	   finds	   that,	   after	   controlling	   for	   Internet	   sophistication	   and	   broadband	   speed,	  
peer-­‐to-­‐peer	  usage	  reduces	  by	  about	  30%	  the	  probability	  that	  an	  individual	  will	  purchase	  
music,	   and	   overall	   that	   piracy	   reduced	   music	   sales	   by	   about	   7.8%	   in	   2002.	   Rob	   and	  
Waldfogel	  (2006)	  survey	  the	  piracy	  and	  music	  purchasing	  behavior	  of	  412	  college	  students	  
at	  4	  colleges	  in	  2003	  and	  find	  that	  each	  pirated	  download	  displaces	  about	  0.2	  album	  sales,	  
and	  that	  overall	  piracy	  reduced	  per	  capita	  expenditures	  on	  music	  by	  about	  20%.	  Waldfogel	  
(2010)	   uses	   a	   survey	   of	   University	   of	   Pennsylvania	   undergraduates	   in	   January	   2009	  
analyzing	   piracy	   and	   purchase	   behavior	   for	   music,	   and	   finds	   that	   each	   pirated	   download	  
displaces	  between	  0.15	  and	  0.3	  album	  sales.	  Finally,	  in	  the	  context	  of	  Census	  data,	  Michel	  
(2006)	   and	   Hong	   (2004)	   use	   purchase	   data	   from	   the	   Consumer	   Expenditure	   Survey	  
combined	   with	   census	   data	   on	   broadband	   usage	   and	   find	   that	   file	   sharing	   causes	   a	   5	   to	  
7.6%	  reduction	  in	  sales.	  
In	  the	  context	  of	  country-­‐level	  cross	  sectional	  data,	  Hui	  and	  Png	  (2003)	  use	  country-­‐level	  
data	  for	  28	   countries	   from	   1994-­‐1998	   and	   find	   that	   physical	   piracy	   reduces	   sales	   by	  about	  
42%.	   Pietz	   and	   Waelbroeck	   (2004)	   use	   CD	   sales	   for	   16	   countries	   from	   2000-­‐2001	   and	   find	  
that	  piracy	  explains	  about	  25%	  of	  the	  decline	  in	  music	  sales	  observed	  over	  that	  time	  frame.	  
Finally,	   Zentner	   (2009)	   uses	   country-­‐level	   music	   sales	   and	   broadband	   penetration	   for	   49	  
countries	   from	   1997-­‐2008	   and	   finds	   that	   file-­‐sharing	   may	   explain	   up	   to	   50%	   of	   the	   decline	  
in	  music	  sales	  observed	  during	  that	  period.	  	  

12	  

As	  noted	  above,	  it	  is	  also	  possible	  to	  conduct	  similar	  analyses	  using	  city-­‐level	  (MSA-­‐level)	  
data.	   This	   approach	   has	   been	   used	   by	   Zentner	   (2006)	   and	   Liebowitz	   (2008b)	   for	  
broadband	  penetration	  and	  music	  sales	  major	  cities	  in	  the	  U.S.	  from	  1998-­‐2003,	  with	  both	  
papers	   finding	   that	   piracy	   (via	   broadband	   availability)	   caused	   a	   significant	   portion	   of	   the	  
observed	  decline	  in	  CD	  sales	  during	  this	  period.	  
In	  the	  context	  of	  the	  impact	  of	  piracy	  on	  the	  distribution	  of	  revenue	  between	  CD	  sales	  and	  
live	  performances,	  Mortimer,	  Nosko,	  and	  Sorensen	  (2012)	  find	  that	  while	  piracy	  displaces	  
CD	  sales,	  it	  increases	  concert	  revenue	  for	  less	  well-­‐known	  artists.	  
A	   final	   set	   of	   papers	   analyze	   how	   piracy	   impacts	   the	   composition	   of	   “best	   of”	   and	  
bestselling	   lists	   of	   music,	   with	   Bhattacharjee	   et	   al.	   (2007)	   finding	   that	   piracy	   reduces	   the	  
duration	  albums	  spend	  on	  bestselling	  charts,	  and	  with	  Waldfogel	  (2011)	  finding	  that	  file-­‐
sharing	  does	  not	  seem	  to	  impact	  the	  quality	  of	  music	  appearing	  on	  “best	  of”	  lists.	  	  
The	  Impact	  of	  Piracy	  on	  Motion	  Picture	  Sales:	  
Given	  that	   the	   academic	   literature	   seems	   to	   show	   that	   piracy	   hurts	   music	   sales,	  why	  might	  
motion	   picture	   piracy	   have	   a	   different	   effect?	   Two	   obvious	   differences	   between	   motion	  
picture	  and	  music	  piracy	  are	  first	  that	  motion	  picture	  files	  are	  typically	  much	  larger	  than	  
music	   files,	   and	   second	   that	   motion	   picture	   piracy	   developed	   into	   a	   significant	  
phenomenon	   with	   the	   development	   of	   the	   BitTorrent	   protocol	   (in	   2003),	   well	   after	   the	  
mainstream	   development	   of	   music	   piracy	   (with	   Napster	   in	   1999).	   Based	   on	   these	  
differences,	  we	  might	  expect	  that	  the	  impact	  of	  motion	  picture	  piracy	  would	  be	  seen	  later	  
than	  the	  impact	  of	  music	  piracy	  was,	  and	  that	  motion	  picture	  piracy	  might	  be	  more	  strongly	  
tied	  to	  the	  presence	  of	  broadband	  Internet	  connections.	  And	  this	  is	  exactly	  what	  we	  see	  in	  
the	  literature.	  
This	  effect	  can	  be	  seen	  quite	  clearly	  when	  analyzing	  the	  differences	  between	  three	  papers	  
in	   the	   academic	   literature.	   First,	   Liebowitz	   (2008b),	   discussed	   above,	   used	   broadband	  
Internet	  penetration	  and	  music	  sales	  at	  an	  MSA	  level	  for	  the	  99	  largest	  MSAs	  from	  1998-­‐
2003	  to	  show	  that	  increased	  broadband	  penetration	  led	  to	  a	  sharp	  decline	  in	  music	  sales	  

13	  

during	  this	  timeframe.	  Note	  that	  this	  time	  period	  was	  after	  the	  introduction	  of	  Napster	  in	  
1999	  and	  before	  the	  introduction	  of	  BitTorrent	  in	  2003.	  
In	   contrast	   to	   these	   results,	   Smith	   and	   Telang	   (2010)	   uses	   essentially	   the	   same	   methods	   as	  
Liebowitz	  used	  for	  music,	  but	  use	  DVD	  sales	  data	  and	  broadband	  Internet	  penetration	  for	  
2000-­‐2003.	   Their	   results	   also	   differ	   from	   Liebowitz’s	   results:	   increased	   broadband	  
penetration	  caused	  about	  9.3%	  of	  the	  $14.1	  billion	  increase	  in	  DVD	  sales	  from	  2000-­‐2003.	  	  
Their	  interpretation	  of	  the	  difference	  between	  their	  results	  those	  in	  Liebowitz	  (2008b)	  is	  
that,	   while	   music	   piracy	   was	   prevalent	   from	   2000-­‐2003,	   movie	   piracy	   was	   much	   less	  
developed	   during	   that	   period.	   As	   such	   increased	   broadband	   penetration	   from	   2000-­‐2003	  
may	   have	   exposed	   DVD	   consumers	   to	   the	   beneficial	   aspects	   of	   the	   Internet	   (increased	  
information	  about	  movies,	  increased	  product	  selection	  through	  online	  retailers,	  and	  lower	  
prices)	  without	  exposing	  these	  customers	  to	  the	  potentially	  harmful	  aspects	  of	  the	  Internet	  
(increased	  availability	  of	  pirated	  content).	  	  
Based	  on	  this	  we	  would	  expect	  that	  increased	  broadband	  Internet	  penetration	  would	  harm	  
DVD	  sales	  after	  2003.	  And	  indeed	  evidence	  from	  descriptive	  statistics	  on	  DVD	  sales	  seems	  
to	   bear	   this	   out.	   Figure	   2	   is	   taken	   from	   Zentner	  (2012)	   and	   shows	   that	   DVD	   sales	   flattened	  
in	  2004,	  and	  that	  combined	  VHS	  and	  DVD	  sales	  dropped	  by	  27%	  from	  2004	  to	  2008	  when	  
measured	  in	  constant	  2008	  dollars.	  
Was	   this	   decline	   causally	   related	   to	   an	   increase	   in	   broadband-­‐enabled	   Internet-­‐based	  
piracy	   from	   2003-­‐2008?	   Zentner	   (2012)	   finds	   that	   it	   was.	   Specifically,	   Zentner	   uses	  
country-­‐level	  panel	  data	  from	  2001	  through	  2008	  for	  36	  European	  countries	  and	  the	  U.S.	  
and	  Japan.	  These	  data	  document	  theatrical	  revenue,	  video	  rental,	  and	  video	  sales	  data	  for	  
movies,	   along	   with	   broadband	   Internet	   penetration	   for	   the	   time	   period.	   The	   use	   of	   panel	  
data	  allows	  Zentner	  to	  control	  for	  factors	  unrelated	  to	  broadband	  penetration	  in	  a	  way	  that	  
is	   not	   possible	   if	   one	   were	   to	   only	   observe	   time	   series	   or	   cross	   sectional	   data.	   Zentner	  
attempts	  to	  isolate	  the	  impact	  of	  broadband-­‐enabled	  movie	  piracy	  by	  comparing	  the	  impact	  
of	   increased	   broadband	   penetration	   before	   and	   after	   the	   widespread	   adoption	   of	  
BitTorrent	   in	   2003.	   Zentner	   finds	   that	   prior	   to	   the	   introduction	   of	   BitTorrent,	   increased	  

14	  

broadband	   penetration	   had	   a	   positive	   impact	   on	   motion	   picture	   sales	   (consistent	   with	  
Smith	  and	  Telang	  2010),	  but	  after	  2003,	  increased	  broadband	  penetration	  had	  a	  negative	  
impact	  on	  sales.3	  
Figure	  2:	  U.S.	  Video	  Rental	  and	  Sales	  Revenue,	  1994-­‐2008	  
(Measured	  in	  Constant	  2008	  Dollars)	  

	  	  
Source:	  Zentner	  (2012),	  p.	  2	  
	  
This	  result	  —	  that	  piracy	  harms	  motion	  picture	  sales	  —	  is	  consistent	  with	  all	  but	  two	  of	  the	  
academic	   papers	   we	   are	   aware	   of	   that	   have	   looked	   at	   the	   impact	   of	   Internet	   piracy	   on	  
movie	   sales,	   a	   set	   of	   papers	   that	   span	   a	   variety	   of	   datasets,	   settings,	   and	   statistical	  
methodologies.	  
In	  the	  context	  of	  surveys,	  Bounie,	  Bourreau,	  and	  Waelbroeck	  (2006)	  use	  data	  on	  purchase	  
and	   file	   sharing	   behavior	   for	   a	   sample	   of	   620	   French	   individuals	   in	   2005,	   and	   find	   that,	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3	  Zentner	  also	  observes	  (p.	  25)	  that	  legal	  online	  video	  sales	  and	  rentals	  were	  a	  very	  small	  part	  of	  the	  market	  

(approximately	  1%	  of	  DVD	  sales	  and	  rentals)	  even	  as	  late	  as	  2008.	  

15	  

while	  file	  sharing	  has	  no	  statistical	  impact	  on	  theatrical	  attendance,	  file	  sharing	  leads	  to	  a	  
large	   decline	   in	   both	   video	   sales	   and	   video	   rentals.	   Similarly,	   Rob	   and	   Waldfogel	   (2007)	  
conducted	   a	   survey	   of	   500	   University	   of	   Pennsylvania	   undergraduates	   in	   the	   fall	   2005	  
semester.	  These	  students	  were	  given	  a	  list	  of	  the	  top	  50	  movies	  from	  each	  of	  the	  3	  previous	  
years	  (150	  movies	  in	  all)	  and	  asked	  whether	  they	  saw	  the	  movie,	  and	  what	  channel	  (piracy,	  
theater,	   television,	   rental,	   purchase)	   they	   used	   to	   view	   the	   movie.	   The	   authors	   used	   this	  
data	  to	  find	  that	  unpaid	  consumption	  of	  movies	  reduces	  paid	  consumption	  on	  nearly	  a	  one-­‐
for-­‐one	  basis.	  	  
Likewise,	   Hennig-­‐Thurau,	   Henning,	   and	   Sattler	   (2007)	   use	   a	   combination	   of	   customer’s	  
stated	  intentions	  and	  reported	  behavior	  to	  analyze	  the	  impact	  of	  file	  sharing	  on	  movie	  sales	  
and	  find	  that	  file-­‐sharing	  results	  in	  significant	  cannibalization	  of	  theater	  visits,	  DVD	  rentals,	  
and	  DVD	  purchases.	  Finally,	  Bai	  and	  Waldfogel	  (2012)	  use	  a	  survey	  of	  college	  students	  in	  
China	  and	  find	  that	  75%	  of	  Chinese	  movie	  consumption	  is	  through	  pirate	  channels,	  and	  that	  
each	  instance	  of	  unpaid	  consumption	  displaces	  about	  0.14	  paid	  sales.	  	  
In	  the	  context	  of	  “natural	  experiments,”	  Danaher	  et	  al.	  (2010)	  use	  data	  surrounding	  NBC’s	  
decision	   to	   remove	   its	   television	   content	   from	   the	   iTunes	   store	   in	   September	   2008.	   They	  
find	  that	  piracy	  on	  NBC	  content	  increased	  by	  11.4%	  relative	  to	  ABC,	  CBS,	  and	  FOX	  piracy,	  
after	  NBC’s	  content	  was	  removed	  from	  iTunes.	  They	  also	  find	  that	  piracy	  levels	  on	  ABC,	  CBS,	  
and	   FOX	   content	   increased	   during	   this	   timeframe	   as	   well,	   potentially	   suggesting	   that	   NBC’s	  
decision	  to	  remove	  it’s	  content	  from	  iTunes	  caused	  an	  increase	  in	  both	  NBC	  and	  non-­‐NBC	  
piracy	  as	  users	  switched	  from	  iTunes	  to	  BitTorrent	  to	  obtain	  their	  television	  content.	  
In	  the	  context	  of	  product	  level	  data,	  Danaher	  and	  Waldfogel	  (2012)	  and	  Smith	  and	  Telang	  
(2013)	   both	   examine	   the	   impact	   of	   longer	   international	   release	   windows	   on	   sales	   levels.	  
Danaher	  and	  Waldfogel	  use	  box	  office	  data	  from	  July	  2003	  through	  July	  2006	  for	  the	  top	  10	  
movies	   in	   each	   time	   period	   across	   17	   countries	   and	   find	   that,	   after	   the	   widespread	  
diffusion	   of	   BitTorrent,	   longer	   lags	   between	   the	   U.S.	   and	   the	   international	   release	   date	  
cause	   about	   a	   1.3%	   reduction	   in	   sales	   per	   week,	   or	   about	   a	   7%	   reduction	   per	   movie.	   Smith	  
and	   Telang	   (2012)	   use	   a	   similar	   method,	   but	   focus	   on	   DVD	   sales.	   Specifically,	   Smith	   and	  
Telang	  use	  data	  from	  2009	  through	  2011	  for	  seven	  countries	  covering	  DVD	  sales	  for	  over	  
16	  

200	  titles.	  They	  find	  that	  a	  1-­‐week	  longer	  release	  delay	  between	  the	  first	  DVD	  pirate	  source	  
and	   the	   legitimate	   DVD	   release	   date	   is	   correlated	   with	   a	   2%	   reduction	   in	   DVD	   sales	   per	  
movie.	   Likewise,	   De	   Vany	   and	   Walls	   (2007)	   use	   piracy	   and	   revenue	   data	   for	   a	   major	   studio	  
release	  and	  find	  that	  file-­‐sharing	  caused	  a	  movie	  to	  lose	  $40	  million	  in	  box	  office	  revenue.	  
Finally,	   Ma	   et	   al.	   (2013)	   use	   the	   timing	   of	   the	   availability	   of	   theatrical	   piracy	   relative	   to	   the	  
box	  office	  release	  date	  and	  find	  that	  pre-­‐release	  piracy	  can	  cause	  an	  8%	  reduction	  in	  box	  
office	  sales,	  and	  that	  overall	  box	  office	  revenue	  would	  be	  24%	  higher	  if	  no	  piracy	  were	  to	  
occur	  in	  the	  theatrical	  window.	  
In	  the	  context	  of	  panel	  data,	  Zentner	  (2012)	  uses	  theatrical	  revenue	  and	  home	  video	  sales	  
(VHS	  and	  DVD)	  for	  36	  countries	  from	  1996-­‐2008	  to	  analyze	  whether	  Internet	  penetration	  
reduces	   movie	   sales.	   He	   finds	   no	   statistical	   relationship	   between	   increased	   broadband	  
Internet	   penetration	   and	   theatrical	   revenue,	   but	   a	   strong	   negative	   relationship	   between	  
increased	  broadband	  penetration	  and	  DVD	  sales.	  Similarly,	  Liebowitz	  and	  Zentner	  (2012)	  
use	   panel	   data	   for	   major	   cities	   in	   the	   U.S.,	   including	   Internet	   penetration,	   demographics,	  
and	  television	  viewership	  to	  analyze	  whether	  increases	  in	  broadband	  Internet	  penetration	  
reduces	   television	   viewership.	   While	   not	   a	   direct	   measure	   of	   the	   impact	   of	   piracy,	   they	  
argue	  that	  broadband	  penetration	  may	  represent	   an	  indirect	  measure	  of	  piracy	  given	  the	  
prevalence	  of	  pirated	  television	  content	  on	  the	  Internet.	  Their	  results	  are	  consistent	  with	  
the	  results	  reported	  above	  in	  that	  they	  find	  a	  moderate	  reduction	  in	  television	  viewership	  
among	  younger	  viewers	  caused	  by	  increased	  broadband	  Internet	  penetration.	  
Martikainen	   (2011)	   is	   one	   of	   the	   two	   academic	   papers	   we	   are	   aware	   of	   that	   find	   no	  
evidence	  of	  harm	  from	  file	  sharing.	  Martikainen	  uses	  BitTorrent	  download	  data,	  collected	  
from	  March	  to	  May	  2009	  and	  finds	  no	  evidence	  that	  increased	  levels	  of	  BitTorrent	  sharing	  
reduce	   DVD	   sales.	   However,	   it	   is	   also	   important	   to	   note	   that	   this	   paper	   is	   only	   able	   to	  
analyze	   DVD	   sales,	   not	   digital	   sales;	   and	   other	   work	   in	   the	   literature	   (e.g.,	   Danaher	   et	   al.	  
2010)	  finds	  that	  during	  a	  similar	  time	  frame,	  digital	  sales	  and	  digital	  piracy	  were	  strongly	  
related,	  while	  there	  was	  no	  statistical	  relationship	  between	  digital	  piracy	  and	  physical	  sales.	  
The	  other	  academic	  paper	  we	  are	  aware	  of	  that	  finds	  no	  evidence	  of	  harm	  from	  piracy	  is	  
Smith	  and	  Telang	  (2009)	  which	  analyzes	  how	  movie	  broadcasts	  on	  advertising	  supported	  
17	  

television	   stations	   impact	   demand	   for	   the	   movie	   through	   legal	   (DVD)	   and	   illegal	   (piracy)	  
channels.	  This	  paper	  finds	  that	  movie	  broadcasts	  stimulate	  demand	  in	  both	  legal	  and	  illegal	  
channels,	  and	  uses	  the	  broadcast	  of	  movies	  on	  television	  as	  an	  exogenous	  shock	  to	  demand.	  
The	  paper	  finds	  that	  movies	  that	  have	  pirated	  copies	  available	  at	  the	  time	  of	  broadcast	  have	  
a	   similar	   increase	   in	   post-­‐broadcast	   DVD	   sales	   versus	   movies	   that	   do	   not	   have	   pirated	  
copies	   available.	   The	   paper	   argues	   that	   this	   suggests	   that	   digital	   piracy	   at	   the	   time	   a	   movie	  
is	   shown	   on	   television	   does	   not	   significantly	   impact	   DVD	   sales.	   However,	   the	   paper	   also	  
notes	  that	  “our	  results	  do	  not	  speak	  to	  the	  impact	  of	  piracy	  in	  the	  earlier	  part	  of	  a	  movie’s	  
lifecycle,	   where	   the	   availability	   of	   pirated	   content	   may	   have	   a	   negative	   impact	   on	   sales”	   (p.	  
336).	  
Returning	   to	   our	   initial	   statement	   that	   one	   should	   determine	   what	   the	   literature	   says	   by	  
first	  looking	  at	  individual	  papers	  and	  then	  looking	  at	  the	  weight	  of	  the	  literature’s	  finding,	  
our	   review	   of	   the	   literature	   suggests	   that	   while	   it	   is	   fair	   to	   say	   that	   the	   results	   in	   the	  
academic	   literature	   are	   mixed	   with	   respect	   to	   whether	   file-­‐sharing	   harms	   sales,	   we	   also	  
believe	  it	  is	  fair	  to	  say	  that	  the	  vast	  majority	  of	  papers	  find	  evidence	  of	  harm.	  	  
Specifically,	  restricting	  attention	  to	  papers	  published	  in	  peer-­‐reviewed	  journals,	  our	  review	  
of	   the	   literature	   finds	   three	   papers	   that	   find	   no	   evidence	   of	   harm	   from	   piracy	   (see	   Table	   1)	  
and	  15	  papers	  finding	  that	  piracy	  results	  in	  a	  statistically	  significant	  decrease	  in	  sales	  (see	  
Table	  2).	  	  
Table	  1:	  Peer-­‐Reviewed	  Journal	  Articles	  Finding	  No	  Statistical	  Impact	  of	  Piracy	  
Citation	  
Oberholzer	  and	  
Strumpf	  (2007,	  Journal	  
of	  Political	  Economy)	  
Smith	  and	  Telang	  	  
(2009,	  MIS	  Quarterly)	  

Primary	  Data	  

Result	  

2002	  OpenNap	  music	  
downloads,	  2002	  U.S.	  sales	  
of	  popular	  albums	  
2005-­‐2006	  Amazon	  DVD	  
sales	  ranks	  and	  BitTorrent	  
movie	  file	  downloads	  
Andersen	  and	  Frenz	  
2006	  survey	  of	  Canadian	  
(2010,	  J.	  of	  Evolutionary	   customers’	  file	  sharing	  and	  
Economics)	  
CD	  purchasing	  behavior	  

“[F]ile	  sharing	  has	  had	  no	  statistically	  significant	  
effect	  on	  purchases	  of	  the	  average	  album	  in	  our	  
sample.”	  
“[T]he	  availability	  of	  pirated	  content	  at	  [television	  
broadcast]	  has	  no	  effect	  on	  post-­‐broadcast	  DVD	  sales	  
gains.	  
There	  is	  “no	  (statistical)	  association	  between	  the	  
number	  of	  P2P	  files	  downloaded	  and	  CD	  album	  
sales.”	  	  

	  

18	  

Table	  2:	  Peer-­‐Reviewed	  Journal	  Articles	  Finding	  That	  Piracy	  Harms	  Sales	  
Citation	  
Hui	  and	  Png	  (2003,	  
Contrib.	  to	  Economic	  
Analysis	  &	  Policy)	  
Peitz	  and	  Waelbroeck	  
(2004,	  Rev.	  of	  Econ.	  Res.	  
on	  Copyright)	  
Bounie	  et	  al.	  (2006,	  Rev.	  
of	  Econ.	  Res.	  on	  
Copyright)	  
Michel	  (2006,	  Topics	  in	  
Economic	  Analysis	  and	  
Policy)	  
Rob	  and	  Waldfogel	  
(2006,	  Journal	  of	  Law	  
and	  Economics)	  
Zentner	  (2006,	  Journal	  
of	  Law	  and	  Economics)	  

Primary	  Data	  

Result	  

1994-­‐98	  IFPI	  worldwide	  
CD	  sales	  data	  and	  physical	  
piracy	  rates	  
1998-­‐2002	  worldwide	  CD	  
sales,	  IPSOS	  survey	  data	  
for	  piracy	  downloads	  
2005	  survey	  of	  movie	  
piracy	  and	  purchases	  from	  
French	  universities	  
1995-­‐2003	  U.S.	  BLS	  micro	  
Consumer	  Expenditure	  
Survey	  data	  
2003	  survey	  of	  U.S.	  college	  
students	  piracy	  and	  
purchase	  behavior	  
2001	  survey	  of	  European	  
music	  purchase	  and	  piracy	  
behavior	  
Bhattacharjee	  et	  al.	  
1995-­‐2002	  Billboard	  100	  
(2007,	  Management	  
chart	  rankings,	  WinMX	  file	  
Science)	  
sharing	  post	  2000	  
Hennig-­‐Thurau,	  
2006	  survey	  of	  German	  
Henning,	  Sattler	  (2007,	   movie	  purchase	  and	  piracy	  
Marketing	  Science)	  
intentions	  
Rob	  and	  Waldfogel	  
2005	  survey	  of	  U.	  Penn.	  
(2007,	  Journal	  of	  
students’	  movie	  purchase	  
Industrial	  Economics)	  
and	  piracy	  behavior	  
Liebowitz	  (2008,	  
1998-­‐2003	  Census	  data	  on	  
Management	  Science)	  
broadband	  Internet	  use	  
and	  music	  purchases	  
Danaher	  et	  al.	  (2010,	  
2007-­‐2008	  BitTorrent	  
Marketing	  Science)	  
downloads	  of	  television	  
torrents	  
DeVany	  and	  Walls	  
Box	  office	  revenue	  and	  the	  
(2007,	  Review	  of	  
supply	  of	  pirated	  content	  
Industrial	  Organization)	   for	  an	  unnamed	  movie	  
Waldfogel	  (2010,	  
2009-­‐2010	  survey	  of	  
Information	  Economics	   Wharton	  students’	  music	  
and	  Policy)	  
piracy	  and	  purchases	  
Bai	  and	  Waldfogel	  
2008-­‐2009	  survey	  of	  
(2012,	  Information	  
Chinese	  university	  
Economics	  and	  Policy)	  
students’	  movie	  behavior	  
Danaher	  et	  al.	  (2013,	  J.	  
2008-­‐2011	  iTunes	  music	  
of	  Industrial	  Economics)	   sales	  in	  France	  and	  other	  
European	  countries	  

“[D]emand	  for	  music	  CDs	  decreased	  with	  piracy,	  
suggesting	  that	  ‘theft’	  outweighed	  the	  ‘positive’	  
effects	  of	  piracy.”	  	  
Internet	  piracy	  may	  have	  been	  responsible	  for	  a	  20%	  
decrease	  in	  music	  sales	  between	  1998-­‐2002.	  
“[Piracy]	  has	  a	  strong	  [negative]	  impact	  on	  video	  
[VHS	  and	  DVD]	  purchases	  and	  rentals”	  but	  
statistically	  no	  impact	  on	  box	  office	  revenue.	  
“The	  relationship	  between	  computer	  ownership	  and	  
music	  purchases	  weakened”	  due	  to	  piracy,	  
potentially	  reducing	  CD	  sales	  by	  13	  percent.	  
“[E]ach	  album	  download	  reduces	  purchases	  by	  0.2	  in	  
our	  sample,	  although	  possibly	  by	  much	  more.”	  
“[Piracy]	  may	  explain	  a	  30	  percent	  reduction	  in	  the	  
probability	  of	  buying	  music.”	  	  
P2P	  file	  sharing	  technologies	  have	  resulted	  in	  
“significantly	  reduced	  chart	  survival	  except	  for	  those	  
albums	  that	  debut	  high	  on	  the	  charts.”	  
Piracy	  causes	  “substantial	  cannibalization	  of	  theater	  
visits,	  DVD	  rentals	  [and]	  purchases	  responsible	  for	  
annual	  revenue	  losses	  of	  $300	  million	  in	  Germany.”	  
“[U]npaid	  first	  [piracy]	  consumption	  reduces	  paid	  
consumption	  by	  about	  1	  unit.”	  	  
“[F]ile	  sharing	  appears	  to	  have	  caused	  the	  entire	  
decline	  in	  record	  sales	  [observed	  from	  1998-­‐2003].”	  	  
The	  removal	  of	  NBC	  content	  from	  iTunes	  resulted	  in	  
an	  11.4%	  increase	  in	  demand	  for	  NBC	  piracy	  relative	  
to	  ABC,	  CBS,	  and	  FOX	  piracy.	  
“[Piracy]	  of	  a	  major	  studio	  movie	  accelerated	  its	  box-­‐
office	  decline	  and	  caused	  the	  picture	  to	  lose	  about	  
$40	  million	  in	  revenue.”	  
“[A]n	  additional	  song	  stolen	  reduces	  paid	  
consumption	  by	  between	  a	  third	  and	  a	  sixth	  of	  a	  
song.”	  
“[T]hree	  quarters	  of	  [Chinese	  students’]	  movie	  
consumption	  is	  unpaid	  and	  …	  each	  instance	  of	  
[piracy]	  displaces	  0.14	  paid	  consumption	  instances.”	  
The	  HADOPI	  anti-­‐piracy	  law	  “caused	  iTunes	  music	  
sales	  to	  increase	  by	  22-­‐25%	  [in	  France]	  relative	  to	  
changes	  in	  the	  control	  group	  [countries].”	  

	  

19	  

Moreover,	  if	  one	  were	  to	  further	  restrict	  attention	  to	  what	  are	  commonly	  considered	  “first	  
or	  second	  tier”	  academic	  journals,4	  and	  also	  eliminate	  the	  Smith	  and	  Telang	  (2009)	  paper	  
which	  focuses	  on	  the	  impact	  of	  piracy	  of	  catalog	  titles	  (12-­‐18	  months	  after	  the	  DVD	  release),	  
the	   count	   would	   be	   one	   published	   paper	   finding	   no	   evidence	   of	   harm	   (Oberholzer-­‐Gee	   and	  
Strumpf)	  and	  11	  published	  papers	  finding	  evidence	  of	  harm.	  
To	   summarize,	   while	   the	   academic	   literature	   is	   not	   uniform	   in	   finding	   harm,	   taken	   as	   a	  
whole	  we	  see	  a	  very	  consistent	  story	  across	  the	  academic	  literature:	  The	  vast	  majority	  of	  
papers	  which	  have	  been	  published	  in	  peer-­‐reviewed	  academic	  journals	  —	  papers	  spanning	  
a	   variety	   of	   methods,	   time	   periods,	   and	   contexts	   —	   find	   that	   piracy	   causes	   a	   statistically	  
significant	   decrease	   in	   sales.	   Moreover,	   the	   conclusion	   that	   piracy	   harms	   sales	   is	  
particularly	   strong	   among	   papers	   published	   in	   first	   of	   second	   tier	   academic	   journals	   and	  
among	  papers	  analyzing	  the	  most	  recently	  available	  data.	  
2.2 The	  Impact	  of	  Piracy	  on	  Welfare	  Creation	  and	  Distribution	  
In	  this	  section	  we	  analyze	  two	  important	  social	  welfare	  questions	  surrounding	  piracy:	  Does	  
piracy	  reduce	  overall	  social	  welfare	  by	  reducing	  the	  incentives	  to	  create	  content	  and	  does	  
piracy	  change	  the	  distribution	  of	  welfare	  between	  artists	  and	  firms?	  
Analyzing	   the	   impact	   of	   piracy	   on	   overall	   social	   welfare	   is	   important	   because	   even	   if	   one	  
accepts	  that	  filesharing	  displaces	  sales,	  it	  is	  worth	  asking	  whether	  policymakers	  should	  be	  
concerned	  with	  this	  displacement.	  In	  instances	  where	  illegal	  downloaders	  value	  a	  product	  
below	   its	   purchase	   price,	   pirating	   that	   product	   does	   not	   result	   in	   a	   lost	   sale	   but	   provides	  
value	   to	   the	   consumer	   that	   would	   not	   have	   been	   obtained	   without	   the	   illegal	   channel.	   In	  
instances	  where	  pirates	  value	  the	  product	  above	  its	  purchase	  price	  but	  choose	  to	  pirate	  it	  
for	  free,	  a	  sale	  is	  lost.	  However,	  the	  surplus	  lost	  by	  the	  producer	  of	  the	  good	  (the	  purchase	  
price)	   is	   simply	   transferred	   to	   the	   consumer	   (who	   obtained	   the	   good	   for	   free	   instead	   of	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
4	  Which	  in	  this	  case	  would	  include	  Information	  Economics	  and	  Policy,	  Journal	  of	  Industrial	  Economics,	  Journal	  

of	  Law	  and	  Economics,	  Journal	  of	  Marketing,	  Journal	  of	  Political	  Economy,	  Management	  Science,	  Marketing	  
Science,	  MIS	  Quarterly,	  Review	  of	  Economics	  and	  Statistics,	  Review	  of	  Industrial	  Organization.	  

20	  

having	  to	  purchase	  it),	  resulting	  in	  no	  first-­‐order	  loss	  to	  social	  welfare.	  Thus	  there	  are	  three	  
main	  reasons	  why	  one	  might	  oppose	  filesharing:	  
1. The	   simplest	   case	   in	   which	   one	   might	   oppose	   filesharing	   is	   when	   one’s	   personal	  
welfare	   is	   tied	   to	   profits	   of	   the	   creative	   industries.	   For	   example,	   a	   music	   artist	   has	   a	  
personal	   incentive	   to	   care	   that	   creators	   are	   compensated	   for	   their	   efforts,	   and	   an	  
employee	  of	  a	  movie	  studio	  may	  worry	  that	  if	  piracy	  diminishes	  studio	  profits	  she	  
may	   lose	   her	   job.	   Because	   most	   evidence	   seems	   to	   indicate	   that	   filesharing	   does	  
displace	   media	   sales,	   it	   is	   not	   surprising	   that	   these	   industries	   are	   frequently	  
opposed	  to	  filesharing.	  
2. Another	   argument	   against	   filesharing	   could	   be	   made	   on	   philosophical	   grounds.	  
Intellectual	  property	  rights	  are	  a	  part	  of	  the	  legal	  structure	  of	  many	  countries,	  and	  
without	  such	  protection	  information	  goods	  such	  as	  movies	  or	  songs	  could	  easily	  be	  
replicated	  and	  sold	  by	  anyone,	  limiting	  the	  ability	  of	  content	  creators	  to	  profit	  from	  
their	   work.	   If	   one	   philosophically	   believes	   that	   creators	   have	   inherent	   rights	   as	   sole	  
executors	   over	   how	   their	   creations	   are	   distributed	   or	   sold,	   then	   illegal	   filesharing	  
damages	   our	   ability	   to	   enforce	   this	   right,	   and	   therefore	   should	   be	   opposed.	   Purely	  
philosophical	   arguments	   are	   not	   the	   subject	   of	   this	   book	   however,	   and	   so	   we	  
mention	  this	  argument	  but	  note	  that	  it	  is	  not	  one	  for	  which	  we	  can	  provide	  evidence	  
for	  or	  against.	  
3. Finally,	  one	  might	  worry	  that	  if	  filesharing	  diminishes	  the	  ability	  of	  content	  creators	  
to	   profit	   from	   their	   creative	   efforts	   (which	   appears	   to	   be	   the	   case),	   the	   incentives	   to	  
bring	   new	   quality	   works	   to	   the	   market	   will	   also	   be	   diminished	   resulting	   in	   either	  
fewer	  or	  lower	  quality	  works	  of	  creative	  media	  such	  as	  music	  and	  motion	  pictures.	  
This	  is	  clearly	  a	  potential	  concern	  not	  only	  for	  producers	  but	  also	  for	  consumers	  and	  
policymakers,	   because	   if	   a	   product	   that	   would	   have	   existed	   in	   the	   absence	   of	  
filesharing	  is	  never	  created	  due	  to	  reduced	  incentives	  brought	  about	  by	  filesharing,	  
both	  producers	  and	  consumers	  lose	  causing	  an	  overall	  net	  loss	  in	  social	  welfare.	  A	  
related	  supply	  side	  argument	  is	  that	  while	  piracy	  in	  one	  region	  or	  country	  may	  not	  
affect	  the	  decision	  of	  whether	  or	  not	  to	  create	  products,	  it	  may	  affect	  the	  availability	  
21	  

of	   products	   in	   those	   regions.	   For	   example,	   even	   if	   high	   piracy	   in	   some	   country	   X	   did	  
not	   change	   a	   music	   label’s	   decision	   of	   what	   artists	   to	   develop	   and	   what	   songs	   to	  
offer,	   it	   may	   deter	   some	   distribution	   platforms	   or	   stores	   from	   offering	   content	   in	  
country	   X	   due	   to	   reduced	   potential	   profits.	   If	   some	   consumers	   who	   would	   have	  
bought	  the	  product	  cannot	  purchase	  due	  to	  lack	  of	  availability,	  social	  welfare	  could	  
be	  lost.	  	  
These	   three	   categories	   are	   the	   basic	   sources	   of	   most	   opposition	   to	   filesharing.5	  However,	  
the	   first	   category	   is	   limited	   to	   a	   particular	   set	   of	   agents	   and	   the	   second	   category	   relies	   on	   a	  
philosophical	   argument	   that	   is	   difficult	   to	   address	   empirically.	   Because	   this	   chapter	   is	  
focused	   on	   policy	   we	   will	   base	   our	   discussion	   on	   the	   third	   category	   of	   opposition	   to	  
filesharing.	  
A	  necessary	  condition	  for	  filesharing	  to	  affect	  the	  supply	  of	  creative	  works	  is	  that	  content	  
creators	   must	   be	   incentivized	   by	   the	   profits	   they	   can	   obtain	   from	   their	   works.	   While	   this	  
may	   seem	   tautologically	   true	   to	   an	   economist,	   reasonable	   debate	   exists	   as	   to	   whether	   such	  
an	   assumption	   is	   valid	   in	   the	   world	   of	   artistic	   goods.	   First,	   if	   profits	   surpass	   a	   level	   beyond	  
which	  additional	  profits	  do	  not	  impact	  incentives	  to	  create,	  then	  some	  reduction	  in	  profits	  
may	   not	   lead	   to	   a	   change	   in	   supply.	   Second,	   it	   may	   be	   that	   not	   all	   content	   creation	   is	  
incentivized	   by	   profits.	   Hypothetically,	   there	   may	   exist	   a	   musician	   creating	   highly-­‐valued	  
music	   who	   would	   continue	   to	   work	   in	   exactly	   the	   same	   manner	   even	   in	   the	   face	   of	  
diminished	   profitability.	   However,	   one	   might	   argue	   that	   the	   products	   brought	   to	   market	  
involve	   not	   just	   the	   work	   of	   this	   artist	   but	   also	   others	   involved	   in	   the	   production	   chain,	  
from	  sound	  engineers	  who	  master	  the	  album	  to	  label	  executives	  who	  see	  that	  the	  music	  is	  
marketed	   and	   promoted	   to	   distributors	   who	   actually	   sell	   it.	   How	   necessary	   are	   these	   parts	  
of	  the	  production	  process,	  and	  how	  motivated	  are	  they	  by	  profits?	  	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

5	  The	  notion	  has	  also	  been	  advanced	  that	  because	  piracy	  allows	  consumers	  to	  acquire	  goods	  such	  as	  songs	  or	  

movies	  for	  free,	  it	  has	  the	  psychological	  effect	  of	  lowering	  their	  perceived	  value	  of	  such	  products,	  diminishing	  
their	  willingness	  to	  pay.	  Rather	  than	  evaluate	  the	  validity	  of	  this	  claim,	  we	  simply	  note	  that	  if	  it	  is	  true	  it	  again	  
serves	  to	  diminish	  the	  ability	  of	  creators	  to	  profit	  from	  their	  works	  and	  as	  such	  can	  be	  evaluated	  in	  light	  of	  the	  
three	  categories	  of	  arguments	  already	  described.	  

22	  

Perhaps	   blockbuster	   movies	   represent	   a	   clearer	   example	   where	   creative	   works	   are	   likely	  
incentivized	   by	   profits.	   Film	   studios	   are	   profit-­‐maximizing	   firms	   who	   frequently	   invest	  
hundreds	  of	  millions	  of	  dollars	  into	  the	  creation	  and	  promotion	  of	  movies	  in	  the	  hopes	  of	  
making	   returns	   on	   these	   investments.	   If	   the	   profits	   on	   films	   are	   significantly	   reduced	   by	  
piracy,	   then	   these	   studios	   will	   have	   less	   incentive	   to	   invest	   in	   the	   creation	   of	   such	   films.	  
Reduced	   incentives	   might	   have	   a	   particularly	   large	   impact	   on	   more	   innovative	   films	   that	  
might	   be	   considered	   riskier	   in	   terms	   of	   their	   chance	   of	   success.	   And	   thus	   there	   are	   reasons	  
to	   believe	   that	   filesharing	   may	   impact	   the	   quality	   or	   quantity	   of	   goods	   brought	   to	   the	  
market,	   but	   there	   are	   also	   reasons	   to	   consider	   that	   it	   may	   have	   less	   impact	   than	   one	   would	  
expect	   in	   situations	   where	   profits	   are	   less	   of	   an	   incentive	   or	   where	  reduced	   profits	   are	   still	  
enough	   to	   incentivize	   similar	   innovation.	   Thus	   the	   question	   of	   whether	   reduced	   profits	  
from	   filesharing	   affects	   the	   supply	   of	   creative	   works	   is	   an	   empirical	   one	   and	   the	   answer	  
may	  differ	  between	  industries	  or	  between	  different	  types	  of	  products.	  
In	  spite	  of	  this,	  there	  exists	  very	  little	  evidence	  as	  to	  whether	  filesharing	  impacts	  the	  supply	  
of	   creative	   works.	   The	   question	   is	   difficult	   to	   answer	   for	   several	   reasons.	   First,	   like	  
measuring	  the	  impact	  of	  piracy	  on	   sales,	  it	  is	  difficult	  to	  measure	  the	  impact	  of	  piracy	   on	  
supply	  because	  we	  cannot	  observe	  the	  counterfactual	  —	  what	  creative	  works	  would	  have	  
been	  created	  in	  the	  absence	  of	  piracy?	  Second,	  even	  if	  an	  experiment	  were	  to	  allow	  us	  to	  
measure	   the	   counterfactual,	   the	   hypothesis	   is	   that	   piracy	   may	   impact	   the	   quantity	   or	  
quality	  of	  creative	  works,	  and	  quality	  is	  difficult	  to	  measure.	  For	  example,	  if	  the	  number	  of	  
songs	  created	  were	  to	  remain	  the	  same	  when	  piracy	  rises	  but	  the	  average	  quality	  of	  these	  
songs	  were	  lower,	  how	  would	  we	  observe	  this	  lower	  quality	  in	  order	  to	  measure	  it?	  Third,	  
even	   in	   situations	   where	   natural	   experiments	   cause	   shocks	   to	   piracy	   (such	   as	   the	   adoption	  
of	  BitTorrent	  leading	  to	  a	  surge	  of	  movie	  piracy,	  or	  the	  shutdown	  of	  Limewire	  leading	  to	  a	  
reduction	  in	  music	  piracy),	  while	  the	  impact	  on	  sales	  might	  be	  expected	  to	  be	  immediate,	  
the	   impact	   on	   supply	   of	   creative	   content	   (if	   there	   is	   one)	   will	   likely	   be	   longer	   term	   as	   firms	  
slowly	   respond	   to	   the	   changed	   environment,	   and	   adjust	   to	   new	   profit	   levels.	   Thus,	   these	  
effects	   are	   harder	   to	   observe,	   as	   we	   do	   not	   know	   how	   much	   lag	   to	   expect	   between	   a	  
technology	  or	  policy	  shock	  and	  any	  potential	  resulting	  change	  in	  supply	  of	  creative	  works.	  

23	  

One	   piece	   of	   evidence	   that	   begins	   to	   examine	   this	   question	   can	   be	   found	   in	   Waldfogel	  
(2011).	  The	  goal	  of	  the	  Waldfogel	  study	  is	  to	  examine	  the	  supply	  of	  new	  music	  over	  time,	  
looking	   at	   the	   development	   of	   Napster	   as	   a	   natural	   experiment	   that	   began	   a	   large	   rise	   in	  
filesharing	   behavior,	   and	   a	   subsequent	   lowering	   of	   music	   industry	   profits.	   Waldfogel	  
observes	   that	   the	   number	   of	   new	   albums	   is	   increasing	   over	   time,	   but	   that	   many	   of	   these	  
newer	  albums	  are	  of	  lower	  quality	  as	  technological	  advancements	  have	  lowered	  barriers	  to	  
entry.	  To	  fix	  quality	  at	  a	  certain	  time-­‐invariant	  level,	  Waldfogel	  constructs	  several	  indices	  of	  
the	  number	  of	  albums	  produced	  each	  year	  that	  eventually	  make	  it	  onto	  a	  critical	  “best	  of”	  
list,	   such	   as	   Rolling	   Stone’s	   500	   Best	   Albums	   list.	   Thus	   he	   is	   able	   to	   measure	   the	   number	   of	  
new	   albums	   above	   a	   constant	   quality	   threshold	   and	   ask	   how	   this	   number	   changes	   over	  
time.	   He	   finds	   that	   the	   post-­‐Napster	   levels	   of	   this	   index	   are	   similar	   to	   pre-­‐Napster	   levels,	  
and	   that	   post-­‐Napster	   trends	   do	   not	   depart	   significantly	   from	   pre-­‐Napster	   trends.	   Some	  
may	   argue	   that	   this	   definition	   of	   a	   constant	   threshold	   of	   quality	   could	   be	   flawed.	   Waldfogel	  
also	  shows	  similar	  results	  when	  the	  term	  “quality”	  could	  be	  interchanged	  with	  “demand”	  or	  
“appeal”	   by	   producing	   indices	   of	   the	   number	   of	   songs	   from	   each	   year	   that	   have	   sold	   over	   a	  
certain	  number	  of	  copies.	  	  
Figure	  3:	  Supply	  of	  New	  Albums	  Above	  Quality	  Threshold	  

	  

	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Source:	  Waldfogel	  (2011),	  p.	  34	  
	  

24	  

	  However,	   Waldfogel	   also	   acknowledges	   that	   the	   spread	   of	   filesharing	   coincided	   with	  
advances	  in	  technology	  and	  the	  digitization	  of	  music,	  both	  of	  which	  reduced	  the	  production	  
costs	   for	   music.	   Thus	   his	   conclusion	   is	   not	   that	   piracy	   does	   not	   impact	   the	   supply	   of	  
creative	   works,	   but	   rather	   that	   the	   net	   effect	   of	   both	   technological	   advances	   in	   music	  
production	   and	   distribution	   (including	   but	   not	   limited	   to	   filesharing)	   that	   occurred	   after	  
1999	   had	   little	   impact	   on	   the	   supply	   of	   quality	   music.	   The	   counterfactual	   —	   what	   would	  
have	  happened	  to	  the	  supply	  of	  quality	  music	  in	  the	  absence	  of	  piracy,	  but	  in	  the	  presence	  
of	  other	  unrelated	  cost-­‐reducing	  technologies	  —	  still	  remains	  unclear.	  	  
If	  anything,	  the	  Waldfogel	  study	  highlights	  the	  challenge	  of	  why	  it	  is	  so	  hard	  to	  estimate	  the	  
link	   between	   filesharing	   and	   supply.	   Even	   with	   a	   good	   measure	   of	   supply	   and	   a	   strong	  
experiment	  like	  the	  introduction	  of	  Napster,	  many	  things	  are	  changing	  over	  time	  that	  affect	  
the	  production	  of	  creative	  content.	  Given	  this,	  it	  is	  not	  clear	  what	  lag	  we	  might	  expect	  to	  see	  
between	   an	   experiment	   and	   a	   supply	   response,	   so	   we	   are	   left	   without	   a	   clear	   hypothesis	  
test.	   Finally,	   Waldfogel	   highlights	   the	   need	   to	   consider	   not	   just	   the	   quantity	   but	   also	   the	  
quality	   of	   what	   is	   supplied.	   We	   believe	   that	   his	   indices	   provide	   the	   best	   standard	   currently	  
available	  for	  measuring	  quality	  with	  respect	  to	  music,	  but	  it	  is	  not	  clear	  how	  to	  transport	  
such	   a	   concept	   to	   movies	   or	   other	   media.	   And	   in	   the	   end,	   his	   findings	   can	   speak	   only	   to	   the	  
link	   between	   digitization	   and	   supply,	   where	   filesharing	   is	   only	   one	   aspect	   of	   digitization	  
that	  may	  be	  counterbalanced	  by	  other	  positive	  aspects	  of	  digitization.	  
An	  interesting	   potential	   approach	   to	   studying	   how	   content	   industries	   change	   the	   supply	   of	  
new	   quality	   products	   in	   the	   presence	   of	   reduced	   profits	   from	   filesharing	   is	   to	   consider	  
product	   availability	   rather	   than	   product	   supply.	   While	   generally	   one	   believes	   that	   piracy	  
accelerates	   the	   release	   of	   legal	   products,	   high	   levels	   of	   piracy	   may	   discourage	   firms	   from	  
making	   their	   products	   available	   in	   markets	   with	   high	   piracy.	   Anecdotal	   evidence	   in	  
countries	   like	   Spain,	   which	   is	   generally	   considered	   a	   high	   piracy	   country,	   suggests	   that	  
firms	   are	   reluctant	   to	   release	   legal	   versions	   of	   their	   products	   or	   to	   invest	   in	   marketing	   and	  
promotion	  of	  their	  products	  (New	  York	  Times,	  August	  20,	  2011).	  If	  the	  presence	  of	  piracy	  
causes	  these	  responses,	  the	  outcome	  will	  be	  reduced	  social	  welfare	  to	  any	  consumers	  who	  
would	   have	   benefitted	   from	   the	   market	   availability	   of	   these	   products.	   Marketing,	  

25	  

promotions	   and	   other	   services	   are	   also	  an	  important	  component	  of	   the	   product	   experience	  
and	  a	  decision	  of	  reduce	  investments	  in	  such	  activities	  would	  also	  constitute	  social	  loss	  by	  
reducing	   the	   information	   available	   to	   consumers	   about	   products	   they	   might	   benefit	   from	  
consuming.	  	  
However,	   while	   current	   empirical	   evidence	   of	   a	   connection	   between	   piracy	   and	   product	  
availability	  is	  sparse,	  given	  standard	  economic	  theory	  it	  seems	  reasonable	  to	  assume	  that	  
some	  connection	  will	  exist.	  Hypothetically,	  imagine	  a	  world	  in	  which	  the	  moment	  a	  major	  
blockbuster	  film	  is	  produced,	  piracy	  prevents	  the	  studio	  that	  developed	  it	  from	  extracting	  
any	   revenue	   from	   theater	   ticket	   sales,	   DVD	   sales,	   or	   other	   legitimate	   channels.	   In	   other	  
words,	  imagine	  a	  world	  where	  everyone	  can	  easily	  obtain	  motion	  picture	  content	  for	  free	  
through	   piracy	   channels	   and	   as	   a	   result	   no	   one	   pays	   for	   this	   content.	   In	   this	   hypothetical	  
world,	  is	  seems	  highly	  unlikely	  that	  studios	  would	  invest	  the	  large	  fixed	  costs	  necessary	  to	  
develop	   blockbuster	   movies.	   Indeed,	   this	   is	   the	   very	   logic	   behind	   the	   copyright	   protections	  
afforded	  to	  content	  creators	  by	  the	  U.S.	  Constitution.	   And	  thus	  we	  propose	  that,	  even	  in	  the	  
absence	   of	   conclusive	   proof	   that	   piracy	   reduces	   the	   incentives	   to	   supply	   quality	   content,	  
that	   there	   is	   theoretical	   rationale	   for	   governments	   to	   consider	   the	   possibility	   that	  
filesharing	  may	  negatively	  impact	  social	  welfare.	  
A	  related	  welfare	  question	  is	  whether	  the	  availability	  of	  piracy	  impacts	  the	  distribution	  of	  
welfare	  between	  artists	  and	  firms.	  In	  the	  context	  of	  the	  music	  industry,	  Mortimer,	  Nosko,	  
and	   Sorensen	   (2012)	   analyze	   the	   impact	   of	   piracy	   on	   both	   sales	   of	   music	   and	   on	   the	  
demand	   for	   live	   concert	   performances	   by	   artists.	   They	   find	   that	   while	   piracy	   reduces	   the	  
demand	   for	   recorded	   music,	   it	   simultaneously	   increases	   the	   demand	   for	   live	   concerts,	  
particularly	  among	  less	  well-­‐known	  artists.	  Given	  that	   most	  artist	  contracts	  have	  allowed	  
the	   artist	   to	   retain	   their	   revenue	   from	   concerts	   (even	   while	   they	   share	   revenue	   with	   the	  
record	   label	   for	   recorded	   music	   sales),	   this	   shift	   away	   from	   recorded	   music	   sales	   toward	  
concert	   sales	   effectively	   represents	   a	   shift	   of	   welfare	   away	   from	   labels	   (through	   reduced	  
recorded	   music	   revenue)	   and	   toward	   artists	   (through	   increased	   concert	   revenue).	  
However,	   it	   is	   important	   to	   note	   that	   labels	   have	   responded	   to	   this	   shift	   in	   revenue	   toward	  
concerts	   by	   asking	   artists	   to	   sign	   “360	   degree	   deals,”	   where	   artists	   agree	   to	   give	   the	   label	   a	  

26	  

percentage	  of	  their	  income	  through	  all	  channels	  (including	  concerts).	  It	  is	  also	  worth	  noting	  
that	   we	   know	   of	   no	   studies	   in	   the	   literature	   that	   suggest	   a	   similar	   shift	   in	   revenue	   away	  
from	  firms	  and	  toward	  artists	  in	  the	  context	  of	  the	  movie	  industry.	  
3. Responding	  to	  the	  Threat	  from	  Piracy	  
If	  piracy	  represents	  a	  threat	  to	  media	  sales,	  and	  potentially	  to	  creative	  incentives,	  the	  next	  
logical	   question	   is	   how	   should	   governments	   and	   those	   in	   the	   creative	   industry	   respond?	   In	  
this	   section	   we	   attempt	   to	   review	   what	   the	   academic	   literature	   can	   tell	   us	   about	   this	  
question.	  
To	  frame	  this	  discussion,	  we	  start	  with	  the	  widely	  held	  view	  that	  media	  companies	  “can’t	  
compete	  with	  free.”	  This	  view	  is	  most	  commonly	  advanced	  by	  those	  in	  the	  industry	  arguing	  
for	   stronger	   anti-­‐piracy	   legislation	   to	   eliminate	   the	   ubiquitous	   availability	   of	   pirated	  
content.	   However,	   those	   arguing	   against	   strong	   copyright	   enforcement	   have	   also	   advanced	  
this	   argument.	   For	   example,	   Nick	   Bilton	   (2012)	   in	   a	   New	   York	   Times	   editorial	   argued	  
against	   copyright	   enforcement	   on	   the	   basis	   of	   the	   fact	   that	   copyright	   enforcement	   will	  
never	  be	  fully	  effective	  and	  therefore	  should	  be	  abandoned.	  
In	  our	  discussion	  below	  we	  argue	  that	  the	  view	  that	  firms	  can’t	  compete	  with	  free	  (pirated)	  
content	   is	   flawed.	   Rather,	   competing	   with	   free	   can	   be	   seen	   as	   a	   special	   case	   of	   price	  
competition.	   Firms	   are	   well	   acquainted	   with	   price	   competition:	   differentiate	   a	   higher	  
priced	   product	   along	   a	   set	   of	   attributes	   that	   are	   valuable	   to	   the	   market	   and	   consumers	   will	  
willingly	   pay	   more	   to	   purchase	   your	   product	   rather	   than	   purchasing	   a	   lower	   priced	  
competing	  product.	  	  
We	   believe	   that	   there	   are	   direct	   analogies	   between	   this	   example	   of	   market-­‐based	  
competition	   and	   competition	   in	   the	   context	   of	   pirated	   products,	   but	   with	   a	   twist.	   In	   a	  
typical	   market-­‐based	   environment,	   firms	   can	   only	   differentiate	   their	   own	   product	   from	  
their	   competition,	   while	   in	   the	   context	   of	   pirated	   goods,	   firms	   can	   both	   increase	   the	  
attractiveness	  of	  their	  own	  products	  relative	  to	  pirated	  products	  (through	  attributes	  such	  
as	  availability,	  convenience,	  and	  reliability),	  and	  they	  can	  also	  use	  anti-­‐piracy	  interventions	  
to	   reduce	   the	   attractiveness	   of	   competing	   pirated	   content	   relative	   to	   paid	   content.	   We	  
27	  

discuss	   each	   of	   these	   alternatives	   below,	   starting	   with	   the	   academic	   literature	   on	   the	  
effectiveness	  of	  anti-­‐piracy	  interventions.	  	  
3.1 The	  Effectiveness	  of	  Anti-­‐Piracy	  Interventions	  
As	   we	   see	   it,	   anti-­‐piracy	   interventions	   can	   be	   categorized	   along	   two	   axes.	   The	   first	   axis	  
concerns	   whether	   the	   intervention	   is	   regulatory	   (government-­‐driven)	   or	   voluntary	  
(industry-­‐driven),	   and	   the	   second	   axis	   relates	   to	   whether	   the	   intervention	   targets	   the	  
supply-­‐	  or	  demand-­‐side	  of	  piracy.	  	  
Along	   the	   first	   axis,	   regulatory	   interventions	   include	   any	   government-­‐sponsored	   effort	   to	  
reduce	   piracy,	   while	   industry	   interventions	   include	   approaches	   through	   industry	  
cooperation	  or	  market-­‐based	  efforts	  to	  address	  piracy.	  Along	  the	  second	  axis,	  supply-­‐side	  
interventions	  target	  the	  supply	  of	  pirated	  content	  while	  demand-­‐side	  interventions	  target	  
individuals	   demanding	   pirated	   content.	   Figure	   4	   summarizes	   this	   categorization	   and	  
includes	  example	  interventions	  in	  each	  category.	  
Figure	  4:	  Categorization	  of	  Anti-­‐Piracy	  Regulations	  
	  
Demand-­‐Side	  
Regulatory	  (Government-­‐
HADOPI	  in	  France,	  IPRED	  in	  
Driven)	  
the	  EU	  
Voluntary	  (Industry-­‐Driven)	   Copyright	  Alert	  System	  in	  
the	  U.S.,	  various	  industry	  
lawsuits	  against	  file-­‐sharers,	  

Supply-­‐Side	  
Megaupload	  Shutdown	  
Voluntary	  changes	  in	  search	  
engine	  ranking	  algorithms	  to	  
reduce	  prominence	  of	  piracy	  
in	  search	  results	  

	  
In	  the	  context	  of	  regulatory,	  demand-­‐side	  interventions,	  Danaher	  et	  al.	  (2013)	  analyze	  how	  
the	  HADOPI	  law	  in	  France	  impacted	  French	  music	  sales	  by	  comparing	  music	  sales	  in	  France	  
and	   a	   set	   of	   control	   group	   countries	   before	   and	   after	   the	   HADOPI	   legislation	   was	   passed.	  
Their	   paper	   finds	   that	   HADOPI	   law	   in	   France	   caused	   a	   20-­‐25%	   increase	   in	   French	   music	  
sales	  relative	  to	  the	  control	  group	  countries	  (see	  Figure	  5).	  	  

28	  

Figure	  5:	  iTunes	  Music	  Sales	  Before	  and	  After	  HADOPI	  

13.2

Log	  of	  iTunes	  Sales

Assembly	  and	  Senate	  back
Hadopi Bill

National	  Assembly
amends,	  supports,
and	  then	  rejects
Hadopi	  Bill

25

Control	  Group
France
Google	  Trends	  "Hadopi"

20

Constitutional	  Council	  
rejects	  Hadopi	  Bill

12.8

15

Hadopi	  begins	  first	  
wave	  notices
12.4

10

Constitutional	  Council	  
accepts	  amended	  Bill

12

Hadopi	  begins
second	  wave	  notices

Google	  Trends	  Relative	  Indiex

13.6

5

Hadopi	  Bill	  
presented	  to	  
National	  Assembly
6-­‐Apr-­‐11

6-­‐May-­‐11

6-­‐Mar-­‐11

6-­‐Jan-­‐11

6-­‐Feb-­‐11

6-­‐Dec-­‐10

6-­‐Oct-­‐10

6-­‐Nov-­‐10

6-­‐Sep-­‐10

6-­‐Jul-­‐10

6-­‐Aug-­‐10

6-­‐Jun-­‐10

6-­‐A pr-­‐10

6-­‐May-­‐10

6-­‐Mar-­‐10

6-­‐Jan-­‐10

6-­‐Feb-­‐10

6-­‐Dec-­‐09

6-­‐Oct-­‐09

6-­‐Nov-­‐0 9

6-­‐Sep-­‐09

6-­‐Jul-­‐09

6-­‐A ug-­‐0 9

6-­‐Jun-­‐09

6-­‐Apr-­‐09

6-­‐May-­‐09

6-­‐Mar-­‐09

6-­‐Jan-­‐09

6-­‐Feb-­‐09

6-­‐Dec-­‐08

6-­‐Oct-­‐08

6-­‐Nov-­‐08

6-­‐Sep-­‐08

6-­‐Jul-­‐08

0

6-­‐Aug-­‐08

11.6

	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Source:	  Danaher	  et.	  al.	  2012	  
The	   authors	   also	   run	   an	   additional	   level	   of	   differencing	   in	   their	   models	   by	   comparing	  
changes	   in	   high	   piracy	   (i.e.,	   rap,	   hip-­‐hop),	   medium	   piracy	   (i.e.,	   rock,	   pop)	   and	   low	   piracy	  
genres	   (i.e.,	   Christian,	   classical,	   folk,	   and	   jazz).	   The	   logic	   here	   is	   that	   higher	   piracy	   genres	  
should	   have	   a	   higher	   number	   of	   “treated”	   consumers,	   and	   therefore	   should	   have	   a	   larger	  
increase	  in	  sales	  after	  the	  HADOPI	  legislation	  was	  passed	  than	  other	  genres	  do.	  And,	  indeed,	  
the	   authors	   find	   the	   increase	   in	   sales	   for	   the	   low,	   medium,	   and	   high	   piracy	   genres	   was	   7%,	  
16%	  and	  30%	  respectively.	  	  
Finally,	   the	   authors	   show	   that	   their	   results	   are	   robust	   to	   including	   iOS	   device	   sales,	   to	  
eliminating	   any	   individual	   control-­‐group	   country	   from	   their	   analysis,	   and	   to	   eliminating	  
any	   individual	   record	   label	   from	   their	   analysis,	   suggesting	   that	   these	   results	   are	   not	   driven	  
by	  changes	  in	  iOS	  device	  sales	  around	  the	  introduction	  of	  HADOPI,	  or	  by	  factors	  peculiar	  to	  
any	   particular	   control	   group	   country	   or	   label.	   Finally,	   it	   is	   important	   to	   note	   that	   the	  
reported	   results	   suggest	   that	   sales	   in	   France	   have	   increased	   relative	   to	   what	   they	   would	  
have	   been	   (as	   proxied	   by	   the	   control	   group	   countries).	   Thus,	   while	   total	   recorded	   music	  
sales	   (which	   include	   both	   physical	   and	   digital	   channels)	   have	   continued	   to	   decline	   in	  
France	   after	   the	   law’s	   introduction,	   the	   results	   suggest	   that	   absent	   the	   HADOPI	   law,	   the	  
decline	  in	  sales	  would	  have	  been	  even	  more	  severe	  than	  what	  has	  been	  observed.	  

29	  

These	   results,	   showing	   an	   increase	   in	   sales	   following	   a	   regulatory	   demand-­‐side	  
intervention	   are	   similar	   to	   those	   reported	   by	   Adermon	   and	   Liang	   (2010),	   who	   find	   that	  
enforcement	  of	  the	  European	  Union	  IPRED	  directive	  in	  2009	  caused	  a	  27%	  increase	  in	  CD	  
sales	  and	  a	  48%	  increase	  in	  digital	  music	  sales	  in	  Sweden.	  
In	  the	  context	  of	  regulatory,	  supply-­‐side	  interventions	  Danaher	  and	  Smith	  (2013)	  analyze	  
the	   impact	   of	   the	   recent	   shutdown	   of	   Megaupload	   and	   its	   sister	   sites	   on	   digital	   motion	  
picture	  sales.	  Megaupload	  and	  Megavideo	  were	  shutdown	  on	  January	  18,	  2012	  after	  the	  U.S.	  
Department	   of	   Justice	   obtained	   a	   grand	   jury	   indictment	   against	   the	   site’s	   founders	   for	  
copyright	   infringement.	   This	   analysis	   differs	   from	   the	   HADOPI	   analysis	   in	   that	   the	   HADOPI	  
law	   affected	   French	   consumers,	   and	   as	   such,	   one	   could	   construct	   a	   set	   of	   control	   group	  
countries	  to	  proxy	  for	  what	  sales	  in	  France	  would	  have	  been	  in	  the	  absence	  of	  HADOPI.	  In	  
contrast,	  the	  Megaupload	  shutdown	  affected	  users	  in	  all	  countries	  worldwide.	  Thus,	  in	  the	  
absence	  of	  a	  suitable	  control	  group	  of	  countries,	  Danaher	  and	  Smith	  use	  the	  fact	  that	  there	  
was	   heterogeneity	   in	   Megaupload	   usage	   across	   countries	   to	   identify	   the	   impact	   of	   the	  
Megaupload	  shutdown.	  	  
Specifically,	   the	   authors	   obtain	   data	   from	   two	   major	   motion	   picture	   studios	   documenting	  
sales	  through	  their	  major	  digital	  channels	  for	  12	  countries	  where	  data	  were	  available.	  They	  
then	  use	  Google	  AdPlanner	  data	  (showing	  the	  number	  of	  unique	  Internet	  users	  who	  visited	  
Megaupload.com	  in	  the	  month	  before	  its	  shutdown)	  and	  International	  Telecommunication	  
Union	  data	  (showing	  the	  number	  of	  Internet	  users	  in	  a	  particular	  country)	  to	  calculate	  the	  
proportion	   of	   Megaupload	   users	   in	   a	   set	   of	   12	   countries.	   This	   “Megaupload	   penetration	  
ratio”	  varies	  between	  a	  high	  of	  17%	  in	  Spain	  to	  a	  low	  of	  1.8%	  in	  the	  United	  States.	  
The	   author’s	   identification	   strategy	   compares	   sales	   changes	   before	   and	   after	   the	   shutdown	  
of	  the	  Megaupload	  site	  across	  countries	  with	  different	  penetrations	  of	  Megaupload	  usage.	  
The	   logic	   is	   that	   countries	   with	   a	   higher	   pre-­‐shutdown	   penetration	   of	   Megaupload	   usage,	  
have	   more	   “treated”	   users	   than	   other	   countries	   do,	   and	   therefore	   should	   have	   a	   higher	  
(relative)	   increase	   in	   sales	   compared	   than	   those	   other	   countries	   if	   the	   shutdown	   had	   an	  
impact.	  

30	  

Indeed,	  the	  authors	  find	  that	  this	  is	  the	  case.	  Their	  results	  suggest	  that	  a	  1%	  reduction	  in	  
Megaupload	   usage	   within	   a	   particular	   country	   causes	   a	   2.5-­‐3.8%	   increase	   in	   digital	   sales.	  
They	  calculate	  that	  this	  increase	  translates	  into	  a	  6-­‐10%	  increase	  in	  revenues	  from	  digital	  
movie	   sales	   and	   rentals	   for	   two	   major	   studios	   in	   the	   18	   weeks	   after	   the	   Megaupload	  
shutdown.	  
Lauinger	  et	  al.	  (2013)	  have	  also	  examined	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  Megaupload	  shutdown	  on	  the	  
overall	   availability	   of	   pirated	   content	   online.	   They	   find	   that	   while	   shutting	   down	  
Megaupload	  may	  have	  temporarily	  reduced	   the	  availability	  of	  content,	  this	  content	  quickly	  
appears	  on	  other	  sites.	  We	  note,	  however,	  that	  while	  this	  may	  be	  true,	  it	  doesn’t	  necessarily	  
mean	   that	   shutting	   down	   prominent	   sites	   will	   be	   ineffective	   when	   it	   comes	   to	   reducing	   the	  
utility	   of	   using	   piracy	   relative	   to	   legitimate	   channels.	   It	   may	   be	   that	   shutting	   down	  
prominent	   sites	   increases	   consumer	   search	   costs	   to	   find	   new	   sites	   enough	   that	   some	  
consumers	  choose	  to	  use	  legitimate	  channels	  (with	  lower	  search	  costs)	  instead	  of	  investing	  
the	  effort	  to	  find	  the	  content	  on	  one	  of	  a	  number	  of	  pirate	  sites.	  
This	   conjecture	   is	   loosely	   consistent	   with	   evidence	   in	   the	   economics	   literature	   regarding	  
price	   competition	   and	   consumer	   search	   costs	   online.	   This	   literature	   has	   shown	   that	  
consumers	   are	   willing	   to	   pay	   several	   dollars	   more	   to	   purchase	   homogenous	   goods	  
(typically	   books,	   CDs,	   and	   movies)	   from	   heavily	   branded	   sites	   such	   as	   Amazon.com,	   even	  
when	   those	   products	   are	   available	   for	   lower	   prices	   from	   other	   sites	   (see	   for	   example	  
Brynjolfsson	   and	   Smith	   (2000)	   and	   Smith	   and	   Brynjolfsson	   (2001)).	   Smith,	   Bailey,	   and	  
Brynjolfsson	   (2000)	   argue	   that	   the	   price	   advantages	   enjoyed	   by	   these	   sites,	   can	   be	  
explained	   as	   rational	   responses	   of	   consumers	   to	   the	   high	   search	   costs	   associated	   with	  
finding	  other	  lower	  priced	  sellers	  online,	  high	  cognitive	  costs	  associated	  with	  learning	  how	  
to	  use	  these	  new	  sites,	  or	  other	  preferences	  for	  convenience,	  quality,	  and	  reliability	  offered	  
by	   heavily-­‐branded,	   well-­‐known	   sites.	   These	   results	   are	   similar	   to	   other	   results	   in	   the	  
literature	   showing	   that	   consumers	   face	   high	   search	   costs	   when	   search	   for	   or	   processing	  
information	   in	   online	   markets	   (see	   for	   example	   Brynjolfsson,	   Dick,	   and	   Smith	   (2010),	  
Johnson	  et	  al.	  (2004),	  and	  Hann	  and	  Terwiesch	  (2003)).	  

31	  

In	   addition	   to	   these	   papers	   showing	   that	   regulatory	   interventions	   (whether	   supply-­‐	   or	  
demand-­‐side)	   can	   increase	   the	   sales	   of	   media	   products,	   Bhattacharjee	   et	   al.	   (2006)	   analyze	  
how	   voluntary	   demand-­‐side	   interventions	   —	   specifically,	   the	   RIAA’s	   lawsuits	   against	  
individuals	   in	   2003	   and	   2004	   —	   impacted	   sales.	   The	   authors	   find	   that	   these	   lawsuits	  
reduced	   the	   number	   of	   files	   individuals	   were	   sharing	   on	   P2P	   networks,	   and	   had	   a	  
disproportionately	  large	  impact	  on	  large	  file	  sharers.	  
Thus,	  we	  believe	  that	  when	  taken	  as	  a	  whole,	  the	  academic	  literature	  shows	  that	  demand-­‐	  
and	   supply-­‐side	   interventions	   can	   be	   effective	   in	   increasing	   media	   sales	   by	   reducing	   the	  
utility	  of	  consuming	  pirated	  content	  relative	  to	  the	  utility	  of	  legitimate	  content.	  	  
However,	  we	  also	  note	  that	  while	  these	  results	  should	  be	  encouraging	  to	  decision-­‐makers	  
in	  the	  media	  industries	  looking	  for	  ways	  to	  increase	  revenue	  in	  the	  presence	  of	  piracy,	   the	  
extant	  research	  only	  analyzes	  the	  benefit	  of	  these	  policies	  to	  legal	  sales,	  they	  do	  not	  analyze	  
the	   net	   social	   benefit	   of	   these	   policies	   after	   taking	   into	   account	   the	   costs	   —	  both	   direct	   and	  
indirect	   (e.g.,	   costs	   arising	   from	   privacy,	   human	   rights,	   or	   goodwill	   costs)	   —	   associated	  
with	   implementing	   these	   interventions.	   These	   costs	   are	   difficult	   to	   measure	   but	   will	   be	  
important	  to	  evaluating	  the	  overall	  benefits	  from	  any	  anti-­‐piracy	  intervention.	  	  
3.2 The	  Effectiveness	  of	  Market-­‐Based	  Efforts	  to	  Reduce	  Piracy	  
The	   results	   reported	   above	   suggest	   that	   anti-­‐piracy	   regulation	   can	   reduce	   the	   utility	   of	  
consuming	  pirated	  content	  relative	  to	  content	  obtained	  through	  legitimate	  digital	  channels,	  
and	  in	  so	  doing,	  can	  cause	  people	  who	  otherwise	  would	  have	  pirated	  to	  consume	  through	  
legitimate	   channels	   instead.	   In	   this	   section,	   we	   review	   research	   results	   that	   suggest	   that	  
there	  are	  a	  variety	  of	  ways	  that	  media	  firms	  can	  impact	  the	  marketing	  of	  their	  products	  to	  
improve	  the	  attractiveness	  of	  their	  products	  relative	  to	  pirated	  consumption.	  
Perhaps	   the	   most	   clear	   manner	   in	   which	   firms	   can	   compete	   with	   piracy	   is	   to	   sell	   their	  
content	  through	  a	  variety	  of	  digital	  distribution	  channels,	  allowing	  consumers	  to	  obtain	  the	  
products	   they	   are	   looking	   for	   with	   as	   much	   or	   greater	   ease	   as	   they	   can	   pirate	   them.	   And	  
there	   is	   empirical	   evidence	   that	   the	   use	   of	   legitimate	   digital	   distribution	   channels	   has	   a	  
meaningful	   impact	   on	   piracy	   levels.	   For	   example,	   Danaher	   et.	   al.	   (2010)	   examined	   the	  
32	  

impact	   of	   NBC’s	   decision	   to	   remove	   their	   video	   content	   from	   the	   iTunes	   store	   on	   piracy	  
levels	  and	  on	  DVD	  sales	  levels	  through	  Amazon.com.	  	  
By	   comparing	   piracy	   rates	   of	   NBC	   content	   to	   piracy	   of	   similar	   ABC,	   CBS,	   and	   Fox	   content	  
(before	   and	   after	   the	   removal	   of	   NBC	   from	   iTunes),	   the	   authors	   found	   a	   statistically	   and	  
economically	   significant	   increase	   in	   piracy	   of	   NBC	   content	   caused	   by	   the	   removal	   of	   the	  
legal	   digital	   distribution	   channel.	   In	   fact,	   the	   increase	   in	   the	   number	   of	   pirated	   NBC	  
downloads	  was	  larger	  than	  the	  size	  of	  the	  iTunes	  market	  had	  been,	  suggesting	  that	  when	  
consumers	  pay	  the	  fixed	  cost	  of	  switching	  to	  piracy	  they	  consume	  more	  content	  than	  they	  
would	   purchase.	   This	   interpretation	   was	   validated	   by	   a	   second	   experiment	   —	   when	   NBC	  
returned	  their	  content	  to	  iTunes	  nine	  months	  later,	  piracy	  of	  that	  content	  decreased	  by	  a	  
much	   smaller	   amount	   than	   it	   had	   increased	   after	   the	   removal.	   Sales	   of	   physical	   DVD’s	   of	  
this	   content	   at	   Amazon	   exhibited	   no	   meaningful	   changes	   during	   either	   of	   these	  
experiments.6 	  Thus	   the	   authors	   make	   two	   conclusions:	   First,	   the	   opening	   of	   a	   digital	  
distribution	   channel	   can	   encourage	   filesharers	   to	   migrate	   to	   legal	   channels.	   Second,	  
consumers	   may	   be	   somewhat	   tied	   to	   physical	   vs.	   digital	   channels,	   as	   there	   seems	   to	   be	   a	  
short	  run	  substitution	  between	  piracy	  and	  paid	  legal	  downloads	  but	  not	  between	  paid	  legal	  
downloads	  and	  physical	  purchases.7	  
Another	   issue	   that	   impacts	   the	   consumer’s	   decision	   to	   pirate	   is	   the	   timing	   of	   content	  
availability	   in	   legitimate	   versus	   pirated	   channels.	   Many	   firms	   adopt	   a	   sequential	   release	  
strategy	  across	  channels.	  For	  example,	  movie	  studios	  commonly	  release	  their	  content	  first	  
in	   theaters,	   and	   later	   on	   DVD,	   digital,	   or	   television	   platforms.	   Likewise,	   music	   labels	  
commonly	   delay	   the	   availability	   of	   the	   content	   on	   streaming	   services	   relative	   to	   CD	   or	  
iTunes	  release	  dates.	  These	  business	  practices	  developed	  as	  way	  to	  maximize	  revenue	  from	  
consumers	   by	   exploiting	   the	   (negative)	   correlation	   between	   consumers’	   willingness	   to	   pay	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

6	  We	  note	  that	  this	  conclusion	  is	  generally	  consistent	  with	  Waldfogel	  (2009)	  who	  finds	  that	  increased	  viewing	  

of	  YouTube	  content	  did	  not	  significantly	  reduce	  college	  student’s	  television	  viewing,	  and	  Hu	  and	  Smith	  (2013)	  
who	  find	  that	  delayed	  available	  of	  Kindle	  eBooks	  did	  not	  significantly	  increase	  overall	  demand	  for	  print	  books.	  
7	  The	  authors	  note,	  however,	  that	  in	  the	  long	  run	  it	  is	  likely	  that	  digital	  sales	  cannibalize	  physical	  ones.	  The	  
managerial	  point	  here	  is	  not	  that	  digital	  channels	  will	  not	  affect	  sales	  in	  physical	  channels,	  but	  rather	  that	  
refusing	  to	  use	  digital	  channels	  for	  particular	  pieces	  of	  content	  is	  unlikely	  to	  forestall	  this	  cannibalization	  in	  
the	  presence	  of	  digital	  piracy	  channels.	  

33	  

for	  content	  and	  their	  willingness	  to	  wait	  for	  that	  content	  to	  become	  available	  in	  a	  particular	  
channel.	   However,	   the	   recent	   academic	   literature	   suggests	   that	   delayed	   release	   windows	  
can	   also	   encourage	   filesharing.	   As	   such,	   it	   may	   be	   time	   for	   firms	   to	   revisit	   the	   optimality	   of	  
these	  delayed	  release	  windows	  given	  the	  presence	  of	  pirated	  content.	  
Similarly,	   firms	   may	   wish	   to	   revisit	   strategies	   that	   rely	   on	   sequential	   release	   strategies	  
across	  countries.	  For	  example,	  Danaher	  and	  Waldfogel	  (2012)	  document	  that	  movie	  studios	  
have	  historically	  delayed	  box	  office	  releases	  of	  films	  across	  countries	  for	  several	  reasons,	  
including	   the	   high	   cost	   of	   film	   prints	   and	   the	   desire	   to	   have	   the	   movies’	   stars	   present	   to	  
promote	  the	  premiere.	  But	  the	  authors	  also	  note	  that,	  after	  controlling	  for	  most	  variables	  
that	   impact	   a	   film’s	   returns,	   longer	   lag’s	   between	   the	   world	   premiere	   of	   a	   film	   and	   a	  
country’s	   premiere	   are	   correlated	   with	   lower	   returns	   for	   that	   film	   in	   that	   country.	   The	  
authors	   find	   that	   this	   correlation	   grew	   more	   negative	   after	   the	   widespread	   adoption	   of	  
movie	  filesharing	  protocols	  such	  as	  BitTorrent,	  and	  that	  correlation	  grew	  more	  negative	  for	  
highly-­‐pirates	   genres	   like	   science	   fiction	   than	   for	   less	   pirated	   genres.	   They	   show	   that	   an	  
increasingly	   large	   amount	   of	   international	   piracy	   of	   films	   occurs	   in	   the	   window	   between	  
the	   U.S.	   release	   and	   foreign	   release,	   and	   conclude	   that	   shortening	   these	   release	   windows	  
could	  result	  in	  at	  least	  7%	  higher	  returns	  due	  to	  reductions	  in	  this	  pre-­‐release	  piracy.	  	  
In	   summary,	   the	   academic	   literature	   suggests	   that,	   in	   addition	   to	   various	   anti-­‐piracy	  
strategies,	  there	  are	  many	  market-­‐based	  strategies	  that	  content	  creators	  can	  use	  in	  order	  to	  
make	   their	   products	   more	   appealing	   relative	   to	   filesharing.	   Specifically,	   the	   two	   studies	  
highlighted	   above	   demonstrate	   that	   the	   ease	   of	   access	   to	   content	   through	   legitimate	  
channels,	   and	   the	   timing	   of	   legitimate	   channels	   relative	   to	   pirated	   availability	   are	  
important	  components	  of	  the	  consumer’s	  decision	  whether	  to	  pirate	  or	  purchase.	  But	  this	  
alone	  does	  not	  mean	  that	  the	  burden	  of	  competing	  with	  piracy	  should	  fall	  entirely	  on	  the	  
shoulders	   of	   producers.	   For	   example,	   producers	   could	   make	   their	   products	   vastly	   more	  
appealing	  by	  setting	  the	  price	  to	  zero,	  but	  few	  would	  suggest	  that	  this	  solution	  is	  ideal	  (in	  
such	   a	   scenario,	   as	   discussed	   above	   it	   seems	   difficult	   to	   imagine	   that	   the	   quality	   and	  
quantity	   supplied	   would	   not	   be	   affected).	   Rather,	   it	   seems	   as	   if	   a	   combined	   approach	   could	  
be	   implemented,	   with	   government	   policies	   acting	   to	   decrease	   the	   appeal	   of	   illegal	  

34	  

filesharing	   (effectively	   raising	   the	   “price”	   of	   piracy)	   while	   producers	   simultaneously	  
attempt	  to	  deliver	  products	  to	  consumers	  with	  appealing	  timing,	  convenience,	  and	  quality.	  
4. Discussion	  
Digital	  channels	  create	  new	  opportunities	  for	  the	  copyright	  industries	  in	  the	  form	  of	  new	  
channels	  to	  reach	  consumers	  and	  lower	  costs	  associated	  with	  distributing	  content	  digitally.	  
However,	   digital	   channels	   can	   also	   create	   a	   parallel	   set	   of	   challenges	   for	   the	   copyright	  
industries	   and	   potentially	   for	   society	   when	   these	   same	   digital	   channels	   and	   cost	  
advantages	  are	  used	  by	  digital	  pirates	  to	  provide	  nearly	  perfect	  copies	  of	  content	  through	  
piracy	   channels.	   The	   goal	   of	   this	   chapter	   was	   to	   outline	   the	   findings	   in	   the	   academic	  
literature	   regarding	   the	   impact	   of	   piracy	   on	   sales	   and	   the	   effectiveness	   of	   both	   market-­‐
based	  and	  policy-­‐based	  approaches	  to	  reducing	  the	  impact	  of	  piracy,	  and	  to	  raise	  important	  
policy	  issues	  that	  should	  be	  addressed	  in	  future	  academic	  research.	  	  
Our	  analysis	  concludes	  that	  the	  vast	  majority	  of	  the	  academic	  literature	  that	  has	  looked	  at	  
this	   question	   finds	   that	   piracy	   results	   in	   a	   statistically	   significant	   reduction	   in	   sales,	  
particularly	   in	   emerging	   digital	   channels.	   We	   also	   note	   that	   while	   there	   are	   a	   few	   academic	  
studies	   analyzing	  the	  broader	  social	  impact	  of	  piracy,	  standard	  economic	  theory	  suggests	  
that	   if	   piracy	   reduces	   revenue	   to	   content	   creators	   that,	   ceteris	  paribus,	   it	   will	   also	   reduce	  
the	  incentives	  to	  create	  new	  high	  quality	  content,	  and	  that	  any	  reduction	  in	  the	  supply	  of	  
creative	  content	  could	  significantly	  impact	  overall	  social	  welfare.	  	  
Finally,	  our	  review	  of	  the	  literature	  suggests	  that	  content	  creators	  and	  governments	  retain	  
many	   tools	   to	   reduce	   the	   impact	   of	   piracy	   on	   sales.	   Specifically,	   we	   argue	   that	   content	  
creators	  can	  reduce	  the	  impact	  of	  piracy	  on	  sales	  by	  treating	  piracy	  as	  a	  competing	  good,	  
and	   differentiating	   legal	   content	   from	   pirated	   content	   along	   a	   set	   of	   attributes	   that	   are	  
attractive	   to	   the	   consumer	   such	   as	   convenience,	   reliability,	   and	   usability.	   However,	   we	   also	  
argue	   that	   government	   and	   industry	   anti-­‐piracy	   interventions	   can	   also	   serve	   as	   effective	   in	  
increasing	  sales	  in	  legal	  channels	  by	  reducing	  the	  convenience,	  reliability,	  and	  usability	  of	  
pirated	  content	  relative	  to	  content	  offered	  in	  legal	  channels.	  
	  
35	  

References:	  
Adermon,	  A.,	  C-­‐Y	  Liang.	  2010.	  Piracy,	  Music,	  and	  Movies:	  A	  Natural	  Experiment.	  Working	  
Paper,	  Uppsala	  University,	  Uppsala,	  Sweden.	  
Andersen,	  B.,	  M.	  Frenz.	  2010.	  Don’t	  blame	  the	  P2P	  file-­‐sharers:	  the	  impact	  of	  free	  music	  
downloads	  on	  the	  purchase	  of	  music	  CDs	  in	  Canada.	  Journal	  of	  Evolutionary	  Economics,	  
20:715-­‐740.	  
Bai,	  J.,	  J.	  Waldfogel.	  2012.	  Movie	  Piracy	  and	  Sales	  Displacement	  in	  Two	  Samples	  of	  Chinese	  
Consumers.	  Information	  Economics	  and	  Policy,	  24(3)	  187-­‐196.	  
Barker,	  G.,	  T.	  Maloney.	  2012.	  The	  Impact	  of	  Free	  Music	  Downloads	  on	  the	  Purchase	  of	  Music	  
CDs	  in	  Canada.	  Working	  Paper	  Number	  4-­‐2012,	  Australian	  National	  University	  College	  of	  
Law.	  
Bhattacharjee,	  S.,	  R.	  Gopal,	  K.	  Lertwachara,	  J.	  Marsden.	  2006.	  Impact	  of	  Legal	  Threats	  on	  
Online	  Music	  Sharing	  Activity:	  An	  Analysis	  of	  Music	  Industry	  Legal	  Actions.	  Journal	  of	  Law	  
and	  Economics,	  49	  91–114.	  
Bhattacharjee,	  S.,	  R.	  Gopal,	  K.	  Lertwachara,	  J.	  Marsden,	  R.	  Telang.	  2007.	  The	  Effect	  of	  Digital	  
Sharing	  Technologies	  on	  Music	  Markets:	  A	  Survival	  Analysis	  of	  Albums	  on	  Ranking	  Charts.	  
Management	  Science	  53(9)	  1359-­‐1374.	  
Bilton,	  Nick.	  2012.	  Internet	  Pirates	  Will	  Always	  Win.	  New	  York	  Times,	  Sunday	  Review,	  
August	  4.	  (Available	  from	  http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/05/sunday-­‐
review/internet-­‐pirates-­‐will-­‐always-­‐win.html)	  
Boorstin,	  E.	  2004.	  Music	  Sales	  in	  the	  Age	  of	  File	  Sharing”	  Senior	  Thesis,	  Princeton	  
University,	  April	  2004.	  
Bounie,	  D.,	  M.	  Bourreau,	  P.	  Waelbroeck.	  2006.	  Piracy	  and	  the	  Demand	  for	  Films:	  Analysis	  of	  
Piracy	  Behavior	  in	  French	  Universities.	  Review	  of	  Economic	  Research	  on	  Copyright	  Issues,	  
3(2)	  15-­‐27.	  
Brynjolfsson,	  E.,	  M.	  Smith.	  2000.	  Frictionless	  Commerce?	  A	  Comparison	  of	  Internet	  and	  
Conventional	  Retailers.	  Management	  Science,	  46(4)	  563-­‐585.	  
Brynjolfsson,	  E.,	  A.	  A.	  Dick,	  M.	  D.	  Smith.	  2010.	  A	  Nearly	  Perfect	  Market?	  Differentiation	  
Versus	  Price	  in	  Consumer	  Choice.	  Quantitative	  Marketing	  and	  Economics,	  8(1)	  1-­‐33.	  
Chellappa,	  R.	  K.,	  Shivendu,	  S.	  2005.	  Managing	  Piracy:	  Pricing	  and	  Sampling	  Strategies	  for	  
Digital	  Experience	  Goods	  in	  Vertically	  Segmented	  Markets.	  Information	  Systems	  Research,	  
16(4)	  400-­‐417.	  
Conner,	  K.R.,	  R.P.	  Rumelt.	  1991.	  Software	  Piracy—	  an	  Analysis	  of	  Protection	  Strategies.	  
Management	  Science	  37	  125–139.	  

36	  

Danaher,	  B.,	  S.	  Dhanasobhon,	  M.D.	  Smith,	  R.	  Telang.	  2010.	  Converting	  Pirates	  without	  
Cannibalizing	  Purchasers:	  The	  Impact	  of	  Digital	  Distribution	  on	  Physical	  Sales	  and	  Internet	  
Piracy.	  Marketing	  Science,	  29(6)	  1138-­‐1151.	  
Danaher,	  B.,	  S.	  Dhanasobhon,	  M.	  D.	  Smith,	  R.	  Telang.	  2013.	  Understanding	  Media	  Markets	  in	  
the	  Digital	  Age:	  Economics	  and	  Methodology.	  Working	  Paper,	  Carnegie	  Mellon	  University,	  
Pittsburgh,	  PA.	  
Danaher,	  B.,	  M.	  D.	  Smith.	  2013.	  Gone	  in	  60	  Seconds:	  The	  Impact	  of	  the	  Megaupload	  
Shutdown	  on	  Movie	  Sales.	  Working	  Paper,	  Carnegie	  Mellon	  University,	  Pittsburgh,	  PA.	  
(Available	  from	  http://ssrn.com/abstract=2229349).	  
Danaher,	  B.,	  M.D.	  Smith,	  R.	  Telang,	  S.	  Chen.	  Forthcoming.	  The	  Effect	  of	  Graduated	  Response	  
Anti-­‐Piracy	  Laws	  on	  Music	  Sales:	  Evidence	  from	  an	  Event	  Study	  in	  France.	  Journal	  of	  
Industrial	  Economics,	  Forthcoming.	  
Danaher,	  B.,	  J.	  Waldfogel.	  2012.	  Reel	  Piracy:	  The	  Effect	  of	  Online	  Movie	  Piracy	  on	  Film	  Box	  
Office	  Sales.	  Working	  Paper.	  Wellesley	  College.	  Boston,	  Massachusetts.	  
De	  Vany,	  A.S.,	  W.D.	  Walls.	  2010.	  Estimating	  the	  Effects	  of	  Movie	  Piracy	  on	  Box-­‐office	  
Revenue.	  Review	  of	  Industrial	  Organization	  30:291-­‐301.	  
Hammond,	  R.G.	  2012.	  Profit	  Leak?	  Pre-­‐Release	  File	  Sharing	  and	  the	  Music	  Industry.	  
Working	  Paper,	  North	  Carolina	  State	  University,	  Raleigh,	  North	  Carolina.	  
Hann,	  I.,	  Terwiesch,	  C.	  2003.	  Measuring	  the	  frictional	  cost	  of	  online	  transactions:	  The	  case	  
of	  a	  name-­‐your-­‐own-­‐price	  channel.	  Management	  Science,	  49,	  1563–1579.	  
Helberger,	  N.,	  A.	  Huygen,	  N.	  Van	  Eijk.	  2012.	  Ups	  and	  Downs:	  Economic	  and	  Cultural	  Effects	  
of	  File	  Sharing	  on	  Music,	  Film	  and	  Games.	  Working	  Paper,	  University	  of	  Amsterdam,	  
Amsterdam,	  Netherlands.	  (Available	  from	  http://ssrn.com/abstract=2009969)	  
Hennig-­‐Thurau,	  T.,	  V.	  Henning,	  H.	  Sattler.	  2007.	  Consumer	  File	  Sharing	  of	  Motion	  Pictures.	  
Journal	  of	  Marketing.	  71(October)	  1-­‐18.	  
Hong,	  S.,	  2004.	  The	  Effect	  of	  Digital	  Technology	  on	  the	  Sales	  of	  Copyrighted	  Goods:	  
Evidence	  from	  Napster.	  Stanford	  University,	  Mimeo.	  
Hu,	  Y.,	  M.	  D.	  Smith.	  2012.	  The	  Impact	  of	  eBook	  Distribution	  on	  Print	  Sales:	  Analysis	  of	  a	  
Natural	  Experiment.	  Working	  Paper,	  Carnegie	  Mellon	  University,	  Pittsburgh,	  PA.	  (Available	  
from	  http://ssrn.com/abstract=1966115)	  
Hui,	  K.,	  I.	  Png.	  2003.	  Piracy	  and	  the	  Legitimate	  Demand	  for	  Recorded	  Music.	  Contributions	  
to	  Economic	  Analysis	  &	  Policy,	  2(1)	  Article	  11.	  
Johnson,	  E.	  J.,	  Moe,	  W.	  W.,	  Fader,	  P.	  S.,	  Bellman,	  S.,	  &	  Lohse,	  J.	  2004.	  On	  the	  depth	  and	  
dynamics	  of	  world	  wide	  web	  shopping	  behavior.	  Management	  Science,	  50,	  299–308.	  

37	  

Liebowitz,	  S.	  1985.	  Copying	  and	  Indirect	  Appropriability:	  Photocopying	  of	  Journals.	  Journal	  
of	  Political	  Economy,	  93(5)	  945-­‐957.	  
Liebowitz,	  S.	  2005.	  Pitfalls	  in	  Measuring	  the	  Impact	  of	  File-­‐Sharing.	  CESifo	  Economic	  Studies,	  
51(2-­‐3)	  435-­‐473.	  
Liebowitz,	  S.	  2007.	  How	  Reliable	  is	  the	  Oberholzer-­‐Gee	  and	  Strumpf	  Paper	  on	  File-­‐Sharing?	  
Working	  Paper	  (http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1014399).	  
Liebowitz,	  S.	  2008a.	  File-­‐Sharing:	  Creative	  Destruction	  or	  just	  Plain	  Destruction?	  Journal	  of	  
Law	  and	  Economics,	  49	  1-­‐28.	  
Liebowitz,	  S.	  2008b.	  Testing	  File-­‐Sharing's	  Impact	  by	  Examining	  Record	  Sales	  in	  Cities.	  
Management	  Science,	  54(4)	  852-­‐859.	  
Liebowitz,	  S.	  2010.	  The	  Oberholzer-­‐Gee/Strumpf	  File-­‐Sharing	  Instrument	  Fails	  the	  Laugh	  
Test.	  Working	  Paper.	  University	  of	  Texas	  at	  Dallas,	  Dallas,	  Texas.	  
Liebowitz,	  S.,	  A.	  Zentner.	  2012.	  Clash	  of	  the	  Titans:	  Does	  Internet	  Use	  Reduce	  Television	  
Viewing?	  Review	  of	  Economics	  and	  Statistics,	  94(1)	  234-­‐245.	  
Lauinger,	  T.,	  M.	  Szydlowski,	  K.	  Onarlioglu,	  G.	  Wondracek,	  E.	  Kirda,	  C.	  Kruegel.	  2013.	  
Clickonomics:	  Determining	  the	  Effect	  of	  Anti-­‐Piracy	  Measures	  for	  One-­‐Click	  Hosting.	  
Working	  Paper,	  Northeastern	  University,	  Boston,	  Massachusetts.	  
Ma,	  L.,	  A.	  Montgomery,	  P.	  Singh,	  M.D.	  Smith.	  2013.	  Pre-­‐Release	  Movie	  Piracy	  and	  Box	  Office	  
Sales:	  Estimates	  and	  Policy	  Implications.	  Working	  Paper,	  Carnegie	  Mellon	  University,	  
Pittsburgh,	  Pennsylvania.	  (Available	  from	  http://ssrn.com/abstract=1782924)	  	  
Martikainen,	  E.	  2011.	  Does	  File-­‐Sharing	  Reduce	  DVD	  Sales?	  Working	  Paper,	  University	  of	  
Turku.	  Turku,	  Finland.	  
Michel,	  N.	  2006.	  The	  impact	  of	  digital	  file	  sharing	  on	  the	  music	  industry:	  an	  empirical	  
analysis.	  Berkeley	  Electronic	  Press:	  Topics	  in	  Economic	  Analysis	  &	  Policy,	  6,	  Article	  18.	  
Mortimer,	  J.	  H.,	  A.	  Sorensen,	  C.	  Nosko.	  2012.	  Supply	  Responses	  to	  Digital	  Distribution:	  
Recorded	  Music	  and	  Live	  Performances.	  Information	  Economics	  and	  Policy,	  24(1)	  3-­‐14.	  
Oberholzer,	  F.,	  K.	  Strumpf.	  2007.	  The	  Effect	  of	  File	  Sharing	  on	  Record	  Sales.	  An	  Empirical	  
Analysis.	  Journal	  of	  Political	  Economy,	  115(1)	  1-­‐42.	  
Peitz,	  M.,	  P.	  Waelbroeck.	  2004.	  The	  Effect	  of	  Internet	  Piracy	  on	  CD	  Sales:	  Cross-­‐Section	  
Evidence.	  Review	  of	  Economic	  Research	  on	  Copyright	  Issues,	  1(2)	  71-­‐79.	  
Rob,	  R.,	  J.	  Waldfogel.	  2006.	  Piracy	  on	  the	  High	  C's:	  Music	  Downloading,	  Sales	  Displacement,	  
and	  Social	  Welfare	  in	  a	  Sample	  of	  College	  Students.	  Journal	  of	  Law	  and	  Economics,	  49(1)	  29-­‐
62.	  

38	  

Rob,	  R.,	  J.	  Waldfogel.	  2007.	  Piracy	  on	  the	  Silver	  Screen.	  Journal	  of	  Industrial	  Economics,	  
55(3)	  379-­‐393.	  
Smith,	  M.D.,	  J.	  Bailey,	  E.	  Brynjolfsson.	  2000.	  Understanding	  Digital	  Markets:	  Review	  and	  
Assessment,	  Brynjolfsson	  and	  Kahin,	  eds.	  Understanding	  the	  Digital	  Economy,	  MIT	  Press,	  
Cambridge,	  MA,	  99-­‐136.	  
Smith,	  M.D.,	  E.	  Brynjolfsson.	  2001.	  Customer	  Decision	  Making	  at	  an	  Internet	  Shopbot:	  
Brand	  Still	  Matters.	  The	  Journal	  of	  Industrial	  Economics,	  49(4)	  541-­‐558.	  
Smith,	  M.D.,	  R.	  Telang.	  2009.	  Competing	  with	  Free:	  The	  Impact	  of	  Movie	  Broadcasts	  on	  DVD	  
Sales	  and	  Internet	  Piracy.	  Management	  Information	  Systems	  Quarterly,	  33(2)	  312-­‐338.	  
Smith,	  M.D.,	  R.	  Telang.	  2010.	  Piracy	  or	  Promotion?	  The	  Impact	  of	  Broadband	  Internet	  
Penetration	  on	  DVD	  Sales.	  Information	  Economics	  and	  Policy,	  Special	  Issue	  on	  the	  
Economics	  of	  Digital	  Piracy,	  21	  289-­‐298.	  
Smith,	  M.D.,	  R.	  Telang.	  2013.	  The	  Impact	  of	  Movie	  Release	  Windows	  on	  Sales	  and	  Piracy.	  
Working	  Paper,	  Carnegie	  Mellon	  University,	  Pittsburgh,	  PA.	  
Takeyama,	  L.N.	  1994.	  The	  Welfare	  Implications	  of	  Unauthorized	  Re-­‐	  production	  of	  
Intellectual	  Property	  in	  the	  Presence	  of	  Demand	  Network	  Externalities.	  Journal	  of	  Industrial	  
Economics,	  42	  155–66.	  
Waldfogel,	  J.	  2009.	  Lost	  on	  the	  web:	  Does	  web	  distribution	  stimulate	  or	  depress	  television	  
viewing?	  Information	  Economics	  and	  Policy,	  21(2)	  158–168.	  
Waldfogel,	  J.	  2010.	  Music	  File	  Sharing	  and	  Sales	  Displacement	  in	  the	  iTunes	  Era.	  
Information	  Economics	  and	  Policy,	  22(4)	  306-­‐314.	  
Waldfogel,	  J.	  2011.	  Bye,	  Bye,	  Miss	  American	  Pie?	  The	  Supply	  of	  New	  Recorded	  Music	  Since	  
Napster.	  NBER	  Working	  Paper	  No.	  16882.	  
Zentner,	  A.	  2006.	  Measuring	  the	  Effect	  of	  File	  Sharing	  on	  Music	  Purchases.	  The	  Journal	  of	  
Law	  and	  Economics,	  49	  63–90.	  
Zentner,	  A.	  2009.	  Ten	  Years	  of	  File	  Sharing	  and	  Its	  Effect	  on	  International	  Physical	  and	  
Digital	  Music	  Sales.	  Working	  Paper,	  University	  of	  Texas	  at	  Dallas,	  Dallas,	  Texas.	  (Available	  
from	  http://ssrn.com/abstract=1724444)	  
Zentner,	  A.	  2012.	  Measuring	  the	  Impact	  of	  File	  Sharing	  on	  the	  Movie	  Industry:	  An	  Empirical	  
Analysis	  Using	  a	  Panel	  of	  Countries.	  Working	  Paper,	  University	  of	  Texas	  at	  Dallas,	  Dallas,	  
Texas.	  (Available	  from	  http://ssrn.com/abstract=1792615)	  

39	  

