NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LENDING TO LEMONS:
LANDSCHAFTS-CREDIT IN 18TH CENTURY PRUSSIA
Kirsten Wandschneider
Working Paper 19159
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19159
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2013

This paper has been prepared for Housing and Mortgage Markets in Historical Perspective, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Price V. Fishback, Kenneth Snowden, Eugene N. White (eds.), Chicago:
University of Chicago Press. I thank Timothy Guinnane and Larry Neal for comments and discussions
throughout this project. I also thank participants at the 2010 Utrecht workshop for Intermediation and
Financial Markets, the 2010 EHA meetings, the Berlin Colloquium in Economic History, the UCLA
Economic History Proseminar and the NBER-URC conference on Housing and Mortgage Markets
in Historical Perspective. Parts of this chapter were completed while in residence at the Humboldt
University in Berlin. Support from the Prussian State Archive is gratefully acknowledged. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Kirsten Wandschneider. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Lending to Lemons: Landschafts-Credit in 18th Century Prussia
Kirsten Wandschneider
NBER Working Paper No. 19159
June 2013
JEL No. G21
ABSTRACT
The following paper describes the emergence of cooperative mortgage credit associations, called
‘Landschaften’in 18th century Prussia, and thereby tells the history of mortgage-covered bonds.
Landschaften facilitatedthe refinancing of loans for Prussian estates by issuing covered bonds
(Pfandbriefe) that were jointly backed by their members. They relied on dual recourse, cooperative
structure, joint liability, and local administration to overcome asymmetric information problems
related to lending. Their emergence serves as an example for financial innovation in historical
mortgage markets. Pfandbriefe exist to this day and are known for their security. Their success goes
back to some of the historical features.
Kirsten Wandschneider
Department of Economics
Occidental College
Fowler 223
Los Angeles, CA 90041, U.S.A.
kirsten@oxy.edu

1. Introduction

Landschaften were cooperative mortgage credit associations that were created in Prussia
in the late 18th century. They facilitated the refinancing of loans to Prussian noble estates
by issuing covered bonds – Pfandbriefe – that were jointly backed by the member estates.
Landschaften were public institutions that did not have a profit motive and except for
reserve funds did not hold their own capital.

Their emergence tells the history of

mortgage-covered bonds and serves as an interesting example of financial innovation in
historical mortgage markets.

The 2007/08 financial crisis, which was preceded by a large housing bubble, has ignited
interest in mortgage-backed securities and their regulation. It has also forced American
banks to search for alternate ways to finance mortgages and reduce their dependence on
the asset-backed securities market. Before this background, the introduction of covered
bonds has been debated in the US. Covered bonds are secured directly by a pool of
collateral, typically consisting of mortgages or public sector debt. They remain on the
balance sheets of the issuing banks, as opposed to the off-balance sheet transactions for
unsecured mortgage-backed securities. Covered bonds carry a dual recourse feature,
meaning that they are backed by the collateral pool, as well as the issuers’ creditworthiness (Packer, Stever and Upper, 2007). They therefore often receive the highest
credit ratings, and are considered an alternative investment to government securities. For
the US mortgage market they have also been discussed as a way to replace the federal
guarantees in the housing market. A bill to introduce covered bond legislation was
proposed in the US in 2010 (HR 4884 and HR 5823), but it narrowly failed to be included
in the 2010 Dodd-Frank financial overhaul law. A similar bill was reintroduced in 2011
(HR 940), recommended by the House Financial Services Committee, but failed to
advance to a House vote.2 New covered bond legislation has not yet been introduced in
the 2013 congress, but industry insiders remain optimistic. Despite the lack of a cohesive
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2

For news coverage on the legislation, compare for example “An Effort to Adapt a EuropeanStyle Tool to US Mortgages” The New York Times, November 3rd, 2010 and “Geithner Backs
New Financing Approach for Mortgages” The New York Times, March 16th, 2011.

	  

2	  

US covered bond framework, individual banks have made foray into introducing covered
bonds in the US market, and foreign banks have been expanding their US denominated
covered bond offerings.3
Prior to the 1990s, covered bonds – called Pfandbriefe in German – could only be found
in Germany and Denmark, and to a lesser extent in Austria and Switzerland (Packer,
Stever, Upper, 2007). In the 1990s, covered bonds gained popularity with the
introduction of covered bond bills in most of Europe. By 2011, the size of the European
covered bond market had grown to 2.7 trillion Euros, with the German market taking up
about one third.4 Covered bonds have remained stable investment options throughout the
recent crisis. Yet few economists know about their origins and why they proved to be
such successful and safe financial instruments. This paper sheds light on the origins of
the German Pfandbrief, which serves as template for covered bonds today.
The current study is primarily focused on the five ‘old’ Landschaften as Pfandbrief
issuers: the ‘Silesian Landschaft’ founded in 1770, the Kur-und Neumärkische
Ritterschaftliche Kreditinstitut (1777), the Landschaft of Pomerania (1781), the
Landschaft of West-Prussia in Marienwerder (1787), and the Landschaft of East Prussia
in Königsberg (1788) (Hecht, 1908, p. 10). However, throughout the 19th century the
Landschafts-concept spread to other German regions.5 While the old Landschaften were
closed down at the end of World War II, others were folded into modern Pfandbriefissuing banks and some smaller institutions exist to this day.
From today’s perspective, the study of Landschaften is relevant for several reasons:
First, as mentioned above, Landschaften provide the first institutional example of how
safe bonds could be based on land (Frederiksen, 1894). They are the only mortgage
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3

See the US Covered Bond Investor Forum:
http://www.euromoneyconferences.com/uscoveredbonds.html.	  
4
European Covered Bond Council, www.ecbc.hypo.org. The German Pfandbrief-market is the
largest individual bond market in Europe (Mastroeni, 2001).
5
Other examples of Landschaften established outside of Prussia were the Ritterschaftliches
Kreditinstitut des Fürstenstums Lüneburg in Celle (1766/1790), the Hamburgische Landschaft
(1782), the Landschaft of Schleswig-Holstein (1811), Mecklenburg (1818 and 1840), Posen
(1822), Würtemberg (1825), Calenberg, Grubenhagen and Hildesheim (1825), Bremen und
Verden (1826), and the Hannoversche Landes Kreditanstalt (1840) (Frederiksen,1894).

	  

3	  

lending institutions prior to the emergence of private mortgage banks in the mid-19th
century. While mortgage credit had been an important element in European finance since
the Middle Ages, previous attempts at issuing mortgage-backed debt, including John
Law’s ‘système’, had failed.6 Landschaften and their creation of the Pfandbriefe therefore
present an example for successful innovation in financial markets.
Second, Landschaften constitute a non-bank financial institution taking on the role of a
delegated monitor.7 In this function, they enrich the understanding of German financial
history, which has predominantly been focused on the success of the large universal-style
credit banks.8 Landschaften, as non-bank financial intermediaries, were successful in
recapitalizing the impoverished Prussian estates and they provided credit and liquidity.
Third, by connecting the landholding Junker class to the financial market in Berlin,
Landschaften enabled Junkers to expand the amount of leverage taken on against their
estates, solidifying their economic dominance.9 Pfandbriefe also constituted an attractive
investment choice for capital holders. However, as Landschaften were extended to
include farmers and non-noble landholders in the mid 19th century, they expanded credit
access beyond the nobility and eased the transition from serfdom to peasant
proprietorship (Frederiksen, 1894). Landschaften thus played an important role in the
economic, political, and social development of Prussia and later the German Reich.10
In the following, this paper focuses on the first of these aspects – Landschaften as
historical example for the emergence of mortgage covered bonds. It describes the
common operational features of the Landschaften and demonstrates how they served as
financial intermediaries. Concentrating on the institutional details, the stability and
relative success of the Landschaften can be traced back to their specific design, which
helped overcome adverse selection, moral hazard, and auditing and enforcement

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
6

Compare Hofman, Postel-Vinay and Rosenthal (2009).
Compare Stiglitz (1990).
8
For a review of recent developments in research focusing on German financial history compare
for example Burhop (2006), Guinnane (2002) and Fohlin (2007).
9	  For a more recent discussion, refer to Schiller (2003) and Hess (1990).
10
Compare Gerschenkron (1946) for a discussion of the role of the Prussian Junker class for
German economics and political development.
7

	  

4	  

problems related to lending. The paper also briefly outlines the role and function of the
Landschaften for the Prussian economy.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the economic
conditions in Prussia at the time of the creation of the Landschaften. Section 3 discusses
the features of the Landschaften and pays special attention to how Landschaften
overcame the informational problems related to lending. Section 4 provides empirical
evidence of their spread and performance by looking at the number of estates that
borrowed, the number of Pfandbriefe issued and their yields. Section 5 concludes and
discusses suggestions for future work.

2. Economic Conditions in Prussia and the Creation of the Landschaften
Prior to 1848, Prussia was a monarchy, ruled by the king and supported by the
bureaucracy and the landed aristocracy – the Junkers. Prussian society was organized in a
feudal class system and the representatives of these classes, especially the Junkers,
controlled local affairs through manorial courts and police powers. The Junkers also
organized economic activity and have often been portrayed as being pre-occupied with
the status of agriculture and their estates and showing little interest in furthering industry
(Schiller, 2003; Hess, 1990).
At the end of the Seven Years War in 1763, Prussia emerged as political and economic
power in central Europe. However, economic conditions were bleak. The war had
disrupted trade and economic activity, and especially the areas east of the river Elbe had
suffered from enemy occupation and from having been the site of military operations.
Farms were neglected and landowners, farmers and peasants were short on horses, cattle,
sheep, fodder and seed (Henderson, 1962). To restore agricultural production, both
landowners and farmers were in need of long-term credits at affordable rates.
Before the war, landowners had relied on private credit intermediaries who had offered
loans at about 6% interest plus ½ to 1% commission. Traditional sources for loans
included family, local merchants, and the church (Enders, 2008). Loans were usually
granted up to half of the last sale price of the estate and would often be secured by an
	  

5	  

entry into the cadastral register of the estate (Mauer, 1907, p. 19). The foundation for the
formal use of land as collateral for loans had already been laid with the 1722 Prussian
bankruptcy law, which stipulated the publication of the cadastral register (Jessen, 1962, p.
36). Revisions of the Prussian mortgage laws in 1748 and 1750 established a seniority
ranking for debt, which secured debt registered in first position a privileged status
(Weyermann, 1910, p. 64). These legal advancements had improved creditor rights and
facilitated the verification of collateral, leading to an influx of credit to the estates.
During the Seven Years War, the credit limit had been raised above the traditional
threshold of 50% of the estate’s last sale price, contributing to the high indebtedness of
the manors by the end of the war (Mauer, 1907, p. 20). Triggered by post-war economic
distress, defaults on estate loans were rising.
The agricultural credit crisis coincided with the financial depression and general credit
crunch in the crisis of 1763. At the end of the war, speculative trading activities that had
been profitable in wartime came under pressure, leading to bank failures, especially of
the bank house De Neufville in Amsterdam. The financial crisis was transmitted through
bills of exchange from Amsterdam via Hamburg to Berlin, putting pressure on creditors
who started calling back estate loans, raising interest rates and restricting available credit.
This put additional pressure on borrowers, especially on those already experiencing
financial strain. The credit market began to resemble a lemons market, as described by
Akerlof (1970), where at rising rates only the high risk borrowers that had an immediate
need for credit remained in the market. Shrinking loan supply then led to a complete
credit collapse. The idea that the credit collapse in the crisis goes back to a lemon’s
problem and cannot solely be explained by the overall tightness of credit can be seen in
the fact that after the creation of the Landschaften, some lenders relied on the Landschaft
to carry out the estate’s assessment, but would then negotiation a private credit contract
in place of the Landschaft’s loan (Ucke, 1888). Moreover, the credit market was liquid
before the war and recovered quickly after the creation of the Landschaften.11

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
11	  Borchardt

(1961) also shows that the lack of credit in Germany was in fact not a problem of
supply but rather of insufficient matching between creditors and debtors. 	  

	  

6	  

To aid the landholders, King Frederick II had tried to halt the crisis’ transmission to
Berlin through the refusal of Wechselstrenge (holder in due course) and bailouts.
However, both measures only heightened the risk perception of creditors, as the king
colluded with the landed nobility, thus increasing pressure on lenders and worsening the
credit crunch (Schnabel and Shin, 2004). In 1765, Frederick II passed a three-year
general moratorium on all outstanding debts – principal and interest payments – but this
was insufficient to restore the estates and it did not relieve the overall shortage of capital.
At the end of the moratorium in 1768, many estates went into foreclosure and
liquidations of estates in which less than half of the outstanding debt could be recovered
were common (Weyermann, 1910, p. 66). Land as collateral no longer sufficed to attract
private loans and creditors shied away from all rural investments.
To illustrate the situation, a 1771 study of estates in the Kur- and Neumark reveals that
the average level of indebtedness of the estates was 53% of their value, but about 15% of
estates held debts over 100%, and some as high as 200% of the estate’s value (Pr. Br. Rep
23B, Neumärkische Stände, Nr. 635). In addition, mortgage rates for the safest mortgage
loans had climbed to 10% and the commission had widened to 2-3%, substantially
increasing the cost of credit (Frederiksen, 1894).
Landschaften were created in this credit vacuum. The design of the Landschaften goes
back to a proposal made by a Berlin merchant named Diederich Ernst Bühring in 1767.
Bühring had spent the early years of his career in Amsterdam, gaining experience with
trading bills of exchange that were used to finance economic activities in the Dutch
colonies. Growing up in Bremen, he was also acquainted with Bremer ‘HandfesteUrkunden’, private bearer bonds that were backed with a claim on real estate belonging
to the debtor (Jessen, 1962, p. 40-41). Knowledge of these various financial instruments
clearly influenced his thinking about mortgage credit, just as other innovations of
mortgage securitization had been influenced by existing securities.12 Bühring’s plan
combined his ideas of these various financial instruments and stipulated the creation of a
general mortgage institute for Prussia, the ‘General Landschaftskasse,’ that would
collectively hypothecate all of Prussia’s noble estates. This Landschaftskasse would issue
bearer bonds at 4% and would guarantee the convertibility and punctual payment of
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
12	  Compare	  Frehen,	  Rouwenhorst	  and	  Goetzman	  (2013)	  in	  this	  volume.	  

	  

7	  

interest rates. Estate holders would elect to be part of this mortgage bank and would pay
4.5 or 5% interest on their loans. The interest rate differential would be used for
administrative funds and to assemble a reserve fund for emergencies.13
Bühring’s proposal was presented to King Frederick II in February of 1767 who
forwarded it to his minister of finance, Etat-Minister von Hagen. Von Hagen rejected the
plan in March of 1767. But in 1768, Johann Heinrich Casimir von Carmer – the new
finance minister and minister of justice – proposed a Landschaft for all of Prussia, similar
to Bühring’s original idea. Von Carmer stipulated that all noble estates would be
mandatory members of this new organization. The Landschaft would issue covered bonds
up to half the value of all estates and guarantee the interest payments as well as the
principal, backing the Pfandbriefe with the joint liability of all member estates.
Furthermore, Pfandbriefe should circulate as quasi-money to alleviate the general
shortage of credit.
It remains ambiguous whether Bühring’s plan served as the template for von Carmer’s
proposal. However, since Bühring’s ideas laid out the key details he is often referred to as
the conceptual father of the Landschaften (Jessen, 1962, p. 38). In 1777, after the first
two Landschaften had already been established, Bühring was officially credited with the
original concept of the Landschaften (Jessen, 1962, p. 44).
Based on von Carmer’s ideas, but adapted to regional Landschaften rather than one single
institution for all of Prussia, King Frederick II passed a cabinet order to found the first of
the Landschaften, the Silesian Landschaft in August of 1769. In the summer of 1770 the
statutes of the Silesian Landschaft were ratified by the general assembly of the Silesian
feudal class, and in December of 1770 the first Pfandbriefe were issued (Jessen, 1962, p.
47).
The creation of the Silesian Landschaft took up important elements of Bühring’s as well
as Carmer’s original plans. As von Carmer had suggested, the noble estates of Silesia
were combined in a mandatory credit association and would jointly back all Pfandbriefe
issued by the Landschaft. The key concept of the Pfandbrief went back to Bühring’s
original plan, with the Landschaft guaranteeing the interest payments as well as limited
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
13

	  

Compare Bühring’s original plan, as cited in Maurer (1907, p. 190-95).

8	  

convertibility. Lenders could therefore rely on the Landschaft rather than on individual
borrowers for their payments. They would purchase standardized Pfandbriefe rather than
negotiating private loans with individual borrowers. Lenders also benefitted from reduced
transaction costs and an emerging secondary market. The key feature of the Landschaftscredit for landholders was that it was long-term and affordable, so landholders were
insured against low and variable returns. In addition, loans could not be called-in by the
lender. This provided additional stability and security for the debtors.

3. The Design of the Landschaften and their Lending Mechanisms
The key features of the Pfandbriefe can be seen on the example of a Pfandbrief issued by
the Silesian Landschaft on June 24th, 1774, shown in Figure 1.

The picture displays a

privileged Pfandbrief over 30 Reichstaler Courant, at 14 Reichstaler per mark fine silver.
It is made out for the estate named ‘Jaschkowitz’ in the district of Toste in Upper Silesia,
and it is backed by all combined estates in Upper Silesia. Interest was payable in cash in
Cosel or Breslau and the receipts of the bi-annual interest payments were stamped on the
Pfandbrief. Interest payments were carried out through 1923 (noted on the back, not
shown) and in 1929 this Pfandbrief was stamped worthless and exchanged for a new gold
Pfandbrief.
(Insert Figure 1 here.)
Following this example, this section details the design of the Landschaften and explains
their role in the credit market. It also outlines the special organizational features that
Landschaften relied on to overcome the asymmetric information problems related to
lending.

3.1 The Design of the Landschaften
The design of the Landschaften anchored their function as intermediaries between lenders
and borrowers. To obtain a loan, a landholder and member of the Landschaft would place
a request with the Landschaft. The local assessor, who was also a member of the
	  

9	  

Landschaft, would estimate the value of the estate and determine a credit limit that was
either based on the net profit of the estate (Grundsteuerreinertrag) or its last sale price.
After the credit was granted, the Pfandbriefe were handed to the estate holder the
following Christmas or Johanni (Saint John the Baptist, June 24th). Estate holders could
present these bonds to the Landschaft and ask to be paid in cash after a period of six
months. Alternatively estate holders could sell the bonds directly in the open market.
Bonds were initially issued at 4% and borrowers had to commit to paying bi-annual
interest payments in cash to the Landschaft, plus an added ½-1% for administrative
purposes.14
(Insert Figure 2 here.)
To raise funds, the Landschaft sold Pfandbriefe to creditors, especially urban merchant
bankers that were seeking investment opportunities. Pfandbriefe paid 3.5-4% interest to
the lenders and were first sold at their nominal value. With rising popularity their initial
sale prices demanded a premium of ¼ to ½% and it became easier for landholders to sell
them directly to investors rather than cashing them in with the Landschaft. Figure 2
describes the transaction, assuming that the Landschaft was presented with the
Pfandbrief, Figure 3 describes how borrowers could sell their Pfandbriefe directly. In
both cases the Landschaft remained responsible for coupon payments to the lender and
the borrower made regular bi-annual interest payments to the Landschaft, so that the
creditor would always interact with the Landschaft and not have to seek out individual
borrowers for payment.
(Insert Figure 3 here.)
By interfacing with lenders and borrowers, Landschaften introduced an artificial supply
of credit, as they stood ready to extend Pfandbriefe to borrowers in need. Similarly, on
the demand side, the Landschaft sold Pfandbriefe to creditors that were looking for safe
investment opportunities.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
14

The 4% interest rate was adjusted later to 3.5%, then raised again. Over their lifespan, most
Landschaften created different issues of bonds, all priced between 3.5% and 5%.

	  

10	  

Landschaften reduced transaction costs as they pooled loans and created a uniform debt
instrument. They could realize economies of scale and scope by including up to 2,500
borrowers and reaching deeper into the pool of creditors.15 As the Pfandbriefe were
standardized, this also offered creditors an emerging secondary market that increased
liquidity. Pfandbriefe of the Prussian Landschaften were quoted on the Berlin Bourse and
were available to a wide audience of lenders.
The following section now turns to the institutional features that the Landschaften
incorporated in order to address the information asymmetry problems related to lending
and in order to operate as effective credit providers.

3.2 Adverse Selection

Adverse selection is an ex ante informational problem which captures that under certain
conditions only borrowers that are a poor credit risk will be attracted into a market. In
response, lenders will not be willing to supply capital to this pool of ‘lemons’. As
described in section 2, this corresponds to the historical situation following the Seven
Years War and the credit crisis of 1763. To overcome adverse selection, the old
Landschaften, except for the Landschaft of the Kur- und Neumarkt, automatically
included all noble estates situated within the geographic expanse of the Landschaft.16
While this did not change the destitute economic situation of the estates, it gave all
estates equal credit access at fixed interest rates and thus broadened the pool of potential
borrowers. Since all estates that were part of the Landschaft were also included in the
joint liability, landowners had an incentive to rely on the Landschaft for credit, increasing
participation and again improving the borrower pool.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
15

By the early 20th Century, the East Prussian Landschaft even included over 15,000 estates that
had issued Pfandbriefe.
16
Landschaften built on the history of earlier financial functions of Prussian feudal organizations,
which had provided banking services to its members. However, most of these old credit banks
had been shut down by a decree of the king in 1717. Only the ‘Kreditwerk der Churmärkischen
Landschaft’ had survived as the last of these old credit banks. It functioned as the credit institute
for the Prussian upper class and remained in operation until 1820, issuing bonds that were traded
on the exchanges of Berlin and Vienna (Jessen, 1962, p. 48).

	  

11	  

In exchange for the compulsory membership, all members of the Landschaften held a
‘right to credit’, so the Landschaft could not discriminate against individual estates.
Therefore, a key to prevent adverse selection was the determination of the credit limit and
the correct assessment of the estate to guarantee collateral. The assessment of the member
estates prior to granting a loan followed two different mechanisms. Starting from the last
sale price of the estate, the landholder could obtain a loan up to one quarter, one third or
one half of this price, depending on when the sale had taken place. Alternatively, the net
profit of the estate (Grundsteuerreinertrag) was assessed by a tax commissioner, and the
estate holder could then obtain a loan of 15-20 times the assessed amount (Altrock, 1914,
p. 25).17 Though in practice, the majority of the loans were based on previous sale prices,
extending loans based on the net profit guaranteed that the cash-flow of the estate would
be sufficient to cover the interest payments on the loan, regardless of the value of the
estate. To ensure a conservative assessment, the assessor could even be held personally
liable for losses in the case of a too generous assessment (Weyermann, 1910).
Pfandbriefe were entered into the cadastral register of the estates and took precedence
over all other outstanding debt, holding the preferred first debtor position. In cases where
existing debt could not be extinguished prior to the Landschafts loan, the amount of
capitalized debt was subtracted from the maximum loan value. But often landholders
could exchange Pfandbriefe for existing debt up to the credit limit (Altrock, 1914, pp.
60/61). Pfandbriefe were also used to service standing obligations such as rent payments
or payments resulting from inheritance or estate settlements (Ritterschaftliche Haupt
Direktion, Rep 23A Kurmärkische Stände).
3.3 Moral Hazard
Moral hazard constitutes an interim problem in the lending process in which borrowers
that have received funds engage in risky behavior, for example choosing a more risky
investment project. Moral hazard can be avoided through improved incentives and
monitoring. Moral hazard is also reduced when borrowers have to put up significant
collateral. Without microdata on individual loans, it is hard to verify to what extent moral
hazard presented a problem for the Landschaften. Generally, funds are described as being
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
17

	  

The same net profit measure was also used to determine tax liability of individual estates.

12	  

put to productive use, such as purchases of new agricultural machinery or construction or
renovation of houses and barns on the estates.
Some indication for moral hazard might be the practice by which some landholders used
the proceeds of the Landschaften loans to purchase additional land, which then again
could be mortgaged. Contemporaries worried that the Landschaften set off a speculative
boom in real estate. Changes in ownership of estates were frequent between 1780 and
1806 and the noble estates were consolidated in the 1780s and 1790s (Mauer, 1907, p.
21). In 1789 the King passed a law for Silesia that limited the extent at which new estates
could be purchased with Pfandbriefe. However, this law was difficult to enforce and was
abolished again in 1791. While the Landschaften failed to set up an effective mechanism
to prevent land speculation, the practice appeared to have attracted fewer followers over
time. A case study of the East Prussian Landschaft finds little systematic estate
enlargement using Landschafts-credit between the years 1806-34 (Wandschneider, 2013).
The key mechanism for Landschaften to address moral hazard was collateral and the
principle of joint unlimited liability. Issuing the Pfandbrief, two legal obligations were
incurred, which mirror the dual recourse feature of today’s Pfandbriefe (Mauer, 1907, p.
3-4). First, the owner of the Pfandbrief held a claim against the estate to which the
Pfandbrief was tied. This claim was a charge against the land on which the estate was
situated, not against any private property or assets of the owner, but in ensured that each
borrower brought in adequate collateral. Second, the Pfandbrief constituted a claim
against the Landschaft, meaning that the Pfandbrief was backed by all liquid assets of the
Landschaft as well as all land of the member estates of the Landschaft, whether they had
borrowed money or not. This dual recourse can also clearly be seen on the Pfandbrief
example, shown in Figure 1.
The joint liability feature, that the Pfandbrief was backed by all member estates,
resembled group-lending contracts used in modern microfinance groups, as well as in the
design of the credit cooperatives founded in mid-19th century Germany by Friedrich
Raiffeisen and Hermann Schulze-Delitzsch.18 Even tough the joint liability appears to
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
18

A detailed discussion of the Raiffeisen credit cooperatives can be found in Guinnane (2001,
2002).

	  

13	  

have never been called on in practice, it served as an important signal, at least in the early
years of the Landschaftens’ existence. It also increased the incentive for neighbors to
monitor each other (Hagedorn, 1978, p.58). Since Landschaften were relatively large
institutions, local monitoring was not always easy. But all members of the Landschaft
belonged to the same social class, making the group fairly homogeneous and conscious of
social stigma. Moreover, Landschaften built on the existing political and social order,
continuing and often replacing the organization of the ‘Stände’, which had historically
ensured representation of the nobles.

This reinforced the relationship between the

Landschaft and the pre-existing social structure. Landschaften were also subdivided in
smaller regional groups for administrative purposes. For example the Landschaft for East
Prussia was split into three administrative regions (Angerburg, Königsberg and
Mohrungen), each of which again was divided into 3-5 districts.19 These smaller
administrative units reinforced monitoring, as the joint liability first extended to the
district, then to the administrative region, and then the Landschaft as a whole. One
advantage of the Landschaften over private lenders laid in the fact that all monitoring was
now relegated to this institutional structure within a central authority.
3.4 Auditing and Enforcement
To help with auditing and enforcement, Landschaften relied heavily on local expertise
and used local officers to inspect the estates and set the maximum loan amount.20
Landschaften were self-governed with elected officials coming from the membership of
estate holders. Landschaften were managed by the ‘General-Landschaftsdirektion’ (board
of directors), headed by the Generallandschaftsdirektor (general director), elected for six
years. Next to the director worked a corporate counsel, which also had judicial powers to
be able to carry out foreclosure of delinquent estates. In addition, three
‘Generallandschaftsräte’ with full voting rights were part of the board of directors. These
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
19

The Prussian administrative units of ‘Department’ and ‘Kreis’ are frequently translated as
administrative district and county, respectively. Eddie (2008) argues that the terms administrative
region for Department and district for Kreis are more accurate representations. Also, the
Landschafts Departments and Kreise do not exactly follow the administrative units.
20
Landschaften also refrained from valuing life stock early on, as it was found that lifestock was
too variable and estate owners would ‘borrow’ life stock for the time of the assessment
(Frederiksen, 1894).

	  
	  

14	  

had to be estate holders in the Landschaft and be fully employed in agriculture. In
contrast to the director and the counsel, which were employed by the Landschaft, all
other positions were honorary. By relying on voluntary labor, Landschaften kept
administrative costs to a minimum and reinforced the role of Landschaften members as
stakeholders of the institution.
The board of directors carried out the important decision-making and the day-to-day
operations of the Landschaft. Members of the directorship were elected by a supervisory
board, called ‘Landschaftsausschuss’, that represented the membership of the Landschaft.
It included 20-25 members, and met at least once a year to supervise the activities of the
board of directors (Jessen, 1962, p. 119). Over time Landschaften supplemented the
Landschaftsdirektion with additional tax and accounting committees that assisted with
assessing the estates and supervising financial matters.
To strengthen their enforcement mechanism and provide a tool to address defaulting
estate holders, Landschaften had the right to directly foreclose on estates that were in
arrear with their payments. The foreclosure process provided a credible threat and even if
not frequently, was employed on a regular basis. Due to the relatively conservative loan
amount of half the tax value of the estate, Landschaften were usually able to cover the
amount of the outstanding loan with the sale price.
3.5 Additional Measures

Additional mechanisms, which boosted the stability of the Landschaften, were the
accumulation of reserve funds, and over time, the introduction of amortization schedules.
In addition to the land provided as collateral for the Pfandbriefe, Landschaften built
reserve funds that were used to cover unexpected operating costs or irregular losses.
Reserve funds were never used as a source of loan funds, but they represented a form of
forced saving that added a level of security to the Pfandbriefe. Over time, all
Landschaften built sizable reserve funds, however, these assets were only used for
emergencies and not to issue credit. The capital accumulated by the Landschaften
resulted from the interest differential paid by the borrowers, as well as capital injected by
the crown. For the Silesian Landschaft, for example, King Frederick II extended starting
	  

15	  

capital in form of a loan of 200,000 Talers at 2% interest (Frederiksen, 1894). However,
not all Landschaften received this form of direct assistance. Moreover, the Landschaften
seemed not to depend on these loans for their day-to-day operations but could count on
official support in times of a crisis. The close relationship between the king and the
Landschaften thus added an extra layer of security. It also served as a form of ‘bail-in’ of
the king who had an interested in supporting the Junkers, thus supported the Landschaft,
which ultimately also benefitted the creditors.
Landschaften varied to the extent at which the borrowers had to amortize their existing
debt. While the Landschaften paid out the principal of the loans on demand, originally,
the individual borrowers were only obliged to make regular interest payments to the
Landschaft and the ‘old’ Landschaften did not carry provisions how the existing debt
should be retired. Only over time did Landschaften introduce obligatory amortization
schedules (Frederiksen, 1894). Between 1770 and 1777 borrowers could opt to retire their
debt through bond payments as well as cash payments to the Landschaft. In 1777 the bylaws of the Silesian Landschaft stipulated that debts could only be extinguished with
Pfandbriefe of the corresponding interest schedules. Only after 1785 cash payments were
permitted again. The lack of amortization was seen as a structural weakness of the
Landschaften since extinguishing outstanding debt was cumbersome. In the design of the
subsequent Landschaften, for example Posen in 1818, provisions to pay off the debt were
included from the start (Mauer, 1907, p. 168). For the ‘old’ Landschaften, however,
estate holders resisted the amortization, especially during the agrarian crisis of the 1820s.
But as economic conditions improved, the West and the East Prussian Landschaft began
creating amortization funds to extinguish some of the existing Pfandbriefe. In 1832, the
East Prussian Landschaft even raised the interest payments for the estate holders by 1/6%
(Mauer, 1907, p. 169). But in practice, these funds were nothing but expanded reserve
funds for the Landschaft as they were never used to relieve the estates of their debt.
Mandatory amortization by the estate holders was only introduced in the 1920s. (Jessen,
1962, p. 78).

	  

16	  

4. Empirical evidence
The following section presents empirical evidence on Landschaften membership, number
of loans, and Pfandbrief yields that is consistent with the description of the credit market
above, and that highlights the importance of the institutional features of the Landschaften.
This evidence remains descriptive since data are scarce and often inconsistent.
Nevertheless it shows that overall the Landschaften were successful in providing credit to
the Prussian nobility. Contemporaries describe the Landschaften as averting liquidations
of Junker estates and stabilizing economic conditions. For example, Frederiksen (1894)
cites that King Frederick II claims in his memoirs that the Silesian Landschaft saved 400
of the best families of the province from ruin. In fact, Landschaften lowered the cost of
credit for agricultural estates from about 8% before the Seven Years War to below 5%,
and Pfandbriefe circulated widely soon after their issue. While in Silesia, interest rates in
1770 had been 6, 8 and 10%, rates averaged 4.66% in 1777 and 4% in 1787 (Jessen,
1962, p. 67).

Homer and Sylla (1996, p. 258) show that interest rates in Prussia

throughout the 19th century were consistently lower than in neighboring regions.
Pfandbriefe were deemed extremely safe investment choices, often at par with
government securities. They also increased the value of the estates that could be used as
collateral and brought a stabilization and eventual rise in the price of land. In 1770, the
value of all noble estates in Silesia was estimated to be 60 million Reichstaler, of which
22 million were registered debts. Already by 1790, the value of the estates had doubled
and Pfandbriefe valued at 15 million Reichstaler were circulating (Jessen, 1962, p.68).
(Insert Figure 4 here.)
The number of estates that borrowed through the Landschafts-system (Figure 4) rose
steeply, especially from the mid 19th century onward. With it also the total amount of
Pfandbriefe increased (Figure 5), emphasizing their popularity in financial markets.
Pfandbriefe were also popular investment choices abroad, to the degree that the
government worried about interest payments that were paid to foreigners and tried to curb
foreign sales (Franz, 1902, p. 26).
(Insert Figure 5 here.)
	  

17	  

The steep rise in the number of estates for the Landschaft of East Prussia and the amount
of Pfandbriefe issued corresponded to the changes in regulations of the Landschaften.
Over time, they expanded to include smaller estates and farms. In 1808 the East Prussian
Landschaft decided to include non-noble estates that belonged to the Köllmer, a group of
free farmers. Beginning in 1849, the East Prussian Landschaft included all estates of a
minimum tax value of 1500 marks (Altrock, 1914, p. 108). But the effect of the
Landschaften for these smaller farms remained limited as large estates took more
advantage of the Landschafts-credit than smaller ones. In the second half of the 19th
century the system of Landschaften solidified and expanded not just in terms of members
but also in terms of financial services offered. Many Landschaften added additional
services in the form of Darlehnskassen (savings and loan associations) and insurance
companies (mostly fire and life insurance). In 1860, for example, the East Prussian
Landschaft added the Landschaftliche Darlehnskasse to encourage savings by its
members. But not only individual Landschaften, also the whole network expanded.
Similar to the central organizations of the Raiffeisen credit cooperatives, a CentralLandschaft for all Prussian States was founded in 1873.21 This central organization was a
cooperation of twelve regional Landschaften. The Central-Landschaft issued unified
Central-Pfandbriefe, which were thought to be more appealing to a wider group of
buyers. However, since the individual Landschaften still issued their own Pfandbriefe
alongside the Central-Pfandbriefe, the Central-Landschaft’s success remained below
expectations (Jessen, 1962, p. 92).
In practice, Landschaften issued two different kinds of Pfandbriefe. First, ‘Capitalsbriefe’
(capital bonds), which constituted 90% of the total share of all Pfandbiefe and second
‘Realisationsbriefe’ (realized bonds, 10% of the total). Realisationsbriefe could be
exchanged on demand at the Landschaft into Prussian Taler. They were issued in smaller
denominations of 20-100 Talers, while Capitalsbriefe were denominated up to 10,000
Talers. For Capitalsbriefe, there was a six-months exchange period after which the
Pfandbriefe could be cashed in (Jessen, 1962, p. 72). The Landschaft thus needed to hold
reserves in the amount of all issued Realisationsbriefe. At an exchange rate of 14 Talers
to a mark of fine silver, Pfandbriefe were directly tied to the monetary base, but backed
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
21

	  

Compare Guinnane (1997) on the Raiffeisen centrals.

18	  

by land rather than specie. They helped expand the money supply similar to the early 18th
century US land banks, which had issued bank notes tied to mortgages (Thayer, 1953).
Often borrowers could pay obligations directly with the acquired Pfandbriefe, without
cashing them in at the Landschaft.
Zöllner writes in his “Letters about Silesia” in 1793, describing the function of the
Pfandbriefe as quasi-money:
“Und im Grunde war es für die Provinz so gut, as wenn 14 Millionen Taler bares
Geld in dieselbe gekommen wäre, weil diese Summe in Pfandbriefen vorhanden
war, deren man sich zu allen Zahlungen eben so sicher und mit noch grösserer
Bequemlichkeit als der Klingenden Münze bedienen konnte” (Zöllner, p. 399)
Translation: “In effect, it was as if 14 million Taler in cash had entered the
province, as this sum was available in Pfandbriefe, which could be used for all
payments with the same security and even greater convenience as coins.”

(Insert Figure 6 here.)
Figure 6 shows the development of Pfandbrief yields for the five old Landschaften in
comparison with the 4% Prussian sovereign bond. The movements of these yields reflect
the major economic and political events of Prussia at the time, but their peacetime overall
stability also speaks to the success of the Landschaften. As can be seen from the graph,
Pfandbriefe frequently traded at par with or above the Prussian state bonds.
All Landschaften initially issued 4% Pfandbriefe, which were converted to 3.5% in the
1830s to follow general market trends. From the 1830s forward, Landschaften issued a
broader selection of Pfandbriefe with varying interest rates (3.5% - 5%) to compete with
changing conditions in the credit markets.
The yields of the Silesian Landschaft remained below 4% from the outset and were stable
until the beginning of the Napoleonic Wars, when the yields of all Landschaften spiked.
The Wars halted agricultural productivity in Prussia. They also burdened East Prussia
with approximately 260 million marks in wartime costs (Altrock, 1914, p. 110). In
	  

19	  

response, Landschaften members were granted extensions on their interest payments
between 1807 and 1818 (Ristau, 1992). Also, after 1807, both the Silesian Landschaft
and the East Prussian Landschaft incorporated territories of the Prussian State as member
estates. This allowed Prussia to request Pfandbriefe backed by these territories and raise
funds to pay off war debts. Thus the Silesian Landschaft, as well as the East Prussian,
were actively used to expand the government budget and the fiscal debt with the
Landschaft was not amortized until 1900. However, other Landschaften refused to accept
State territories into their domain, thus assuring their independence from the Prussian
State (Jessen, 1962, p. 74).
The years 1807-1815 were also years of agricultural reform for Prussia. Following the
proposals by Karl August von Hardenberg and Heinrich Friedrich Karl Freiherr von Stein
the old feudal system was abolished and farmers were liberated (Jessen, 1962, p. 84). As
part of the reforms, noble estate holders were compensated for the loss of agricultural
labor with part of the land that had belonged to farmers. The effect of these reforms on
the value of the estates and thus the value of the Pfandbriefe was unclear at first. The
loss of workers reduced the productivity of the estates, but the additional land again could
be used as collateral for the issue of new Pfandbriefe (Mauer, 1907, p. 52).
The Pfandbrief yields for all five Landschaften recovered with the end of the War and,
with the exception of spikes for East and West Prussia in the early 1820s, which were
related to the agricultural crisis and the loss of British grain exports, remained stable until
the 1848 revolution. Beginning the in 1840s, the Landschaften struggled to attract capital
due to the rising need for credit in industry, especially railroads and mining (Altrock,
1914, p. 113). Frequent Pfandbrief conversions also lowered their popularity in the
1860s. However, prices steadily recovered again after the German unification of 1871,
trading close to par in the 1880s and 1890s.
(Insert Figure 7 here.)
Another measure for the stability of the Landschaften are data on interest arrears that the
Landschaften accumulated as distressed borrowers failed to make regular payments
(shown in Figure 7). The outstanding interest arrears mirror the changes in the yields.
Arrears are generally low for the period after the 1830s, speaking to the Landschaftens’
	  

20	  

stability and their overall successful monitoring of loans. Arrears spike, especially for the
Landschaft of East Prussia, for the years before 1815, related to the suspension of
payments during the War. They rise again, predominantly for East and West Prussia
during the early 1820s, mirroring the yield movement and reflecting the agricultural crisis
that affected the estates (Ucke, 1888).
With rising interest arrears, Landschaften did make use of their right to take estates with
nonperforming loans into receivership and ultimately foreclose estates to recover the
outstanding loan amounts. Systematic data on estates in receivership and foreclosures are
lacking, but for 1829 for example, the Acta of the Königliche Oberpräsident of Prussia
list 30 estates in receivership in East Prussia and 32 estates in receivership in West
Prussia (XX.HA Hist. Sta. Königsberg). Data on West Prussia for the period after 1870
shows that Landschaften did make use of this enforcement mechanism and foreclosed on
anywhere between 2 to 23 estates in almost every year after 1870 (Hecht, 1908).
Therefore, the takeover of the estates was by no means and empty threat and speaks to
the effective design of the Landschaften to address moral hazard, as described in the
previous section.

5. Conclusion
Landschaften were public non-profit institutions that issued covered bonds and
formalized the mortgage market in Prussia, beginning in the second half of the 18th
century. They were effective in providing credit to Prussian noble estates and by
demonstrating how bonds could be safely backed with land served as an early
predecessor for credit cooperatives as well as private mortgage banks. They also proved
extremely durable, establishing an asset class of mortgage-backed securities –
Pfandbriefe – that has remained popular to this day.
Landschaften assumed an important financial intermediary function connecting the
landholding but cash-poor Junker class with credit sources in Berlin. Landschaften
reduced transaction costs for lenders and borrowers and relied on dual recourse, joint
liability, local monitoring and forced membership to avoid problems of moral hazard and
	  

21	  

adverse selection. They also cooperated with the crown, with some Landschaften even
mortgaging crown lands and thus directly supporting government finances. Through the
Landschaften, Junkers could easily take on large amounts of debt that were available
long-term at comparatively cheap rates. The creation of a standardized debt instrument
also enabled a growing secondary market, which increased the liquidity of mortgage
loans. Since Pfandbriefe were issued in various denominations they also circulated as
cash equivalent and helped expand the monetary base.
Then as now, the stability of the Pfandbriefe was anchored in their one to one
correspondence to an underlying asset, which was guaranteed by the institution of the
Landschaften. The dual recourse feature, which gave bondholders the double security of
the underlying asset and the guarantee of the Landschaft as issuing institution, remains
the key feature of Pfandbriefe today. The historical example highlights successful
financial innovation but also shows, which institutional features made covered bonds
successful to this day. Future research plans to investigate the performance and loan
portfolios of individual Landschaften and quantify the effect of the Landschaften on the
economic and political development of Prussia.

	  

22	  

Archival Sources:
Brandeburgisches Landes Hauptarchiv, Potsdam:
Pr. Br. Rep 23B, Neumärkische Stände, Nr. 635
Ritterschaftliche Haupt Direktion, Rep 23A Kurmärkische Stände
Tableau der mit Pfandbriefen belegten Domänen (1817). Staatsarchiv Potsdam, Pr. Br.
Rep 23A Kurmärkische Stände C 2919.
Geheimes Staatsarchiv Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin Dahlem:
I.HA Rep 93B Nr 3267 Ministerium der öffentlichen Arbeiten in Pommern
XX.HA, Hist. StA Königsberg, Rep 2 Oberpräsident der Provinz Ostpreussen I, Titel 22,
Nr 47

References:
Altrock, Walther v. (1914). Der Landwirtschaftliche Kredit in Preussen, I. Die
Ostpreussische Landschaft. Verlagsbuchhandlung Paul Parey, Berlin.
Akerlof, George (1970). The Market for “Lemons”: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
Mechanism. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 84, Nr. 3, pp. 488-500.
Brämer, H. (1867). “Grundkreditinstitute in Preussen.” Zeitschrift des Statistischen
Buraeaus, Vol. VII, p. 216.
Borchardt, Knut (1961). “Zur Frage des Kapitalmangels in der ersten Hälfte des 19.
Jahrhunderts in Deutschland.” Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik, Vol. 173,
pp. 401-421.
Burhop, Carsten (2006). “Did Banks Cause the German Industrialization?” Explorations
in Economic History, Vol. 43, pp. 39-63.
Eddie, Scott M. (2008). Landownership in Eastern Germany before the Great War, a
Quantitative Analysis. Oxford University Press, New York.
Enders, Lieselott (2008). Die Uckermark: Geschichte einer kurmaerkischen Landschaft
vom 12. bis zum 18. Jahrhundert. Veroeffentlichungen des Brandenburgischen
Landeshauptarchivs, Berliner Wissenschafts-Verlag, Berlin.
Fohlin, Caroline (2007). Finance Capitalism and Germany’s Rise to Industrial Power,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

	  

23	  

Franz, Robert (1902). Die landschaftlichen Kreditinstitute in Preussen, ihre rechtlichen
und finanziellen Verhältnisse und ihre geschichtliche Entwicklung, Verlag F Schneider &
Co., Berlin.
Frehen, Rik, K. Geert Rouwenhort and William N. Goetzmann (2013). “Dutch Securities
for American Land Speculation in the late-Eighteenth Century,” forthcoming in Housing
and Mortgage Markets in Historical Perspective, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Price V. Fishback, Kenneth Snowden, Eugene N. White (eds.), University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Frederiksen, D. M. (1894). “Mortgage Banking in Germany,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 47-76.
Gerschenkron, Alexander (1946). Bread and Democracy in Germany. Cornell University
Press, Ithaca, N.Y. (1989).
Guinnane, Timothy (1997). “Regional Organizations in the German Cooperative Banking
System in the late 19th Century.” Research in Economics, Vol. 51, pp. 251-274.
Guinnane, Timothy (2001). “Cooperatives as Information Machines: German Rural
Credit Cooperatives, 1883-1914.” Journal of Economic History, Vol. 61, No. 2, pp. 366389.
Guinnane, Timothy (2002). “Delegated Monitors, Large and Small: Germany’s Banking
System, 1800-1914.” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 40, No. 1, pp. 73-124.
Hagedorn, Fred (1978). Die Landschaften, eine rechtsgeschichtliche Darstellung der
preussischen Agrarkreditinstitute. Inaugural Dissertation, Freiburg, Germany.
Hecht, F. (1908). Die Organisation des Bodenkredits in Deutschland. Dritte Abteilung,
Erster Band, von Duncker & Humbolt, Leipzig, Germany.
Henderson, W. O. (1962). “The Berlin Commercial Crisis of 1763.” The Economic
History Review, New Series, Vol. 15, No. 1, pp. 89-102.
Hess, Klaus (1990). Junker und Bürgerliche Grossgrundbesitzer im Kaiserreich:
Landwirtschaftlicher Grossbetrieb, Grossgrundbesitz und Familienfideikomiss in
Preussen. Historische Forschungen, Steiner.
Hoffman, Philip, Gilles Postel-Vinay and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal (2011). “History,
Geography, and the Markets for Mortgage Loans in Nineteenth-Century France.” In Dora
Costa and Naomi Lamoreaux (eds.), Understanding Long-Run Economic Growth:
Geography, Institutions and the Knowledge Economy, University of Chicago Press,
Chicgago, IL.
Homer S. and R. Sylla (1996). A History of Interest Rates, Rutgers University Press, New
Brunswick.
Jessen, Hartwig (1962). Das Landschaftliche Kreditwesen. Gabler, Wiesbaden, Germany.

	  

24	  

Mastroeni, O. (2001). “Pfandbrief-style Products in Europe.” BIS papers (5), Basel, Bank
of International Settlements.
Mauer,
Hermann
(1907).
Das
Landschaftliche
Kreditwesen
Preussens,
Agrargeschichtlich und Volkswirtschaftlich Betrachtet. Verlag Karl J. Trübner,
Strassburg.
Meitzen, August (1868). Der Boden und die Landwirthschaftlichen Verhältnisse des
Preussischen Staates. Prussia, Finanzministerium, Ministerium für Landwirtschaft,
Domänen und Forsten.
Ostpreussische Landschaft (1913). 125 Jahre Ostpreussische Landschaft. Königsberg.
Packer, Frank, Ryan Stever and Christian Upper (2007). “The Covered Bond Market.”
BIS Quarterly Review, Basle.
Ristau, Bernd (1992). “Adelige Interessenpolitik in Konjunktur und Krise. Ein Beitrag
zur Geschichte der landschaftlichen Kreditkasse Ostpreussens 1788-1835.” in:
Denkhorizonte und Handlungsspielräume: Historische Studien für Rudolf Vierhaus zum
70. Geburtstag, Rudolf Vierhaus (ed.), Wallstein Verlag, Göttingen.
Schiller, Rene (2003). Vom Rittergut zum Grossgrundbesitz: Ökonomische und Soziale
Transformationsprozesse der ländlichen Eliten in Brandenburg im 19. Jahrhundert.
Akademie Verlag, Berlin.
Schnabel, Isabel and Hyun Song Shin (2004). “Liquidity and Contagion: The Crisis of
1763,” Journal of the European Economic Association. Vol. 2, No. 6, pp. 929-968.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1990). “Peer Monitoring in Credit Markets.” World Bank Economic
Review, IV, pp. 351-66.
Thayer, Theodore (1953). “The Land-Bank System in the American Colonies.” Journal
of Economic History, Vol. 13, No.2, pp. 145-59
Ucke, Arnold (1888). Die Agrarkrisis in Preussen während der zwanziger Jahre dieses
Jahrhunderts. Max Niemeyer, Halle.
Wandschneider, Kirsten (2013). “Landschaften as Credit Purveyors – The Example of
East Prussia.” Unpublished working paper. Occidental College.
Weyermann, Moritz (1910). Zur Geschichte des Immobiliarkreditwesens in Preussen mit
besonderer Nutzanwendung auf die Theorie der Bodenverschuldung. Braunsche
Hofbuchdruckerei und Verlag, Karlsruhe.
Zöllner, Johann Friedrich (1793). Briefe über Schlesien. Maurer, Berlin.

	  

25	  

Figure 1: An Example of a Pfandbrief

Courtesy of Auktionshaus Tschöpe

	  

26	  

Figure 2: Borrowing Intermediated by the Landschaft – Version 1
	  
Loan
application
Pfandbrief
Pfandbrief
Borrower
(Junkers)

Cash
Payment
Landschaft

Pfandbrief

Lender
(Urban
Capitalist)

Interest
Payment

Cash
Payment
Interest
Payment

	  

27	  

Figure 3: Borrowing Intermediated by the Landschaft – Version 2

Loan application
Pfandbrief

Borrower
(Junkers)

Landschaft
Interest Payment

Pfandbrief
Cash

Interest Payment
Lender
(Urban Capitalist)

	  

28	  

Figure 4 – Number of Estates that Issued Pfandbriefe
16000	  
14000	  

Number	  of	  Estates	  

12000	  
10000	  

Silesia	  
Kur-­‐&Neumark	  

8000	  

Pomerania	  
6000	  

Westprussia	  
Eastprussia	  

4000	  

0	  

1770	  
1777	  
1784	  
1791	  
1798	  
1805	  
1812	  
1819	  
1826	  
1833	  
1840	  
1847	  
1854	  
1861	  
1868	  
1875	  
1882	  
1889	  
1896	  
1903	  

2000	  

Source: Hecht (1908), Kur- und Neumärkisches Landschaftliches Kreditinstitut: Tableau
der mit Pfandbriefen belegten Domänen (1817), Brämer (1867).

	  

29	  

Figure 5: Amount of Pfandbriefe Outstanding (in Mark)
700000000	  

Total	  Amount	  of	  Pfandbriefe	  

600000000	  
500000000	  
Silesia	  

400000000	  

Kur-­‐&Neumark	  
Pomerania	  

300000000	  

Westprussia	  
Eastprussia	  

200000000	  

0	  

1770	  
1778	  
1786	  
1794	  
1802	  
1810	  
1818	  
1826	  
1834	  
1842	  
1850	  
1858	  
1866	  
1874	  
1882	  
1890	  
1898	  
1906	  

100000000	  

Source: Hecht (1908), 125 Jahre Ostpreussische Landschaft (1913)

	  

30	  

Figure 6: Maximum Yields of Pfandbriefe for the Five Old Landschaften
10	  
9	  

Yields	  

8	  
7	  
6	  
5	  

3	  

1770	  
1775	  
1780	  
1785	  
1790	  
1795	  
1800	  
1805	  
1810	  
1815	  
1820	  
1825	  
1830	  
1835	  
1840	  
1845	  
1850	  
1855	  
1860	  
1865	  
1870	  
1875	  
1880	  
1885	  
1890	  
1895	  
1900	  
1905	  

4	  

Silesia	  

Kur-­‐&	  Neumark	  

Pomerania	  

Westprussia	  

Eastprussia	  

Prussian	  Bond	  

Source: Hecht (1908), Meitzen (1868)

	  

31	  

Outstanding	  Interest	  Payments	  as	  share	  of	  total	  
Pfandbriefe	  

	  
0	  
1770	  
1775	  
1780	  
1785	  
1790	  
1795	  
1800	  
1805	  
1810	  
1815	  
1820	  
1825	  
1830	  
1835	  
1840	  
1845	  
1850	  
1855	  
1860	  
1865	  
1870	  
1875	  
1880	  
1885	  
1890	  
1895	  
1900	  
1905	  

Figure 7: Interest Payments in Arrears as Share of the Total Pfandbrief Volume
16	  

14	  

12	  

10	  

8	  

6	  

4	  

2	  

Silesia	  
Kur-­‐&	  Neumark	  
Pomerania	  
Westprussia	  
Eastprussia	  

Source: Hecht (1908)

32	  

