NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEDICAID INSURANCE IN OLD AGE
Mariacristina De Nardi
Eric French
John Bailey Jones
Working Paper 19151
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19151
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2013

For useful comments and suggestions we thank Joe Altonji, Norma Coe, Courtney Coile, Amy Finkelstein,
Victor Rios-Rull, Karl Scholz, Sam Schulhofer-Wohl, Jon Skinner, and Gianluca Violante. For excellent
research assistance we thank David Benson, Taylor Kelley, Jeremy McCauley, An Qi, and Shani Schechter.
De Nardi gratefully acknowledges support from the ERC, grant 614328 “Savings and Risks” and from
the ESRC through the Centre for Macroeconomics. Jones gratefully acknowledges financial support
from the Social Se- curity Administration through the Michigan Retirement Research Center (MRRC
grants UM10-16 and UM12-12). Jones also gratefully acknowledges the hospitality of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago and UCL. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, any agency of the federal
government, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Social Security Administration, or the MRRC.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, and John Bailey Jones. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Medicaid Insurance in Old Age
Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, and John Bailey Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 19151
June 2013, Revised December 2015
JEL No. D11,D14,D31,E21,H2,I14
ABSTRACT
The old age provisions of the Medicaid program were designed to insure poor retirees against medical
expenses. However, it is the rich who are most likely to live long and face expensive medical conditions
when very old. We estimate a structural model of savings and endogenous medical spending with
heterogeneous agents and use it to compute the distribution of lifetime Medicaid transfers and Medicaid
valuations across currently single retirees.
We find that retirees with high lifetime incomes can end up on Medicaid and often value Medicaid
insurance the most, as they face a larger risk of catastrophic medical needs at old ages and face the
greatest consumption risk. Compensating variation calculations indicate that current retirees value
Medicaid insurance at more than its actuarial cost, but that most would value an expansion of the current
Medicaid program at less than its cost. These findings suggest that for current single retirees, the Medicaid
program may be of the approximately right size.
Mariacristina De Nardi
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle St.
Chicago, IL 60604
and University College London
and Institute For Fiscal Studies - IFS
and also NBER
denardim@nber.org
Eric French
University College London and IFS
30 Gordon Street
London, WC1H 0AX
United Kingdom
Eric.French.econ@gmail.com

John Bailey Jones
Department of Economics
BA-113B
University at Albany
State University of New York
Albany, NY 12222
jbjones@albany.edu

1

Introduction

Many elderly households benefit from Medicaid, a means-tested, public health
insurance program. Despite the increasing importance of Medicaid in the presence of
an aging population and rising medical costs, very little is known about how Medicaid
payments are distributed among the elderly and how the elderly value these payments.
Which elderly households receive Medicaid transfers? How redistributive are these
transfers and the taxes needed to finance them? What is the insurance value of these
transfers? Is Medicaid of about the right size? How much would people lose if it
were cut? These are important questions to answer before reforming the programs
currently in place. This paper seeks to fill this gap.
We focus on single retirees, who comprise about 50% of age 70+ people and 70%
of age 70+ households. We document who in the Assets and Health Dynamics of the
Oldest Old (AHEAD) data receives Medicaid. We find that even high income people
become Medicaid recipients if they live long enough and are hit by expensive medical
conditions. The Medicaid recipiency rate in the bottom income quintile stays around
60%-70% throughout retirement. In contrast, the recipiency rate of higher-income
retirees is initially very low, but increases by age, reaching 20% by age 95. Moreover,
data from the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey (MCBS) shows that high income
individuals, conditional on receiving Medicaid transfers, receive larger transfer than
low income individuals.
The data show who ends up on Medicaid, how much they receive from Medicaid,
how much wealth they hold and how much they spend on medical goods and services.
However, to assess how much retirees value the insurance provided by Medicaid and
to perform counterfactuals, we need a model. We thus develop and estimate a lifecycle model of consumption and endogenous medical expenditure that accounts for
Medicare, Supplemental Social Insurance (SSI), and Medicaid. Agents in the model
face uncertainty about their health, lifespan, and medical needs (including nursing
home stays). This uncertainty is partially offset by the insurance provided by the
government and private institutions. Agents choose whether to apply for Medicaid
if they are eligible, how much to save, and how to split their consumption between
medical and non-medical goods. Consistent with program rules, we model two pathways to Medicaid, one for the lifelong poor, and one for people impoverished by large
medical expenses.
To appropriately evaluate Medicaid redistribution, we allow for heterogeneity in
wealth, permanent income, health, gender, life expectancy, and medical needs. We
also require our model to fit well across the entire income distribution, rather than
2

simply explain mean or median behavior. We estimate the model by matching lifecycle profiles of assets, out-of-pocket medical spending, and Medicaid recipiency rates
for elderly singles across different cohorts and permanent income groups. Matching
Medicaid recipiency introduces an unexpected angle in the identification of bequest
motives. To match Medicaid recipiency rates, Medicaid must be fairly generous,
which in turn reduces medical expense risk. To reconcile high observed asset holdings
with reduced medical expense risk, a bequest motive is necessary.
Our model matches its targets well and produces parameter estimates within the
bounds established by previous work. It also generates an elasticity of total medical
expenditures to co-payment changes that is close to the one estimated by Manning
et al. [47] using the RAND Health Insurance Experiment. Moreover, although our
model was not required to match the distribution of out-of-pocket and total medical
expenditures, and Medicaid payments, it turns out to match the corresponding data
from the MCBS survey.
Our model shows that the current Medicaid system provides different kinds of
insurance to households with different resources. Households in the lower permanent
income quintiles are much more likely to receive Medicaid transfers, but the transfers
that they receive are on average relatively small. Households in the higher permanent
income quintiles are much less likely to receive any Medicaid transfers, but when
they do these transfers are very big and correspond to severe and expensive medical
conditions. Therefore, and consistent with the MCBS data, Medicaid is an effective
insurance device for the poorest, but also offers valuable insurance to the rich, by
insuring them against catastrophic medical conditions, which are the most costly in
terms of utility and the most difficult to insure in the private market.
We also find that, with moderate risk aversion and realistic lifetime and medical
needs risk, the value most retirees place on Medicaid insurance exceeds the actuarial
value of their expected payments. For example, if we decrease the discounted present
value of Medicaid payments by a dollar, to maintain the same level of utility a retired
person at the bottom of the income distribution would have to be compensated by
more than a dollar, and a person at the top of the distribution would have to be
compensated by more than three dollars. On the other hand, we find that a Medicaid
expansion would be valued by most retirees at less than its cost. These comparisons
of the transfers’ actuarial values to the recipient’s valuations suggests that the current
Medicaid program for most currently single retirees is about the right size.
Our calculations also show that it is the richer retirees who value Medicaid most
highly and thus might be most in favor of a Medicaid expansion. However, this
comparison does not take into account the subsidization implied by Medicaid taxes.
3

Using data from the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics (PSID), we estimate the distribution of Medicaid-related taxes. Our PSID computations indicate if we decrease
the discounted present value of Medicaid payments by a dollar, a retired person at
the bottom of the income distribution would save 0.2 dollars in taxes, and a person
at the top of the distribution would save nearly five dollars. Therefore under the
current tax system the rich would not support an expansion of Medicaid insurance,
because the increase in their Medicaid tax burden would exceed the increase in their
Medicaid valuation.
The paper thus contributes to the literature in multiple ways. First, it evaluates
how Medicaid redistributes across people in a model with rich heterogeneity. Second,
it uses the model to compute retirees’ valuation of Medicaid insurance in a framework
that matches the data well and explicitly models the response of savings and medical
expenditures to the Medicaid rules. Finally, it provides additional identification of the
bequest motive by carefully modeling risks and insurance and by matching Medicaid
recipiency and payment rates.

2

Literature review

This paper is related to previous work on savings, health risks, and social insurance. Kotlikoff [44] stresses the importance of modeling health expenditures when
studying precautionary savings, but Hubbard et al. [35] and Palumbo [59] solve
dynamic programming models of saving under medical expense risk and find that
medical expenses have relatively small effects. However, Hubbard et al. [35] and
Palumbo [59] likely underestimated medical spending risk, because the data sets available at that time were missing late-in-life medical spending and had poor measures
of nursing home costs. As a result, the data understated the extent to which medical
expenses rise with age and income.
Using newer and more comprehensive data, De Nardi et al. [19] and Marshall,
McGarry, and Skinner [49] find that late-in-life medical expenses are large and generate powerful savings incentives. Furthermore, Poterba, Venti, and Wise [62] show
that those in poor health have considerably lower assets than similar individuals in
good health. Lockwood [46], Nakajima and Telyukova [52], and Yogo [69] add to the
literature by estimating life cycle models that include additional insurance choices,
housing, and portfolio choices respectively. Laitner et al. [45] derive analytic expressions providing intuition for how uncertain longevity and medical expense risk affect
savings decisions.

4

In this paper, we extend the endogenous medical spending model of De Nardi et
al. [19] to measure the distribution of Medicaid transfers, the taxes used to fund the
transfers, and the valuations retirees place on them. Consistent with the institutions,
we explicitly model two separate ways to qualify for Medicaid: having low income
and assets (the “categorically needy” pathway, which incorporates SSI) or becoming
impoverished by high medical needs (the “medically needy” pathway). People at
different points of the income distribution qualify for Medicaid benefits in different
ways and thus receive different insurance. Because nearly two-thirds of Medicaid
payments to the elderly are to those in nursing homes, we model the nursing home
state explicitly. We expand our set of econometric targets to include Medicaid eligibility rates, adding an important new source of identification. We also compare the
Medicaid payments predicted by the model to those observed in the MCBS. We show
that our model matches Medicaid payment flows well, although they are not matched
by construction.
Earlier studies of Medicaid include Hubbard et al. [36] and Scholz et al. [66],
who argue that means-tested social insurance programs (in the form of a minimum
consumption floor) provide strong incentives for low-income individuals not to save.
Consistent with this evidence, Gardner and Gilleskie [31] exploit cross-state variation in Medicaid rules and find Medicaid has significant effects on savings. Brown
and Finkelstein [10] develop a dynamic model of optimal savings and long-term care
purchase decisions and conclude that Medicaid crowds out private long-term care
insurance for about two-thirds of the wealth distribution. Consistent with this evidence, Brown et al. [12] exploit cross-state variation in Medicaid rules and also find
significant crowding out. We also find that Medicaid encourages spending and reduces
savings.
Several new papers study the importance of medical expense risk in general equilibrium, including Hansen et al. [33], Paschenko and Porapakkarm [60], İmrohoroğlu
and Kitao [39]. Kopecky and Koreshkova [43] find that old-age medical expenses
and the coverage of these expenses provided by Medicaid have large effects on aggregate capital accumulation. Braun et al. [7] use a model with medical expense risk
to assess the incentive and welfare effects of Social Security and means-tested social
insurance programs like Medicaid. They too find that Medicaid provides the elderly
with valuable insurance. Compared to these papers, we focus more on valuations and
redistribution at the individual level and include much more heterogeneity. We allow
demographic transitions to depend on lifetime earnings, consistent with Hurd [37] and
Hurd, McFadden, and Merrill. [38], who highlight the importance of accounting for
the link between wealth and mortality in life-cycle models. We estimate our model
5

against life-cycle profiles, rather than calibrating it. Most important, in our model
people can adjust medical spending – as well as consumption and savings – allowing
the quality of care to vary.
Several recent papers also contain life-cycle models where the choice of medical
expenditures is endogenous. In addition to having different emphases, these papers
model Medicaid in a more stylized way. Fonseca et al. [28] and Scholz and Seshadri [65]
assume that the consumption floor is invariant to medical needs, whereas our specification allows for more realistic links between medical needs and Medicaid transfers.
Ozkan [57] studies health investments over the life cycle, but does not focus on the
role of Medicaid.
This paper also contributes to the literature on the redistribution generated by
government programs. Although there is a lot of research about the amount of redistribution provided by Social Security and a smaller amount of research about
Medicare, to the best of our knowledge this is the first paper to comprehensively
examine how Medicaid transfers to the elderly are distributed across income groups,
and to document how even people with higher lifetime income can end up on Medicaid. Furthermore, we assess the valuation individuals place on their expected Medicaid transfers.1 We also estimate the distribution of the taxes used to finance these
transfers. Unlike Social Security, unemployment benefits, and disability insurance,
Medicaid is not financed using a specific tax, but by general government revenue,
making it difficult to determine how redistributive “Medicaid taxes” are. Adapting
the approach of McClellan and Skinner [50], we assume that the Medicaid tax burden
is proportional to the general tax burden.

3

Key features of the Medicaid program

In the United States, there are two major public insurance programs helping the
elderly with their medical expenses. The first one is Medicare, a federal program
that provides health insurance to almost every person over the age of 65. The second
one is Medicaid, a means-tested program that is run jointly by the federal and state
governments.2
An important characteristic of Medicaid is that it is the payer of “last resort”:
1

Using a simpler, calibrated model, Brown and Finkelstein [10] analyze how Medicaid affects the
valuation of long-term care insurance. Braun et al. [7] calculate the aggregate welfare effects of
eliminating means-tested social insurance.
2
De Nardi et al. [20] and Gardner and Gilleskie [31] document many important aspects of
Medicaid insurance in old age.

6

Medicaid contributes only after Medicare and private insurance pay their share and
the individual spends down his assets to a “disregard” amount. Whereas non-meanstested insurance reduces savings only by reducing risks, Medicaid’s asset test provides
an additional savings disincentive.
One area where Medicaid is particularly important is long-term care. Medicare
reimburses only a limited amount of long-term care costs and most elderly people do
not have private long-term care insurance. As a result, Medicaid covers almost all
nursing home costs of poor old recipients. More generally, Medicaid ends up financing
70% of nursing home residents (Kaiser Foundation [56]) and these costs are of the
order of $60,000 to $75,000 a year (in 2005). Furthermore, 62% of Medicaid’s $81
billion per year transfers for the elderly in 2009 were for nursing home payments
(Kaiser Foundation [29]).
Medicaid-eligible individuals can be divided into two main groups. The first group
comprises the categorically needy, whose income and assets fall below certain thresholds. People who receive SSI typically qualify under the categorically needy provision.
The second group comprises the medically needy, who are individuals whose income is
not particularly low, but who face such high medical expenditures that their financial
resources are small in comparison. The categorically needy provision thus affects the
saving of people who have been poor throughout most of their lives, but has no impact
on the saving of middle- and upper-income people. The medically needy provision,
instead, provides insurance to people with higher income and assets who are still at
risk of being impoverished by their medical conditions.

4

Some data

We use two main data sets, the AHEAD and the MCBS. We begin this section
with an overview of each dataset.

4.1

The AHEAD dataset

The Assets and Health Dynamics of the Oldest Old (AHEAD) dataset is a survey
of individuals who were non-institutionalized and aged 70 or older in 1994. It is
part of the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS) conducted by the University of
Michigan. We consider only single (i.e., never married, divorced, or widowed), retired
individuals. A total of 3,727 singles were interviewed for the AHEAD survey in late
1993-early 1994, which we refer to as 1994. These individuals were interviewed again
in 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002, 2004, 2006, 2008, and 2010. We drop 229 individuals
7

who were partnered with another individual at some point during the sample period
or who did not remain single until death, and 252 individuals with labor income
over $3,000 at some point during the sample period. We are left with with 3,246
individuals, of whom 588 are men and 2,658 are women. Of these 3,246 individuals,
370 are still alive in 2010. We do not use 1994 assets or medical expenses. Assets in
1994 were underreported (Rohwedder et al. [64]) and medical expenses appear to be
underreported as well.
A key advantage of the AHEAD relative to other datasets is that it provides
panel data on health status, including nursing home stays. We assign individuals a
health status of “good” if self-reported health is excellent, very good or good, and
are assigned a health status of “bad” if self-reported health is fair or poor. We assign
individuals to the nursing home state if they were in a nursing home at least 120
days since the last interview (or on average 60 days per year) or if they spent at least
60 days in a nursing home before the next scheduled interview and died before that
scheduled interview.
We break the data into 5 cohorts, each of which contains people born within a
5-year window. The first cohort consists of individuals that were ages 72-76 in 1996;
the second cohort contains ages 77-81; the third ages 82-86; the fourth ages 87-91;
and the final cohort, for sample size reasons, contains ages 92-102. Throughout, we
will refer to each of these 5-year birth cohorts as a cohort.
Since we want to understand the role of income, we further stratify the data by
post-retirement permanent income (PI). We measure PI as the individual’s average
non-asset income over all periods during which he or she is observed. Non-asset
income includes Social Security benefits, defined benefit pension benefits, veterans
benefits and annuities. Since we model social insurance explicitly, we do not include
SSI transfers. Because there is a roughly monotonic relationship between lifetime
earnings and the non-asset income variables that we use, our measure of PI is also a
good measure of lifetime permanent income.

4.2

The MCBS dataset

An important limitation of the AHEAD data is that it lacks information on other
payers of medical care, such as Medicaid and Medicare. Although there there are
some self-reported survey data on total billable medical expenditures in the AHEAD,
these data are mostly imputed, and are considered to be of low quality. To circumvent
this issue, we use data from the 1996-2010 waves of the Medicare Current Beneficiary
Survey (MCBS).
8

The MCBS is a nationally representative survey of disabled and elderly Medicare beneficiaries. Respondents are asked about health status, health insurance, and
health care expenditures paid out-of-pocket, by Medicaid, by Medicare, and by other
sources. The MCBS data are matched to Medicare records, and medical expenditure
data are created through a reconciliation process that combines survey information
with Medicare administrative files. As a result, it gives extremely accurate data on
Medicare payments and fairly accurate data on out-of-pocket and Medicaid payments.
Both the AHEAD and the MCBS survey include information on those who enter a
nursing home or die. This is an important advantage compared to the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS), which does not capture late-life or nursing home
expenses.
MCBS respondents are interviewed up to 12 times over a 4-year period, forming
short panels. We aggregate the data to an annual level. We use the same sample
selection rules in the MCBS that we use for the AHEAD data. Specifically, we
drop those who were observed to be married over the sample period, work, or be
younger than 72 in 1996, 74 in 1998, etc. These sample selection procedures leave us
17,103 different individuals who contribute 40,157 person-year observations. Details
of sample construction, as well as validation of the MCBS relative to the aggregate
national statistics, are in Appendix A.
As with the AHEAD data, we assign individuals a health status of “good” if
self-reported health is excellent, very good or good, and are assigned a health status
of “bad” if self-reported health is fair or poor. We define an individual as being
in a nursing home if that individual was in a nursing home at least 60 days over
the year. In the MCBS, individuals are asked about total income, not annuitized
income. Fortunately, we found that this variable lines up well with total income in
the AHEAD. Furthermore, in the AHEAD, the correlation between total income and
annuitized income is 0.8. Consistent with our computations in the AHEAD, we use
average total income, over the time that we observe an individual, as our measure of
permanent income (PI) in the MCBS.

4.3

Medicaid recipiency and payments

AHEAD respondents are asked whether they are currently covered by Medicaid.
Figure 1 plots the fraction of the sample receiving Medicaid by age, birth cohort and
PI quintile.
The approach we use to stratify the data behind Figure 1 is one we will use
repeatedly throughout the paper. Recall that we stratify the data by PI quintile and
9

a

b

Figure 1: Each line represents Medicaid recipiency rates for a cohort-income cell, traced
over the time period 1996-2010. Thicker lines refer to higher permanent income
groups. Panel a: cohorts aged 74 and 84 in 1996. Panel b: cohorts aged 79 and
89 in 1996.

cohort. For each cohort-quintile cell, we calculate the Medicaid recipiency rate in
each calendar year. We then construct life-cycle profiles by ordering the recipiency
rates by cohort and age at each year of observation. Moving from the left-hand-side
to the right-hand-side of our graphs, we thus show data for four cohorts, with each
cohort’s data starting out at the cohort’s average age in 1996. (We omit the profiles
for the oldest cohort because the sample sizes are tiny.) For each cohort in the figure
there are five horizontal lines, one for each PI quintile. To indicate PI rank, we
vary the thickness of the lines on our graphs: thicker lines represent observations for
higher-ranked PI groupings.
The members of the first cohort appear in our sample at an average age of 74 in
1996. We then observe them in 1998, when they are on average 76 years old, and
then again every other year until 2010. The other cohorts start from older initial ages
and are also followed for fourteen years. The graphs report the Medicaid recipiency
rate for each cohort and PI grouping at eight dates over time. At each sample date,
we calculate the Medicaid recipiency rate for individuals alive at that date — we use
an unbalanced panel. Cohort-income-year cells with fewer than 10 observations are
dropped.
Unsurprisingly, Medicaid recipiency is inversely related to PI: the thin top line
shows the fraction of Medicaid recipients in the bottom 20% of the PI distribution,
while the thick bottom line shows median assets in the top 20%. The top left line
shows that for the bottom PI quintile of the cohort aged 74 in 1996, about 70%
10

of the sample receives Medicaid in 1996; this fraction stays rather stable over time.
This is because the poorest people qualify for Medicaid under the categorically needy
provision, where eligibility depends on income and assets, but not the amount of
medical expenses.
The Medicaid recipiency rate tends to rise with age most quickly for people in
the middle and highest PI groups. For example, in the oldest cohort and top two PI
quintiles the fraction of people receiving Medicaid rises from about 4% at age 89 to
over 20% at age 96. Even people with relatively large resources can be hit by medical
shocks severe enough to exhaust their assets and qualify them for Medicaid under the
medically needy provision.
Permanent
Income
Quintile
Bottom
Fourth
Third
Second
Top

Average
Benefit
9,080
5,720
2,850
1,950
1,280

Recipiency
Rate
.70
.42
.16
.08
.05

Average
Benefit per
Recipient
12,990
13,690
18,350
24,360
23,790

Table 1: Average Medicaid benefits, recipiency, and benefits per recipient, MCBS.

Table 1 shows average Medicaid benefits, the recipiency rate, and benefits per
recipient in the MCBS data, conditional on PI quintile. Average payments decline
with PI. However, this is because recipiency rates also decline by PI. In fact, the
payments received by each Medicaid recipient increases with PI, from $12,990 at the
bottom quintile to $23,790 at the top.

4.4

Medical expense profiles

In all survey waves, AHEAD respondents are asked about the medical expenses
they paid out-of-pocket. Out-of-pocket medical expenses are the sum of what the
individual spends out-of-pocket on private and Medicare part B insurance premia,

11

drug costs, and costs for hospital, nursing home care,3 doctor visits, dental visits, and
outpatient care. It does not include expenses covered by insurance, either public or
private. The AHEAD’s expenditure measure is retrospective, as it measures spending
over the previous two years. We annualize the data by dividing spending over the last
two years by two. It includes medical expenses during the last year of life, collected
through interviews with the deceased’s children or other survivors.
a

b

Figure 2: Each line represents median out of pocket medical expenditures for a cohortincome cell, traced over the time period 1996-2010. Thicker lines refer to higher
permanent income groups. Panel a: cohorts aged 74 and 84 in 1996. Panel b:
cohorts aged 79 and 89 in 1996.

French and Jones [30] show that the medical expense data in the AHEAD line up
with the aggregate statistics. For our sample, mean out-of-pocket medical expenses
are $4,605 with a standard deviation of $14,450 in 2005 dollars. Although this figure
is large, it is not surprising, because Medicare did not cover prescription drugs for
most of the sample period, requires co-pays for services, and caps the number of
3

Nursing home costs include a food and shelter component, besides medical costs, thus raising the
question of whether the food and shelter components should be eliminated from the nursing home
costs to avoid double counting these items. There are two reasons why this is not as important
as one might expect. First, the food and shelter component of nursing home costs make up for a
small share of total nursing home costs. In fact, when we eliminate the food and shelter component
of nursing home costs, our medical expense profiles do not change much. Second, many retirees in
nursing homes keep their houses (whether owned or rented), expecting to go back to them. Hence,
they are paying for two dwellings and it would be wrong to remove the shelter component of nursing
homes from for these people. Finally, it should be noted that the shelter component is larger than
the food component for most single retirees. For these reasons we believe that our approach most
closely approximates reality.

12

reimbursed nursing home and hospital nights.
a

b

Figure 3: Each line represents the 90th percentile of out-of-pocket medical expenditures
for a cohort-income cell, traced over the time period 1996-2010. Thicker lines
refer to higher permanent income groups. Panel a: cohorts aged 74 and 84 in
1996. Panel b: cohorts aged 79 and 89 in 1996.

Figures 2 and 3 display the median and 90th percentile of the out-of-pocket medical expense distribution, respectively. The graphs highlight the large increase in
out-of-pocket medical expenses that occurs as people reach very advanced ages, and
show that this increase is especially pronounced for people in the highest PI quintiles. Protected by Medicaid, individuals in the bottom income quintiles pay less
out-of-pocket.

4.5

Net worth profiles

Our measure of net worth (or assets) is the sum of all assets less mortgages and
other debts. The AHEAD has information on the value of housing and real estate,
autos, liquid assets (which include money market accounts, savings accounts, T-bills,
etc.), IRAs, Keoghs, stocks, the value of a farm or business, mutual funds, bonds,
and “other” assets.
Figure 4 reports median assets by cohort, age, and PI quintile. However, the fifth,
bottom line is hard to distinguish from the horizontal axis because households in
this PI quintile hold few assets. Unsurprisingly, assets turn out to be monotonically
increasing in PI, so that the thin bottom line shows median assets in the lowest PI
quintile, while the thick top line shows median assets in the top quintile. For example,
the top left line shows that for the top PI quintile of the cohort age 74 in 1996, median
13

a

b

Figure 4: Each line represents median assets for a cohort-income cell, traced over the
time period 1996-2010. Thicker lines refer to higher permanent income groups.
Panel a: cohorts aged 74 and 84 in 1996. Panel b: cohorts aged 79 and 89 in
1996.

assets started at $200,000 and then stayed rather stable until the final time period:
$170,000 at age 76, $190,000 at age 78, $220,000 at age 80, $210,00 at age 82, $220,000
at age 84, $200,00 at age 86, and $130,000 at age 88.4
For all PI quintiles in these cohorts, the assets of surviving individuals do not
decline rapidly with age. Those with high PI do not run down their assets until their
late 80s, although those with low PI tend to have their assets decrease throughout
the sample period. The slow rate at which the elderly deplete their wealth has been
a long-standing puzzle (see for example, Mirer [51]). However, as De Nardi, French,
and Jones [19] show, the risk of medical spending rising with age and income goes a
long way toward explaining this puzzle.

5

The model

We focus on single people, male or female, who have already retired. This allows us
to abstract from labor supply decisions and from complications arising from changes
4

The jumps in the profiles are due to the fact that there is dispersion in assets within a cell, and
very rapid attrition due to death, especially at very advanced ages. For example, for the highest
PI grouping in the oldest cohort, the cell count goes from 29 observations, to 20, and finally to 12
toward the end of the sample. Our GMM criterion weights each moment condition in proportion to
the number of observations, so these cells have little effect on the GMM criterion function and thus
the estimates.

14

in family size.

5.1

Preferences

Individuals in this model receive utility from the consumption of both non-medical
and medical goods. Each period, their flow utility is given by
u(ct , mt , µ(·)) =

1 1−ν
1
ct + µ(ht , ζt , ξt , t)
m1−ω ,
1−ν
1−ω t

(1)

where t is age, ct is consumption of non-medical goods, mt is total consumption
of medical goods, and µ(·) is the medical needs shifter, which affects the marginal
utility of consuming medical goods and services. The consumption of both goods is
expressed in dollar values. The intertemporal elasticities for the two goods, 1/ν and
1/ω, can differ.5 One way to interpret the medical spending in the utility function
formulation is that medical spending improves within-period health. This is a simple
way to capture endogenous medical spending, and is similar to other specifications
used in the literature (Einav et al. [23], McClellan and Skinner [50], Bajari et al. [3]).
We assume that µ(·) shifts with medical needs, such as dementia, arthritis, or
a broken bone. These shocks affect the utility of consuming medical goods and
services, including nursing home care. Formally, we model µ(·) as a function of age,
the discrete-valued health status indicator ht , and the medical needs shocks ζt and
ξt . Individuals optimally choose how much to spend in response to these shocks.
A complementary approach is that of Grossman [32], in which medical expenses
represent investments in health capital, which in turn decreases mortality (e.g., Yogo [69])
or improves health. While a few studies find that medical expenditures have significant effects on health and/or survival (Card et al. [14]; Doyle [17], Chay et al. [16]),
most studies find small effects (Brook et al. [8]; Fisher et al. [27]; and Finkelstein
and McKnight [25]). Interestingly, Finkelstein et al. [26] find that access to Medicaid increases medical total medical spending, but do not find that Medicaid reduces
mortality for the under 65 population. Instead, they find that access to Medicaid reduces depression, which is consistent with our model that allows added health care to
improve utility, but not longevity. These findings confirm that the effects of medical
5

We assume that preferences are separable between medical and non-medical goods, which restricts the set of possible and income elasticities. The parameters of our current specification are
identified largely by income elasticities, by matching the way in which out-of-pocket medical spending rises with income at multiple ages. However, our specification also generates reasonable price
elasticities. Given that a simpler specification matches the facts well, we decided to not estimate a
more complex non-separable specification, where identification would be less transparent.

15

expenditures on the health outcomes are extremely difficult to identify. Identification
problems include reverse causality (sick people have higher health expenditures) and
lack of insurance variation (most elderly individuals receive baseline coverage through
Medicare). To get around these problems, Khwaja [40] estimates a structural model
in which medical expenditures both improve health and provide utility. He finds (page
143) that medical utilization would only decline by less than 20% over the life cycle
if medical care was purely mitigative and had no curative or preventive components.
Blau and Gilleskie [6] also estimate a structural model and reach similar conclusions.
Given that older people have already shaped their health and lifestyle, we view
our assumption that their health and mortality depend on their lifetime earnings, but
are exogenous to their current decisions, to be a reasonable simplification.

5.2

Insurance mechanisms

We model two important types of health insurance. The first one pays a proportional share of total medical expenses and can be thought of as a combination
of Medicare and private insurance. Let q(ht ) denote the individual’s co-insurance
(co-pay) rate, i.e., the share of medical expenses not paid by Medicare or private
insurance. We allow the co-pay rate to depend on whether a person is in a nursing
home (ht = 1) or not. Because nursing home stays are virtually uninsured by Medicare and private insurance, people residing in nursing homes face much higher co-pay
rates. However, co-pay rates do not vary much across other medical conditions.
The second type of health insurance that we model is Medicaid, which is meanstested. To link Medicaid transfers to medical needs, µ(ht , ζt , ξt , t), we assume that
each period Medicaid guarantees a minimum level of flow utility ui , which potentially
¯
differs between categorically needy (i = c) and medically needy (i = m) recipients. In
practice, the floors for categorically and medically needy recipients are very similar,
and we will set them equal in the estimation. We will allow the floors to differ,
however, in some policy experiments.
More precisely, once the Medicaid transfer is made, an individual with the state
vector (ht , ζt , ξt , t) can afford a consumption-medical goods pair (ct , mt ) such that
1 1−ν
1
ui =
ct + µ(ht , ζt , ξt , t)
m1−ω .
¯
1−ν
1−ω t

(2)

To implement our utility floor, for every value of the state vector, we find the expenditure level xi = ct + mt q(ht ) needed to achieve the utility level ui (equation (2)),
¯
¯
assuming that individuals make intratemporally optimal decisions. This yields the
16

minimum expenditure xc (·) or xm (·), which correspond to the categorically and medi¯
¯
cally needy floors. The actual amount that Medicaid transfers, bc (at , yt , ht , ζt , ξt , t) or
bm (at , yt , ht , ζt , ξt , t), is then given by xc (·) or xm (·) less the individual’s total financial
¯
¯
resources (assets, at , and non-asset income, yt ).
In the standard consumption-savings model with exogenous medical spending
(e.g., Hubbard et al. [36]), means-tested social insurance is typically modeled as a
government-provided consumption floor. In that framework a consumption floor is
equivalent to a utility floor, as a lower bound on consumption provides a lower bound
on the utility that an individual can achieve. Our utility floor formulation is thus a
straightforward generalization of means-tested insurance from the workhorse model,
generalized to the case in which people choose their medical expenditures.

5.3

Uncertainty and non-asset income

The individual faces several sources of risk, which we treat as exogenous: health
status risk, survival risk, and medical needs risk. At the beginning of each period,
the individual’s health status and medical needs shocks are realized, and need-based
transfers are determined. The individual then chooses consumption, medical expenditure, and savings. Finally, the survival shock hits.
We parameterize the preference shifter for medical goods and services (the needs
shock) as
log(µ(·)) = α0 + α1 t + α2 t2 + α3 t3 + α4 ht + α5 ht × t
+σ(h, t) × ψt ,

σ(h, t)2 = β0 + β1 t + β2 t2 + β4 ht + β5 ht × t,
ψt = ζt + ξt ,

ξt ∼

ζt = ρm ζt−1 + ǫt ,
σξ2 +

σǫ2
1 − ρ2m

≡ 1,

N(0, σξ2 ),

ǫt ∼

N(0, σǫ2 ),

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

where ξt and ǫt are serially and mutually independent. We thus allow the need for
medical services to have temporary (ξt ) and persistent (ζt ) shocks. It is worth stressing
that we do not allow any component of µ(·) to depend on PI, which affects medical
expenditures solely through the budget constraint.
Health status can take on three values: good (3), bad (2), and in a nursing
home (1). We allow the transition probabilities for health to depend on previous
health, sex (g), permanent income (I), and age. The elements of the health status
17

transition matrix are
πj,k,g,I,t = Pr(ht+1 = k|ht = j, g, I, t),

j, k ∈ {1, 2, 3}.

(9)

Mortality also depends on health, sex, permanent income and age. Let sg,h,I,t
denote the probability that an individual of sex g is alive at age t + 1, conditional on
being alive at age t, having time-t health status h, and enjoying permanent income I.
Since non-asset post-retirement income yt , is mainly composed of social security
and defined benefit pension income, it is not subject to shocks. For example, we
found that negative health shocks have little effect on income changes in our AHEAD
data. Thus, we model it a deterministic function of sex, permanent income, and age:
yt = y(g, I, t).

5.4

(10)

The individual’s problem

Consider a single person seeking to maximize his or her expected lifetime utility
at age t, t = tr+1 , ..., T , where tr is the retirement age.
To be categorically needy, a person must be eligible for SSI, by satisfying the SSI
income and asset tests:
yt + rat − yd ≤ Y and at ≤ Ad ,
(11)
¯
where: at denotes assets; r is the real interest rate; Y is the SSI income limit; yd is
¯
the SSI income disregard; and Ad is the SSI asset limit and asset disregard. Note that
SSI eligibility is based on income gross of taxes. Low-income individuals with assets
in excess of Ad can spend down their wealth and qualify for SSI in the future.
If a person is categorically needy and applies for SSI and Medicaid, he receives the
SSI transfer, Y − max{yt + rat − yd , 0}, regardless of his health; in addition to deter¯
mining income eligibility, Y is the largest possible SSI benefit. A sick person, defined
¯
here as one who can not achieve the utility floor with expenditures of Y, receives
¯
additional resources in accordance with equation (2). The combined SSI/Medicaid
transfer for a categorically needy person is thus given by


bc at , yt, µ(·) = Y − max{yt + rat − yd , 0} + max − Y, 0 ,
(12)
¯
¯
recalling the restrictions on yt and at in equation (11).
If the person’s total income is above Y and/or her assets are above Ad , she is not
¯
eligible for SSI. If the person applies for Medicaid, transfers are given by



bm at , yt , µ(·) = max xm (·) − max{yt + rat − yd , 0} + max{at − Ad , 0} , 0 , (13)
¯
18

where we assume that the income disregard yd and the asset disregard Ad are the
same as under the categorically needy pathway.
Each period eligible individuals choose whether to receive Medicaid or not. We
will use the indicator function IM t to denote this choice, with IM t = 1 if the person
applies for Medicaid and IM t = 0 if the person does not apply.
When the person dies, any remaining assets are left to his or her heirs. We denote
with e the estate net of taxes. Estates are linked to assets by
et = e(at ) = at − max{0, τ · (at − x̃)}.
The parameter τ denotes the tax rate on estates in excess of x̃, the estate exemption
level. The utility the household derives from leaving the estate e is
(e + k) (1−ν)
φ(e) = θ
,
1−ν
where θ is the intensity of the bequest motive, while k determines the curvature of
the bequest function and hence the extent to which bequests are luxury goods.
Using β to denote the discount factor, we can then write the individual’s value
function as
(
Vt (at , g, ht , I, ζt, ξt ) =

max

ct ,mt ,at+1 ,IM t

u(ct , mt , µ(·))



+ βsg,h,I,tEt Vt+1 (at+1 , g, ht+1 , I, ζt+1 , ξt+1 )
)
(e(at+1 ) + k) (1−ν)
+ β(1 − sg,h,I,t)θ
,
(14)
1−ν

subject to the laws of motion for the shocks and the following constraints. If IM t = 0,
i.e., the person does not apply for SSI and Medicaid,
at+1 = at + yn (rat + yt ) − ct − q(ht )mt ≥ 0,

(15)

where the function yn (·) converts pre-tax to post-tax income. If IM t = 1, i.e., the
person applies for SSI and Medicaid, we have
at+1 = bi (·) + at + yn (rat + yt ) − ct − q(ht )mt ≥ 0,
at+1 ≤ min{Ad , at },

(16)
(17)

where bi (·) = bc (·) if equation (11) holds, and bi (·) = bm (·) otherwise. Equations
(15) and (16) both prevent the individual from borrowing against future income.
19

Equation (17) forces the individual to spend at least xi (·), and to keep assets below
¯
the limit Ad up through the beginning of the next period.
To express the dynamic programming problem as a function of ct only, we can
derive mt as a function of ct by using the optimality condition implied by the intratemporal allocation decision. Suppose that at time t the individual decides to
spend the total xt on consumption and out-of-pocket payments for medical goods.
The optimal intratemporal allocation then solves:
L=

1 1−ν
1
ct + µ(·)
m1−ω + λt (xt − mt q(ht ) − ct ) ,
1−ν
1−ω t

where λt is the multiplier on the intratemporal budget constraint. The first-order
conditions for this problem reduce to
1/ω

µ(·)
ν/ω
ct .
(18)
mt =
q(ht )
This expression can be used to eliminate mt from the dynamic programming problem
in equation (14), and to simplify the computation of bi (·).

6

Estimation procedure

We adopt a two-step strategy to estimate the model. In the first step, we estimate
or calibrate those parameters that can be cleanly identified outside our model. For
example, we estimate mortality rates from raw demographic data. In the second step,
we estimate the rest of the model’s parameters (ν,ω,β,uc ,um , and the parameters of
¯ ¯
ln µ(·)) with the method of simulated moments (MSM), taking as given the parameters
that were estimated in the first step. In particular, we find the parameter values that
allow simulated life-cycle decision profiles to “best match” (as measured by a GMM
criterion function) the profiles from the data. The moment conditions that comprise
our estimator are:
1. To better evaluate the effects of Medicaid insurance, we match the fraction of
people on Medicaid by PI quintile, 5 year birth cohort and year cell (with the
top two PI quintiles merged together).
2. Because the effects of Medicaid depend directly on an individual’s asset holdings, we match median asset holdings by PI-cohort-year cell.
3. We match the median and 90th percentile of the out-of-pocket medical expense
distribution in each PI-cohort-year cell (the bottom two quintiles are merged).
20

Because the AHEAD’s out-of-pocket medical expense data are reported net
of any Medicaid payments, we deduct government transfers from the modelgenerated expenses before making any comparisons.
4. To capture the dynamics of medical expenses, we match the first and second
autocorrelations for medical expenses in each PI-cohort-year cell.
The first three sets of moment conditions are those described in section 4.6
The mechanics of our MSM approach are as follows. We compute life-cycle histories for a large number of artificial individuals. Each of these individuals is endowed
with a value of the state vector (t, at , g, ht, I) drawn from the data distribution for
1996, and each is assigned the entire health and mortality history realized by the
person in the AHEAD data with the same initial conditions. This way we generate attrition in our simulations that mimics precisely the attrition relationships in
the data (including the relationship between initial wealth and mortality). The simulated medical needs shocks ζ and ξ are Monte Carlo draws from discretized versions of
our estimated shock processes. We discretize the asset grid and, using value function
iteration, we solve the model numerically. This yields a set of decision rules, which, in
combination with the simulated endowments and shocks, allows us to simulate each
individual’s net worth, medical expenditures, health, and mortality. Additional detail
on our computational approach can be found in Appendix B.
We then compute asset, medical expense and Medicaid profiles from the artificial
histories in the same way as we compute them from the real data. We use these
profiles to construct moment conditions, and evaluate the match using our GMM
criterion. We search over the parameter space for the values that minimize the criterion. Appendix C contains a detailed description of our moment conditions, the
weighting matrix in our GMM criterion function, and the asymptotic distribution of
our parameter estimates.

7

First-step estimation results

In this section, we briefly discuss the life-cycle profiles of the stochastic variables
used in our dynamic programming model. Using more waves of data, we update the
procedure for estimating the income process described in De Nardi et al. [19]. The
6

As was done when constructing the figures in section 4, we drop cells with less than 10 observations from the moment conditions. Simulated agents are endowed with asset levels drawn from the
1996 data distribution, and thus we only match asset data 1998-2010.

21

procedures for estimating demographic transition probabilities and co-pay rates are
new.

7.1

Income profiles

We model non-asset income as a function of age, sex, and the individual’s PI
ranking. Figure 5 presents average income profiles, conditional on PI quintile, computed by simulating our model. In this simulation we do not let people die, and we
simulate each person’s financial and medical history up through the oldest surviving
age allowed in the model. Since we rule out attrition, this picture shows how income
evolves over time for the same sample of elderly people. Figure 5 shows that average
annual income ranges from about $5,000 per year in the bottom PI quintile to about
$23,000 in the top quintile; median wealth holdings for the two groups are zero and
just under $200,000, respectively.

Figure 5: Average income, by permanent income quintile.

7.2

Mortality and health status

We estimate health transitions and mortality rates simultaneously by fitting the
transitions observed in the HRS to a multinomial logit model. We allow the transition
probabilities to depend on age, sex, current health status, and PI. We estimate annual
transition rates: combining annual transition probabilities in consecutive years yields
two-year transition rates we can fit to the AHEAD data. Appendix D gives details
on the procedure.
22

Permanent
Income
Percentile
10
30
50
70
90

Males
Nursing
Bad
Home Health
1.65
1.67
1.69
1.72
1.75

6.02
6.63
7.32
8.04
8.81

Good
Health
7.51
8.47
9.47
10.42
11.31

Females
Nursing
Bad
Good
Home Health Health
2.48
2.60
2.73
2.86
3.00

10.01
10.98
11.99
13.02
13.94

All†

12.01
13.15
14.26
15.26
16.15

10.44
11.49
12.53
13.52
14.39

By gender:‡
Men
Women

9.71
13.55

By health status:⋄
Bad Health
Good Health

10.69
13.99

Notes: Life expectancies calculated through simulations using estimated health transition and survivor functions.
ulation;

‡

†

Using gender and health distributions for entire pop-

Using health and permanent income distributions for each gender;

⋄

Using

gender and permanent income distributions for each health status group.

Table 2: Life expectancy in years, conditional on reaching age 70.

Using the estimated transition probabilities, we simulate demographic histories,
beginning at age 70, for different gender-PI-health combinations. Table 2 shows life
expectancies. We find that rich people, women, and healthy people live much longer
than their poor, male, and sick counterparts. For example, a male at the 10th PI
percentile in a nursing home expects to live only 1.65 more years, while a female at
the 90th percentile in good health expects to live 16.15 more years.7
7

Our predicted life expectancy at age 70 is about three years less than what the aggregate
statistics imply. This discrepancy stems from using data on singles only: when we re-estimate
the model for both couples and singles, predicted life expectancy is within a year of the aggregate
statistics for both men and women. In addition, our estimated income gradient is similar to that
in Waldron [68], who finds that those in the top of the income distribution live 3 years longer than

23

Another important driver of saving is the risk of needing nursing home care. Table 3 shows the probability at age 70 of ever entering a nursing home. The calculations
show that 46.1% of women will ultimately enter a nursing home, as opposed to 30.6%
for men. These numbers are similar to those from the Robinson model described in
Brown and Finkelstein [9], which show 27% of 65-year-old men and 44% of 65-year-old
women require nursing home care.
Permanent
Income
Percentile

Males
Bad
Good
Health Health

10
30
50
70
90

26.4
26.9
27.2
27.2
27.2

30.1
31.2
32.0
32.5
32.4

Females
Bad
Good
Health Health
41.2
42.5
43.6
44.1
44.4

45.2
46.8
47.9
48.8
49.0

All†
40.7
42.2
43.3
43.9
43.9

By gender:‡
Men
Women

30.6
46.1

By health status:⋄
Bad Health
Good Health

39.9
45.0

Notes: Percentages calculated through simulations using estimated health transition
and survivor functions;
‡

†

Using gender and health distributions for entire population;

Using health and permanent income distributions for each gender;

⋄

Using gender

and permanent income distributions for each health status group.

Table 3: Percentage of people ever entering a nursing home, conditional on being alive at
age 70.

those at the bottom, conditional on being 65.

24

7.3

Co-pay rates

The co-pay rate qt = q(ht ) is the share of total billable medical spending not
paid by Medicare or private insurers. Thus, it is the share paid out-of-pocket or by
Medicaid. We allow it to differ depending on whether the person is in a nursing home
or not: qt = q(ht ).
Using data from the MCBS, we estimate the co-pay rate by taking the ratio of
mean out-of-pocket spending plus Medicaid payments to mean total medical expenses.
The co-pay rate for people not in a nursing home averages 27% and does not vary
much with demographics. The co-pay rate for those in nursing homes is 68%. For
every dollar spent on nursing homes, 34 cents come from Medicaid and 34 cents
are from out-of-pocket, with 32 cents coming from Medicare or other sources. We
cross-checked these co-pay rates with data from the 1997-2008 waves of the Medical
Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS), again making the same sample selection decisions
as in the AHEAD. For those not in a nursing home, the MCBS and MEPS estimated
co-pay rates were very similar. However, MEPS does not contain information on
individuals in nursing homes, so we rely on the estimated co-pay rates from MCBS.

8
8.1

Second step results, model fit, and identification
Parameter values

Table 4 presents our estimated parameters. Our estimate of β, the discount factor,
is 0.994, which suggests a high level of patience. However, in our model individuals
discount the future not only because of impatience, but also because they might not
survive to the next period. The effective discount factor is the product βsg,h,I,t. As
Table 2 shows, the survival probability for our sample of older individuals is low,
implying an effective discount factor much lower than β.
Our estimate of ν, the coefficient of relative risk aversion for “regular” consumption, is 2.8, while our estimate of ω, the coefficient of relative risk aversion for medical
goods, is 3.0. Bajari et al. [3] estimate the same utility function in a static model
of health insurance choice and medical care utilization. They estimate ν = 1.9 and
ω = 3.2. Thus, they also find ν < ω. However, their estimated value for ν is lower
than ours. Because we allow for self-insurance through savings, for any given set of
parameters, demand for health insurance will be lower. Thus we need a higher coefficient of consumption risk aversion to explain health insurance and medical spending
choices. Einav et al. [23] and McClellan and Skinner [50] also study two period
25

problems where utility depends on medical care.
Our estimates imply that the demand for medical goods is less elastic than the
demand for consumption. In a recent study, Fonseca et al. [28] calculate that the coinsurance elasticity for total medical expenditures ranges from -0.27 to -0.35, which
they find to be consistent with existing micro evidence. Repeating their experiment
(a 150% increase in co-pay rates) with our model reveals that elasticities range by
age and income: richer and younger people have higher elasticities. To calculate a
summary number, we use our model of mortality and an annual population growth
rate of 1.5% to find a cross-sectional distribution of ages. Combining this number
with our simulations, we find an aggregate cross-sectional elasticity of -0.25.

†

β: discount factor

.994
(0.013)

ν: RRA, consumption

2.825
(0.025)

ω: RRA, medical expenditures

2.986
(0.029)

Y: SSI income level
¯

$6,670
(207)

uc = um : utility floor†
¯
¯

$4,600
(144)

θ: bequest intensity

39.71
(2.51)

k: bequest curvature (in 000s)

13.0
(0.650)

The estimated utility floor is indexed by the consumption level that provides the floor
when µ = 0.

Table 4: Estimated preference parameters. Standard errors are in parentheses below estimated parameters.

The SSI income benefit (which is also the income threshold to be categorically
needy) is estimated at $6,670, a number close to the $6,950 statutory threshold used
26

in many states.
In our baseline estimates, we constrain the two utility floors to be the same, as
Medicaid generosity does not appear to be drastically different across the two categories of recipients. The utility floor corresponds to the utility from consuming $4,604
a year when healthy. It should be noted that the medically needy are guaranteed a
minimum income of $6,670 ($7,270 including the income disregard) so that their total
consumption when healthy is at least $7,270 a year. However, when there are large
medical needs, transfers are determined by the Medicaid-induced utility floor.
The point estimates of θ and k imply that, in the period before certain death, the
bequest motive becomes operative once consumption exceeds $3,500 per year. (See
De Nardi, French, and Jones [19] for a derivation.) For individuals in this group, the
marginal propensity to bequeath, above the threshold level, is 78 cents out of every additional dollar. Several other authors have recently estimated bequest motives inside
structural models of old age saving.8 Imposing a linear bequest motive, Kopczuk and
Lupton [42] find that agents with bequest motives (around three quarters of the population) would, when facing certain death, bequeath all wealth in excess of $29,700.
De Nardi et al. [19] find that, depending on the specification, the bequest motive
becomes active between $31,500 and $43,4000, and generates a marginal propensity
to bequeath of 88-89%. Lockwood [46] finds a threshold of $18,400 and a propensity
to bequeath of 92%. While these studies suggest bequests are more of a luxury good
than do our estimates, none of them seek to explain Medicaid usage. In contrast,
Ameriks et al. [2] estimate their model using survey data questions, including hypothetical questions about bequests and long-term care insurance, in a model aimed at
assessing Medicaid and medical expense risk. They find a terminal bequest threshold
of $7,100 and a propensity to bequeath of 98%. Compared to them, we find a lower
threshold, but a much higher marginal propensity to consume.
We now turn to discussing how well the model fits the some key aspects of the
data, the identification of the model’s parameters, and to highlighting some of the
model’s implications for medical and non-medical spending at older ages.
8

Assembling these figures requires a few derivations and inflation adjustments. Calculations are
available on request.

27

8.2

Model fit

Figure 6 compares the Medicaid recipiency profiles generated by the model (dashed
line) to those in the data (solid line) for the members of four birth-year cohorts. In
panel a, the lines at the far left of the graph are for the youngest cohort, whose
members in 1996 were aged 72-76, with an average age of 74. The second set of
lines are for the cohort aged 82-86 in 1996. Panel b displays the two other cohorts,
starting respectively at age 79 and 89. The graphs show that the model matches the
general patterns of Medicaid usage. The model tends to over-predict usage by the
poor, especially at older ages, and to underpredict usage by the rich, especially at
younger ages.
a

b

Figure 6: Each line represents Medicaid recipiency for a cohort-income cell, traced over
the time period 1996-2010: data (solid lines) and model (dashed lines). Thicker
lines refer to higher permanent income groups. Panel a: cohorts aged 74 and 84
in 1996. Panel b: cohorts aged 79 and 89 in 1996.

28

Figure 7 plots median net worth by age, cohort, and PI. Here too the model does
well, matching the observation that the savings patterns differ by PI and that higher
PI people don’t run down their assets until well past age 90.
b

a

Figure 7: Each line represents median net worth for a cohort-income cell, traced over the
time period 1996-2010: data (solid lines) and model (dashed lines). Thicker
lines refer to higher permanent income groups. Panel a: cohorts aged 74 and 84
in 1996. Panel b: cohorts aged 79 and 89 in 1996.

Figure 8 displays the median and ninetieth percentile of out-of-pocket medical
expenses paid by people in the model and in the data. Permanent income has a large
effect on out-of-pocket medical expenses, especially at older ages. Median medical
expenses are less than $1,500 a year at age 75. By age 100, they stay flat for those
in the bottom quintile of the PI distribution but often exceed $5,000 for those at the
top of the PI distribution. Panels a and b show that the model does a reasonable
job of matching the medians found in the data. The other two panels report the
90th percentile of out-of-pocket medical expenses in the model and in the data and
thus provides a better idea of the tail risk by age and PI. Here the model reproduces
medical expenses of $4,000 or less at age 74, staying flat over time for the lower PI
people, but tends to understate the medical expenditures of high-PI people in their
late nineties.
Turning to cross-sectional distributions of medical spending, Figure 9 presents
three panels. Panel a, in the top left corner, presents the cumulative distribution
function (CDF) of out-of-pocket medical expenditures found in the AHEAD and
MCBS data, as well as that produced by the model. The solid line is the modelpredicted CDF, the dashed line is the AHEAD CDF, and the dotted line is the MCBS
29

a

b

c

d

Figure 8: Each line represents median (top panels) and 90th percentile (bottom panels)
of medical expenditures for a cohort-income cell, traced over 1996-2010: data
(solid lines) and model (dashed lines). Thicker lines: higher permanent income
groups. Panels a and b: different cohorts.

CDF. Because the model’s parameters are estimated in part by fitting AHEAD outof-pocket spending profiles—although not the CDF itself—it is not surprising that
AHEAD and model-predicted CDFs are very similar. The model-predicted 90th
percentile of out-of-pocket spending is greater than what is observed in the AHEAD
data, although it is very close to what is observed in the MCBS.
Panel b shows the CDF of Medicaid payments, both as predicted by the model
and in the MCBS data. Medicaid expenditures in the MCBS data are higher than
those predicted by the model up to the 98th percentile, but are lower thereafter.
Panel c, at the bottom, shows the CDF of total medical expenditures from all payers.
Total expenditures in the MCBS are higher than the model predictions up to the 86th
30

.9
.8
.7
.6
.5
0

.1

.2

.3

.4

Probability

.6
.5
.4
0

.1

.2

.3

Probability

.7

.8

.9

1

b: Medicaid expenditures

1

a: out-of-pocket expenditures

500

1500

3750

10000

27500

75000

500

1500

Medical expenses (2005 dollars)

3750

10000

27500

75000

Medical expenses (2005 dollars)

.6
.5
.4
0

.1

.2

.3

Probability

.7

.8

.9

1

c: total expenditures

500

1500

3750

10000

27500

75000

Medical expenses (2005 dollars)

Figure 9: Cumulative distribution functions of medical spending: model (solid line),
AHEAD data (dashed line) and and MCBS data (dotted line). Panel a: out-ofpocket expenditures. Panel b: Medicaid expenditures. Panel c: total expenditures.

percentile at $43,000, and are lower thereafter. In summary, these differences are not
large and the model fits well the distribution of-out-of pocket, Medicaid, and total
medical spending. Because Medicaid and total medical expenditures are not part of
the GMM criterion we use to estimate the model, the ability of the model to fit these
data provides additional validation. This feature is important for policy analysis, as
it means the model is able to match the risk of catastrophic medical spending.
Table 5 shows average Medicaid and out-of-pocket expenditures for each PI quintile, both as predicted by the model and as in the data. The first two columns of
Table 5 compare Medicaid expenditures in the MCBS data to those predicted by
the model. It shows that retirees at the bottom of the PI distribution have average
31

Permanent
Income
Quintile
Bottom
Fourth
Third
Second
Top
Men
Women

Medicaid payments
MCBS
Model
Data

Out-of-pocket expenses
MCBS AHEAD Model
Data
Data

9,080
5,720
2,850
1,950
1,280

10,070
7,960
6,000
3,910
2,250

4,050
5,340
6,470
7,300
8,020

2,550
4,270
5,050
6,360
7,000

2,210
3,800
6,330
8,500
10,600

2,850
4,410

3,780
5,980

5,440
6,470

4,760
5,230

8,280
6,420

Table 5: Average Medicaid payments and out-of-pocket medical expenditures (2005 dollars), model, MCBS data, and AHEAD data, 1996-2010, for all individuals 72
and older in 1996.

Medicaid expenditures of $9,080 and $10,070 in the data and model, respectively. For
those at the top of the PI distribution, Medicaid expenditures are $1,280 and $2,250
in data and model, respectively. It bears noting that the Medicaid payments reported
in the MCBS are on average smaller than those reported in the administrative records:
De Nardi et al. [18] find the administrative payments to be 24% higher. Keeping this
in mind, Table 5 shows that the model matches Medicaid payments fairly well.
As shown in Table 1, although average Medicaid payments in the MCBS are
smaller at the top of the PI distribution, conditional on receiving Medicaid those at
the top of the PI distribution receive much larger payments. This is also true in the
model. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to document the progressivity
of Medicaid payments among the elderly.9
The last three columns of Table 5 compare out-of-pocket expenditures from the
MCBS, the AHEAD and the model. The MCBS data shows a less steep PI gradient
than the AHEAD data or the model. Those at the bottom of the PI distribution
spend $4,050 in the MCBS data and $2,380 in the AHEAD data, while expenditures
at the top are $8,020 in the MCBS versus $6,390 in the AHEAD. Overall, however,
9

Work by Bhattacharya and Lakdawalla [5] and McClellan and Skinner [50] studied Medicare
progressivity.

32

the gradients are similar. This similarity in average out-of-pocket expenditures gives
us confidence that our facts are robust across datasets. The final column shows
the average out-of-pocket expenditures predicted by the model. Overall the model
fits the data well for both out-of-pocket and Medicaid expenditures. Details on the
construction of these cross-sectional comparisons, and additional comparisons, can be
found in Appendix A.

8.3

Parameter identification

The preference parameters are identified jointly. There are multiple ways to generate high saving by the elderly: large values of the discount factor β, low values
of the utility floors uc and um , large values of the curvature parameters ν and ω,
¯
¯
or strong and pervasive bequest motives (high values of θ and small values of k).
Dynan, Skinner and Zeldes [22] point out that the same assets can simultaneously
address both precautionary and bequest motives. There are also multiple ways to
ensure that the income-poorest elderly do not save, including high utility floors and
bequest motives that become operative only at high levels of consumption. All of
these mechanics are documented in more detail in Appendix F, which shows how
changing individual parameters, one at a time, affects the components of our GMM
criterion and the life-cycle profiles of several key variables.
We acquire additional identification in several ways. We require our model to
match Medicaid recipiency rates, which helps pin down the utility floors and the SSI
threshold Y. To be able to match the fraction of people on Medicaid by PI, cohort,
¯
and age, the Medicaid insurance floors have to be substantial, in excess of $4,500 of
consumption by the healthy. A lower floor would generate too few people on Medicaid,
especially at higher PI quintiles: Table A5 in Appendix F shows that lowering the
utility floor significantly worsens the model’s fit of its Medicaid recipiency targets.
By way of comparison, the model with endogenous medical expenses in De Nardi,
French and Jones [19], the one most comparable with the model in this paper, was
not estimated to match Medicaid recipiency rates. That model was able to fit the
asset data using a similar value of β, no bequest motives, and lower utility floors.
This specification matches the asset data very well even with our current, richer
specification of the Medicaid program; the combination in fact matches the asset
data better than our baseline estimates. However, the Medicaid program implied
by those estimates is too stingy to generate the Medicaid fractions observed in the
data. Requiring the model to match Medicaid recipiency thus introduces a tension
in the estimation process: Medicaid needs to be fairly generous to generate both a
33

high fraction of people on Medicaid and the pattern of Medicaid recipiency across age
and PI. However, a more generous Medicaid program reduces the need to accumulate
assets. To match the same asset profiles under a more generous insurance system we
need a higher discount factor and/or a stronger bequest motive.
The income gradient of medical expenditures helps us pin down the the coefficients of relative risk aversion for non-medical and medical goods, ν and ω. Dividing
equation (18) by consumption allows us to obtain an equation governing the optimal
ratio of medical goods and services to non-medical consumption goods
mt
=
ct



µ(·)
q(ht )

1/ω

ν−ω

ct ω .

(19)

This ratio depends on the relative size of the two risk aversion coefficients, ω and
ν. As resources (and thus consumption) grow, mctt falls if people are more risk averse
over medical goods than over non-medical goods (ω > ν). Put differently, people
with higher wealth and permanent income spend a smaller share of their resources on
medical goods than on consumption goods when ω > ν. Our estimates suggest this
is the empirically relevant case. Requiring our model to match the observed variation
in out-of-pocket medical expenses across permanent income groups helps identify the
size of these two parameters. In the data, out-of-pocket medical spending rises with
permanent income. However, prior to age 90, the increase in medical expenditure is
smaller than the increase in income, suggesting that medical expenditures share of
total expenditure is falling in total expenditure, and thus ω > ν. Hence, inspection
of equation (19) and Figures 2, 3, and 5 help explain how ω and ν are separately
identified. Appendix F shows that these two parameters are tightly identified. Reducing either ν or ω by 10% leads to large changes in both our GMM criteria and in
the age-profiles of assets, Medicaid recipiency, and the consumption of non-medical
goods and medical goods and services.
We also estimate the coefficients for the mean of the logged medical needs shifter
µ(ht , ψt , t), the volatility scaler σ(ht , t) and the process for the shocks ζt and ξt . As
we show in the graphs that follow, the estimates for these parameters (available from
the authors on request) imply that the demand for medical services rises rapidly with
age. Matching the median and 90th percentile of out-of-pocket medical expenditures,
along with their first and second autocorrelations, is the principal way in which we
identify these parameters. The last two lines in Table A5 show the effects of first
reducing the average of the medical needs shocks by 10% and then reducing their
variance by 10%. Both changes worsen the fit of medical spending, but the first
change also significantly worsens the fit of the Medicaid recipiency moments.
34

8.4

Medical and non-medical spending in old age: present
discounted values

Figure 10: Simulated consumption for the cohort aged 74 in 1996.

To assess the effects of Medicaid from a lifetime perspective, we simulate extended
life histories for the youngest cohort. Each simulated individual receives a value
of the state vector (t, at , g, ht , I) drawn from the empirical distribution of 72- to
76-year-olds in 1996. He or she then receives a series of health, medical expense,
and mortality shocks consistent with the stochastic processes described in the model
section, and is tracked to (potentially) age 100. Figure 10 uses these simulations to
show the model’s implications for non-medical consumption, showing the trajectory
of average consumption for each PI quintile. In contrast to medical expenditures,
which rise rapidly with age, average non-medical consumption expenditures decline,
albeit slightly, over retirement. This pattern is quite similar to the spending profiles
found in the Consumer Expenditure Survey (see, e.g, Banks et al. [4]).
After simulating life histories, we convert the expenditure streams into present
discounted values, using the model’s assumed pre-tax interest rate of 4%. Table 6
shows the present discounted value of both non-medical and medical consumption
as of age 74. Table 6 reveals that the consumption of medical goods and services
is large relative to the consumption of non-medical goods at all PI levels. However,
non-medical consumption rises more quickly in PI than total medical spending, as
ν < ω. Non-medical spending for the poorest is 25% of non-medical spending for the
richest. In contrast, the total medical spending of the bottom PI quintile is nearly
50% of the total medical spending of the top quintile. In fact, for low PI individuals,
35

the present discounted value of total medical spending exceeds the present discounted
value of non-medical consumption; for high PI individuals, the opposite is true.
Permanent
Income
Quintile
Bottom
Fourth
Third
Second
Top

Non-medical
consumption

Medical
goods and services
Total Out-of-pocket

59,200
79,700
106,800
163,900
234,900

108,300
121,100
139,500
178,800
229,700

11,200
20,400
35,100
55,200
80,600

Men
Women

136,000
143,800

133,900
172,200

42,700
46,300

Good Health
Bad Health

173,200
97,500

182,200
144,000

54,300
33,000

Table 6: Present discounted value of non-medical consumption and the consumption of
medical goods and services at age 74.

The final column of Table 6 shows that out-of-pocket medical expenses rise in PI
even more quickly. This is because Medicaid covers a higher share of medical expenses
for the poor. Over their lifetime, the out-of-pocket costs of medical goods and services
for the income-richest are over 7 times as large as those of the income-poorest. The
table also shows that the present discounted value of all spending, medical and nonmedical, is larger for women than men, as they tend to live almost 4 years longer.
Furthermore, those in good health also tend to spend more, as they tend to have
longer lives and higher PI.

9
9.1

Medicaid benefits, taxes, and valuations
Medicaid benefits received and taxes paid

The first column of Table 7 shows the present discounted value of Medicaid benefits, beginning at age 74. Although the payments decrease by PI quintile, they are
36

non-trivial for all PI groups. For instance, those in the the highest PI quintile expect
to receive $8,800, which is about 40% of their yearly income. Although the poor
are more likely to be receive Medicaid, even the rich are sometimes impoverished by
expensive medical conditions, making them eligible for Medicaid benefits too.
Permanent Income
Quintile

Medicaid
Payments

Medicaid
Taxes

Taxes/
Payments

33,600
29,400
20,400
15,100
8,800

6,700
8,600
20,600
30,300
40,200

0.20
0.29
1.01
2.00
4.59

Men
Women

8,600
22,400

28,800
20,000

3.34
0.89

Good Health
Bad Health

17,800
23,700

26,400
12,500

1.48
0.53

Bottom
Fourth
Third
Second
Top

Table 7: Present discounted value of Medicaid payments received (simulated from the
model), Medicaid taxes paid (computed from the PSID), and the ratio of Medicaid
taxes to Medicaid payments, all from the standpoint of age 74.

These flows reinforce the view that middle- and higher-income people also benefit
from Medicaid transfers in old age. Women receive more Medicaid transfers than
men, both because they live longer and because they tend to be poorer. Finally,
those in good health at age 74 receive almost as much as those in bad health at 74,
because they tend to live long enough to require costly procedures and long nursing
home stays.
The middle column of Table 7 calculates the present discounted value at age 74
of the taxes paid to finance Medicaid transfers over all of one’s life, including the
working period. Since we do not explicitly model the working period, to calculate
Medicaid tax payments, we modify the approach found in McClellan and Skinner [50],
who calculate tax payments for Medicare. We first use data from the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics (PSID) to calculate lifetime taxes paid by different groups. Because
Medicaid has no dedicated funding source, we assume that it is financed by a tax
37

schedule that is proportional to total tax payments, and that the average Medicaid
tax rate in this progressive tax schedule balances the Medicaid budget for this cohort.
See Appendix E for more details.
We use the PSID because it includes income from spouses who have died before
the AHEAD sample begins. A large share of our sample consists of elderly widows. To
capture the progressivity of the taxes they paid when young, we need a data source
that includes income from their deceased husbands. Because high income women
tend to marry high income men, ignoring the income and taxes paid by husbands
would understate the taxes paid by higher-income widows relative to lower-income
people, who might have not been married, or married with lower-earning spouses.
Although the AHEAD has tax records from working years, information on taxes paid
by deceased spouses is incomplete.
Those in the top PI quintile pay on average $42,400 in taxes towards Medicaid,
nearly 6 times as much as those in the bottom of the PI distribution. This reflects
both higher income and higher marginal tax rates. As a result, those at the top of the
PI distribution pay in much more than than they receive in Medicaid payments. The
rightmost column of Table 7 shows the ratio of taxes paid to transfers received. Those
at the top of the distribution pay on average $5 in taxes for every $1 in payments
received, whereas those at the bottom of the distribution pay $0.21 for every $1 in
transfers received.

9.2

Household valuations of Medicaid

In this section, we simulate changes in Medicaid generosity and compare the resulting increases (or decreases) in government costs to the resulting gains (or losses)
in consumer welfare.
To measure the costs of a Medicaid reform we compute by how much the present
discounted value of Medicaid payments changes when the program changes. This represents the increase (or decrease) in the lifetime actuarial cost of providing Medicaid
insurance and is an ex-post measure.
To measure the welfare gains, we compute the compensating variation; that is, the
immediate payment after the Medicaid reform that would leave the retiree as well off
as before the reform. This is an ex-ante measure. More specifically, the compensating
variation at age 74, λ74 = λ(a74 , g, h74, I, ζ74 , ξ74 ), is computed as:
Vt (at , g, ht, I, ζt , ξt ; current Medicaid) = Vt (at + λ74 , g, ht, I, ζt , ξt ; Medicaid reform),
where Vt (at , g, ht , I, ζt, ξt ; .) is the value function evaluated at a given set of state
38

variables, either in the world with current Medicaid (left hand side of the equation
above) or in a world with a reformed Medicaid program. Our measure is similar to the
ones computed for Medicare by Finkelstein and McKnight [25] and McClellan and
Skinner [50] but uses a forward-looking value function, rather than a static utility
function. When considering a group, we simply take averages across all its members.
If Medicaid provides retirees with valuable insurance, the compensating variation
may exceed the change in the actuarial value of Medicaid payments. On the other
hand, people may value the transfer flows at less than their actuarial value. For
example, if they are very impatient, they might prefer having the cash today, to
dispose of as they wish, over receiving Medicaid transfers in the future. Furthermore,
assets are taxed at 100% for those receiving Medicaid transfers, which in turn distorts
savings decisions.
To distinguish the insurance provided by the categorically and the medically needy
programs, we first analyze a 10% decrease in the categorically needy utility floor. This
corresponds to the consumption of the categorically needy when healthy dropping
from $4,610 to $4,140. Columns (1) and (2) of Table 8 show that this change only
affects people in the bottom two PI quintiles, as people with higher incomes never
qualify as categorically needy. The discounted present value of Medicaid payments
drops by $4,100 and $2,100, respectively, for people in the two bottom PI quintiles.
Column (2) reports the compensating variation.
Column (3) presents the ratio of column (2) to column (1), and reveals that the
categorically needy people value their lost Medicaid insurance at more than the cost
of providing it. However, the ratio is not very large, suggesting that the insurance
value of these transfers, at the margin, is not very large. Nonetheless, because this
group pays only a small fraction of the transfers’ cost (see Table 7), the value they
place on their Medicaid benefits almost surely exceeds their associated tax burden.
We next cut the consumption value of both utility floors (that is, both the categorically and medically needy floors) by 10%, and simulate our model again. The
right-hand-side panel of Table 8 shows the resulting reductions in Medicaid payments
and their compensating variations. A striking feature of this table is that while people in the lowest three PI quintiles value Medicaid fairly close to its cost, people in
the top two PI quintiles value Medicaid at two to three times its cost. In fact, the
compensating variation for retirees in the top PI quintile, $4,400, is as big as that
of the middle quintile, and is two-thirds as big as the compensating variation at the
bottom. The insurance value of Medicaid is very high for these people because of two
reasons. First, because these people are high-income they have a high lifetime level
of consumption, and thus have more consumption to lose should it fall. Second, they
39

Permanent
Income
Quintile

Categorical floor down 10%
Both floors down 10%
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Reduction Compen- Ratio Reduction Compen- Ratio
in PDV of
sating
of
in PDV of
sating
of
Payments Variation (2)/(1) Payments Variation (5)/(4)

Bottom
Fourth
Third
Second
Top

4,100
2,100
0.0
0.0
0.0

5,600
2,200
0.0
0.0
0.0

1.37
1.05
NA
NA
NA

4,500
4,000
2,900
2,200
1,400

6,300
5,000
4,400
4,100
4,400

1.40
1.25
1.52
1.86
3.14

Men
Women

300
1,200

200
1,600

0.67
1.33

1,300
3,100

1,100
5,600

0.85
1.81

Good Health
Bad Health

700
1,700

900
2,200

1.29
1.29

2,600
3,300

4,800
5,000

1.85
1.52

Notes. Left panel: the categorically needy floor is cut by 10%. Right panel: both Medicaid floors are
cut by 10%. Columns (1) and (4): decrease in the present discounted value of Medicaid payments
as of age 74. Columns (2) and (5): dollar amount needed to compensate people for the Medicaid
benefit cut. Columns (3) and (6): ratio of column (2) to column (1) and column (5) to column (4),
respectively, which give the average compensating variation per dollar of reduced Medicaid benefits.

Table 8: The costs and benefits of cutting Medicaid by 10%.

face the double compounded risk of living well past their life expectancy, and facing
extremely high medical needs. It is in those states of the world that insurance is most
valuable. Offsetting these insurance gains, however, is a redistributive tax system.
While individuals in the top income quintile place a value of $3.14 on each dollar of
transfers, they pay $4.59 of taxes (Table 7).
In Table 9, we analyze the benefits of making the Medicaid program more generous, by increasing the Medicaid consumption floor by 10% (from $4,610 to $5,070).
Table 9 shows that people at the bottom PI quintiles value these Medicaid increases
at less than their cost, people in the next two quintiles value them at slightly above
cost, and people in the top quintile value them by twice as much. In the aggregate,
taking averages over all retirees reveals that the cost increase associated with a more

40

Permanent
Income
Quintile

Both floors up 10%
(1)
(2)
(3)
Payment Compensating Ratio
Increase
Variation
(2)/(1)

Bottom
Fourth
Third
Second
Top

4,700
4,200
3,100
2,300
1,300

2,600
3,100
3,600
2,900
2,600

0.55
0.74
1.16
1.26
2.00

Men
Women

1,400
3,300

600
3,500

0.43
1.06

Good Health
Bad Health

2,500
3,500

3,000
3,000

1.20
0.86

Notes. Column (1): increase in the present discounted value of Medicaid payments at age 74.
Column (2): dollar amount people would be willing to pay to receive the higher Medicaid benefits.
Column (3) is the ratio of column (2) to column (1), which show the average compensating variation
per dollar of reduced Medicaid benefits.

Table 9: The costs and benefits of increasing Medicaid by 10%.

generous Medicaid program slightly exceeds the average valuation. Comparing the
valuations to the associated tax burdens (see Table 7), however, produces different
implications. Even though high-income retirees would receive the most “bang per
buck” from a Medicaid expansion, under the current redistributive tax system they
would not support it, as their tax burden would rise more than their valuation. In
contrast, low-income retirees, who receive the least bang per buck from a Medicaid
expansion, would support the expansion, as their tax burden would rise by even less.
Only people in the middle quintile value a Medicaid expansion in excess of both its
cost and their tax burden.
Put together, the results in Tables 8 and 9 indicate that under current programs
rules people value Medicaid transfers at more than their actuarial cost, but that
increasing Medicaid’s generosity would raise its insurance value by less than its cost.
Our model therefore suggests that the current Medicaid system is of about the right
size for most currently retired singles.
41

9.3

Long-term-care insurance

While our model includes endogenous medical spending and several dimensions
of individual-level heterogeneity, it abstracts from the decision to purchase long term
care insurance (LTCI). Only about 9% of elderly singles have LTCI (Lockwood [46])
and only 4% of LTC expenditures are paid for by LTCI (Congressional Budget Office [55]). Given that our results suggest that the elderly, and especially the high
income elderly, value Medicaid insurance heavily, it is surprising that the market for
LCTI is so small.
Brown and Finkelstein argue that that one major reason that the LTCI market
is so small is that Medicaid crowds out LTCI and thus that major reductions in
Medicaid would increase LTCI use. This is due to the fact that Medicaid is a payer of
last resort and is subject to asset and income tests, which implies that LTCI payments
for nursing home care would often crowd out Medicaid payments for the same services.
If there are fixed costs to acquiring/providing or discarding LTCI, larger changes
in Medicaid generosity are more likely to induce changes in LTCI holdings. Our experiments thus involve relatively small changes to the Medicaid program, which imply
smaller incentives to change LTCI positions. But even in the absence of transaction
costs, there are other important reasons why LTCI use is limited and why it would
likely stay limited even if Medicaid generosity was reduced by a reasonable amount.
These factors include:
1. Lack of efficiency in the private market for long-term care insurance. Prices are
high: Brown and Finkelstein [10] report that imperfect competition and transaction costs result in prices that are marked up substantially above expected
claims, with loads on typical policies from 18 to 51 cents on the dollar, depending on whether one takes into account lapsed policies. These loads are much
higher than loads that have been estimated in other private insurance markets
and point to the existence of one or more supply side imperfections.
2. Limited insurance against nursing home risk. Brown and Finkelstein [11] report
that comprehensive LTCI contracts exist but are not purchased. The typical
LTCI contracts held by households cap both the maximum number of days covered over the life of the policy and the maximum daily payment for a nursing
home stay, a daily payment that is often fixed in nominal terms (Fang [24]).
Even the policies that provide some kind of indexation of the daily maximum
payment are typically linked to aggregate price indexes rather than actual nursing home costs, thus generating substantial purchasing power risk between the
42

time a person purchases the policy and the time she enters a nursing home. As
a result, most available policies do not provide insurance against tail risk, which
is exactly the risk that the richest in our model fear the most, due to longer
longevity and higher risk of large medical needs when very old.
3. Severe adverse selection. Hendren [34] shows that when private information
problems are sufficiently large within certain subgroups, insurance markets fail
to emerge. His main empirical findings are that a large fraction of those applying
for insurance are rejected by underwriters, and that those who are rejected hold
significant private information. He also finds that 23% of 65 year olds have
health conditions that preclude them from purchasing LTCI.
4. Bequest motives (Lockwood [46]). In a framework with exogenous medical
spending, Lockwood argues that reasonably estimated bequest motives, together with medical expense risk, help fit the patterns of both asset decumulation and LTCI purchases seen in the data. We also estimate a significant
bequest motive, which reduces the value of LTCI.

9.4

Unpacking the Results: Moral hazard and exogenous expenditures

An important and open question is the extent to which people impoverish themselves in order to qualify for Medicaid. Because our model includes savings and medical spending choices, it is well suited to address the quantitative importance of this
form of moral hazard. Moral hazard arises within our model both contemporaneously,
in that retirees may purchase too much subsidized health care, and dynamically, in
that people might be over-spending over a number of periods to qualify for Medicaid
in the future. To better understand the quantitative importance of moral hazard, we
analyze further the 10% cut in Medicaid generosity considered in columns (4)-(6) of
Table 8.
A change in Medicaid generosity has two effects. First, it mechanically changes
eligibility and transfers at any given level of individual resources. Second, it changes
the degree of moral hazard by changing the incentives to consume and save. To help
disentangle these effects, Table 10 shows total and out-of-pocket medical spending,
non-medical spending, and Medicaid recipiency rates at age 85 for the simulated life
histories used to construct Table 8. The top panel of Table 10 shows quantities for
the estimated baseline model, while the second panel shows the quantities after a

43

10% reduction in the Medicaid utility floor. The bottom two panels show the differences between the two cases, in absolute and then relative (percentage) terms.
Table 10 shows that a 10% Medicaid cut would lead to lower non-medical spending.
Non-medical spending at age 85 falls on average $100- $290, depending on the income
group. However, this decline in non-medical spending is modest relative to the decline
in total medical spending, which falls by an average of $430-$1,790. The decline in total medical spending is driven by lower government transfers: while cutting Medicaid
reduces total medical expenditures, out-of-pocket expenditures increase slightly for
all groups but the richest. Although people save more after a Medicaid cut, the savings response is modest relative to the decline in total medical spending from reduced
transfers. These findings indicate that the mechanical effects of changing Medicaid
are larger than the moral hazard effects.10
Another way to assess the importance of moral hazard to treat medical expenditures as an exogenous, rather than endogenous, variable. To do this we find the
stochastic process for exogenous medical expenses that allows the model to best fit
its estimation targets. We hold preference parameters fixed, so that our experiment
focusses solely on changes to medical spending. Although our process for exogenous medical spending does not depend on wealth or permanent income, the medical
spending that it generates is fairly similar to that of the endogenous medical spending
model. We show model predictions for the exogenous medical spending specification
in Figure 16.

10

Using data from a large self-insured employer, Bajari et al. [3] find significant moral hazard.
They focus on how changes in the co-insurance rate q changes the allocation of medical versus nonmedical spending, but do not focus on savings. In contrast, in our Medicaid reforms, the coinsurance
rates remain at their baseline values – the intratemporal allocation still obeys equation (18) – and
we focus on the effect of Medicaid insurance on savings.

44

Permanent
Income
Baseline
Bottom
Fourth
Third
Second
Top

Consumption

Medicaid
Recipiency (%)

22,110
21,280
22,710
25,630
32,790

1,430
2,860
5,310
8,210
11,860

89.1
42.9
9.9
3.7
1.3

Medicaid Floors Decreased 10%
Bottom
7,600
20,320
Fourth
9,600
19,870
Third
12,240
21,580
Second
18,420
24,980
Top
26,210
32,360

1,580
3,010
5,420
8,260
11,850

88.6
41.0
8.9
3.3
1.2

-1,790
-1,410
-1,130
-650
-430

150
150
110
50
-10

-0.5
-2.0
-1.0
-0.4
-0.1

-8.1
-6.6
-5.0
-2.5
-1.3

10.5
5.2
2.1
0.6
-0.1

-0.6
-4.5
-9.6
-10.6
-7.1

Difference
Bottom
Fourth
Third
Second
Top

7,890
9,810
12,380
18,520
26,330

Medical Expenditures
Total
OOP

-290
-210
-140
-100
-120

Percentage Differences
Bottom
-3.7
Fourth
-2.1
Third
-1.1
Second
-0.5
Top
-0.5

Table 10: The effects of decreasing Medicaid payments by 10%, Age 85.

45

We then use the exogenous medical spending model to re-evaluate the 10% Medicaid cut considered in Tables 8 and 10. The compensating variations associated with
this experiment are, from the bottom PI quintile to the top: $5,200, $5,300, $5,000,
$5,700, and $8,400. The similarity between these valuations and the valuations in
the fifth column of Table 8 is not surprising. The utility floor in the endogenous
1
spending model is indexed with consumption, as u = 1−ν
c1−ν , which is identical to
¯
¯
utility in the exogenous spending model when the consumption floor is c. A 10%
¯
cut in c thus represents the same reduction in guaranteed utility for both medical
¯
spending specifications, and should be valued similarly under both specifications.11
Our finding that high-income retirees often value Medicaid as much as poorer retirees
is robust to making medical expenses exogenous.
When medical spending is endogenous, cuts to the utility floor reduce both consumption and medical expenditures; recall that the transfers are allocated optimally
between consumption and out-of-pocket medical spending.12 When medical spending
is exogenous, cuts to the utility floor can only reduce consumption. The transfer
reductions associated with a cut to the utility floor are thus smaller, and the valuations per unit of spending higher, when medical spending is exogenous. We still find,
however, that high-PI people have the highest valuation per dollar of spending.

9.5

Adverse selection

Our model generates considerable heterogeneity in health, mortality, and medical
needs. To quantify the extent to which the Medicaid population are adversely selected
on the basis of their medical needs, Table 11 compares Medicaid recipients to other
retirees along several dimensions. We construct Table 11 by simulating the baseline
model over the sample period 1996-2010 and taking cross-sectional averages. The
first row of the table shows, unsurprisingly, that Medicaid recipients are considerably
poorer. The second row shows that Medicaid recipients indeed have much higher
total medical spending.
Because medical spending in our model represents the convolution of medical
needs (µ) and financial incentives, we also consider the distribution of the medical
preference shifter µ. Bajari et al. [3] measure adverse selection in a similar, if more
11

Differences in model dynamics, along with differences in the estimated spending processes, mean
the valuations will not be identical.
12
When ν and ω are close in value, as they are in our estimates, equation (18) can be approximated
 1/ν
as m = µq
c, so that medical spending is proportional to consumption. Cuts in the utility floor
thus reduce medical and non-medical spending by similar proportions.

46

detailed, way. Compared to non-recipients, the values of µ that confront Medicaid
recipients are 4.7 times as likely to lie in the top decile, and 28 times as likely to lie
in the top percentile. In short, Medicaid recipients are more likely to be sick, and far
more likely to be very sick, consistent with Medicaid’s role as the payer of last resort,
and consistent with our argument that Medicaid provides valuable insurance against
catastrophic medical events.

Mean Net Income
Mean Medical spending
Total
Out-of-pocket
Medicaid
Medical needs shifter (µ)
Mean
Fraction in top 50% of distribution (%)
Fraction in top 10% of distribution (%)
Fraction in top 1% of distribution (%)
Fraction of population (%)

All
Retirees

Medicaid
Recipients

NonRecipients

16,270

6,240

19,020

28,930
6,680
5,680

61,820
2,940
26,440

19,920
7,700
0

1,270
50.0
10.0
1.0
100.0

5,150
67.9
26.0
4.0
19.7

210
45.1
5.6
0.1
80.3

Table 11: Comparison of Medicaid and non-Medicaid recipients: Simulations

10

Conclusions and future research

In this paper we assess the effects of Medicaid insurance on single retirees. Although Medicaid payments decrease with permanent income, even higher income
people can receive sizeable Medicaid payments because they tend to live longer and
face higher medical needs in very old age. Furthermore, our compensating variation
calculations show that many higher income retirees value Medicaid insurance as much
or more than lower-income ones. Our compensating variation calculations also indicate that retirees value Medicaid insurance at more than its actuarial cost, but that
most would value expansions of the current Medicaid program at less than cost. This
suggests that the Medicaid program may currently be of the approximate right size
for currently single retirees.
47

In the interest of tractability, our framework does not allow households to adjust
their holdings of LTCI. Although only 9% of the households in our AHEAD sample
hold such insurance, cuts to Medicaid may compel households to increase their coverage. Introducing this additional margin of portfolio choice to our model could lower
our estimates of the value households place on Medicaid. While in Section 9.3 we
argue that there are many reasons to think that introducing LTCI decisions would
not significantly affect our results, it is worth studying this question more formally.
By focussing on the retirement period, we are able to explicitly model many dimensions of uncertainty and heterogeneity and to treat medical expenditures as a choice
variable. However, it would be valuable to model the entire life cycle, the distortions
generated by the income taxes needed to finance Medicaid, and the anticipated effects
of Medicaid changes at younger ages.
By concentrating on single retirees, we study the population that is most likely
to receive Medicaid transfers. The data shows that couples tend to be richer and less
likely to end up in nursing homes and thus receive much smaller Medicaid payments.
For example, singles in our MCBS sample on average receive $3,760 in Medicaid
transfers a year, while couples in the same age range on average receive $2,140, or
$1,070 per person. It nonetheless would be interesting to extend our analysis to
include the valuation of Medicaid insurance by couples.

48

References
[1] Joseph G. Altonji and Lewis M. Segal. Small sample bias in gmm estimation of
covariance structures. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 14(3):353–
366, 1996.
[2] John Ameriks, Andrew Caplin, Steven Laufer, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. The
joy of giving or assisted living? Using strategic surveys to separate bequest and
precautionary motives. Journal of Finance, 66(2):519–561, 2011.
[3] Patrick Bajari, Han Hong, Ahmed Khwaja, and Christina Marsh. Moral hazard,
adverse selection and health expenditures: A semiparametric analysis. RAND
Journal of Economics, 45(4):747–763, 2014.
[4] James Banks, Richard Blundell, Peter Levell, and James P. Smith. Life-cycle
consumption patterns at older ages in the US and the UK. RAND Working
Paper WR-1100, 2015.
[5] Jay Bhattacharya and Darius Lakdawalla. Does Medicare benefit the poor?
Journal of Public Economics, 90(1):277–292, 2006.
[6] David M. Blau and Donna Gilleskie. The role of retiree health insurance in the
employment behavior of older men. International Economic Review, 49(2):475–
514, 2008.
[7] R. Anton Braun, Karen A. Kopecky, and Tatyana Koreshkova. Old, sick, alone
and poor: A welfare analysis of old-age social insurance programs. Mimeo,
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, 2015.
[8] Robert Brook, John E. Ware, William H. Rogers, Emmett B. Keeler, Allyson R.
Davies, Cathy A. Donald, George A. Goldberg, Kathleen N. Lohr, Patricia C.
Masthay, and Joseph P. Newhouse. Does free care improve adults’ health? results
from a randomized trial. New England Journal of Medicine, 309(23):1426–1434,
1983.
[9] Jeff Brown and Amy Finkelstein. The interaction of public and private insurance:
Medicaid and the long term care insurance market. NBER Working Paper 10989,
2004.
[10] Jeff Brown and Amy Finkelstein. The interaction of public and private insurance:
Medicaid and the long term care insurance market. American Economic Review,
98(5):837–880, 2008.
49

[11] Jeff Brown and Amy Finkelstein. The private market for long-term care insurance
in the u.s.: A review of the evidence. Journal of Risk and Insurance, 76(1):5–29,
2009.
[12] Jeffrey R. Brown, Norma B. Coe, and Amy Finkelstein. Medicaid crowd-out of
private long-term care insurance demand: Evidence from the health and retirement survey. In James M. Poterba, editor, Tax Policy and the Economy. MIT
Press, 2007.
[13] Moshe Buchinsky. Recent advances in quantile regression models: A practical
guideline for empirical research. Journal of Human Resources, 33:88–126, 1998.
[14] David Card, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas. Does Medicare save lives? The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(2):597–636, 2009.
[15] Gary Chamberlain. Comment: Sequential moment restrictions in panel data.
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics,, 10(1):20–26, 1992.
[16] Kenneth Y. Chay, Daeho Kim, and Shailender Swaminathan. Medicare, hospital
utilization and mortality: Evidence from the programs origins. Mimeo, 2010.
[17] Joseph Doyle. Returns to local-area healthcare spending: Using health shocks
to patients far from home. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
3(3):221–243, 2011.
[18] Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, John Jones, and Jeremy McCauley. Medical
spending on the U.S. elderly. Mimeo, University College London, 2015.
[19] Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, and John B. Jones. Why do the elderly
save? The role of medical expenses. Journal of Political Economy, 118(1):39–75,
2010.
[20] Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, John B. Jones, and Angshuman Gooptu.
Medicaid and the elderly. NBER Working Paper 17689, 2011.
[21] Darrell Duffie and Kenneth J. Singleton. Simulated moments estimation of
markov models of asset prices. Econometrica, 61(4):929–952, 1993.
[22] Karen E. Dynan, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes. The importance of
bequests and life-cycle saving in capital accumulation: A new answer. American
Economic Review, 92(2):274–278, 2002.
50

[23] Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, Stephen P. Ryan, Paul Schrimpf, and Mark R.
Cullen. Selection on moral hazard in health insurance. American Economic
Review, 103(1):178–219, 2013.
[24] Hanming Fang. Insurance markets for the elderly. In John Piggott and Alan
Woodland, editors, Handbook of the Economics of Population Ageing, page forthcoming. Elsevier, 2014.
[25] Amy Finkelstein and Robin McKnight. What did Medicare do? the initial impact
of Medicare on mortality and out of pocket medical spending. Journal of Public
Economics, 92(7):1644–1669, 2008.
[26] Amy Finkelstein, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan
Gruber, Joseph P. Newhouse, Heidi Allen, Katherine Baicker, and Oregon
Health Study Group. The oregon health insurance experiment: Evidence from
the first year. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3):1057–1106, 2012.
[27] Elliott S. Fisher, David E. Wennberg, Therese A. Stukel, Daniel J. Gottlieb, F.L.
Lucas, and Etoile L. Pinder. The implications of regional variations in Medicare
spending. part 2: Health outcomes and satisfaction with care. Annals of Internal
Medicine, 138(4):288–322, 2003.
[28] Raquel Fonseca, Pierre-Carl Michaud, Titus Galama, and Arie Kapteyn. On the
rise of health spending and longevity. Rand Working Paper WR-722, 2009.
[29] The Kaiser Foundation. Medicaid: A Primer. http://www.statehealthfacts.org/,
2013.
[30] Eric French and John Bailey Jones. On the distribution and dynamics of health
care costs. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 19(4):705–721, 2004.
[31] Lara Gardner and Donna Gilleskie. The effects of state medicaid policies on the
dynamic savings patterns of the elderly. Working Paper 12208, National Bureau
of Economic Research, May 2006.
[32] Michael Grossman. On the concept of health capital and the demand for health.
Journal of Political Economy, 80(2):223–255, 1972.
[33] Gary D. Hansen, Minchung Hsu, and Junsang Lee. Health insurance reform:
The impact of a Medicare buy-in. Working Paper 18529, National Bureau of
Economic Research, November 2012.
51

[34] Nathaniel Hendren. Private information and insurance rejections. Econometrica,
81(5):1713–1762, 2013.
[35] R. Glenn Hubbard, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes. Expanding the
life-cycle model: Precautionary saving and public policy. American Economic
Review, 84:174–179, 1994.
[36] R. Glenn Hubbard, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes. Precautionary
saving and social insurance. Journal of Political Economy, 103(2):360–399, 1995.
[37] Michael D. Hurd. Mortality risk and bequests. Econometrica, 57(4):779–813,
1989.
[38] Michael D. Hurd, Daniel McFadden, and Angela Merrill. Predictors of mortality
among the elderly. Working Paper 7440, National Bureau of Economic Research,
1999.
[39] Selahattin İmrohoroğlu and Sagiri Kitao. Social security, benefit claiming and
labor force participation: A quantitative general equilibrium approach. Mimeo,
2009.
[40] Ahmed Khwaja. Estimating willingness to pay for Medicare using a dynamic
life-cycle model of demand for health insurance. Journal of Econometrics,
156(1):130–147, 2010.
[41] Ruud H. Koning.
http://www.xs4all.nl/

Kernel:

A gauss library for kernel estimation.

[42] Wojciech Kopczuk and Joseph Lupton. To leave or not to leave: The distribution
of bequest motives. Review of Economic Studies, 74:207–235, 2007.
[43] Karen Kopecky and Tatyana Koreshkova. The impact of medical and nursing
home expenses and social insurance policies on savings and inequality. Mimeo,
2009.
[44] Laurence J. Kotlikoff. Health expenditures and precautionary savings. In Laurence J. Kotlikoff, editor, What Determines Saving? Cambridge, MIT Press,
1988, 1988.
[45] John Laitner, Daniel Silverman, and Dmitriy Stolyarov. Annuitized wealth and
post-retirement saving. Working Paper 20547, National Bureau of Economic
Research, October 2014.
52

[46] Lee Lockwood. Incidental bequests: Bequest motives and the choice to self-insure
late-life risks. Mimeo, 2014.
[47] Willard G. Manning, Joseph P. Newhouse, Naihua Duan, Emmett B. Keeler, and
Arleen Leibowitz. Health insurance and the demand for medical care: Evidence
from a randomized experiment. American Economic Review, 77:251–277, 1987.
[48] Charles F. Manski. Analog Estimation Methods in Econometrics. Chapman and
Hall, 1988.
[49] Samuel Marshall, Kathleen McGarry, and Jonathan S. Skinner. The risk of
out-of-pocket health care expenditure at the end of life. In Explorations in the
Economics of Aging, pages 101–128. University of Chicago Press, 2011.
[50] Mark McClellan and Jonathan Skinner. The incidence of Medicare. Journal of
Public Economics, 90(1):257–276, 2006.
[51] Thad Mirer. The wealth-age relation among the aged. American Economic
Review, 69:435–443, 1979.
[52] Makoto Nakajima and Irina Telyukova. Home equity in retirement. Mimeo,
2012.
[53] Whitney K. Newey. Generalized method of moments specification testing. Journal of Econometrics, 29(3):229–256, 1985.
[54] Whitney K. Newey and Daniel L. McFadden. Large sample estimation and
hypothesis testing. In Robert Engle and Daniel L. McFadden, editors, Handbook
of Econometrics, Volume 4. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1994.
[55] Congressional Budget Office.
Financing long-term care for the elderly.
http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/54xx/doc5400/04-26-longtermcare.pdf, 2004.
[56] The Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured. Medicaid: A Primer.
Menlo Park, CA, The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, 2010.
[57] Serdar Ozkan. Income inequality and health care expenditures over the life cycle.
Mimeo, Federal Reserve Board, 2011.
[58] Ariel Pakes and David Pollard. Simulation and the aysmptotics of optimization
estimators. Econometrica, 57(5):1027–1057, 1989.

53

[59] Michael G. Palumbo. Uncertain medical expenses and precautionary saving near
the end of the life cycle. Review of Economic Studies, 66:395–421, 1999.
[60] Svetlana Pashchenko and Ponpoje Porapakkarm. Quantitative analysis of health
insurance reform: Separating regulation from redistribution. Review of Economic
Dynamics, 16(3):383 – 404, 2013.
[61] Jorn-Steffen Pischke. Measurement error and earnings dynamics: Some estimates
from the PSID validation study. Journal of Business & Economics Statistics,
13(3):305–314, 1995.
[62] James M. Poterba, Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise. The asset cost of poor
health. Working Paper 16389, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2010.
[63] James Powell. Estimation of semiparametric models. In Robert Engle and
Daniel L McFadden, editors, Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 4. Elsevier,
Amsterdam, 1994.
[64] Susann Rohwedder, Steven J. Haider, and Michael Hurd. Increases in wealth
among the elderly in the early 1990s: How much is due to survey design? Review
of Income and Wealth, 52(4):509–524, 2006.
[65] John Karl Scholz and Ananth Seshadri. Health and wealth in a lifecycle model.
Mimeo, 2013.
[66] John Karl Scholz, Ananth Seshadri, and Surachai Khitatrakun. Are americans
saving optimally for retirement? Journal of Political Economy, 114:607–643,
2006.
[67] George Tauchen. Finite state markov-chain approximations to univariate and
vector autoregressions. Economics Letters, 20(2):177–181, 1986.
[68] Hilary Waldron. Trends in mortality differentials and life expectancy for male
social security-covered workers, by socioeconomic status. Social Security Bulletin,
67(3):1–28, 2007.
[69] Motohiro Yogo. Portfolio choice in retirement: Health risk and the demand for
annuities, housing, and risky assets. Mimeo, University of Pennsylvania, 2009.
[70] Katherine Young, Rachel Garfield, MaryBeth Musumeci, Lisa Clemans-Cope,
and Emily Lawton. Medicaid’s role for dual eligible beneficiaries. Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured, pages 1–19, 2012.
54

Appendix A: for online publication: the MCBS data
In order to assess the accuracy of the model’s predictions, we compare modelpredicted distributions of out-of-pocket and Medicaid medical spending to the distributions observed in the AHEAD and MCBS data in the main text of the paper.
Here, we describe in greater detail the construction and accuracy of the MCBS data.
The MCBS is a nationally representative survey of disabled and age-65+ Medicare
beneficiaries. The survey contains an over-sample of beneficiaries older than 80 and
disabled individuals younger than 65. Respondents are asked about health status,
health insurance, and health care expenditures (from all sources). The MCBS data
are matched to Medicare records, and medical expenditure data are created through a
reconciliation process that combines information from survey respondents with Medicare administrative files. As a result, the survey is thought to give extremely accurate
data on Medicare payments and fairly accurate data on out-of-pocket and Medicaid
payments. As in the AHEAD survey, the MCBS survey includes information on those
who enter a nursing home or die. Respondents are interviewed up to 12 times over a
4 year period. We aggregate the data to an annual level.
In order to assess the quality of the medical expenditure data in the MCBS,
we benchmark it against administrative data from the Medicaid Statistical Information System (MSIS) and survey data from the AHEAD. For Medicare payments, the
match is close. For example, when using population weights, the number of Medicare
beneficiaries lines up almost exactly with the aggregate statistics. More important,
Medicare expenditures per beneficiary are very close. Over the 1996-2006 period,
MCBS Medicare expenditures per capita for the age 65+ population are $6,070, only
11% smaller than the value of $6,820 in the official statistics.13
The MCBS also accurately measures the share of the population receiving Medicaid payments.14 However, MCBS Medicaid payments for the age 65+ population
are on average 32% smaller than what administrative data from the MSIS suggest.
13

Medicare statistics are located at http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/cats/health nutrition/
medicare medicaid.html.
14
According to MCBS data, there were on average 5.1 million age 65+ Medicaid beneficiaries over the 1996-2006 period, versus 4.7 million “aged” (which mostly refers to
aged 65+) Medicaid beneficiaries in the MSIS data.
This difference potentially reflects a small number of Medicaid age 65+ individuals who are classified as “disabled” instead of “aged” in the MSIS data.
Medicaid MSIS statistics are located at
https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Computer-Data-and-Systems/
MedicaidDataSourcesGenInfo/MSIS-Tables.html. See De Nardi et al. [18] for further comparisons of the MCBS data to administrative data on Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries and
payments.

55

Expenditure
Percentile
everyone
95-100%
90-95%
70-90%
50-70%
0-50%

Percentage
of Medicaid
enrollees

Percentage
of Medicaid
expenditures (MSIS)

100%
5%
5%
20%
20%
50%

100%
40.5%
20.1%
32.5%
5.9%
1.0%

Average
Average
expenditure per expenditure per
enrollee (MSIS) enrollee (MCBS)
13,410
100,060
50,180
21,940
3,690
240

8,630
69,410
37,510
13,150
2,460
330

Note: 2010 MSIS data, adjusted to 2005 dollars
Table A1: Medicaid enrollment and expenditures by enrollee spending percentile, MSIS
versus MCBS.

Table A1 compares the distribution of the MSIS administrative payment data (taken
from Young et al. [70]) to data from the MCBS. We show the MCBS distribution
for all dual Medicare/Medicaid beneficiaries, the set closest to the the sample in the
MSIS data. 59% of all dual eligibles are age 65+, the other 41% being disabled individuals under age 65 who are potentially more costly than the age 65+ dual eligibles.
Table A1 shows both means and means conditional on the distribution of payments.
The MSIS data show that the least costly 50% of all Medicaid enrollees account for
only 0.9% of total Medicaid payments, whereas the most costly 5% of all beneficiaries
are responsible for 41% of payments. Although the MCBS data match the MSIS data
well across the bottom 70% of the distribution, the top 5% of all payments in the
MSIS average $100,060, whereas in the MCBS they are $69,810. Limiting the MCBS
sample to our estimation sample (retired singles who meet our age selection criteria:
greater than 70 in 1994, 72 in 1996, 74 in 1998, etc.) leads to higher payments:
average Medicaid payments for Medicaid beneficiaries in this MCBS subsample are
$13,620.
The next set of benchmarking exercises that we perform is for out-of-pocket medical spending, Medicaid recipiency and income between the AHEAD and MCBS.We
restrict the sample to singles (over the sample period) who meet the AHEAD age
criteria (at least 70 in 1994, 72 in 1996, ...) and who are not working over the sample
period, just as we do in the AHEAD data. We construct a measure of permanent
income, which is the percentile rank of total income over the period we observe these
56

Income
Quintile

Total
income

1
2
3
4
5

7,740
10,290
15,500
19,290
33,580

AHEAD data
Out-ofAnnuity pocket
income expenses
4,820
8,270
10,900
14,390
26,300

Medicaid
recipiency

2,550
4,270
5,050
6,360
7,000

60.9%
28.1%
11.0%
5.6%
3.0%

MCBS data
Out-ofTotal
pocket
Medicaid
income expenses recipiency
6,750
10,020
13,740
19,710
44,150

4,050
5,340
6,470
7,300
8,020

69.9%
41.8%
15.5%
8.0%
5.4%

Table A2: Income, out-of-pocket spending, and Medicaid recipiency rates, AHEAD versus
MCBS, 1996-2010, for those age 72 and older in 1996.

individuals (the MCBS asks only about total income). The first four columns of
Table A2 show sample statistics from the full AHEAD sample while the final three
columns of the table shows sample statistics from the MCBS sample. The first statistics we compare are income. Total income in the AHEAD data (including asset and
other non-annuitized income) lines up well with total income in the MCBS data, although income in the top quintile of the MCBS is higher than in the AHEAD. Next we
compare out-of-pocket medical spending in the MCBS and AHEAD. Out-of-pocket
medical expenditure (including insurance payments) averages $2,360 in the bottom
PI quintile and $6,340 in the top quintile in the AHEAD. In comparison, the same
numbers in the MCBS data are $3,540 and $7,020. Overall, out-of-pocket medical
spending in the MCBS and AHEAD are similar, which may be surprising given that
the two surveys each have their own advantages in terms of survey methodology.15
The share of the population receiving Medicaid transfers is also very similar in the
AHEAD and MCBS. 61% and 70% of those in the bottom PI quintile are on Medicaid in the the AHEAD and MCBS, respectively. In the top quintile, 3% of people
are on Medicaid in the AHEAD whereas 5% are in the MCBS. The higher Medicaid
recipiency rate in the MCBS might reflect that the MCBS data has administrative
information on whether individuals are on Medicaid, which eliminates underreporting
15

There are more detailed questions underlying the out-of-pocket medical expense questions in
the AHEAD, including the use of “unfolding brackets”. Respondents can give ranges for medical
expense amounts, instead of a point estimate or “don’t know” as in the MCBS. The MCBS has the
advantage that forgotten medical out-of-pocket medical expenses will be imputed if Medicare had
to pay a share of the health event.

57

problems.
We also assessed the usefulness of the Medicaid-related data in MEPS. A key
problem with the MEPS data, however, is that that it does not include information
on nursing home stays or expenses in the last few months of life. Using data from
MSIS, Young et al. [70] report that among those aged 65 and older, 79% of all Medicaid
expenses are for long term care (although only 14% of these beneficiaries are receiving
long term care). The MEPS data are useful for understanding the remaining 21% of
Medicaid payments. Consistent with this fact, mean Medicaid payments in the MEPS
for elderly beneficiaries are only $3,499, whereas they are $8,630 in the MCBS, and
$13,414 according to the administrative data from the MSIS.

Appendix B: for online publication: computational details
This Appendix details our simulation procedure.
1. To find optimal decision rules, we solve the model backwards using value function iteration. The state variables of the model are assets, gender, health status,
permanent income, and the permanent and transitory components of medical
spending (ζ and ξ). At each age, we solve the model for 200 grid points for
assets, two points for gender (male and female), three points for health (good,
bad, and nursing home), 13 grid points for permanent income, five points for the
persistent component of medical needs shocks, and four points for the idiosyncratic component of the medical needs shocks. Our approach for discretizing
the medical needs shocks follows Tauchen [67], with the grid spaced over the
percentile range [0.175, 0.825], a specification we found to work well.
2. Our initial sample of simulated individuals is large, consisting of 150,000 random
draws from the individuals in the first wave of our data. Given that we randomly
simulate a sample of individuals that is larger than the number of individuals
observed in the data, most observations will be used multiple times.
3. All initial conditions are taken from the data, except for the split between the
permanent and transitory components of the medical spending shifters (ζ and
ξ). Regarding the final two variables, we only observe out-of-pocket medical
expenses, which in our model are a function of not only the spending shifters, but
all the other state variables. Recall that forward-looking retirees will respond
differently to persistent and transitory shocks of the same size. Inferring the
two shocks would thus involve a costly filtering procedure utilizing the model’s

58

decision rules. We instead draw the initial values of ζ and ξ from their invariant
distributions.
4. For each draw, not only we take the joint distribution of the initial conditions
for the state variables, but we also use the observed health and mortality history
experienced by that particular individual. We assign entire health and mortality
histories to insure that we properly match how our sample composition changes
with age. One concern is that our sample is fairly small, so that the medians (or
90th percentiles) of wealth or medical spending in some cohort-income groups
can change with the deaths of a few individuals. While we expect these effects
to average out if we forward-simulated demographic transitions, it is simpler
to match the data if we base our simulations on actual life histories. A more
fundamental issue is that the processes for health and mortality that we feed into
the model do not depend on wealth, because wealth is an endogenous variable in
our model. However, we know that high wealth is a good predictor of longevity,
conditional on the other state variables. Our simulation procedure captures the
initial wealth/mortality gradient by construction, whereas our estimated health
and mortality transition models do not.
5. Given the optimal decision rules, and the initial conditions of the state variables,
we calculate life histories for savings, consumption, Medicaid recipiency, and
medical spending.
6. We aggregate the simulated data in the same way we aggregate the observed
data, and construct moment conditions. We describe these moments in greater
detail in appendix C. Our method of simulated moments procedure delivers
the model parameters that minimize a GMM criterion function, which we also
describe in Appendix C.

Appendix C: for online publication: moment conditions and
asymptotic distribution of parameter estimates
Recall that we estimate the parameters of our model in two steps. In the first
step, we estimate the vector χ, the set of parameters than can be estimated without
explicitly using our model. In the second step, we use the method of simulated
moments (MSM) to estimate the remaining parameters, which are contained in the
M × 1 vector ∆. The elements of ∆ are ν, ω, β, Y, u, θ, k, and the parameters of
¯
ˆ of the “true” parameter ¯vector
ln µ(·). Our estimate, ∆,
∆0 is the value of ∆ that

59

minimizes the (weighted) distance between the life-cycle profiles found in the data
and the simulated profiles generated by the model.
For each calendar year t ∈ {t0 , ..., tT } = {1996, 1998, 2000, 2002, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010},
we match median assets for QA = 5 permanent income quintiles in P = 5 birth year
cohorts.16 The 1996 (period-t0 ) distribution of simulated assets, however, is bootstrapped from the 1996 data distribution, and thus we match assets to the data for
1998, ..., 2006. In addition, we require each cohort-income-age cell have at least 10
observations to be included in the GMM criterion.
Suppose that individual i belongs to birth cohort p and his permanent income
level falls in the qth permanent income quintile. Let apqt (∆, χ) denote the modelpredicted median asset level for individuals in individual i’s group at time t, where χ
includes all parameters estimated in the first stage (including the permanent income
boundaries). Assuming that observed assets have a continuous conditional density,
apqt will satisfy


Pr ait ≤ apqt (∆0 , χ0 ) |p, q, t, individual i observed at t = 1/2.
The preceding equation can be rewritten as a moment condition (Manski [48], Powell [63] and Buchinsky [13]). In particular, applying the indicator function produces

E 1{ait ≤ apqt (∆0 , χ0 )} − 1/2 |p, q, t, individual i observed at t = 0.

(20)

Letting Iq denote the values contained in the qth permanent income quintile, we can
convert this conditional moment equation into an unconditional one (e.g., Chamberlain [15]):

E [1{ait ≤ apqt (∆0 , χ0 )} − 1/2] × 1{pi = p} × 1{Ii ∈ Iq }

× 1{individual i observed at t} t = 0
(21)
for p ∈ {1, 2, ..., P }, q ∈ {1, 2, ..., QA }, t ∈ {t1 , t2 ..., tT }.
We also include several moment conditions relating to medical expenses. Recall
that within the model medical expenses are chosen annually and are forward-looking
(i.e., for the calendar year in which they are chosen). In contrast, medical expenditures in the AHEAD are averages of spending over the preceding two years. To reconcile the two measures, we first simulate medical expenses at an annual frequency,
take two-year averages, and move the resulting averages back one year, to produce a
16

Because we do not allow for macro shocks, in any given cohort t is used only to identify the
individual’s age.

60

measure of medical expenditures comparable to the ones contained in the AHEAD.
This means that the AHEAD measure for medical spending in 2000 will be compared
to averages of model-simulated spending for 1998 and 1999. Using lagged values also
allows us to account for people who died prior to the most current wave. This too ensures consistency with the AHEAD, which collects end-of-life medical spending data
through survivor interviews.
As with assets, we divide individuals into 5 cohorts and match data from 7 waves
covering the period 1998-2010. (Because the model starts in 1996, while the medical
expense data are averages over 1995-96, we cannot match the first wave.) The moment
conditions for medical expenses are split by permanent income as well. However, we
combine the bottom two income quintiles, as there is very little variation in out-ofpocket medical expenses in the bottom quintile until very late in life; QM = 4.
We require the model to match median out-of-pocket medical expenditures in each
cohort-income-age cell. Let m50
pqt (∆, χ) denote the model-predicted 50th percentile for
individuals in cohort p and permanent income group q at time (age) t. Proceeding as
before, we have the following moment condition:

E [1{mit ≤ m50
pqt (∆0 , χ0 )} − 0.5] × 1{pi = p} × 1{Ii ∈ Iq }

× 1{individual i observed at t} t = 0
(22)

for p ∈ {1, 2, ..., P }, q ∈ {1, 2, ..., QM }, t ∈ {t1 , t2 ..., tT }.
To fit the upper tail of the medical expense distribution, we require the model
to match the 90th percentile of out-of-pocket medical expenditures in each cohortincome-age cell. Letting m90
pqt (∆, χ) denote the model-predicted 90th percentile, we
have the following moment condition:

E [1{mit ≤ m90
pqt (∆0 , χ0 )} − 0.9] × 1{pi = p} × 1{Ii ∈ Iq }

× 1{individual i observed at t} t = 0
(23)

for p ∈ {1, 2, ..., P }, q ∈ {1, 2, ..., QM }, t ∈ {t1 , t2 ..., tT }.
To pin down the autocorrelation coefficient for ζ (ρm ), and its contribution to the
total variance ζ + ξ, we require the model to match the first and second autocorrelations of logged medical expenses. Define the residual Rit as
Rit = ln(mit ) − ln mpqt ,

ln mpqt = E(ln(mit )|pi = p, qi = q, t)

61

and define the standard deviation σpqt as
q

σpqt = E Rit2 |pi = p, qi = q, t .

Both ln mpqt and σpqt can be estimated non-parametrically as elements of χ. Using
these quantities, the autocorrelation coefficient ACpqtj is:
!
Rit Ri,t−j
ACpqtj = E
pi = p, qi = q .
σpqt σpq,t−j
Let ACpqtj (∆, χ) be the jth autocorrelation coefficient implied by the model, calculated using model values of ln mpqt and σpqt . The resulting moment condition for the
first autocorrelation is


Rit Ri,t−1
− ACpqt1 (∆0 , χ0 ) × 1{pi = p} × 1{Ii ∈ Iq }
E
σpqt σpq,t−1
!
× 1{individual i observed at t & t − 1} t

= 0.

(24)

The corresponding moment condition for the second autocorrelation is
E




Rit Ri,t−2
− ACpqt2 (∆0 , χ0 ) × 1{pi = p} × 1{Ii ∈ Iq }
σpqt σpq,t−2
!

× 1{individual i observed at t & t − 2} t

= 0.

(25)

Finally, we match Medicaid utilization (take-up) rates. Once again, we divide
individuals into 5 cohorts, match data from 5 waves, and stratify the data by permanent income. We combine the top two quintiles because in many cases no one in the
top permanent income quintile is on Medicaid: QU = 4.
Let upqt (∆, χ) denote the model-predicted utilization rate for individuals in cohort
p and permanent income group q at age t. Let uit be the {0, 1} indicator that equals
1 when individual i receives Medicaid. The associated moment condition is


E uit − upqt (∆0 , χ0 ) × 1{pi = p} × 1{Ii ∈ Iq }

× 1{individual i observed at t} t = 0
(26)
for p ∈ {1, 2, ..., P }, q ∈ {1, 2, ..., QU }, t ∈ {t1 , t2 ..., tT }.
62

To summarize, the moment conditions used to estimate model with endogenous
medical expenses consist of: the moments for asset medians described by equation
(21); the moments for median medical expenses described by equation (22); the moments for the 90th percentile of medical expenses described by equation (23); the
moments for the autocorrelations of logged medical expenses described by equations
(24) and (25); and the moments for the Medicaid utilization rates described by equation (26). In the end, we have a total of J = 631 moment conditions.
Suppose we have a dataset of I independent individuals that are each observed
at up to T separate calendar years. Let ϕ(∆; χ0 ) denote the J-element vector of
moment conditions described immediately above, and let ϕ̂I (.) denote its sample
c I denote a J × J weighting matrix, the MSM estimator ∆
ˆ is given
analog. Letting W
by
I
c I ϕ̂I (∆; χ0 ),
ϕ̂I (∆; χ0 )′ W
argmin
1+τ
∆
where τ is the ratio of the number of observations to the number of simulated observations.
In practice, we estimate χ0 as well, using the approach described in the main text.
Computational concerns, however, compel us to treat χ0 as known in the analysis that
follows. Under regularity conditions stated in Pakes and Pollard [58] and Duffie and
ˆ is both consistent and asymptotically normally
Singleton [21], the MSM estimator ∆
distributed:

√ 
ˆ − ∆0
I ∆
N(0, V),
with the variance-covariance matrix V given by

V = (1 + τ )(D′ WD)−1 D′ WSWD(D′ WD)−1 ,
where: S is the variance-covariance matrix of the data;
D=

∂ϕ(∆; χ0 )
∂∆′

(27)

∆=∆0

c I }.
is the J×M gradient matrix of the population moment vector; and W = plimI→∞ {W
Moreover, Newey [53] shows that if the model is properly specified,
I
ˆ χ0 )′ R−1 ϕ̂I (∆;
ˆ χ0 )
ϕ̂I (∆;
1+τ

χ2J−M ,

where R−1 is the generalized inverse of
R = PSP,
P = I − D(D′ WD)−1 D′ W.
63

c I converges to S−1 ,
The asymptotically efficient weighting matrix arises when W
the inverse of the variance-covariance matrix of the data. When W = S−1 , V simplifies to (1 + τ )(D′ S−1 D)−1 , and R is replaced with S.
But even though the optimal weighting matrix is asymptotically efficient, it can
be biased in small samples. (See, for example, Altonji and Segal [1].) We thus use a
“diagonal” weighting matrix, as suggested by Pischke [61]. This diagonal weighting
scheme uses the inverse of the matrix that is the same as S along the diagonal and
has zeros off the diagonal of the matrix.
An additional problem is that in cells with small numbers of observations, a moment condition will occasionally have a variance of zero. In one particular cell of
the current specification, every person receives Medicaid. Rather than exclude these
cells from the moment criterion, we add a small amount of measurement error to the
moment condition, so that the weight on the moment (the inverse of the variance) is
large but finite.
We estimate D, S, and W with their sample analogs. For example, our estimate
of S is the J × J estimated variance-covariance matrix of the sample data. When
estimating this matrix, we use sample statistics, so that apqt (∆, χ) is replaced with
the sample median for group pqt.
One complication in estimating the gradient matrix D is that the functions inside the moment condition ϕ(∆; χ) are non-differentiable at certain data points; see
equation (21). This means that we cannot consistently estimate D as the numerical
derivative of ϕ̂I (.). Our asymptotic results therefore do not follow from the standard
GMM approach, but rather the approach for non-smooth functions described in Pakes
and Pollard [58], Newey and McFadden [54] (section 7), and Powell [63].
To find D, it is helpful to rewrite equation (21) as


Pr pi = p & Ii ∈ Iq & individual i observed at t ×
#
"Z

apqt (∆0 ,χ0 ) 
1
f ait p, Ii ∈ Iq , t dait −
= 0.
(28)
2
−∞
It follows that the rows of D are given by


Pr pi = p & Ii ∈ Iq & individual i observed at t ×

 ∂a (∆ ; χ )
pqt
0
0
f apqt p, Ii ∈ Iq , t ×
.
(29)
∂∆′

In practice, we find f apf qt |p, q, t , the conditional p.d.f. of assets evaluated at the
median apqt , with a kernel density estimator written by Koning [41]. The gradients
for equations (22) and (23) are found in a similar fashion.
64

Appendix D: for online publication: demographic transition
probabilities in the AHEAD
Let ht ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3} denote death (ht = 0) and the 3 mutually exclusive health
states of the living (nursing home = 1, bad = 2, good = 3, respectively). Let x be
a vector that includes a constant, age, permanent income, gender, and powers and
interactions of these variables, and indicators for previous health and previous health
interacted with age. Our goal is to construct the likelihood function for the transition
probabilities.
Using a multivariate logit specification, we have, for i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, j ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3},
πij,t = Pr( ht+1 = j| ht = i)
. X
= γij
γik ,
k∈{0,1,2,3}

γi0 ≡ 1,

∀i,

γ1k = exp (xβk ) ,
γ2k = exp (xβk ) ,
γ3k = exp (xβk ) ,

k ∈ {1, 2, 3},

k ∈ {1, 2, 3},

k ∈ {1, 2, 3},

where {βk }3k=0 are sets of coefficient vectors and of course Pr( ht+1 = 0| ht = 0) = 1.
The formulae above give 1-period-ahead transition probabilities,
Pr( ht+1 = j| ht = i). What we observe in the AHEAD dataset, however, are 2-period
ahead probabilities, Pr( ht+2 = j| ht = i). The two sets of probabilities are linked,
however, by
X
Pr( ht+2 = j| ht = i) =
Pr( ht+2 = j| ht+1 = k) Pr( ht+1 = k| ht = i)
k

=

X

πkj,t+1 πik,t .

k

This allows us to estimate {βk } directly from the data using maximum likelihood.

Appendix E: For online publication: the PSID data and our
tax calculations
The lifetime contribution towards Medicaid is calculated using data on household
federal tax payments from the PSID. Our calculations require two steps. The first
one creates a PSID sample that is comparable to the AHEAD sample. The second
65

step computes the present discounted value of lifetime taxes for each individual and
aggregates it by PI quintile, gender, and health status.
To generate a sample from the PSID that matches that from the AHEAD as closely
as possible, we use only individuals that by 1996 are single, make no significant labor
income, and are aged 70 to 79. In the AHEAD sample the cohort is aged 72 to 76
but for sample size reasons in the PSID we increase the window from 5 years to 10
years. This leaves a sample of 112 individuals, who are then sorted by permanent
income into income quintiles as is done with the AHEAD data.
AHEAD data
Number
%

PSID data
Number
%

Men
Women

138
573

19.4
80.6

19
93

17.0
83.0

Good Health
Bad Health
Nursing Home

433
258
20

60.9
36.3
2.8

72
40
0

64.3
35.7
0.0

Total Observations

711

100

112

100

Table A3: Sample size comparison, AHEAD versus PSID, 1996-2010.

PI Quintile

AHEAD data

PSID data

Bottom
Fourth
Third
Second
Top

4,830
8,900
12,550
16,930
32,250

4,530
8,960
11,920
16,970
31,160

Overall Average

15,710

15,880

Table A4: Annuity income comparison, AHEAD versus PSID, 1996-2010.

To compute taxes, we start by computing permanent income, which is the average
66

annuity income for each person, where annuity income is calculated as the sum of
Social Security, VA Pensions, non-VA Pensions, and Annuities. To match the AHEAD
data this is calculated for the years the individual remained alive in 1996, 1998, 2000,
2002, 2004, 2008, and 2010.
Table A4 compares mean annuity income for each income quintile in the PSID
sample and the AHEAD sample and shows that they match closely. After being
sorted by income quintiles, the PDV of total household federal taxes (value in 1995,
measured in 2005 dollars) is calculated for each income quintile-gender group g, as
follows:

Q2015
P2015
P
1
j=t+1 (1 + r(j))
t=1967 w(g, t) I(g)
i∈g tax(i, t)
P DV (taxes, g) =
 Q2015

Q2015
z=1995 (1 + r(z)) ·
q=2005 (1 + i(q))

where w(g, t) is the probability that a member of group g is alive at time t, conditional
on being alive in 1967. The mortality rates behind w(g, t) are taken from McClellan
and Skinner (2006) until age 70 and are then updated using data from the US Life
Tables for 2009. I(g) is the number of people in group g, tax(i, t) is the household
federal taxes of individual i in year t, r(j) is the nominal interest rate in year j, and
i(j) is the inflation rate. Since after 1990 the PSID no longer reports the value of taxes
paid, we assume that tax payments after that year equal those paid in 1990, inflationadjusted. We also assume a 3% real interest rate. We sum across all individuals to
calculate the aggregate PDV of federal taxes. Given the total taxes paid for each
group, we need to determine what fraction of these taxes was related to Medicaid.
To determine the average Medicaid tax rate necessary to balance the Medicaid
budget for this cohort, we sum the present discounted value of Medicaid transfers
reported in Table 7 across individuals. The ratio of the present discounted value of
Medicaid transfers to the present value of total taxes paid is ℵ, the share of total
taxes used to fund Medicaid for the elderly.
Finally, the PDV of contributions to Medicaid for each PI quintile (or gender and
health group) is calculated for each group as ℵ multiplied by the PDV of federal taxes
for that group.

Appendix F: For online publication: identification and sensitivity to parameter values
In this appendix we consider how changes in key parameters affect the model’s
implications for outcomes such as savings, out-of-pocket medical spending, and Medicaid recipiency. We change one parameter at a time, holding all other parameters
67

at their baseline values. Table A5 shows how the parameter changes affect the asset, out-of-pocket medical spending, and Medicaid recipiency moments, as well as
the total GMM criterion (the sum of all the moments). Figures 11-15 show how the
parameter changes affect the life-cycle profiles of assets, out-of-pocket medical spending, Medicaid recipiency, and non-medical consumption. This appendix also includes
Figure 16, which shows the same profiles for the version of the model where medical
spending is exogenous.
The top row of Table A5 shows the moment contributions for our baseline model.
The second row shows the moment contributions that result when we reduce the
consumption curvature parameter ν by 10%. This specification fits the data much
worse: the GMM criterion in the baseline model is 1,217, whereas it is 3,513 when
we reduce ν by 10%. Figure 11 reveals that this specification produces much lower
medical spending and Medicaid recipiency, and Table A5 shows that this leads to a
much worse model fit.
Decreasing the curvature parameter ω by 10% leads the model to over-predict
medical spending and Medicaid recipiency. Reducing the discount factor β by 10%
leads to much more rapid asset decumulation, which is not consistent with the data.
The next two rows of Table A5 show the effects of changing the bequest motive parameters, that is the marginal propensity to consume out of wealth in the final period
before certain death (MPC) and the threshold where the bequest motive becomes
operative. Both of these objects are functions of the bequest parameters θ and k.
Changing the bequest parameters does not necessarily make the make the model fit
the asset moments less well, but it does make the model fit the medical spending and
Medicaid recipiency moments less well. Next, we decrease the utility floor and the
Medicaid income threshold by 10%. Reducing these parameters worsens the model’s
fit of the Medicaid moments. Finally, reducing either the mean or the variance of the
medical needs shocks causes the model to fit the data less well.

68

Asset
Quantiles

Specification
Baseline
ν decreased 10%
ω decreased 10%
β decreased 10%
MPC decreased 10%
Bequest threshold doubled
Utility floors decreased 10%
Medicaid income threshold
decreased 10%
Medical shocks decreased 10%
Variance of shocks decreased 10%

Medical Spending
Autocor- Medicaid
Quantiles relations Recipiency

Total

166
202
424
213
179
146
175
165

543
2,355
1,853
696
541
718
532
595

174
189
252
169
174
182
201
150

335
767
1,207
316
351
372
364
345

1,217
3,513
3,736
1,394
1,246
1,418
1,271
1,254

175
163

580
581

174
173

378
321

1,308
1,238

Table A5: Effects of Parameter Changes on GMM Criteria

69

a

b

c

d

Figure 11: Assets (panel a), Medicaid recipiency (panel b), out-of-pocket medical spending
(panel c), and non-medical consumption (d) by age and permanent income.
Dashed line: benchmark, solid line: ν decreased 10%.

70

a

b

c

d

Figure 12: Assets (panel a), Medicaid recipiency (panel b), out-of-pocket medical spending
(panel c), and non-medical consumption (d) by age and permanent income.
Dashed line: benchmark, solid line: ω decreased 10%.

71

a

b

c

d

Figure 13: Assets (panel a), Medicaid recipiency (panel b), out-of-pocket medical spending
(panel c), and non-medical consumption (d) by age and permanent income.
Dashed line: benchmark, solid line: β decreased 10%.

72

a

b

c

d

Figure 14: Assets (panel a), Medicaid recipiency (panel b), out-of-pocket medical spending
(panel c), and non-medical consumption (d) by age and permanent income.
Dashed line: benchmark, solid line: MPC decreased 10%.

73

a

b

c

d

Figure 15: Assets (panel a), Medicaid recipiency (panel b), out-of-pocket medical spending
(panel c), and non-medical consumption (d) by age and permanent income.
Dashed line: benchmark, solid line: Bequest threshold doubled.

74

a

b

c

d

e

Figure 16: Assets (panel a), Medicaid recipiency (panel b), out-of-pocket medical spending
(panel c), and non-medical consumption (d) by age and permanent income.
Dashed line: benchmark, solid line: exogenous medical spending.

75

Appendix G: The CDF of assets predicted by the model compared with the one in the data

.6
.5
.4
0

.1

.2

.3

Probability

.7

.8

.9

1

To gauge model fit of the asset data, figure 17 presents both the CDF of assets
in the AHEAD data and the CDF of assets predicted by the model. The model
prediction is the solid line and the AHEAD data are the dotted line. The CDF for
model predicted assets looks like a step function since we discretize the asset grid.
Overall, the fit of the model is good. The model underpredicts the probability of
having low assets slightly. For example, 47% of all AHEAD households have assets
below $30,000, whereas the model predicts that 41% of all households have assets
below $30,000. At higher asset levels the fit of the model is better. For example, 67%
of all households have assets below $100,000, whereas the model predicts that 66% of
all households have assets below $30,000.

10

30

100

300

1000

Assets (000s of 1998 dollars)

Figure 17: Cumulative distribution functions of assets: model (solid line), AHEAD data
(dotted line).

Appendix H: Robustness of compensating variations to parameter changes
For the purposes of better understanding what affects the compensating variations in our estimated model, we now turn to changing one parameter at a time and
recomputing the compensating variation for a 10% decrease in Medicaid generosity.
It should be noted that, as we have shown in Appendix F, some of these parameter
changes (and notably those for risk aversion and the discount factor) lead to drastic
deteriorations in the model’s fit of the observed data.
76

The results in Table A6 of this appendix show that realistically small changes in
Medicaid generosity and income eligibility generate small changes in the estimated
compensating variations, relative to their benchmark values. In contrast, changes in
parameter values that significantly worsen the fit of the model can generate significant
changes in the compensating variations. It should also be noted that the direction
of these changes makes economic sense. If, for instance, we decrease patience, the
insurance value that households attribute to Medicaid decreases. Similarly, if we
decrease risk aversion, our compensating variations tend to decrease.
Baseline
Model
(1)
Change in
Bottom
Fourth
Third
Second
Top

Initial floor
reduced 10%
(2)

Discounted
4,500
4,000
2,900
2,200
1,400

Y (for SSI)
¯
= $6,950
(3)

Lifetime Spending
3,900
4,400
3,500
4,000
2,500
2,900
1,900
2,200
1,100
1,400

Compensating Variation
Bottom
6,300
6,000
Fourth
5,000
4,800
Third
4,400
4,400
Second
4,100
4,600
Top
4,400
4,600

6,400
5,000
4,400
4,100
4,400

Compensating Variation / Change in Spending
Bottom
1.40
1.54
1.45
Fourth
1.25
1.37
1.25
Third
1.52
1.76
1.52
Second
1.86
2.42
1.86
Top
3.14
4.18
3.14

ν reduced
10%
(4)

ω reduced
10%
(5)

β reduced
10%
(6)

2,600
2,100
1,300
800
400

33,300
34,900
35,000
33,800
29,500

4,600
4,200
3,200
2,500
1,600

3,900
2,400
1,100
600
200

22,800
20,600
20,500
22,500
24,700

4,000
3,600
3,600
2,400
1,700

1.50
1.14
0.85
0.75
0.50

0.68
0.59
0.59
0.67
0.84

0.87
0.86
1.13
0.96
1.06

Table A6: The costs and benefits of increasing Medicaid by 10%, alternative specifications.

77

