                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         EFFECTS OF MENTAL HEALTH ON COUPLE RELATIONSHIP STATUS

                                       Nancy E. Reichman
                                         Hope Corman
                                         Kelly Noonan

                                       Working Paper 19164
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19164


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2013




We are grateful to the Center for Health and Wellbeing at Princeton University for funding support,
to Taťána Čepková and Farzana Razack for excellent research assistance, and to Cynthia Bansak and
to Karen Conway and the other participants at University of New Hampshire Department of Economics
seminar series for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Nancy E. Reichman, Hope Corman, and Kelly Noonan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of Mental Health on Couple Relationship Status
Nancy E. Reichman, Hope Corman, and Kelly Noonan
NBER Working Paper No. 19164
June 2013
JEL No. I10,J12

                                               ABSTRACT

We exploit the occurrence of postpartum depression (PPD), which has a random component according
to the medical community, to estimate causal effects of a salient form of mental illness on couples’
relationship status. We estimate single-equation models as well as bivariate probit models that address
the endogeneity of PPD. We find that this relatively prevalent mental illness reduces the probability
the couples are married (by 22–24%) as well the probability that they are living together (married
or cohabiting) (by 24–26%) three years after the birth of the child. Models stratified by relationship
status at the time of the birth indicate that PPD makes it more likely that unions dissolve (particularly
among baseline cohabitors) and less likely that unions are formed (particularly among baseline non-cohabitors).
The findings contribute to the literature on the effects of mental illness on relationships and to the
broader literature on socioeconomic status and health.


Nancy E. Reichman                                      Kelly Noonan
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School                     Department of Economics
Department of Pediatrics                               Rider University
Child Health Institute of New Jersey                   2083 Lawrence Road, Room SWG 306
89 French St., Room 1348                               Lawrenceville, NJ 08648
New Brunswick, NJ 08903                                and NBER
Nancy.reichman@umdnj.edu                               knoonan@rider.edu

Hope Corman
Department of Economics
Rider University
2083 Lawrenceville Road
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648
and NBER
corman@rider.edu
       This study exploits the occurrence of postpartum depression, which is not uncommon and

has at least some random component according to the medical community (O’Hara & Swain,

1996), to estimate causal effects of a salient form of mental illness on couples’ relationship status

and changes, outcomes that a growing literature has shown are important for many dimensions of

parent and child well-being. Postpartum depression (PPD), which is defined as moderate to

severe depression in a woman after she has given birth, is experienced by 10–20% of all

childbearing women within 6 months of delivery (Miller, 2002). Symptoms include despondent

mood, changes in sleeping and eating patterns, feelings of inadequacy as a parent, and impaired

concentration (Miller, 2002).

       Most research on links between mental illness and relationship status has focused on the

effects of marriage on mental health (see Gove et al., 1983). Evidence on the reverse pathway

(from mental health to relationship status) is much rarer, despite economic theory suggesting that

mental illness would adversely affect couples’ relationships and the fact that mental disorders are

the leading cause of disability not only in the U.S., where 26% of adults suffer from a mental

disorder in a given year (NIMH, 2013), but also in much of the world (Kessler et al., 2009).

Selection into relationships on the basis of mental or physical health is often treated as a

troublesome source of confounding in studies of the effects of relationship status on health rather

than as a question of substantive interest in its own right.

       The existing literature on the effects of mental illness on relationship status has focused

largely on marriage, has focused on a patchwork of populations and outcomes, and does not lend

itself to making causal inferences. Simon (2002) and Wade and Pevalin (2004) used panel data to

explore relationships between mental health (depression in Simon; a composite measure in Wade

& Pevalin) and changes in marital status. Both studies found that mental illness often predates



                                                                                                     3
marital dissolution, although Simon pointed out that part of what may be going on is that marital

discord is leading to marital dissolution, with the discord causing depression along the way.

Simon did not find evidence that depression is associated with subsequent transitions to marriage

in a nationally representative U.S. sample and, using the same data as used by Simon (National

Survey of Families and Households, NSFH), Lamb et al. (2003) did not find that depression

predicts subsequent marriage or cohabitation. Together, these studies found little evidence that

depression is associated with the subsequent union formation, but that it may be associated with

dissolution.

       Agerbo and colleagues (2004), using Danish registry data, found that schizophrenia

increased the likelihood that individuals remained unmarried over a 25-year period.

Schizophrenia, although it is a severe disorder and relatively rare, is useful for assessing

causality because it is less likely to be caused by social circumstances than many other mental

illnesses, including depression (Dohrenwend et al., 1992). However, the findings cannot

necessarily be generalized to more common and less severe types of mental illness.

       Bartel and Taubman (1986) considered different classes of diagnoses as well as when

during the life course the individual was diagnosed. Using panel data on veterans, they examined

the effects of psychoses (e.g., schizophrenia), neuroses (e.g., mood disorders), and other mental

illnesses on the likelihood of marriage. They found that neuroses diagnosed when the individual

was young were negatively associated with marriage, but that recent diagnoses were not. They

found no associations for psychoses or other mental illnesses in their sample of men who had

served in the military.

       Two studies considered the effects of mental illness on the timing, rather than incidence,

of marriage. Forthofer and colleagues (1996) looked at many specific diagnoses and found that



                                                                                                    4
affective disorders (particularly depression) and conduct disorder have substantial associations

with timing of entry into first marriage for both women and men. In particular, those disorders

were positively associated with early first marriage, defined as marriage before age 19. Teitler

and Reichman (2008) investigated how a history of mental illness is related to a woman’s

likelihood of marriage over a 5-year period following a non-marital birth. They found that by 1

year after giving birth, 10% of mothers without mental illness had married, compared to 5% of

mothers with mental illness. By 5 years, the respective figures were 26 and 16%; that is, mothers

with mental illness were about 40% less likely to have married.

       The evidence from this body of literature suggests that the mental illness may affect

relationship status, but that the potential effects vary by the type of mental disorder, outcome,

timing of mental illness relative to the outcome, and population studied. Depression is perhaps

the most important mental illness to consider, as it is the leading cause of disability in the U.S.

for individuals ages 15-44, particularly women (NIMH, 2013). As far as we know, no previous

studies of the effects of mental illness on relationship status have explicitly addressed the

potential endogeneity of mental illness. Additionally, most studies have focused on marriage

(i.e., not on non-marital cohabitation or other relationship types). This study addresses those gaps

by focusing on the effects of PPD—a salient and relatively common form of mental illness with

clear timing of onset—on parents’ relationship status within a clearly defined 3-year period in a

contemporary sample with high rates of relationship change, explicitly addressing the potential

endogeneity of mental illness, and focusing on couple relationships and relationship changes

well beyond a marital/non-marital dichotomy.

Theoretical Model




                                                                                                      5
        According to Weiss and Willis (1997), marriages dissolve because individuals obtain new

information about partners, leading to a reassessment of the expected net benefits of maintaining

relationships, or because there is an unexpected change in an important factor, such as health or

earnings, which reduces the expected net benefits of remaining in the relationship. In their

model, generalized as Equation 1 below, the probability of divorce (D) depends on the husband’s

characteristics at time t (xht), the wife’s characteristics at time t (xwt), laws or other factors that

affect the divorce settlement (st), marital capital such as children or joint assets (kt), and the

quality of the relationship (θt,) which is generally unobserved.

        (1) D= D(xht, xwt, st, kt, θt)

        Weiss and Willis focused on one specific type of change—a partner’s earnings at time t

differing substantially from that individual’s expected earnings at the time the relationship was

formed. The authors posited that unexpected positive changes in earnings could either strengthen

or weaken the relationship. While the individual whose earnings increased will become more

valuable to his/her partner, that individual will also become more desirable to other potential

partners and the net effect will reflect the relative strength of these two opposing forces. Using

data from the 1972 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, Weiss and Willis found that for men,

higher than expected earnings decrease the probability of divorce, whereas for women, higher

than expected earnings increase the probability of divorce. They found that expected earnings of

the partner at the time of the marriage do not affect the probability of divorce and inferred that

unexpected changes in earnings are an important factor in marital dissolution.

        Recent literature, including the Weiss and Willis article, has acknowledged the growth in,

and importance of, non-marital cohabiting relationships and non-marital childbearing. In terms

of the latter, the percentage of births in the U.S. taking place outside of marriage increased from



                                                                                                          6
11% in 1970 to 41% in 2009 (Wildsmith et al., 2011). Carlson, McLanahan and England (2004)

discussed the range of contemporary relationship types among new parents and argued that it

may be more appropriate to consider “union formation” and “union dissolution” more broadly

than changes within the traditional marital/nonmarital dichotomy. The authors hypothesized that

the same factors that affect changes in marital status would affect changes in relationship types

with looser bonds of commitment, such as non-marital cohabitation, but that the strength of the

associations may differ, depending on the factor considered. Their findings are generally

consistent with that hypothesis.

       The Weiss and Willis model could be applied to study any life event that is unexpected

and that affects the arguments in Equation (1). E.g., Wolfers (2006) studied the effects of

changes in divorce laws on divorce rates, carefully disentangling pre-existing trends from the

policy implementation, and found that implementation of unilateral divorce laws (which loosen

restrictions to divorce) significantly increase divorce rates. Reichman et al. (2004) found that a

shock in child quality—i.e., having a newborn with an unexpected but severe exogenous health

problem as opposed to having a healthy newborn—decreases the probability that the parents live

together 12–18 months later.

       In this study, we investigate the extent to which a mental health shock—PPD—affects

couples’ relationship status and transitions. We would expect this particular shock to have

negative impacts on the relationship (e.g., reduce the probability the couple would maintain a

cohabiting or marital union) and that the effects would operate through changes in (1)

relationship quality (θ), (2) the woman’s personal attributes (xwt), and/or (3) relationship capital

(kt). In terms of (1), previous studies have found that maternal depression is associated with

marital discord and conflict (e.g., Burke, 2003). In terms of (2), Marcotte et al. (2000) found,



                                                                                                       7
using econometric techniques to address endogeneity, that depression reduces women’s labor

supply. In terms of (3), PPD appears to have adverse effects on maternal-infant interactions (e.g.,

Murray et al., 1996; Field, 2010) and parenting practices (e.g., Field, 2010); that is, depression

may reduce the mother’s investment in the new child (and potentially the couple’s other

children) and hence the family unit. Declines in relationship quality (θ) and in relationship

capital (kt) would increase the chance of relationship dissolution. However, potential

deterioration in the mother’s characteristics (xwt) would have an ambiguous effect. The mother

may be more likely to remain in the relationship because she is less desirable to other potential

partners, but the father may be more likely to leave the relationship because the mother is

relatively less desirable. Overall, we expect PPD to decrease the likelihood that a couple is

married or in a cohabiting relationship a few years later, increase the probability of relationship

dissolution, and decrease the probability of that the couple will form a stronger union (e.g.,

cohabiting to married).

Data

       The Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing (FFCWB) study follows a cohort of parents

and their newborn children in 20 large cities in the U.S. The study randomly sampled births in 75

hospitals between 1998 and 2000. By design, 75% of the mothers were unmarried at the time of

the birth (baseline). Face-to-face interviews were conducted with 4,898 mothers while they were

still in the hospital after giving birth (see Reichman et al. 2001), with a baseline response rate of

86% among eligible mothers. The newborns’ fathers were also interviewed.

       Follow-up interviews were conducted over the telephone approximately 1 and 3 years

after the birth of the child (there were also 5- and 9-year interviews, which were not used for our

study). Eighty nine percent of the mothers who completed baseline interviews were re-



                                                                                                        8
interviewed when their children were 1 year old and 86% of mothers who completed baseline

interviews were re-interviewed when their children were 3 years old. As part of an “add on”

study to the core survey, data from medical records (from the birth hospitalization) were

collected. The availability of medical record data depended, for the most part, on administrative

processes of hospitals rather than decisions on the part of survey respondents to make their

records available. Medical record data are available for 3,684 (75%) of the 4,898 births in the

FFCWB sample.

       The FFCWB data are well suited for analyzing the effects of PPD on parents’ relationship

status because they include: (1) survey questions asked at the 1-year follow-up interview that

allow us to characterize depression during the postpartum year; (2) detailed survey questions at

all interviews that allow us to characterize couple relationship status and changes; (3) data from

hospital medical records, allowing us to construct measures of the mother’s mental and physical

health before the focal child was born; and (4) rich data to use for control variables or identifiers

for PPD, including the mother’s parents’ history of depressive symptoms.

Methodological Approach

       As discussed above, a key limitation of the small and fragmented literature on the effects

of mental illness on relationship status is that existing studies have not been able to address the

endogeneity of mental illness. As discussed by Simon (2002), it is very difficult to establish the

timing of mental illness relative to changes in couples’ relationships that lead to status changes,

and it is possible that both mental illness and relationship status/changes are associated with

unobserved factors. As such, it would be ideal to consider a shock to mental health and observe

the couple’s relationship status before and after the shock. We adopt this strategy by considering

PPD, which is not uncommon and has a large random component according to the medical



                                                                                                      9
community, and using a multi-pronged estimation strategy to assess robustness of our results and

explore patterns in our estimates.

        In our first main set of analyses, we estimate multivariate probit models of the effects of

PPD (assessed at 1 year) on the parents’ relationship status at 3 years, controlling for relationship

status at the time of the birth (before the PPD) and a host of potentially confounding variables.

We focus on the 3-year endpoint (versus 1 or 5 years) for three reasons: (1) in order to preserve

the temporal ordering of events—so that the PPD, if any, clearly precedes relationship changes

that may occur; (2) so that relationship changes are not so far removed temporally from the PPD

that they are likely to reflect factors other than PPD; and (3) because we observe substantial

relationship change within the relevant 3-year period in our data.

        According to O’Hara and Swain (1996), PPD is unrelated to many sociodemographic

characteristics, but strongly associated with having a history of psychopathology. We explore the

extent to which this is the case in our sample and include both detailed sociodemographic

characteristics and medically-documented prenatal mental illness (as described later), as well as

measures of the mother’s parents’ history of depressive symptoms, in our models. We estimate

models for the sample overall and for salient subsamples (e.g., by prenatal mental illness), and

conduct a number of specification checks. We also conduct falsification or placebo tests that

exploit our ability to establish the temporal ordering of events and allow us to assess whether we

observe “effects” in implausible cases (i.e., the post-birth shock predicting relationship status at

the time of the birth, which it should not). Additionally, we estimate 2-stage models using the

grandparents’ history of depressive symptoms as identifiers for PPD and conduct relevant

statistical tests.




                                                                                                    10
       Finally, we stratify the sample by baseline relationship status in order to estimate the

effects of PPD on specific types of relationship status changes between baseline and three years.

For mothers who were married at baseline, we estimate probit models predicting remaining

married to the father at three years. For baseline cohabitors, we estimate multinomial probit

models predicting both becoming married and living apart at three years, versus maintaining the

cohabiting relationship. For those who were not living together at baseline, we estimate

multinomial probit models predicting transitions to both cohabitation and marriage, compared to

continuing living apart.

Descriptive Analysis

       The sample is limited to cases for which medical record data are available and the mother

completed both the 1-year and 3-year surveys. Of the 3,684 mothers with medical record data

(needed to control for prenatal mental illness), 3,031 completed both the 1- and 3-year surveys.

Of the 3,031 mothers, 24 were excluded from the analyses because the baby’s father was

deceased, another 27 were excluded because of missing information on relationship status at 3

years, and 97 additional mothers were excluded because of missing data on covariates, leaving

an analysis sample of 2,883 cases. We describe our measures below and present summary

statistics in Tables 1 and 2. Unless indicated otherwise, all covariates are measured at baseline, to

ensure that these characteristics preceded the birth and therefore the PPD if that occurred.

Postpartum depression

       We measure PPD using a dichotomous indicator for whether the mother met the

diagnostic criteria for major depression in the past 12 months according to the Composite

International Diagnostic Interview Short Form (CIDI-SF) Version 1.0 November 1998, which

was embedded in the mother’s 1-year follow-up interview. Our main (validated) measure of



                                                                                                  11
depression is based on a count of number of depressive symptoms ranging from 0 to 7, with a

major depressive episode defined as the experience of 3 or more symptoms of dysphoria or

anhedonia for most of the day for a period of at least 2 weeks. The symptoms include being sad,

being blue, and losing interest in things (FFCWB, 2012). Twelve percent of the mothers in our

sample experienced depression in the 12 months prior to their 1-year interviews based on this

measure. We assess sensitivity to a broader validated measure characterizing respondents who

reported experiencing symptoms for at least half the day (instead of most of the day) for a period

of at least 2 weeks in the 12 months prior to their 1-year interviews (FFCWB 2012). Sixteen

percent of mothers in our sample are characterized having experienced depression based on this

more inclusive measure.

       As discussed by Mitchell et al. (2011), who similarly characterized PPD with FFCWB

data, measures of depression based on the 1-year CIDI characterize any depression during the

postpartum year and therefore may capture depressive episodes not directly related to

childbearing. In addition, the questions were asked one year after childbirth, so some mothers

who experienced PPD shortly after giving birth may have faulty recall. Despite these issues,

Mitchell et al. found that rates of CIDI-based depression in the postpartum year among FFCWB

mothers fell in the expected range for PPD.

Relationship status and changes

       At baseline, mothers were asked to classify their relationship status with the focal child’s

father as married, cohabiting, romantically involved but not living together, friends, or little or no

relationship. At the follow-up interviews, there was an additional category for separation or

divorce. The relationship statuses of the couples in our sample at baseline and three years are

cross-tabulated in Table 1. Over three quarters (76%) of the mothers were unmarried (reflecting



                                                                                                   12
the oversampling of non-marital births in the FFCWB study) and almost half (49%) of mothers

who were unmarried cohabited with the father at the time of the birth. Almost one third (31%) of

the mothers in the sample reported three years later that they were married to the focal child’s

father, and 20% reported that they and the father were cohabiting. Thus, about half (51%) of the

mothers were living with (married or cohabiting with) the focal child’s father at the time of 3-

year interview.

        We consider both relationship status and changes as outcomes. For relationship status, we

consider whether the mother and father of the child were married at the time of the mother’s 3-

year interview and also whether they were living together (married or cohabiting) at that time. A

large literature indicates that having married parents is strongly associated with favorable

educational, social, cognitive, and behavioral outcomes (e.g., see Brown, 2010). In addition, a

recent critical review indicates that father residence in the household (which can include

cohabiting unions) has positive effects on socio-emotional adjustment, high school graduation, and

adult mental health of offspring (McLanahan et al., 2012). The effects are thought to operate through

financial resources, time, and social capital (e.g., the father’s relatives) (McLanahan 1999). For

relationship changes, we consider the following changes from baseline to three years—married

to unmarried, cohabiting to married, cohabiting to not living together, not living together to

cohabiting, and not living together to married.

        As can be seen in Table 1, there was considerable fluidity in parental relationships in our

sample. For couples who cohabited at the time of the birth, over half changed status by three

years. Among baseline cohabiters, over 20% were married to the father of the focal child and

over 40% of the couples were no longer living together by the 3-year survey. The group with the

least change in status was the baseline married group, although even that group had a non-trivial

rate of dissolution (12% no longer lived together at three years). Among couples who were living
                                                                                                     13
in the same household at the time of the birth (married or cohabiting), the father was no longer in

the household at three years in 29% of the cases. In sum, over one-third of couples changed

status within the 3-year observation window, with slightly more than half of those who changed

status moving in the direction of less commitment.

Other analysis variables

       The means for all covariates are shown in Table 2, both for the sample as a whole and by

whether the mother had PPD. Below we discuss the overall characteristics of the sample and then

the differences in those characteristics by whether the mother had PPD.

Overall sample characteristics

       As PPD is strongly associated with a history of psychopathology, it is necessary to

control for the prenatal mental health situation in order to ensure that we are estimating the

effects of postpartum, rather than pre-existing or ongoing depression. We control for the

mother’s history of mental illness, based on documentation of any pre-existing mental illness

(e.g., specific diagnoses, indication of use of psychiatric drugs, indication of mental illness in

progress notes) in her prenatal medical record. About 11% of the mothers in the sample had a

history of diagnosed mental illness.

       The choice of the other covariates was guided by the theoretical model presented earlier.

These include a basic set of sociodemographic characteristics of the mother (pre-existing

components of xw in Equation 1)—age, race/ethnicity, nativity, education, whether the mother

lived with both of her own parents at age 15 (proxy for family structure growing up), whether the

birth was covered by Medicaid or other public insurance (proxy for poverty), whether the mother

was employed during the 2-year period preceding the child’s birth, whether the mother attended

religious services several times per month, and the percent of households living below the



                                                                                                     14
poverty line in the mother’s neighborhood (Census Tract). Education was classified as less than

high school, high school graduate, some college, and college graduate. We include an indicator

for missing data on neighborhood poverty, which applied to 3% of our sample, and set the census

tract poverty rate to the sample mean for those cases. We also include indicators for the mother’s

state of residence at the time of the baseline interview in order to control for state policies or

other potentially confounding state-level factors (s in Equation 1).

       The mothers were relatively young when their children were born (mean was 25 years).

About half of the sample was non-Hispanic black and a quarter was Hispanic. About 1 in 7 was

foreign born. Education levels were low; over a third of the mothers did not complete high

school, and only 10% were college graduates. About two thirds of the births were covered by

Medicaid or public insurance. Most mothers (81%) worked within the 2-year period preceding

the child’s birth, and over a third (38%) regularly attended religious services.

       Because mental illness is often associated with physical illness and the directionality is

not always clear (Prince et al., 2007), we include a measure of the mother’s physical health at the

time of the birth. We code the mother as having a physical health condition if there was any

documentation of a pre-existing physical health condition in her prenatal medical record (20%).

       In order to be sure that we do not misattribute characteristics of the child to PPD, we

include several variables related to the focal child that have been demonstrated in past research

to affect relationship status and changes—gender (Lundberg & Rose, 2003), multiple birth (Jena

et al., 2011), and poor infant health (Reichman et al., 2004). Some of these factors have also

been related to PPD (e.g., Stowe & Nemeroff, 1995; Choi et al., 2009). For poor infant health,

we use a measure that we call “severe infant health condition,” which was demonstrated to

reflect an exogenous shock in past research (e.g., Corman et al., 2011; Curtis et al., forthcoming).



                                                                                                     15
That measure, which is based primarily on information abstracted from the hospital medical

records (from the birth hospitalization) is described in Appendix Table 1. We also include the

age (in months) of the child at the time of the 3-year interview, to control for time of exposure to

potential parental relationship transitions.

       We include measures of the parents’ baseline relationship status (discussed earlier), plus

a number of measures that may capture relationship quality and/or relationship capital (θ and k,

respectively, in Equation 1)—whether the father visited the hospital during the birth

hospitalization (82%), the number of months the mother and father knew each other prior to the

birth, whether the mother and father had any previous children together; whether the mother had

children with another partner, whether the father had children with another partner (this variable

was measured at 1 year due to data availability), and whether the father did not complete a

baseline interview, which may be an indicator of his involvement with the mother and was also

used to control for the father’s risk for depression at baseline, as described below.

       We include sociodemographic information about the infant’s father (xh in Equation 1)—if

he is of a different race/ethnicity than the mother, how much older he was than the mother (in

years), if his education was in a category (of those listed earlier for mothers) below the mother’s,

and if his education was in a category above the mother’s (both paternal education variables are

relative to having education in the same category as the mother). We express these

characteristics as differences from the mother for both practical and substantive reasons.

Practically, there is a high degree of correlation in these factors within couples (e.g., the

correlation between mother’s and father’s age is 0.75), making it difficult to disentangle

independent associations. Substantively, a large literature in economics and sociology indicates




                                                                                                  16
that deviations from assortative mating along these and other dimensions are negative predictors

of relationship stability (e.g., in theoretical work by Becker, Landes & Michael, 1977).

        We also include measures of the father’s physical and mental health. We code paternal

suboptimal health using the father’s self-reports of his overall health status (good, fair or poor,

vs. excellent or very good). Forty percent of the fathers had suboptimal health as we have

defined it. The father’s risk for depression is based on his score from a short version of the

Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D), which was included in his baseline

interview. Because all items in the standard CES-D were not asked in the survey, we followed

Mirowsky and Ross (2001), using an abbreviated scale based on the following questions: On

how many days in the past week did you: (1) feel that you could not shake off the blues even

with help from your friends, (2) have trouble keeping your mind on what you were doing, (3)

feel that everything was an effort, (4) sleep restlessly, (5) feel lonely, (6) feel sad, and (7) feel

you could not get going. We calculated the mean response to these seven items, which ranges

from 0 (low risk for depression) to 7 (high risk for depression). In the cases in which father did

not complete the baseline interview, we set his CES-D score equal to the mean (recall that we

also included an indicator for the father not having completed the baseline interview).

        Finally, in certain models we include mental health of the each of the mother’s parents.

Measures of the maternal grandmother’s and grandfather’s history of depressive symptoms were

based on the mother’s positive response to the following question in the 3-year survey: “Did

your biological mother /father ever have periods lasting two weeks or more when she/he was

depressed, blue, or down in the dumps most of the time?” In models where we included the

grandparents’ history of depressive symptoms, we included indicators for missing data on

grandmother’s history of depressive symptoms and for missing data on grandfather’s history of



                                                                                                        17
depressive symptoms and set the corresponding measures to zero for those cases. These

measures are intended to capture the mother’s family-related (genetic or environmental)

predisposition for depression. It is possible that PPD is less of a shock for mothers whose own

parents had a history of depressive symptoms, making these measures important control

variables. However, the measures of the parents’ depressive symptoms could potentially pick up

the effects of the mother’s PPD. As such, we include these measures in some models and not

others and interpret our findings accordingly. Finally, we also use the grandparents’ history of

depressive symptoms as identifiers for PPD in 2-stage models, as described later.

Sample characteristics by PPD status

       As indicated earlier, past research has found that although PPD is strongly associated

with having a history of psychopathology, is it unrelated to many sociodemographic

characteristics. We assess whether this is the case in our data by comparing means of our

covariates by whether the mother had PPD. From Table 2, we can see that PPD is not

significantly associated with race/ethnicity, religious attendance, prenatal employment, having

other children with the same father, or neighborhood poverty. There is a statistically significant

age difference between the 2 groups, but the difference is less than 1 year and therefore not

substantively important. PPD also is not significantly related to the characteristics of the child.

However, in these bivariate tests that do not control for prenatal mental illness or any of the other

covariates, we find that those with PPD are less likely to be native born, to be college graduates,

and to have lived with both biological parents at age 15, and are more likely to have had a

Medicaid-financed birth.

       The two most glaring differences between mothers who had PPD and those who did not

are their baseline relationships and history of mental illness. Mothers who experienced PPD were



                                                                                                      18
less likely to be married to, and more likely to be neither married nor cohabiting with, the child’s

father at the time of the birth. The fathers were less likely to have visited in the hospital, and the

mothers knew the fathers for a shorter period of time. Mothers with PPD and their partners were

more likely to have had children with other partners. As expected, mothers who had PPD were

far more likely to have experienced mental health problems themselves or to have a parent with a

history of depression. These findings underscore the importance of accounting for these and

other potential sources of selection into PPD in our econometric modeling.

Multivariate Analysis

Models of relationship status at three years

       Table 3 presents probit estimates for the estimated effects of PPD on the likelihood that

the mother and father are married at 3 years and that they are married or cohabiting at 3 years.

For each outcome, estimates from two different models are presented—one with all of the

covariates except grandparents’ history of mental illness (Model 1), which are used later as

identifiers for PPD in 2-stage models, and the other including those measures as additional

controls (Model 2). Each cell contains the probit coefficient, the standard error which is

corrected for city clustering of observations using the Huber-White method (in parentheses), and

the marginal effect [in brackets].

       We find that PPD significantly decreased the probability that the mother was married to

the father by 6.9 percentage points (22% relative to the sample mean) and the likelihood that the

father was living in the household (either married or cohabiting) by 12.1 percentage points

(24%), holding constant prenatal mental illness, other maternal characteristics, child

characteristics, relationship characteristics, and paternal characteristics (Model 1). Thus, the

relative magnitudes of the estimated effects of PPD are similar for the two outcomes. The effect



                                                                                                    19
sizes and significance change little when also controlling for the mother’s parents’ history of

depressive symptoms (Model 2).

       Prenatal history of mental illness has a strong negative association with 3-year marital

status when controlling for PPD and the other covariates, with effect sizes slightly larger than

those of PPD. However, prenatal mental illness does not seem to affect whether the father was in

the household at three years. Older mothers, foreign-born mothers, and more highly educated

mothers are more likely to be married at three years, while non-Hispanic black mothers and those

living in poor neighborhoods are less likely to be married. If the father had less (more) education

than the mother, the parents were less (more) likely to be married at three years. These

sociodemographic characteristics have similar associations with father presence in the household

at three years as they do with marriage, with a few exceptions: religious attendance is not a

significant predictor of father presence, severe infant health condition significantly reduces father

presence, and fathers in suboptimal health are more likely to be in the household. It is notable

that, holding constant maternal prenatal mental illness, the mother’s parents’ depression does not

significantly predict relationship status.

       Not surprisingly, the baseline relationship variables have very large associations with 3-

year relationship status. Living together (either married or cohabiting) at the time of the birth is a

strong predictor of both marriage and living together three years later. Whether the father visited

the mother in the hospital is a strong and significant of living together at 3 years. Mothers are

less likely to be married at three years if the father had children with other partners, and the

parents are more likely to be living together at three years it they have previous relationship

capital (other children together). The covariate estimates are similar when using the more

inclusive measure of PPD described earlier (see Appendix Table 2).



                                                                                                    20
Exploring the exogeneity of PPD

       The accuracy of the estimates presented thus far, from single-equation models, depends

on the degree to which PPD represents a truly exogenous shock. We conducted a number of

auxiliary analyses to explore the validity of this assumption.

       Although past research suggests only weak associations between sociodemographic

characteristics and PPD, we found in Table 2 that this was not so clearly the case in our sample.

However, those comparisons did not control for the mother’s own or family history of

depression, which are strongly predictive of PPD. To further explore the associations between

sociodemographic characteristics (particularly baseline relationship status) and PPD, we

estimated probit models with PPD as the outcome that included all of the characteristics in

Model 1 of Table 3 except PPD. Reassuringly, most characteristics were unassociated with PPD

in those models (results not shown). The only characteristics that were statistically significant in

predicting PPD were maternal history of mental illness, missing census tract poverty, mother

having lived with both parents at age 15, father different race/ethnicity than mother, mother

having children with a different partner, and some of the state indicators. Thus, few key

sociodemographic characteristics were associated with PPD in a multivariate context that

controlled for known confounders.

       We further investigated whether our measures of PPD appear to be exogenous by

conducting falsification tests wherein we estimated the effects of having PPD on baseline

relationship status (married to the baby’s father at the time of the birth, and separately, married to

or cohabiting with the baby’s father at the time the birth). If PPD is an exogenous shock, it

should not be predictive of the mother’s pre-birth behavior. Indeed, we found no associations

between PPD and baseline relationship status in these models, providing additional evidence that



                                                                                                   21
our measure of PPD captured an exogenous shock.

       Next, we estimate models stratified by measures of the mother’s and grandparents’

history of mental illness. If PPD is truly exogenous in our models in Table 3, then the estimated

effects of PPD should not differ based on whether the mother had a prenatal mental illness or

whether her parents had a history of depressive symptoms. To verify that this is the case, we

estimated the effects of PPD for three subgroups of mothers—those with no prenatal mental

illness, those with no parental history of depressive symptoms, and those with no prenatal mental

illness and no parental history of depressive symptoms (see Appendix Table 3). In five of the six

regressions, we find that the estimated effects of PPD on relationship status for these groups are

similar to those for the full sample in Table 3. The only exception was that for women with no

prenatal mental illness, the marginal effect of PPD on being married or cohabiting at three years

was 29% lower (-.086, vs. -.121). Overall, the fact that our estimated effects for women for

whom PPD should be the biggest shock are so similar to those for the full sample suggests that

our full-sample estimates do not suffer from substantial bias.

       The final means by which we explored the exogeneity assumption was by estimating 2-

stage (bivariate probit) models wherein we used (1) whether either of the baby’s maternal

grandparents had a history of depressive symptoms and (2) the indicator variable for missing

information on both grandparent’s history of depressive symptoms as identifiers for PPD. As

discussed at several points in this article, although PPD has a large random component, it is

associated with family history of depression. Although the measures of the mothers’ parents’

history of depressive symptoms were reported by the mother three years after the birth of the

focal child and pertained to “ever,” it seems unlikely that a sizable fraction of “first episodes”

among grandparents took place within the past three years. Additionally, if risk for depression is



                                                                                                     22
genetic as opposed to environmental, the timing of the grandparents’ depressive symptoms

would be less problematic for our purposes (using grandparents’ history of depressive symptoms

as identifiers for PPD). Estimates from the bivariate probit models, which estimate PPD in the

first stage and 3-year relationship status in the second stage, are presented in Appendix Table 4.

These results indicate that: (1) the two identifiers are jointly significant predictors of PPD, (2) the

two identifiers are excludable from both outcome equations, and (3) the error term in the PPD

equation is not significantly correlated with the error term in the outcome equation, for either

outcome. Overall, the 2-stage results suggest that our single-equation estimates of the effects of

PPD on relationship status are not biased.

       In sum, we found in this set of analyses that most baseline maternal characteristics do not

predict PPD in a multivariate context, that PPD does not predict baseline relationship status, and

that our single-equation estimates of PPD on relationship status at 3 years appear to be unbiased.

All of these results validate our assumption that we have captured an exogenous mental health

shock and that PPD reduces the likelihood that parents will be married or living together

(married or cohabiting) a few years later.

Additional specification checks

       We controlled for the father’s risk for depression because it represents a potential source

of confounding, given findings from a recent meta-analysis that about 10% of fathers suffer from

depression sometime between the first trimester of their partner's pregnancy and the child's first

birthday and that paternal PPD has a moderate positive correlation with maternal depression

(Paulsen & Bazemore, 2010). However, the control for the father’s baseline risk for depression

could potentially pick up effects of the mother’s PPD. We estimated the models in Table 3

without the control for father’s risk for depression and found that the estimated effects of



                                                                                                    23
maternal PPD did not change. In addition, we re-estimated the models in Table 3 including

father’s depression at 1 year (based on the CIDI, the same instrument that was used for mothers

at 1 year). In all cases, the effects of maternal PPD were substantively the same as in Table 3,

although paternal PPD had independent negative associations with relationship status at three

years (results not shown).

       As discussed earlier, mental and physical health problems can be strongly co-morbid. To

assess whether inclusion of mother’s physical health affected the estimated effect of PPD, we

conducted auxiliary analyses that included all variables from Table 3 except mother’s physical

health condition. The estimated effects of PPD on relationship status at three years remained

identical to those in Table 3 (results not shown).

Models of relationship status change

        We found that PPD reduces the likelihood that parents are married or cohabiting at three

years, that the effects appear to be causal, and that—as expected—baseline relationship status is

a strong predictor of 3-year relationship status. We further explore how PPD affects parents’

relationship dynamics by estimating models that stratify by baseline relationship status.

       In Table 4, we present estimates from models of the effects of PPD on relationship status

for those who were married, those who were cohabiting (but not married), and those who were

not living together at the time of the birth, controlling for the covariates in Model 1 of Table 3

(except for relationship status, multiple birth, severe infant health condition, and state indicators).

The first column shows results from a probit regression predicting being married at three years

among those who were married at baseline. Since transitioning from married to cohabiting is rare

(see Table 1), we do not consider that potential transition. We find that PPD reduced the

likelihood of remaining married by about 7 percentage points, or about 8% relative to the mean



                                                                                                     24
at three years of 88%.

       The shaded columns present results from a multinomial probit model predicting 3-year

relationship status among those who cohabited at baseline. For these women, the relevant

transitions are to marriage and to not living together (remaining cohabiting is the reference

outcome). We find that PPD has a small and statistically insignificant effect on marriage among

this group; however, PPD made it more likely that the parents were no longer living together at

three years, by about 11 percentage points or 28%.

       For those who were not living together at baseline (last two columns), PPD made them 4

percentage points, or 29%, less likely to become cohabiters (although the estimate is not

statistically significant at conventional levels) and 3 percentage points, or 41%, less likely to

marry. Overall, PPD makes it both more likely that unions dissolve (particularly among baseline

cohabitors) and less likely that unions are formed (particularly among baseline non-cohabitors).

Conclusion

       We found that a mental health shock in the form of PPD reduced the probability that the

parents in our sample of mostly non-marital births were married to one another three years after

the birth of the child (by 20–26%) as well the probability that they were living together (married

or cohabiting) at that time (by 16–28%). Models stratified by relationship status at the time of the

birth indicate that PPD made it both more likely that unions dissolved (particularly among

baseline cohabitors) and less likely that unions were formed (particularly among baseline non-

cohabitors). As indicated earlier, Simon (2002) and Wade & Pevalin (2004) found that

depression often predates marital dissolution, but Simon was concerned about drawing causal

inferences from that observation because it was not clear that depression predated the marital

discord that led to the relationship dissolution. Our findings suggest that the associations found



                                                                                                     25
in those studies could reflect causal effects.

       On the other hand, Simon (2002) and Lamb and colleagues (2003), found no associations

between depression and subsequent union formation (marriage for Simon, marriage or

cohabitation for Lamb and colleagues), whereas we found negative effects of PPD on couples’

union formation, particularly among baseline cohabitors. This discrepancy may reflect the

different data and samples, measures of depression, or methodological approaches used. Both

Simon and Lamb et al. used samples of adults (not necessarily women or parents) in the NSFH,

whereas we used a sample of mostly unmarried couples with newborns in urban areas.

Additionally, Simon and Lamb et al. used a measure of risk for depression from the CES-D,

while the CIDI-based measures we used assessed whether mothers met diagnostic criteria for

major depression in the past year. Finally, our methodological approach and tests were designed

to capture the effects of an exogenous mental health shock, whereas the Simon and Lamb et al.

studies did not explicitly account for the endogeneity of mental health.

       Overall, this study makes an important contribution to the fragmented literature on the

effects of mental illness on relationship status by focusing on a salient form of mental illness

with clear timing of onset, addressing the potential endogeneity of mental illness, and focusing

on parental relationship status and changes beyond a marital/non-marital dichotomy (only Lamb

and colleagues considered cohabitation). The findings also contribute indirectly to the literature

on the effects of marriage (and relationship status more broadly) on mental health by providing

evidence of a reverse pathway. More broadly, the findings underscore that not only does

socioeconomic status affect health, but also that health (in this case, maternal mental health) can

affect socioeconomic status—to the extent that father living in another household or being less

committed to the relationship results in lower household income for the mother and child.



                                                                                                   26
       The findings also have implications vis-à-vis PPD in particular. Not only can father

absence resulting from PPD have negative financial ramifications for the mother and child, but

the child can lose the benefits of day-to-day involvement with his/her father as well as the

“insurance” provided by a second resident parent should the PPD result in inadequate bonding

between mother and child or suboptimal mothering at a critical stage of development. Although

some breakups may be beneficial for mothers and their children (e.g., in cases of abuse), overall

the findings from this study suggest that PPD has detrimental implications for mothers and their

children and underscore the importance of identification and treatment of mothers who

experience depression following the birth of a child.

       We close with a few caveats. The findings of this study of mothers giving birth in urban

areas may not generalize to all women giving birth in the U.S. We technically measure

depression during postpartum year rather than PPD, although Mitchell et al. (2011) found that

CIDI-based measures pertaining to the first year after childbirth result in rates in line with those

of PPD. Our findings may not generalize to other forms of depression among women, to women

who are not parents, or to males. Our measure of prenatal mental illness, from medical records,

was not specific to depression and would not capture cases of depression that had not been

diagnosed. Grandparents’ depression was subjectively assessed and reported by the mother.

Finally, we were unable to test the main hypothesized mechanism—changes in relationship

quality, which Tach and Edin (forthcoming) showed is an important predictor of union

dissolution in these data—because it was impossible to establish the temporal ordering of PPD,

changes in relationship quality, and changes in relationship status.




                                                                                                   27
References

Agerbo, E., Byrne, M., Eaton, W. W., & Mortensen, P. B. (2004). Marital and labor market
        status in the long run in schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61(1), 28–33.
Bartel, A., & Taubman, P. (1986). Some economic and demographic consequences of mental
        illness. Journal of Labor Economics, 4(2), 243–256.
Becker, G., Landes, E., & Michael, R. (1977). An economic analysis of marital instability.
        Journal of Political Economy, 85(6), 1141–1187.
Burke, L. (2003). The impact of maternal depression on familial relationships. International
        Journal of Psychiatry, 15, 243–255.
Brown, S.L. (2010). Marriage and child well-being: Research and policy perspectives. Journal of
        Marriage and Family, 72(5): 1059–1077.
Carlson, M., McLanahan, S., & England, P. (2004). Union formation in fragile families.
        Demography, 41(2), 237–261.
Choi, Y., Bishai, D., & Minkovitz, C.S. (2009). Multiple births are a risk factor for postpartum
        maternal depressive symptoms. Pediatrics, 123(4), 1147–1154.
Corman, H., Noonan, K., Schwartz-Soicher, O., & Reichman, N.E.. (2011). Life shocks and
        crime: A test of the “turning point hypothesis.” Demography, 48, 1177–1202.
Curtis, M., Corman, H., Noonan, K., & Reichman, N.E. (forthcoming). Life shocks and
        homelessness. Demography.
Dohrenwend, B. P., Levav, I., Shrout, P. E., Schwartz, S., Naveh, G., Link, B. G., Skodol, A. E.,
        & Stueve, A. (1992). Socioeconomic status and psychiatric disorders: The causation-
        selection issue. Science, 255(5047), 946–952.
Field, T. (2010). Postpartum depression effects on early interactions, parenting, and safety
        practices: A review. Infant Behavior and Development, 33(1), 1–6.
Forthofer, M. S., Kessler, R. C., Story, A. L., & Gotlib, I. H. (1996). The effects of psychiatric
        disorders on the probability and timing of first marriage. Journal of Health and Social
        Behavior, 37(2), 121–132.
Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study. Core scales documentation. Available at:
        http://www.fragilefamilies.princeton.edu/documentation/core/scales/ff_1yr_scales.pdf
        [Accessed January 3, 2012].
Gove, W. R., Hughes, M., & Style, C. B. (1983). Does marriage have positive effects on the
        psychological well-being of the individual? Journal of Health and Social Behavior,
        24(2), 122–131.
Jena, A., Goldman, D., & G. Joyce. (2011). Association between the birth of twins and parental
        divorce. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 117(4), 892–897.
Kessler, R., Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., Alonso, J., Chatterji, S. Lee, S., Ormel, J., Üstün, T.B, & Wang,
         P.S. (2009). The global burden of mental disorders: An update from the WHO World
         Mental Health (WMH) Surveys. Epidemiol Psichiatr Soc, 18(1): 23–33.
Lamb, K. A., Lee, G. R., & DeMaris, A. (2003). Union formation and depression: Selection and
         relationship effects. Journal of Marriage and Family, 65(4), 953–962.
Lundberg, S., & E. Rose. (2003). Child gender and the transition to marriage. Demography,
         40(2), 333–349.
Marcotte, D. E., Wilcox-Gok, V., & Redmon, D. P. (2000). The labor market effects of mental
        illness—The case of affective disorders. Research in Human Capital and Development,
        13, 181–210.
McLanahan, S. (1999). Father absence and the welfare of children. Pp. 117-145 in Coping with
                                                                                                28
        Divorce, Single Parenting, and Remarriage: A Risk and Resiliency Perspective. M.
        Hetherington (ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
McLanahan, S., Tach, L., & Schneider, D. (2012). The causal effects of father absence. Princeton
        University, Center for Research on Child Wellbeing Working Paper # WP12-20-FF.
        Available at: http://crcw.princeton.edu/publications/articles/2012/1199.pdf [Accessed May
        27, 2013].
Miller, L.J. (2002). Postpartum depression. Journal of the American Medical Association,
        287(6), 762–765.
Mitchell, C., Notterman, D., Brooks-Gunn, J., Kotenko, I., Jaeger, K., Hobcraft, J., Garfinkel, I.,
        & McLanahan, S. (2011). The role of mother’s genes and environment on postpartum
        depression. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(20), 8189–8193.
Murray, L., Fiori-Cowley, A., Hooper, R., & Cooper, P. (1996). The impact of postnatal
        depression and associated adversity on early mother-infant interactions and later infant
        outcome. Child Development, 67(5), 2512–2526.
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). (2013). The numbers count: Mental disorders in
        America. Available at: http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/the-numbers-count-
        mental-disorders-in-america/index.shtml [Accessed May 27, 2013].
O'Hara, M.W., & Swain, A.M. (1996). Rates and risk of postpartum depression: A meta analysis.
        International Review of Psychiatry, 8(1), 37–54.
Prince, M., Patel, V., Saxena, S., Maj, M., Maselko, J., Phillips, M.R., & Rahman, A. (2007). No
        health without mental health. The Lancet, 370(9590), 859–877.
Reichman, N.E., Corman, H., Noonan, K. (2004). Effects of child health on parents’ relationship
        status. Demography 41(3), 569–584.
Reichman, N.E., Teitler, J.O., Garfinkel, I., & McLanahan, S. (2001). Fragile Families: Sample
        and design. Children and Youth Services Review, 23(4), 303–326.
Simon, R.W. (2002). Revisiting the relationships among gender, marital status, and mental
        health. American Journal of Sociology, 107(4), 1065–1096.
Stowe, Z.N., & Nemeroff, C.B. (1995) Women at risk for postpartum-onset major depression.
        American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 173 (2), 639–645.
Tach, L., & K. Edin. The compositional and institutional sources of union dissolution for married
        and unmarried parents in the United States. Demography. Published online 10 May 2013.
Teitler, J.O., Reichman, N.E. (2008). Mental illness as a barrier to marriage among unmarried
        mothers. Journal of Marriage and Family, 70(3), 772–782.
Wade, T. J., & Pevalin. D. J. (2004). Marital transitions and mental health. Journal of Health and
        Social Behavior, 45(2), 155–170.
Weiss, Y., & R. J. Willis. (1997). Match quality, new information, and marital dissolution.
        Journal of Labor Economics, 15(1, Part 2), 293–329.
Wildsmith, E., Steward-Streng, N.R., & Manlove, J. (2011). Childbearing outside of marriage:
        Estimates and trends in the United States. Child Trends Research Brief. Publication
        #2011-29. Available at: http://childtrends.org/wp-
        content/uploads/2013/02/Child_Trends-2011_11_01_RB_NonmaritalCB.pdf [Accessed
        May 27, 2013].
Wolfers, J. (2006). Did unilateral divorce laws raise divorce rates? A reconciliation and new
        results. American Economic Review, 96(5), 1802–1820.




                                                                                                29
Table 1: Parents’ Relationship Status at Baseline and 3 Years

                                         Baseline
                       Married          Cohabiting         Not Living    All
                                                           Together
3 years
Married                  603                232                  72     907


Cohabiting                3                 402                 170     575


Not living                80                436                 885     1,401
together

                         686               1,070                1,127   2,883




                                                                                30
Table 2: Sample Characteristics
                                                     Full     Postpartum No Postpartum
                                                    Sample    Depression  Depression
Maternal Characteristics
  Prenatal history of mental illness                0.11***      0.21        0.09
  Age in years, mean                                 25.0**      24.4        25.1
                                                      (6.0)      (5.8)       (6.1)
   Non-Hispanic whitea                                0.21       0.20        0.21
   Non-Hispanic black                                 0.48       0.51        0.48
   Hispanic                                           0.27       0.25        0.28
   Other race/ethnicity                               0.04       0.03        0.04
   Foreign born                                     0.15***      0.10        0.15
   < High school graduatea                            0.34       0.34        0.34
   High school graduate                               0.31       0.32        0.31
   Some college but not graduate                      0.25       0.27        0.25
   College graduate                                  0.10**      0.07        0.11
   Lived with both parents at age 15                 0.42**      0.36        0.43
   Medicaid birth                                    0.65*       0.69        0.64
   Pre-existing physical health condition             0.20       0.21        0.20
   Neighborhood poverty rate                          0.19       0.20        0.19
   Employed                                           0.81       0.83        0.81
   Regularly attends religious services               0.38       0.35        0.39
Child Characteristics
   Male                                              0.52        0.52        0.52
   Multiple birth                                    0.02        0.02        0.02
   Severe infant health condition                    0.02        0.02        0.02
   Age in months at 3 year interview, mean           35.7        35.8        35.7
                                                     (2.4)       (2.4)       (2.5)
Relationship Characteristics
   Married at time of birth                         0.24***      0.18         0.25
   Cohabiting at time of birth                        0.37       0.37         0.37
   Not living together at time of birtha             0.39**      0.45         0.38
   Father visited hospital                           0.82**      0.78         0.83
   # months knew father, mean                        57.1**      50.3         58.1
                                                     (55.8)     (52.1)       (56.2)
   Parents had other children together                0.36       0.34         0.36
   Mother had child with another partner             0.35**      0.41         0.34
   Father had child with another partner            0.35***      0.41         0.34
   Father did not complete baseline interview         0.17       0.18         0.17
Paternal Characteristics
   Age difference (father minus mother in years),     2.6         2.9         2.5
   mean                                              (5.0)       (5.0)       (5.0)
   Different race/ethnicity than mother             0.04**       0.02        0.04
                                                                                      31
   CES-D score, mean                                       1.2            1.3              1.2
                                                          (1.2)          (1.1)            (1.2)
  Lower education category than mother                    0.26           0.29             0.26
  Higher education category than mother                   0.24           0.22             0.24
  Suboptimal physical health                              0.40           0.43             0.40
Grandparent’s Mental Illness
  Grandmother’s history of depressive symptoms          0.26***          0.47             0.23
  Grandfather’s history of depressive symptoms          0.12***          0.21             0.11
  Missing grandmother’s history of depressive            0.07**          0.10             0.07
  symptoms
  Missing grandfather’s history of depressive           0.28***          0.36             0.27
  symptoms
  N                                                      2,883           355             2,528
Notes: *** p <0.01; ** p <0.05; * p < 0.10 for significant difference between mothers who had
postpartum depression and those who did not. All figures are proportions unless indicated
otherwise. Standard deviations are in parentheses. All parent and relationship characteristics are
measured at baseline, except father had children with another partner, which is measured at 1
year. a Reference category in regression models.




                                                                                                  32
Table 3: Multivariate Probit Estimates of the Effects of Postpartum Depression and
Covariates on Parents’ Relationship Status at 3 Years (N=2,883)
                                   Married at 3 years      Married or Cohabiting at 3 Years
                                       Coefficient                    Coefficient
                                     (Standard Error)              (Standard Error)
                                    [Marginal Effect]             [Marginal Effect]
                               Model 1         Model 2       Model 1           Model 2
Maternal Mental Illness
 Postpartum depression         -0.229***       -0.248***    -0.306***         -0.333***
                                 (0.088)         (0.096)     (0.085)           (0.089)
                                [-0.069]        [-0.074]     [-0.121]          [-0.132]

  Prenatal history of mental   -0.246***       -0.256***      -0.002            -0.014
  illness                        (0.077)         (0.078)     (0.066)           (0.067)
                                [-0.073]        [-0.076]     [-0.001]          [-0.006]

Other Maternal
Characteristics
  Age, years                   0.076**          0.073*        0.058**           0.057**
                                (0.038)         (0.039)       (0.029)           (0.028)
                               [0.024]          [0.023]       [0.023]           [0.023]

  Age squared                  -0.001*          -0.001*       -0.001*           -0.001*
                                (0.001)          (0.001)       (0.001)           (0.001)
                               [-0.000]         [-0.000]      [-0.000]          [-0.000]

  Non-Hispanic black           -0.252***       -0.245***     -0.290***         -0.280***
                                 (0.095)         (0.092)       (0.081)           (0.083)
                                [-0.080]        [-0.078]      [-0.115]          [-0.111]

  Hispanic                      -0.116           -0.105        -0.030            -0.013
                                (0.079)         (0.077)        (0.067)           (0.069)
                               [-0.036]         [-0.033]      [-0.012]          [-0.005]

  Other race/ethnicity          -0.051           -0.052        -0.244            -0.231
                                (0.204)          (0.205)       (0.189)           (0.190)
                               [-0.016]         [-0.016]      [-0.097]          [-0.092]

  Foreign born                 0.357***        0.362***      0.454***          0.464***
                                (0.116)         (0.118)       (0.127)           (0.126)
                                [0.122]         [0.124]       [0.175]           [0.179]

  High school graduate           0.094           0.099         0.006             0.015
                                (0.085)         (0.084)       (0.077)           (0.076)
                                [0.030]         [0.032]       [0.002]           [0.006]

  Some college, but not        0.331***        0.336***       0.159**           0.163**
  graduate                      (0.102)         (0.102)       (0.081)            0.083
                                                                                           33
                               [0.111]    [0.113]     [0.063]     [0.065]

  College graduate             0.683***   0.686***   0.405***    0.415***
                                (0.149)    (0.147)    (0.149)     (0.150)
                                [0.248]    [0.249]    [0.157]     [0.160]

  Lived with both parents at    -0.025     -0.004      0.061      0.092*
  age 15                        (0.069)    (0.076)    (0.049)     (0.052)
                               [-0.008]   [-0.001]    [0.024]     [0.036]

  Medicaid birth                 -0.113    -0.113    -0.138*     -0.139*
                                (0.081)    (0.083)    (0.080)     (0.081)
                               [-0.037]   [-0.036]   [-0.055]    [-0.055]

  Pre-existing physical         0.059      0.052       0.040       0.030
  health condition             (0.103)    (0.104)     (0.057)     (0.055)
                               [0.019]    [0.017]     [0.016]     [0.012]

  Neighborhood poverty         -0.766**   -0.768**    -0.374      -0.367
  rate                          (0.364)    (0.368)    (0.304)     (0.305)
                               [-0.245]   [-0.245]   [-0.149]    [-0.146]

  Employed                      0.009      0.011      -0.023      -0.024
                               (0.081)    (0.079)     (0.069)     (0.071)
                               [0.003]    [0.004]    [-0.009]    [-0.010]

  Regularly attends            0.192**    0.196**     -0.013      -0.009
  religious services           (0.085)     (0.085)    (0.070)     (0.071)
                               [0.062]    [0.063]    [-0.005]    [-0.003]

Child Characteristics
  Male                          0.014      0.012       0.027       0.027
                               (0.053)    (0.052)     (0.052)     (0.053)
                               [0.005]    [0.004]     [0.011]     [0.011]

  Multiple birth                0.039      0.031       0.032       0.027
                               (0.201)    (0.205)     (0.285)     (0.295)
                               [0.013]    [0.010]     [0.013]     [0.011]

  Severe infant health          -0.115     -0.116    -0.419***   -0.402***
  condition                     (0.140)    (0.141)     (0.130)     (0.134)
                               [-0.035]   [-0.035]    [-0.164]    [-0.158]

  Age at 3 year interview,     -0.027*    -0.028*    -0.055***   -0.055***
  months                        (0.015)    (0.015)     (0.011)     (0.010)
                               [-0.009]   [-0.009]    [-0.022]    [-0.022]

Relationship
Characteristics

                                                                             34
  Married                      2.176***    2.175***    1.338***    1.337***
                                (0.081)     (0.079)     (0.095)     (0.094)
                                [0.721]     [0.721]     [0.461]     [0.461]

  Cohabiting                   0.508***    0.504***    0.721***    0.721***
                                (0.095)     (0.096)     (0.040)     (0.041)
                                [0.168]     [0.166]     [0.278]     [0.278]

  Father visited hospital        0.267       0.270     0.467***    0.469***
                                (0.211)     (0.214)     (0.086)     (0.086)
                                [0.080]     [0.081]     [0.184]     [0.185]

  # months knew father         -0.001*     -0.001*       0.000      -0.000
                                (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.000)
                               [-0.000]    [-0.000]     [0.000]    [-0.000]

  Parents had other children    0.139*      0.141*     0.221***    0.225***
  together                      (0.080)     (0.080)     (0.062)     (0.060)
                                [0.045]     [0.046]     [0.088]     [0.089]

  Mother had child with          0.008       0.007      -0.009      -0.009
  another partner               (0.067)     (0.067)     (0.055)     (0.057)
                                [0.003]     [0.002]    [-0.003]    [-0.004]

  Father had child with        -0.153**    -0.154**     -0.067      -0.067
  another partner               (0.062)     (0.063)     (0.051)     (0.051)
                               [-0.048]    [-0.048]    [-0.027]    [-0.027]

  Father did not complete      -0.479***   -0.473***   -0.496***   -0.488***
  baseline interview             (0.109)     (0.110)     (0.085)     (0.086)
                                [-0.135]    [-0.134]    [-0.195]    [-0.192]

Paternal Characteristics
  Age difference (father         0.002       0.002      -0.004      -0.005
  minus mother), years          (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.006)     (0.006)
                                [0.001]     [0.001]    [-0.002]    [-0.002]

  Different race/               -0.170      -0.167      -0.086      -0.082
  ethnicity than mother         (0.172)     (0.175)     (0.156)     (0.158)
                               [-0.051]    [-0.051]    [-0.034]    [-0.033]

  CES-D score                    0.006       0.005     -0.060**    -0.061**
                                (0.026)     (0.026)     (0.025)     (0.025)
                                [0.002]     [0.002]    [-0.024]    [-0.024]

  Lower education category     -0.206**    -0.210**    -0.105**    -0.104**
  than mother                   (0.086)     (0.084)     (0.048)     (0.049)
                               [-0.064]    [-0.065]    [-0.042]    [-0.041]


                                                                               35
  Higher education              0.128*           0.129*             0.054             0.057
  category than mother          (0.068)          (0.068)           (0.053)           (0.054)
                                [0.042]          [0.042]           [0.021]           [0.023]

  Suboptimal physical            0.068            0.067            0.166**           0.166**
  health                        (0.080)          (0.079)           (0.075)           (0.075)
                                [0.022]          [0.021]           [0.066]           [0.066]

Grandparent’s Mental
Illness
   Grandmother’s history of                       0.059                               0.048
   depressive symptoms                           (0.095)                             (0.076)
                                                 [0.019]                             [0.019]

  Grandfather’s history of                        0.007                               0.123
  depressive symptoms                            (0.124)                             (0.088)
                                                 [0.002]                             [0.049]

  Missing grandmother’s                           0.108                               -0.018
  history of depressive                          (0.153)                              (0.126)
  symptoms                                       [0.036]                             [-0.007]

  Missing grandfather’s                           0.026                              0.094**
  history of depressive                          (0.083)                             (0.045)
  symptoms                                       [0.008]                             [0.038]

Notes: *** p <0.01; ** p <0.05; * p <0.10. All models include indicators for mother’s state of
residence at baseline and missing neighborhood level poverty.




                                                                                                 36
Table 4: Effects of Postpartum Depression on Parents’ Relationship Status at 3 Years by
Relationship Status at Baseline
                                          Baseline Relationship Status
                       Married           Cohabiting                 Not Living Together

3-Year Status:         Married     Married       Not Living      Married       Cohabiting
                                                 Together
Postpartum             -0.411**      0.103        0.463**        -0.454**          -0.349
Depression               (0.186)    (0.163)       (0.189)         (0.169)         (0.221)
                        [-0.074]   [-0.028]       [0.114]        [-0.026]        [-0.044]


Prenatal history of      -0.125    -0.374*          0.048          -0.307         0.274
mental illness          (0.165)     (0.227)        (0.161)         (0.301)       (0.229)
                       [-0.019]    [-0.075]        [0.047]        [-0.028]       [0.054]

Other Maternal Characteristics
                       0.060        0.060           -0.034       0.433***         0.103
Age, years            (0.123)      (0.125)         (0.112)        (0.100)        (0.073)
                      [0.009]      [0.016]        [-0.015]        [0.034]        [0.007]

Age squared              -0.000     -0.001          0.000        -0.008***         -0.002
                        (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.001)
                       [-0.000]    [-0.000]        [0.000]        [-0.001]       [-0.000]

Non-Hispanic black      0.055      -0.358**        0.335*         -0.382*          -0.267
                       (0.195)      (0.176)        (0.187)         (0.211)        (0.199)
                       [0.008]     [-0.109]        [0.128]        [-0.027]       [-0.035]

                         -0.011    -0.068           -0.239         0.107          0.055
Hispanic                (0.281)     0.207          (0.165)        (0.287)        (0.262)
                       [-0.002]    [0.010]        [-0.056]        [0.008]        [0.006]

Other race/ethnicity    0.120        0.223          0.492          0.001           -0.709
                       (0.574)      (0.395)        (0.406)        (0.612)         (0.502)
                       [0.016]     [-0.008]        [0.108]        [0.014]        [-0.089]

Foreign born           0.494*       0.028        -0.569***        0.499**         0.342
                       (0.254)     (0.209)         (0.188)        (0.238)        (0.219)
                       [0.060]     [0.063]        [-0.149]        [0.039]        [0.046]

High school graduate     -0.239     0.158           -0.184         0.007           -0.258
                        (0.195)    (0.147)         (0.178)        (0.185)         (0.168)
                       [-0.038]    [0.052]        [-0.064]        [0.006]        [-0.041]


                                                                                            37
Some college, but        -0.185     0.511***     -0.195    0.139       -0.121
not graduate            (0.208)      (0.193)    (0.239)   (0.240)     (0.239)
                        [0.025]      [0.135]   [-0.105]   [0.015]    [-0.022]

College graduate        0.458*      1.047***     0.083     0.063       -0.097
                        (0.258)      (0.368)    (0.553)   (0.548)     (0.572)
                        [0.060]      [0.252]   [-0.111]   [0.008]    [-0.017]


Lived with both          0.171       -0.065      -0.035    -0.135    0.287***
parents at age 15       (0.144)      (0.182)    (0.127)    (0.177)    (0.108)
                        [0.025]     [-0.010]   [-0.003]   [-0.017]    [0.051]


Medicaid birth            -0.301     0.103      0.139      -0.357     0.006
                         (0.220)    (0.180)    (0.185)     (0.166)   (0.109)
                        [-0.047]    [0.008]    [0.026]    [-0.033]   [0.010]

Pre-existing physical    0.009       0.111       -0.005    -0.047     0.073
health condition        (0.127)     (0.191)     (0.117)    (0.206)   (0.215)
                        [0.001]     [0.024]    [-0.013]   [-0.006]   [0.013]


Neighborhood              -0.519    -0.948*     0.012     -1.592**    -0.098
poverty rate             (1.136)     (0.495)   (0.411)     (0.640)   (0.432)
                        [-0.074]    [-0.198]   [0.099]    [-0.130]   [0.021]

Employed                  -0.308    0.246*      0.114       0.019     0.122
                         (0.188)    (0.134)    (0.163)     (0.198)   (0.208)
                        [-0.039]    [0.039]    [0.006]    [-0.001]   [0.019]


Regularly attends        0.114      0.496**    0.425***   0.324**      -0.111
religious services      (0.146)     (0.194)     (0.139)   (0.156)     (0.111)
                        [0.016]     [0.060]     [0.059]   [0.031]    [-0.025]

Child
Characteristics
Male                     0.043      -0.012       -0.114    -0.104      -0.050
                        (0.152)     (0.065)     (0.101)    (0.159)    (0.122)
                        [0.006]     [0.009]    [-0.029]   [-0.008]   [-0.006]

Age at 3 year           -0.059**     0.079     0.115***    -0.057      -0.024
interview, months         (0.029)   (0.036)     (0.019)    (0.040)    (0.026)
                         [-0.008]   [0.005]     [0.022]   [-0.004]   [-0.003]
Relationship
Characteristics


                                                                                38
Father visited           0.238      -0.187       -0.473    0.619***    0.733***
hospital                (0.372)     (0.404)     (0.161)     (0.183)     (0.159)
                        [0.040]     [0.013]    [-0.107]     [0.033]     [0.099]

# months knew            -0.002     -0.003*      -0.001      0.001       -0.001
father                   (0.002)     (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.001)
                        [-0.000]    [-0.000]    [0.000]     [0.000]    [-0.000]

Parents had other        0.105      -0.034     -0.341**    0.379**      0.231
children together       (0.131)     (0.146)      (0.142)   (0.192)     (0.161)
                        [0.015]     [0.027]     [-0.085]   [0.028]     [0.029]

Mother had child         0.091       -0.132      -0.018      0.229       -0.119
with another partner    (0.150)      (0.124)    (0.123)     (0.140)     (0.104)
                        [0.013]     [-0.026]    [0.009]     [0.022]    [-0.024]

Father had child with     -0.424     -0.080    -0.473***    -0.207      0.051
another partner          (0.191)     (0.096)    (0.161)     (0.215)    (0.135)
                        [-0.073]    [-0.023]    [0.024]    [-0.018]    [0.013]

Father did not            -0.288     -0.254    0.632***    -1.086***   -0.511**
complete baseline        (0.254)     (0.243)    (0.164)      (0.302)     (0.245)
interview               [-0.049]    [-0.105]    [0.193]     [-0.064]    [-0.059]

Paternal
Characteristics
Age difference           0.005      -0.002       -0.014      0.004       -0.023
(father minus           (0.018)     (0.010)     (0.011)     (0.021)     (0.015)
mother), years          [0.001]     [0.001]    [-0.003]     [0.001]    [-0.004]

Different race/          -0.129      -0.320      0.105      -0.357       -0.210
ethnicity than mother     0.293       0.277     (0.388)     (0.521)     (0.345)
                        [-0.020]    [-0.070]    [0.058]    [-0.022]    [-0.025]

CES-D score               -0.036    0.112*     0.178***     -0.018       -0.065
                         (0.074)    (0.061)     (0.058)     (0.046)     (0.053)
                        [-0.005]    [0.005]     [0.036]    [-0.000]    [-0.010]

Lower education         -0.321**     -0.103      -0.055    -0.538*      0.052
category than mother      (0.140)    (0.121)    (0.116)     (0.276)    (0.198)
                         [-0.051]   [-0.016]   [-0.004]    [-0.040]    [0.020]

Higher education         0.039      0.320*       0.086       0.100      0.099
category than mother    (0.164)     (0.175)     (0.174)     (0.192)    (0.178)
                        [0.006]     [0.060]    [-0.011]     [0.006]    [0.014]

Suboptimal physical       -0.176    -0.049     -0.417***     0.348      0.151
health                   (0.148)    (0.103)      (0.151)    (0.226)    (0.165)
                        [-0.027]    [0.031]     [-0.104]    [0.026]    [0.016]
                                                                                   39
N                         686                   1070                             1127

Notes: *** p <0.01; ** p <0.05; * p <0.10 ; † p <0.15. Top figures in each cell are probit
coefficients (for those who were married at baseline) or multinomial probit coefficients (for
those who were cohabiting and those who were not living together at baseline. Models include
all variables in Model 1 in Table 3 other than baseline relationship status, multiple birth, severe
infant health condition, and state indicators.




                                                                                                  40
Appendix Table 1: Coding Poor Infant Health

        The coding of abnormal infant health conditions in the FFCWB data was designed to
identify cases that were at least moderately severe, unlikely caused by prenatal behavior, had a
poor long term prognosis, and were present at birth. A pediatric consultant was directed to glean
information from the medical records from the birth hospitalization (augmented with 1-year
maternal reports of conditions that were likely present at birth) and to assign all infant conditions
a number between 1 and 16 according to the grid below. After giving the consultant the grid and
clear instructions, the investigators had no further input into how particular conditions were
coded. If a child had multiple conditions, each condition was assigned a separate number. A
number of variables were constructed from the resulting coding, including:
Severe Infant Health Condition, which was coded as a one (yes) if the child had a health
condition in cell #1. Examples of conditions in cell #1 are microcephalus, renal agenesis, total
blindness, and Down Syndrome. This is the measure used in the current paper.
        Examples of high severity conditions considered possibly related to parents’ behavior
are cerebral palsy (cell 5) and likely related to prenatal behavior are fetal alcohol syndrome (cell
9). These conditions are not coded as 1 in the measure of severe infant health condition.
                                                            Severity
                                   High             Medium               Low            Unknown

Not Behavior Related                 1                  2                 3                 4


Possibly Behavior Related            5                  6                 7                 8


Likely Behavior Related              9                 10                 11               12

Not Enough Information
To Determine if Behavior             13                14                 15               16
Related




                                                                                                  41
Appendix Table 2: Multivariate Probit Estimates of the Effects of Postpartum Depression
and Covariates on Parents’ Relationship Status at 3 Years, Using Broader Measure of
Postpartum Depression (N=2,883)
                              Married at 3 years        Married or Cohabiting at 3 years
                                   Coefficient                       Coefficient
                                 (standard error)                  (standard error)
                                [marginal effect]                 [marginal effect]
                           Model 1           Model 2        Model 1             Model 2
Maternal Mental
Illness
   Postpartum             -0.256***         -0.276***      -0.321***           -0.349***
   depression               (0.075)           (0.084)        (0.066)             (0.069)
                           [-0.077]          [-0.082]       [-0.128]             [-0.138]

  Prenatal history of      -0.236***      -0.246***          0.012            -0.000
  mental illness             (0.073)        (0.075)         (0.067)          (0.069)
                            [-0.070]       [-0.073]         [0.005]          [-0.000]
Other Maternal
Characteristics

  Age, years                0.077**        0.074**         0.060**           0.059**
                            (0.038)        (0.039)         (0.029)           (0.028)
                            [0.025]        [0.024]         [0.024]           [0.023]

  Age squared              -0.001**        -0.001*         -0.001*           -0.001*
                            (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)           (0.001)
                            [-0.000]       [-0.000]        [-0.000]          [-0.000]

  Non-Hispanic black       -0.253***      -0.280***       -0.293***          -0.282***
                             (0.094)        (0.083)         (0.082)            (0.083)
                            [-0.080]       [-0.078]        [-0.116]           [-0.112]

  Hispanic                   -0.122         -0.111          -0.039            -0.022
                            (0.078)         (0.076)        (0.067)           (0.068)
                            [-0.038]       [-0.035]        [-0.015]          [-0.009]

  Other race/ethnicity       -0.057         -0.058          -0.253            -0.242
                            (0.203)         (0.205)        (0.186)           (0.187)
                            [-0.018]       [-0.018]        [-0.101]          [-0.096]

  Foreign born             0.359***       0.366***         0.461***          0.473***
                            (0.118)        (0.120)          (0.128)           (0.128)
                            [0.123]        [0.126]          [0.178]           [0.182]

  High school graduate       0.090          0.095            0.001             0.011
                            (0.084)        (0.084)          (0.078)           (0.078)


                                                                                         42
                          [0.029]     [0.031]     [0.000]     [0.004]

  Some college, but not   0.331***    0.336***    0.158*      0.162*
  graduate                 (0.101)     (0.101)    (0.081)     (0.083)
                           [0.111]     [0.112]    [0.063]     [0.064]

  College graduate        0.678***    0.682***   0.397***    0.407***
                           (0.151)     (0.148)    (0.152)     (0.153)
                           [0.246]     [0.247]    [0.154]     [0.157]

  Lived with both          -0.028      -0.006      0.058      0.090*
  parents at age 15       (0.069)      (0.077)    (0.048)     (0.051)
                          [-0.009]    [-0.002]    [0.023]     [0.036]

  Medicaid birth           -0.113      -0.112    -0.137*     -0.138*
                          (0.081)      (0.082)   (-0.080)    (0.081)
                          [-0.036]    [-0.036]   [-0.055]    [-0.055]

  Pre-existing physical    0.054       0.047       0.032       0.022
  health condition        (0.103)     (0.104)     (0.056)     (0.055)
                          [0.018]     [0.015]     [0.013]     [0.009]

  Neighborhood            -0.767**    -0.768**    -0.375      -0.367
  poverty rate             (0.363)     (0.367)   (0.305)     (0.306)
                           [-0.245]   [-0.245]   [-0.149]    [-0.146]

  Employed                 0.011       0.014      -0.022      -0.023
                          (0.082)     (0.079)    (0.069)     (0.071)
                          [0.003]     [0.004]    [-0.009]    [-0.009]

  Regularly attends       0.193**     0.197**     -0.013      -0.008
  religious services      (0.085)     (0.085)    (0.072)     (0.073)
                          [0.063]     [0.064]    [-0.005]    [-0.003]

Child Characteristics
  Male                     0.013       0.011       0.026       0.026
                          (0.054)     (0.053)     (0.053)     (0.054)
                          [0.004]     [0.003]     [0.010]     [0.010]

  Multiple birth           0.041       0.033       0.042       0.036
                          (0.198)     (0.202)     (0.287)     (0.297)
                          [0.013]     [0.011]     [0.017]     [0.014]

  Severe infant health     -0.121      -0.121    -0.427***   -0.410***
  condition               (0.140)      (0.141)     (0.130)     (0.134)
                          [-0.037]    [-0.037]    [-0.167]    [-0.161]



                                                                         43
  Age at 3 year             -0.027*     -0.028*     -0.055***   -0.056***
  interview, months         (0.015)      (0.015)      (0.010)     (0.010)
                            [-0.009]    [-0.009]     [-0.022]    [-0.022]

Relationship
Characteristics
  Married                   2.178***    2.176***    1.340***    1.338***
                             (0.083)     (0.081)     (0.096)     (0.095)
                             [0.721]     [0.721]     [0.461]     [0.461]

  Cohabiting                0.510***    0.507***    0.724***    0.724***
                             (0.096)     (0.097)     (0.040)     (0.041)
                             [0.169]     [0.167]     [0.279]     [0.279]

  Father visited hospital   0.265***      0.269     0.467***    0.469***
                             (0.210)     (0.214)     (0.084)     (0.084)
                             [0.080]     [0.080]     [0.184]     [0.185]

  # months knew father      -0.001*     -0.001*      -0.000      -0.000
                            (0.001)      (0.001)    (0.000)     (0.000)
                            [-0.000]    [-0.000]    [-0.000]    [-0.000]

  Parents had other          0.139*      0.142*     0.220***    0.225***
  children together          (0.079)     (0.079)     (0.061)     (0.060)
                             [0.045]     [0.046]     [0.087]     [0.089]

  Mother had child with       0.007       0.006      -0.012      -0.013
  another partner            (0.067)     (0.067)    (0.056)     (0.058)
                             [0.002]     [0.002]    [-0.005]    [-0.005]

  Father had child with     -0.149**    -0.150**     -0.063      -0.062
  another partner            (0.062)     (0.062)    (0.051)     (0.051)
                             [-0.047]   [-0.047]    [-0.025]    [-0.025]

  Father did not            -0.478***   -0.472***   -0.496***   -0.488***
  complete baseline           (0.110)     (0.111)     (0.086)     (0.087)
  interview                  [-0.135]    [-0.133]    [-0.195]    [-0.192]

Paternal
Characteristics
  Age difference (father      0.002       0.002      -0.005      -0.005
  minus mother),years        (0.008)     (0.008)    (0.006)     (0.006)
                             [0.001]     [0.001]    [-0.002]    [-0.002]

  Different                  -0.168      -0.164      -0.087      -0.083



                                                                            44
  race/ethnicity than         (0.173)          (0.177)          (0.155)             (0.158)
  mother                      [-0.051]        [-0.049]          [-0.035]            [-0.033]

  CES-D score                  0.007            0.006           -0.059**            -0.059**
                              (0.025)          (0.025)           (0.025)             (0.025)
                              [0.002]          [0.002]           [-0.023]            [-0.024]

  Lower education             -0.206**        -0.210**          -0.104**            -0.104**
  category than mother         (0.086)         (0.083)           (0.048)             (0.049)
                               [-0.064]       [-0.065]           [-0.042]            [-0.041]

  Higher education            0.132**         0.134**             0.057               0.061
  category than mother        (0.067)         (0.067)            (0.053)             (0.052)
                              [0.043]         [0.044]            [0.023]             [0.024]

  Suboptimal physical          0.069            0.069           0.168**             0.168**
  health                      (0.079)          (0.078)          (0.074)             (0.074)
                              [0.022]          [0.022]          [0.067]             [-0.067]

Grandparent’s Mental Illness
  Grandmother’s                                 0.069                                 0.058
  history of depressive                        (0.096)                               (0.074)
  symptoms                                     [0.022]                               [0.023]

  Grandfather’s history                         0.009                                 0.125
  of depressive                                (0.121)                               (0.088)
  symptoms                                     [0.003]                               [0.050]

  Missing                                       0.116                                -0.010
  grandmother’s history                        (0.152)                              (0.124)
  of depressive                                [0.038]                              [-0.004]
  symptoms

   Missing grandfather’s                        0.026                               0.095**
   history of depressive                       (0.083)                              (0.045)
   symptoms                                    [0.008]                              [0.038]
Notes: *** p <0.01; ** p <0.05; * p <0.10. All models include indicators for mother’s state of
residence at baseline and missing neighborhood level poverty.




                                                                                                 45
Appendix Table 3: Effects of Postpartum Depression on Parent’s Relationship Status at 3
Years for Select Subsamples Based on Mental Illness History
                                     Married at 3 Years             Married or Cohabiting at 3
                                                                               Years
                                           Coefficient                       Coefficient
                                        (standard error)                  (standard error)
                                       [marginal effect]                 [marginal effect]
Subsample:
No history of prenatal mental              -0.210**                          -0.216**
illness (N=2,574)                           (0.102)                           (0.089)
                                           [-0.066]                          [-0.086]

No grandparent history of                 -0.442***                          -0.419***
mental illness (N=1,981)                    (0.161)                            (0.152)
                                           [-0.121]                           [-0.165]

No history of prenatal mental             -0.455***                          -0.343**
illness or grandparent history              (0.169)                           (0.156)
of mental illness (N= 1,809)               [-0.129]                          [-0.136]

Notes: *** p <0.01; ** p <0.05; * p <0.10. Probit regressions in the first and third rows include
all covariates from Model 1 of Table 3 except mother’s prenatal history of mental illness. Probit
regressions in the second row included all covariates from Model 1 of Table 3.




                                                                                                 46
Appendix Table 4: Bivariate Probit Estimates of Effects of Postpartum Depression on
Relationship Status at 3 Years (N=2,883)
                                  Postpartum Married at Postpartum Married or
                                   Depression      3 Years      Depression    Cohabiting
                                                                              at 3 Years
                                   Coefficient   Coefficient     Coefficient  Coefficient
                                      (SE)           (SE)           (SE)         (SE)
                                                    [ME]                         [ME]
Maternal Depression
   Postpartum depression                            0.155                       -0.036
                                                   (0.399)                      (0.379)
                                                   [0.052]                     [-0.014]

   Prenatal history of mental      0.417***      -0.320***      0.414***        -0.074
   illness                          (0.077)        (0.088)       (0.077)        (0.087)
                                                  [-0.094]                     [-0.029]

Other Maternal
Characteristics
   Age, years                       -0.046        0.078**        -0.051        0.057**
                                    (0.051)       (0.038)        (0.051)       (0.028)
                                                  [0.025]                      [0.023]

   Age squared                       0.001        -0.001**        0.001          0.001
                                    (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)
                                                  [-0.000]                      [0.000]

   Non-Hispanic black                0.023       -0.285***        0.023       -0.257***
                                    (0.088)        (0.088)       (0.084)        (0.085)
                                                  [-0.091]                     [-0.102]

   Hispanic                          0.082          0.015         0.086          0.077
                                    (0.144)        (0.107)       (0.141)        (0.074)
                                                   [0.005]                      [0.031]

   Other race/ethnicity              0.128          0.007         0.130         -0.194
                                    (0.190)        (0.208)       (0.187)        (0.200)
                                                   [0.002]                     [-0.077]

   Foreign born                     -0.048        0.265**         -0.05        0.423***
                                    (0.152)       (0.123)        (0.149)        (0.117)
                                                  [0.090]                       [0.164]

   High school graduate              0.098          0.105         0.102          0.027
                                    (0.069)        (0.078)       (0.071)        (0.077)
                                                   [0.034]                      [0.011]


                                                                                          47
   Some college, but not           0.150    0.332***    0.155    0.175**
   graduate                       (0.105)    (0.099)   (0.108)   (0.088)
                                             [0.112]             [0.069]

   College graduate                0.028    0.698***    0.029    0.435***
                                  (0.155)    (0.145)   (0.156)    (0.152)
                                             [0.255]              [0.167]

   Lived with both parents at      0.016     -0.008     0.014      0.072
   age 15                         (0.044)    (0.067)   (0.045)    (0.047)
                                            [-0.003]              [0.029]

   Medicaid birth                  0.012     -0.102     0.012     -0.132
                                  (0.103)    (0.084)   (0.102)    (0.083)
                                            [-0.033]             [-0.052]

   Pre-existing physical health   -0.045     0.034     -0.044      0.024
   condition                      (0.079)   (0.103)    (0.080)    (0.010)
                                            [0.011]               [0.008]

   Neighborhood poverty rate       0.134    -0.764**    0.137     -0.310
                                  (0.275)    (0.353)   (0.281)    (0.292)
                                            [-0.246]             [-0.123]

   Employed                        0.078     0.002      0.076     -0.043
                                  (0.087)   (0.080)    (0.088)    (0.069)
                                            [0.001]              [-0.017]

   Regularly attends religious    -0.014    0.192**    -0.018     -0.021
   services                       (0.051)   (0.080)    (0.050)    (0.069)
                                            [0.062]              [-0.008]

Child Characteristics
   Male                           -0.012     0.013     -0.009      0.025
                                  (0.075)   (0.054)    (0.073)    (0.051)
                                            [0.004]               [0.010]

   Multiple birth                  0.046     0.006      0.052      0.018
                                  (0.203)   (0.203)    (0.199)    (0.285)
                                            [0.002]               [0.007]

   Severe infant health            0.069     -0.091     0.070    -0.419***
   condition                      (0.174)    (0.145)   (0.175)     (0.139)
                                            [-0.028]              [-0.165]



                                                                            48
   Age at 3 year interview,         0.002      -0.016      0.003     -0.046***
   months                          (0.016)     (0.017)    (0.016)      (0.010)
                                              [-0.005]                [-0.018]

Relationship Characteristics
   Married                         -0.091     2.129***    -0.086     1.334***
                                   (0.135)     (0.085)    (0.132)     (0.092)
                                               [0.710]                [0.495]

   Cohabiting                      -0.083     0.496***    -0.085     0.718***
                                   (0.056)     (0.093)    (0.055)     (0.040)
                                               [0.165]                [0.277]

   Father visited hospital          -0.107      0.273     -0.112     0.473***
                                   (0.105)     (0.208)    (0.106)     (0.086)
                                               [0.083]                [0.186]

   # months knew father            -0.000     -0.001*     -0.000      -0.000
                                   (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.000)
                                              [-0.000]               [-0.000]

   Parents had other children      0.091*      0.144*     0.087*     0.209***
   together                        (0.048)     (0.081)    (0.048)     (0.063)
                                               [0.047]                [0.083]

   Mother had child with            0.119      -0.004      0.118      -0.025
   another partner                 (0.088)     (0.068)    (0.089)     (0.061)
                                              [-0.001]               [-0.010]

   Father had child with another    0.104     -0.170***    0.105      -0.081
   partner                         (0.077)      (0.063)   (0.077)     (0.054)
                                               [-0.054]              [-0.032]

   Father did not complete         -0.092     -0.472***   -0.095     -0.464***
   baseline interview              (0.138)      (0.096)   (0.138)      (0.082)
                                               [-0.135]               [-0.183]

Parental Characteristics
   Age difference (father minus     0.002       0.003      0.002      -0.003
   mother), years                  (0.006)     (0.008)    (0.006)     (0.006)
                                               [0.001]               [-0.001]

   Different race/ethnicity than   -0.412**    -0.147     -0.420**    -0.075
   mother                           (0.206)    (0.175)     (0.203)    (0.164)
                                              [-0.045]               [-0.030]




                                                                            49
   CES-D score                         -0.023             0.007        -0.023              -0.062**
                                       (0.025)           (0.025)       (0.025)              (0.026)
                                                         [0.002]                           [-0.025]

   Lower education category             0.028            -0.207**       0.026              -0.108**
   than mother                         (0.067)            (0.087)      (0.068)              (0.049)
                                                         [-0.065]                          [-0.043]

   Higher education category           -0.021            0.143**        -0.03               0.071
   than mother                         (0.100)           (0.061)       (0.098)             (0.052)
                                                         [0.047]                           [0.028]

   Suboptimal physical health           0.053             0.052         0.052              0.154**
                                       (0.063)           (0.076)       (0.065)             (0.072)
                                                         [0.017]                           [0.061]
Identifiers
   Either grandparent had             0.623***                        0.622***
   history of depressive               (0.083)                         (0.082)
   symptoms
   Missing both grandparent’s         0.500***                        0.500***
   history of depressive               (0.118)                         (0.116)
   symptoms
   Rho                                          -0.209                           -0.150
                                               (0.203)                           (0.205)
Test Results (p-values)
   Wald Test of rho =0                           0.318                           0.471
   Chi-square joint significance
   test of identifiers                           0.000                           0.000

Exclusion tests (p-values)
    Either grandparent’s history               0.219
                                                                                 0.224
    of depressive symptoms
    Missing both grandparents’
    history of depressive                      0.978
                                                                                 0.700
    symptoms
Notes: *** p <0.01; ** p <0.05; * p <0.10. All models include quadratic terms for age and an
indicator for missing neighborhood level poverty. State indicators not included. SE = standard
error. ME = marginal effect.




                                                                                                     50
