NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF MEDICAID EXPANSIONS IN THE LATE 1980S AND EARLY
1990S ON THE LABOR SUPPLY OF PREGNANT WOMEN
Dhaval M. Dave
Sandra L. Decker
Robert Kaestner
Kosali Ilayperuma Simon
Working Paper 19161
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19161
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2013

The authors thank Onur Altindag, Heather Dahlen, Chad Meyerhoefer and Asako Moriya for helpful
comments. The findings and conclusions in this article are those of the author and do not necessarily
represent the views of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Dhaval M. Dave, Sandra L. Decker, Robert Kaestner, and Kosali Ilayperuma Simon. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Medicaid Expansions in the Late 1980s and Early 1990s on the Labor Supply
of Pregnant Women
Dhaval M. Dave, Sandra L. Decker, Robert Kaestner, and Kosali Ilayperuma Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 19161
June 2013
JEL No. D1,I13,J01,J08,J22
ABSTRACT
A substantial body of research has found that expansions in Medicaid eligibility increased enrollment
in Medicaid, reduced the rate of uninsured, and reduced the rate of private health insurance coverage
(i.e., crowd out). Notably, there has been little research that has examined the mechanism by which
crowd-out occurs. This study examines the effects of expansions in Medicaid eligibility for pregnant
women in the late 1980s and the early 1990s on labor supply, which is one of the possible mechanisms
underlying crowd out. Estimates suggest that the 20 percentage point increase in Medicaid eligibility
during the sample period was associated with a 6% to 7% decrease in the probability that a woman
who gave birth in the past year was employed. Among unmarried women with less than a high school
education, the change in Medicaid eligibility reduced employment by approximately 13% to 16%.
Dhaval M. Dave
Bentley University
Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and NBER
ddave@bentley.edu

Robert Kaestner
Institute of Government and Public Affairs
University of Illinois
815 West Van Buren Street, Suite 525
Chicago, IL 60607
and NBER
kaestner.robert@gmail.com

Sandra L. Decker
Distinguished Consultant
National Center for Health Statistics
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
3311 Toledo Road (Room 6107)
Hyattsville, MD 20782
esp4@cdc.gov

Kosali Ilayperuma Simon
School of Public and Environmental Affairs
Indiana University
Rm 359
1315 East Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN 47405-1701
and NBER
simonkos@indiana.edu

I.

Introduction
Employment and health insurance coverage are tightly linked in the United States

because of the absence of a universal, public health insurance system and the tax deductibility of
employer-provided health insurance benefits. As a result, a large majority of the non-elderly
obtain health insurance coverage through their employers. However, for some segments of the
population, specifically the elderly and the poor, government-financed health insurance is
available. For the elderly, Medicare is a health insurance program that covers virtually all
persons aged 65 and over. For the poor, Medicaid is a joint federal and state health insurance
program that covers poor and near poor children and, to a more limited extent, the parents of
these children. Participation in Medicaid has grown with expansions of the program and in 2011,
nearly one-third of all children and nearly one-tenth of non-elderly adults are covered by
Medicaid.1
The creation and expansion of public health insurance programs has generated interest in
the effect of these programs on employment and employer-sponsored health insurance. Most
research in this area has examined whether expansions in Medicaid have reduced the proportion
uninsured and to what extent this reduction in uninsured was due to poor and near-poor families
switching from private, employer-sponsored insurance to Medicaid (or similar programs such as
the State Children’s Health Insurance Program). Generally, evidence on this question indicates
that the creation and expansion of Medicaid has resulted in a substantial decrease in the
proportion uninsured and some substitution of public for private, employer-provided health
insurance (i.e., crowd-out), although the extent of substitution is debated (Gruber and Simon

1

Authors’ calculations from the 2011 National Health Interview Survey. See http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis.htm,
website last accessed September 26, 2012.

3

2008; Shore-Shepard 2008; Dave et al. 2011; Ham and Shore-Shepard 2005; LoSasso and
Buchmueller 2004).
Notably, less research has been focused on the effect of publicly-provided health
insurance on employment. Few studies have directly examined the effect of Medicare on
employment because it is difficult to separate the effect of Medicare from other benefits,
specifically social security, that occur at the same time as Medicare eligibility. However, several
studies have examined how health insurance coverage affects employment among the elderly,
and the evidence found in this literature implies that Medicare likely has a large effect on
employment (Madrian 2007). For example, the availability of employer-provided health
insurance after retirement is associated with earlier retirement (Strumpf 2010; Blau and Gilleskie
2008; Kapur and Rogowski 2007).
The literature examining the effects of Medicaid on employment is also relatively
small. Much of it is concerned with the period of time when Medicaid was statutorily linked
to the Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program (i.e., prior to the Personal
Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996). Very few studies have
examined whether the expansion of Medicaid, independently of AFDC (or its replacement,
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families ‐ TANF) affected labor supply (Yelowitz 1995;
Ham and Shore-Shepard 2005; Meyer and Rosenbaum 2001; Montgomery and Navin 2000). We
review these papers in more detail below, but note here that the absence of more research on the
effects of Medicaid on labor supply is surprising given the voluminous research on whether
Medicaid has crowded out private health insurance. Crowd-out can occur in two ways: 1) by
people changing labor supply choices such as whether and how much to work, or 2) by

4

employees and employers changing health insurance offers or health insurance take up.2 There
is a small literature on the latter mechanism, and results from it indicate, at most, small changes
in insurance coverage from changes in insurance offer and take up rates. Thus, the absence of
much research on whether Medicaid affected labor supply is noteworthy because without it, the
mechanisms through which crowd-out occurred remain unknown and limits the ability of
policymakers to address the issue effectively.
Our analysis of the effect of Medicaid expansions on pregnant women’s labor supply is
motivated by recent evidence reported by Dave et al. (2011) that Medicaid expansions targeted at
pregnant women resulted in a substantial amount of crowd-out. Estimates reported in Dave et al.
(2011) suggest that one out of every two pregnant women that enrolled in Medicaid during the
late 1980s and early 1990s substituted public for private coverage. A key question for both
theory and policy is what was the mechanism underlying the crowd out. Of course, multiple
factors affect a woman’s decision to work while pregnant or to return to the workforce after
giving birth, such as the health of mother and child, family and workplace support, and the
availability and cost of child care. In this paper, we examine whether the expansions of
Medicaid to pregnant women that took place in the late 1980s and the early 1990s and that
resulted in some substitution of public for private insurance by pregnant women occurred
through changes in labor supply. Specifically, we provide the first estimates of the association
between Medicaid expansions from 1985 to 1996, measured by proportion of the population
eligible for Medicaid, and whether women with a child less than one year old (i.e., pregnant
women) worked in the past year, their number of weeks worked in the past year, their usual

2

Cutler and Gruber (1996) find effects of Medicaid on health insurance take up but do not find any effects of
Medicaid on the probability that the employer offers health insurance. Buchmueller et al. (2005) also find little
evidence that employers changed offers of health insurance, though they find some evidence of other adjustments
such as increased employee contributions.

5

hours of work per week in the past year, and their wages in the past year. Results of the analysis
point to substantial changes in labor supply as the mechanism that explained crowd out.
Estimates indicate that the 20 percentage point increase in Medicaid eligibility during the sample
period was associated with a 6% to 7% decrease in the probability that a woman who gave birth
in the past year was employed. Among unmarried women with less than a high school education,
the change in Medicaid eligibility reduced employment by approximately 13% to 16%.
II.

Literature Review
Compared to the large literature on the insurance effects of Medicaid expansions, there is

relatively little that has been written about its labor market effects. A few papers have examined
the labor supply consequences of Medicaid policy for different time periods (the introduction of
Medicaid in 1965, the expansion of Medicaid for children in the late 1980s/early 1990s) and
different populations than ours (all women due to the expansions in coverage for their children
rather than their own coverage while pregnant). Specifically, Decker and Selck (2011) examined
the impact of Medicaid’s introduction between 1966 and 1972 on welfare participation. Using
aggregated state-level data, they found that the introduction of Medicaid increased AFDC
caseloads. Investigating this effect further with individual-level analyses using data from the
March Current Population Survey (CPS), Decker and Selck (2011) found that the increase in
caseloads came from increases in take-up of Medicaid rather than from reductions in labor
supply. Strumpf (2011) also used March CPS to examine labor supply decisions among single
women in this period surrounding the introduction of Medicaid in the late 1960s. She also found
no evidence that women likely to be eligible for the program reduced their labor supply. Taken
together, these studies suggest that the creation of Medicaid made welfare more attractive for

6

those already eligible for welfare (a take-up effect), perhaps through the value of the medical
benefits overcoming some stigma and administrative hurdles that would have earlier existed.
Blank (1989) used the 1980 National Medical Care Utilization and Expenditure Survey
(NMCUES) to study the issue and found that Medicaid eligibility did not affect AFDC
participation (or, therefore, work).3 Winkler (1991) examined whether the availability of
Medicaid for welfare recipients made welfare (and reduced work) more attractive to those who
might not have chosen welfare if it did not provide health insurance through Medicaid. She used
data from the 1986 March CPS and found that Medicaid availability reduced the probability of
employment, but had no statistically significant impact on hours of work. Moffitt and Wolfe
(1992) examined how Medicaid affected labor supply and welfare participation among single
mothers using data from the 1984 wave of the Survey of Income and Program Participation
(SIPP). They developed a family-specific proxy for the value of Medicaid and found that greater
expected Medicaid spending was associated with lower participation in the labor market and
higher participation in welfare.
Several studies examined the effect of Medicaid expansions in the 1980s and 1990s on
female labor supply. Yelowitz (1995) assessed the impact of delinking welfare (AFDC) from
Medicaid for children during the late 1980s and early 1990s on labor supply. He utilized the
March CPS for 1989 to 1992 and examined the labor supply of single mothers aged 18-55 with
at least one child under age 15. Yelowitz (1995) found that eligibility was associated with a
decrease in welfare participation and an increase in labor force participation, with the effects
being concentrated among separated or divorced women. In contrast to Yelowitz (1995), Ham and

3

Although Blank (1989) found no impact of Medicaid on welfare participation in a cross section, analyses that
exploit state-time variation in the introduction of Medicaid (Decker and Selck 2011 and Strumpf 2011) found that
Medicaid increased welfare participation by making welfare more attractive for those already eligible. The
methodological differences explain the contrast.

7

Shore-Sheppard (2005) and Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001) found no significant association between
labor supply and expanded Medicaid eligibility. Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001) found that increased
labor force participation by single mothers could largely be explained by the expansion of the
Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), and to a lesser extent, welfare benefit cuts.
As this brief review highlights, the previous literature has reported mixed evidence on
whether Medicaid is associated with a change in employment or hours of work. Studies that
examined the expansions in Medicaid in the late 1980s that delinked Medicaid from AFDC
found some evidence that Medicaid eligibility reduced labor supply (Winkler 1991; Yelowitz
1995). However, other studies of the same period reported no association between Medicaid
eligibility and labor supply (Ham and Shore-Sheppard 2005; Meyer and Rosenbaum 2001).
Finally, the only study that examined the most recent expansions in Medicaid (SCHIP) found that
expansions were associated with a reduction in hours of work (Tomohara and Lee 2007).
The mixed findings of the effect of Medicaid on labor supply contrast with the uniformity
of evidence related to “crowd-out”; while studies may differ in terms of magnitudes, almost all
studies of “crowd-out” reported finding that Medicaid expansions are associated with a decline
in employer-sponsored health insurance coverage. This decline in insurance can only come about
through changes in labor supply or changes in offer and take-up rates of employer-sponsored
insurance. The literature on the changes in offers of health insurance does not show evidence of
employers ceasing to offer health insurance to the worker (Buchmueller et al. 2005, ShoreSheppard et al. 2000; and Cutler and Gruber 1996 ) The more limited literature on take-up
suggests at most a small decline (Buchmueller et al., 2005). Therefore, it is likely that crowd out
occurred because of changes in labor supply, but the evidence on this question is limited and

8

inconclusive. This line of research may need to be investigated further, in addition to the
possibility that Medicaid expansions affected labor supply decisions.
In this paper, we investigate the effect of the Medicaid expansions of the late 1980s and
early 1990s on the labor supply of pregnant women. When Medicaid was enacted in 1965, it
provided coverage primarily to those who qualified for cash welfare payments. Beginning in the
early 1980s and particularly after 1987, eligibility for Medicaid coverage of the expenses of
pregnancy and child birth was greatly expanded regardless of participation in welfare. These
Medicaid expansions were first introduced as state options and later were mandatory if a state
wanted to maintain their Federal Medicaid funding. By 1992, all states were required to cover
the expenses of pregnancy and child birth for women in households with incomes up to 133% of
the poverty line, and were permitted to extend eligibility up to 185% of the poverty line. As a
result, the share of women who would be eligible for Medicaid coverage should they become
pregnant rose from 20% in 1986 to almost 45% in 1992 (Currie and Gruber, 1996).
III.

Conceptual Framework
The theoretical model we develop is based on the decisions of a mother who is choosing

consumption, leisure, medical care and health insurance in a dynamic (two-period) model that
spans the pre- to post-birth period. Health insurance is particularly important because it is used
to buy medical care in order to improve maternal and infant health.
A woman’s expected utility is a function of consumption, leisure and child health:
(1)

E (U )  u0 ( x0 , l0 )   {[1   (m0 )][u1 ( x1 , l1 , c)]   (m0 )[u1 ( x1 , l1 , c  z (m1 ))]}

Equation (1) reflects the fact that there are two periods: prior to birth (t=0) and after birth (t=1).
Utility is a function of consumption (x), leisure (l) and child health (c) in each period, although
in period 0 the child is not born and so child health does not enter the utility function. The

9

discount rate is denoted by (β). The model applies only to women who are pregnant; we assume
that Medicaid has no effect on the pregnancy decision.4 Equation (1) also makes child health
uncertain. With probability (π), the child may experience an adverse health shock (z) that lowers
child health and can be offset (repaired) with medical care (m). Medical care can also be used to
alter the probability of an adverse health event.
The woman’s budget constraint is given by:
(2)

x 0  p m ( ) m0 

f





p ( ) m1 f 1
x1
w( )(1  l1 )
  (m0 ) m

 w( )(1  l 0 ) 
W
1 r
1 r
1 r
 1 r

Lifetime income is spent on: consumption (x) in periods 0 and 1; medical care (m) in periods 0
and 1 with price of medical care denoted by pm; and the quantity of health insurance (α). The
interest rate is denoted by (r). Health insurance reduces the price of medical care and is financed
out of earnings (w). The cost of health insurance also includes a loading charge (f/α) where f is a
fixed cost of administering health insurance.
The constrained choice problem is given by:
L  u 0 ( x 0 , l 0 )   {[1   (m0 )][u1 ( x1 , l1 , c)]   ( m0 )[u1 ( x1 , l1 , c  z ( m1 ))]}

(3)

 [ x 0  p m ( ) m0 

f





p ( )m1 f 1
w( )(1  l1 )
x1
  ( m0 ) m

 w( )(1  l 0 ) 
1 r
 1 r
1 r
1 r

The first order conditions for consumption, leisure, medical care and insurance, respectively, are
given by:

4

Given the mixed evidence on this issue, we simplify the analysis by assuming it is zero. For instance, Joyce et al.
(1998), using pooled cross-sections of states, find that expansions in the income thresholds for Medicaid eligibility
between 1987-1991 are associated with a 5% increase in the birthrate among white women but not among black
women. They also find some evidence of a significant decline in the abortion rate, suggesting that the increase in
birthrate may be due to a decrease in abortions rather than an increase in pregnancies. DeLeire et al. (2011) find no
discernible effects on fertility from Medicaid expansions using Natality data from 1985-1996. Zavodny and Bitler
(2010) find little evidence that the expansions had any effect on abortion or pregnancy rates examining state-level
birth and abortion rates between 1982-1996.

10

L
 u0 x    0
(4) x0
u~  u ( x , l , c  z )
1

(5)

1

1

L
1
  [(1   )u1x  u~1x ]  
0
x1
1 r

1

L
 u 0l  w( )  0
l0

L
w( )
  [(1   )u1l  u~1l ]  
0
l1
1 r

L
 ~
 pm ( )m1

(u1  u1 )  [ pm ( ) 
]0
m0
m0
m0 1  r


(6)

 ~
 pm ( )m1
(u1  u1 )  [ pm ( ) 
]
m0 1  r
m0

p ( )
u z
L
   1
  m
0
m1
c m1
1 r


p ( )
u1 z
 m
c m1
1 r

p
p m
L
f
f 1
w
w (1  l1 )
(1  l0 ) 
]0
 [ m m0  2   m 1  2



 1  r  1  r 

 1  r
p
(1  l1 )
m
1
f
w
(7)  m (m0   1 )   2 (1 
)
[(1  l0 ) 
]
1 r
1  r 
1 r


(1  l1 ) pm
m
1
w
f
[(1  l0 ) 
]
(m0   1 )   2 (1 
)
1 r
1 r
1 r




Given the above framework, we examine the effect of Medicaid on a woman’s decisions.
Medicaid provides free health insurance (α), which in this model is the same as setting f=0 and
w
 0 at least for those women with w less than some amount (income eligible).


We begin with women who have private health insurance (α >0) who are working by
definition (as they have private own-name coverage) in a counterfactual world of no Medicaid
expansion (i.e. would not find it desirable or possible to have reduced labor supply and joined
Medicaid absent the expansion). These women experience an increase in wage upon receiving
Medicaid instead of employer health insurance because Medicaid does not have to be financed
11

out of earnings. As shown by equation (5), an increase in the wage will cause them to work
more in both periods because of the substitution effect. However, it is plausible that the marginal
utility of leisure increases post-birth and thus the increase in work would be larger prior to birth
than after birth. Importantly, an increase in wage can only be obtained by changing jobs (to an
employer who does not provide insurance) or by dropping insurance obtained from the current
employer. There is also an income effect associated with Medicaid availability that reduces
work effort in both periods. Thus, among women with private coverage and who are working,
the new availability of Medicaid may increase or decrease work effort and accompany a switch
from private to public insurance. The income effect is likely to dominate for those with a higher
probability of an adverse birth outcome (sick) and/or high use of medical care (preferences for
child quality) because these persons will use more medical care that requires greater loss of
income. The income effect will also dominate in the post-birth period particularly for those with
a high value of child rearing. Therefore, we expect expanded Medicaid eligibility to be
associated with movement from employed with private insurance to employed with public
insurance, and from employed with private insurance to not employed with public insurance.
The latter change to non-employment may be particularly likely post-birth with the plausible
increase in the marginal utility of leisure. While we have expressed changes in terms of
employment, labor supply could also be altered through the intensive margin of hours of work.
The ambiguity with respect to changes in employment also applies to hours of work.
Women who are without private insurance (α=0) and employed experience an income
effect and work less. They were not financing insurance from wages to begin with, so there is no
wage change. The income effect is largest for those with a higher probability of an adverse birth
outcome (sick) and/or high use of medical care (preferences for child quality). Therefore, we

12

expect movement from uninsured/employed to public insurance/employed and to public
insurance/not employed. For this group too, we expect the latter change to non-employment to be
particularly likely post-birth.
One question that arises from the previous analysis is why do some women who work
have different levels of insurance (insured-uninsured)? As shown by equation (7), insured
persons are those with a low “f”, small

pm
w
and/or high
. Persons may be uninsured if they



work in a small firm in which the loading cost is relatively high, or if the generosity of insurance
(

pm
w
) is low relative to the wage cost of insurance (
). We simply assume there is an



insurance market that will equate expected expenditures with premiums.
Women who do not work, and are uninsured, experience an income effect, but this has no
labor supply effect because they do not work. These women move from uninsured to public
insurance with no change in work status. Finally, women who are not working and insured (e.g.,
public insurance through AFDC) experience a wage increase over some range of income that
allows them to remain eligible for Medicaid. Because these women do not have to finance
insurance through wage decreases, they will be more likely to work because of the higher wage.
Therefore, we expect movement from not employed with public insurance (AFDC) to employed
with public insurance (Medicaid).
Our model differs from Yelowitz (1995) because we assume that individuals finance
health insurance through wages. Thus, the availability of public insurance changes the wage and
price of leisure for those who work and are insured privately. By contrast, Yelowitz assumes
that there is no one in this category. For those who work and are uninsured, there is the same
income effect. For those who do not work and are uninsured the same applies.

13

To summarize, based on the above paradigm, we expect expanded Medicaid eligibility to
be associated with:


movement from employed with private insurance to employed with public
insurance, and from employed with private insurance to not employed with public
insurance;



movement from uninsured/employed to public insurance/employed and to public
insurance/not employed;



movement from uninsured to public insurance with no change in work status;



and movement from not employed with public insurance (AFDC) to employed
with public insurance (Medicaid).

Although our model is designed to apply to pregnant women, some expectations above
may also be true for expansions of public insurance to other groups, though movement
particularly in the first category above may be less for other groups if they have lower elasticities
of labor supply/lower marginal utility of leisure compared to pregnant women.
IV.

Research Design

Our analysis is motivated by the incentives described above for pregnant women to
potentially reduce their labor supply in response to the availability of health insurance coverage
that is not tied to the labor market, incentives which increased with the expansion in Medicaid
eligibility. Accordingly, the empirical models are specified to obtain estimates of the effect of
the Medicaid expansions on labor market outcomes and on the joint probability between labor
market outcomes and health insurance.
First, for each type of labor market outcome (L), we estimate the following regression
model:

14

(8)

Likjt   j   t  ELIG kjt  X i   Z jt   u ikjt

i = 1,…,N

(persons)

k=1,2,3

(race)

j=1,…50

(states)

t=1985,…1996

(years)

In equation (8), L is a specific labor market outcome (employed, labor force participation, weeks
worked, hours worked, wages) for woman i in state j and year t; ELIG is the fraction of women
in group k, which is defined by race, in state j and year t that are eligible for Medicaid; X are
individual characteristics of pregnant women such as age, education, and race; and Z are timevarying state-level characteristics including the unemployment rate, poverty rate, and fraction of
single males with incomes below 200% of the federal poverty line (FPL) with private insurance
in state j and year t.5 Equation (1) includes state (αj) and year (βt) effects. We chose to define
our group cells by race, in addition to state and year, because of the large racial differences that
exist in insurance coverage and labor market behaviors. We estimate models for employment,
labor force participation and wages by ordinary least squares and models for hours and weeks
worked by negative binomial regression methods. All models account for the sampling weights
provided in the Current Population Survey, and standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary
correlation within state cells (Moulton 1990; Donald and Lang 2007).
The use of the fraction of women eligible for Medicaid in each state and year to measure
Medicaid eligibility follows the innovation of Currie and Gruber (1996) and Cutler and Gruber
(1996). The key to this measure is that it records the fraction of a fixed sample of women
(usually drawn nationally) who would be eligible for Medicaid if they were pregnant and lived in
5

The fraction of single males with incomes below 200% of the FPL who are privately insured in each state/year is
computed from the March Current Population Surveys.

15

each state in each year, avoiding the endogenous relationship between Medicaid eligibility of an
individual mother and her labor supply or the health of that mother or her infant. To form the
measure, we select a sample of women aged 18 to 39 from the 1986 to 1997 March Current
Population Surveys (CPS) (covering data from 1985-1996). We adjust all financial variables for
price changes such that incomes are deflated (inflated) from the actual year (e.g., 1985,..,1996) to
the policy year (e.g., 1988) for which eligibility will be calculated. Using these inflationadjusted state-specific samples and the Medicaid eligibility rules in a state in a specific year, we
assign eligibility to the (fixed) state sample so that eligibility is calculated using the same sample
of women in each year for a given state. 6 We then calculate the proportion of women aged 18 to
39 within a race-state-year cell that would be eligible for Medicaid if they became pregnant. The
variation in this measure comes from program rules alone--once inflation adjustments are made,
the only way the percent eligible in this fixed sample changes is due to changes in the state
eligibility rules. This variable—the fraction of women that would be eligible for Medicaid
conditional on pregnancy—is merged with the March CPS records by year, state and race. As
documented in Currie and Gruber (1996), Federal mandates during the late 1980s and early
1990s resulted in large increases in all states in the fraction of women who would be eligible for
Medicaid if pregnant, though the magnitude of the increase varied widely according to initial
eligibility limits and state decisions about whether to go beyond Federally mandated minimum
eligibility increases.

6

Currie and Gruber (1996) and Cutler and Gruber (1996) use a national sample instead of state-specific samples.
However, given that the measure is based on state variation in the timing and magnitude of Medicaid expansions,
using state-specific samples introduces no additional variation that would bias estimates. Any endogeneity from the
state income distribution is purged through the state fixed effects. State samples will produce less measurement
error, which is relevant to the correlation between eligibility and insurance.

16

We modify the basic model in several ways to address specific issues. First, in
supplementary models we include state-specific time trends to adjust for the less than perfect
nature of the natural experiment. Inclusion of state-specific time trends (set of state fixed effects
that are interacted with a linear measure for time in years) adjusts for the potential endogeneity
of the Medicaid expansions if states with greater expansions have correlated linear time trends in
labor force participation for other reasons. Second, we assess differential effects by estimating
models that interact Medicaid eligibility with marital status and educational attainment. Here,
we exploit the fact that certain subgroups of the population are more likely to be affected by
shifts in Medicaid policy. For instance, those mothers with relatively less education or who are
unmarried have higher Medicaid take-up rates and larger changes in insurance coverage than
those with more education or who are married because the latter groups are unlikely to be
affected by the eligibility expansions. Thus as a plausibility check, if Medicaid eligibility
expansions are found to impact labor market behavior, we expect stronger effects among
unmarried and low-educated mothers. We also assess differential effects across first pregnancy
and across later pregnancies.
Third, we directly test the predictions of the conceptual framework by modeling the joint
probability between shifts in labor market outcomes and health insurance status. Specifically,
we define six inclusive categories that cover the following joint outcomes: 1) currently employed
with private insurance; 2) currently employed with public insurance; 3) currently employed with
no insurance; 4) not employed with private insurance; 5) not employed with public insurance;
and 6) not employed with no insurance. Based on these mutual outcomes, we estimate the
effects of the Medicaid eligibility expansions on the joint probability of employment and health
insurance status via multinomial logit regression.

17

Finally, we implement some additional specification checks to assess the robustness and
plausibility of our labor supply effects. We estimate models with interactions between age group
and year fixed effects and between age group and state fixed effects because prior studies on
children's Medicaid suggest results that were sensitive to the inclusion of age trends.7 We also
implement a placebo test by relating the eligibility expansions to the labor supply of loweducated single males. We calibrate the labor supply effects to assess whether they are
potentially consistent with the magnitude of the crowd-out effects identified in the literature for
pregnant women.
V.

Data

We use the March CPS for the analyses because it contains the largest sample sizes
among any available datasets that contain information on labor market outcomes of pregnant
women.8 We use data spanning 1986-1997. Pregnant women in the CPS are identified as women
who have children under the age of one at the time of the survey. We limit the sample to women
who gave birth from 1985 - 1996 when they were between the ages of 18-39.
Labor supply was measured in several ways: 1) an indicator for whether the woman was
employed during the year that she gave birth; 2) an indicator for whether the woman was in the
labor force during the year that she gave birth; 3) weeks worked during the year that she gave
birth; 4) usual hours worked per week during the year that she gave birth; and 5) wage and salary
income during the year that the woman gave birth. Our sample sizes range from 22,182 to 23,043
pregnant women who gave birth between 1985 and 1996.
7

Coefficient magnitudes are also robust to controlling for interactions between race indicators and year/state effects,
which account for differential race-specific trends and local labor market conditions (results available upon request).
8
The Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) contains only about 1000 pregnant women per survey
year (or about 12,000 over our sample period), and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) contains even
fewer pregnant women. The Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) would potentially yield larger
sample sizes; however, it is limited over the period experiencing the largest Medicaid eligibility expansions for
pregnant women (1985-1996), since 1994 was the first year that all states participated in the survey.

18

The CPS is also used to calculate the fraction of women eligible for Medicaid by race,
state and year, which is the key independent variable and described in the previous section. We
match this measure of Medicaid eligibility to the CPS records by the woman’s race, state of
residence, and the year that she gave birth. The CPS is further used to compute the fraction of
single men aged 25 to 64 who have incomes below 200% of the FPL and are privately insured by
state and year, which serves to control for trends in health insurance coverage by state.
One limitation of the CPS (which is not unique to the CPS) relates to the timing of the
pregnancy and the reference period over which labor market outcomes are measured. For
instance, consider the 1990 March CPS. Our sample for this year consists of mothers whose
child was born between April 1989 and March 1990 and these mothers were pregnant between
August 1988 and July 1989. Their labor market outcomes (and insurance status) refer to the past
calendar year, which is 1989. For women with children close to one year of age (born April
1989), we will be measuring labor market outcomes during the mother’s last 4 months of
pregnancy and the first 8 months of the child’s life. For women with children less than a month
old (born March 1990), we will be measuring outcomes 6 months prior to pregnancy and during
the first two trimesters. Based on the observed distribution of births across months (obtained
from the U.S. vital statistics) between 1985 and 1996, we will be measuring labor market
outcomes during an average mother’s almost entire pregnancy and approximately the first 3
months of the child’s life. If the pregnant woman does not change her labor force status after the
child is born up to the first 3 months, this timing issue should not bias our estimates. If a
pregnant woman who has dropped out of the labor force while pregnant, induced by the
availability of Medicaid, returns back to work during the first 3 months after giving birth, then
the partial mismatch in the reference period would introduce attenuation bias to our estimates.

19

We therefore interpret our effects as lower-bound conservative estimates of the impact of the
Medicaid eligibility expansions on pregnant women’s labor market behavior.
Table 1 presents sample means and proportions. This table contains weighted sample
means of our data for all years and separately for subgroups based on marital status, education,
and race. On average, 22.1% of pregnant women were eligible for Medicaid coverage over our
sample period; this eligibility increased from 9.7% in 1985 to 31.1% in 1996 (See Figure 1).
Actual reports of Medicaid coverage increased by about 13 percentage points, and the prevalence
of private insurance coverage decreased by over 6 percentage points in the CPS, consistent with
crowd-out. Based on the National Hospital Discharge Surveys, actual Medicaid status at delivery
increased by 15.7 percentage points over this period, coincident with the expansions in
eligibility, whereas private coverage declined by 6 percentage points (Dave et al. 2011).
VI.

Regression Results

Table 2 presents estimates of the effect of expanding Medicaid eligibility on the
employment status, labor force participation, and weeks worked among pregnant women during
the year of childbirth, corresponding to estimates of δ in Equation (8). For each type of labor
market outcome, we estimate models with and without state-specific linear trends. Our preferred
estimates are the ones including state trends, though it is reassuring that magnitudes of estimates
are not very sensitive to these controls.
Estimates in Table 2 indicate that Medicaid eligibility is negatively and significantly
associated with labor supply.9 Specifically, estimates in columns 1 and 2 suggest that a 20
percentage point increase in Medicaid eligibility, which is the approximate change that occurred
over the 1985 to 1996 period, is associated with a 4.1 (with state trends) to 4.4 (without state
trends) percentage points decrease in the probability of employment. This is approximately a 7%
9

Although not reported, parameter estimates are robust to logit or probit estimation for the dichotomous outcomes.

20

decline relative to the baseline mean prevalence of working. These effects are statistically
significant at the one-percent level. With respect to labor force participation, estimates in
columns 3 and 4 suggest a virtually identical decline in labor force participation as in
employment; the reduced probability of working was driven not by an increase in unemployment
(which would not be consistent with pregnant women reducing work effort due to the offer of
health insurance that is no longer tied to the labor market), but rather by these women choosing
to drop out of the labor force. Estimates in columns 5 and 6, which are obtained from negative
binomial regressions models, suggest that a 20 percent point increase in Medicaid eligibility
reduced weeks worked by between 6.8% (with state trends, though imprecisely estimates) and
8.0% (without state trends).
Table 3 examines shifts in weekly hours worked and annual wages. Estimates in
columns 1 and 2 indicate that a 20 percentage point increase in Medicaid eligibility reduced
weekly hours by about 10.2% to 10.5%. The next set of estimates (columns 3 and 4) explore
whether this reduction in labor supply occurred at the extensive or intensive margins by
restricting the analyses to individuals with positive hours worked. Estimates in these columns
decline substantially and suggest that virtually all (almost 80-85%) of the effect on hours worked
is at the extensive margin, that is, the reduction is driven by a decrease in employment and
dropping out of the labor force rather than a decrease in labor supply among women continuing
to work. Estimates in columns 5-6 pertain to the effect of Medicaid eligibility on wages
(including zero wages), whereas the final two specifications estimate effects on wages and are
for a sample with positive wages.10 As with hours worked, we find significant negative effects
on wages (52.5% reduction owing to a 20 percentage point increase in eligibility) with almost all
10

We assign a value of $0.10 to individuals who have zero wages prior to the log transformation in models 5 and 6,
in order to examine effects on the wages of all women (including those who do not work). In models 7 and 8, we
omit these women with zero wages from the analyses.

21

of this effect being realized at the extensive margin (women shifting from positive to zero
wages).
The effects of the other covariates in Tables 2 and 3 are generally consistent with the
literature. Relative to married women, unmarried pregnant women are more likely to be
working, work more weeks and hours per week, and have higher wages. Labor supply and
income decline significantly for low-educated individuals relative to high-school graduates and
above. Relative to whites, black pregnant women supply more labor and have higher income.
Some prior studies on children's Medicaid (for instance, Shore-Sheppard 2008) suggest
that estimates of insurance crowd-out may be sensitive to age trends. For analyses of child
health insurance, Medicaid eligibility differs by age. In our case, age is arguably not relevant
because Medicaid eligibility rules for pregnant women do not depend on the mother’s or the
child’s age. Table 4 confirms that the labor supply estimates are not sensitive to controlling for
indicators for state by age-of-mother and year by age-of-mother interactions.11 Similar to the
effects noted above, a 20 percentage point increase in eligibility is associated with a 4.0
percentage points decline (6% decline relative to the baseline mean) in employment and labor
force participation, an 7.8% decline in weeks worked, and a 10.0% decline in weekly hours
worked.
The above analyses pertain to all pregnant women between the ages of 18-39. However,
subgroups of the population are relatively more likely to be affected by the Medicaid eligibility
expansions. Low-educated or unmarried mothers have higher Medicaid take-up rates and larger
changes in insurance coverage relative to those who are married or with more education because
these latter groups are far less likely to be affected by the eligibility expansions. For instance, in

11

We also confirm that our estimates are robust to the inclusion of indicators for state*race and year*race
interactions (results not reported).

22

the CPS sample, Medicaid participation among pregnant women with less than a high school
education is 2.4 times greater relative to higher educated women, and 6.1 times higher among
unmarried pregnant women relative to those who are married. Therefore, we expect somewhat
larger effects of Medicaid eligibility on the labor supply of unmarried and low-educated pregnant
women.
Table 5 assesses this hypothesis by estimating models that allow the effect of Medicaid
eligibility to differ by marital status (unmarried) and education (less than high school graduates).
Estimates in columns 1 and 2 in the top panel of Table 5 indicate that a 20 percentage point
increase in Medicaid eligibility reduces employment by significantly more among unmarried
women (close to 7 percentage points in models with state trends) relative to married women (2.4
percentage points). A similar pattern and effect magnitudes are expectedly found for labor force
participation (columns 3 and 4). To place these effect sizes in context, these estimates indicate
that a 20 percentage point increase in Medicaid eligibility is associated with an 11% to 13%
decrease in the probability of working and labor force participation among unmarried pregnant
women. With respect to weeks worked in the year of birth (columns 5 and 6) and usual weekly
hours worked (columns 7 and 8), estimates suggest small and insignificant declines among
married pregnant women, but far stronger and significant effects among unmarried pregnant
women (decline of 13-16% in models with state trends). In supplementary specifications (not
reported), we confirm that most of this labor supply effect is realized at the extensive margin.
The bottom panel of Table 5 presents differential effects for pregnant women with less than a
high school education relative to more educated women. Focusing on estimates from models that
include state trends, results suggest that an increase in Medicaid eligibility similar to that
experienced over 1985-1996 is associated with a 14% to 16% decrease in the probability of

23

employment and labor force participation among low-educated women; this compares to a
statistically insignificant 1.3-1.8 % decrease among higher-educated women. Weeks employed
and weekly hours worked declined by approximately 20% among low-educated pregnant
women, with no negative effect on women who are at least high-school graduates. Estimates for
log wages (not reported) suggest a similar pattern of results as above. Overall, estimates in Table
5 bolster the plausibility of our findings because they confirm that the effects of Medicaid
eligibility on labor supply and wages are being driven by behavioral changes among women who
are most likely to be affected by Medicaid policy. Effects on other population groups (highereducated and married women), who are at low-risk of Medicaid take up, are minimal and
generally insignificant.
Women giving birth for the first time may have less information regarding the benefits
available, in which case the Medicaid expansions could induce a smaller labor supply response.
Women with children may also place a higher value on non-work time, and the Medicaid subsidy
is larger for them relative to first-time pregnant women. Labor supply decisions may also
change in different ways when there are already younger kids at home. We therefore assess
whether there are differential effects of Medicaid on labor supply by whether a women was
giving birth for the first time or not. Estimates for this analysis are reported in Table 6. Across all
labor supply measures, for both groups of mothers, we find that the eligibility expansions led to a
reduction in work. With respect to employment, the effect sizes are similar across both groups of
pregnant women. For labor force participation and weeks of employment, the magnitudes of
estimates suggest somewhat larger effects among women who are not first-time mothers, while
the decline in usual hours worked is somewhat great among first-time mothers. However, due to

24

relatively large standard errors resulting from a reduced sample size, we are not able to reject the
null of similar effects across both groups for most of the labor supply outcomes.
The next set of results we present are estimates of the effects of the Medicaid eligibility
expansions on the joint probability of employment status and health insurance. Theory predicts
that expanded Medicaid eligibility would be associated with a movement of pregnant women
from employed with private insurance to employed with public insurance, and from employed
with private insurance to non-employed with public insurance. Estimates for this analysis were
obtained from multinomial logit regression models and are presented in Table 7. We present
estimates for two sets of labor supply outcomes, employment (Panel A) and labor force
participation (Panel B), and for models with and without state-specific trends. Estimates are
highly similar across all of these specifications; hence, we discuss the employment models that
control for state-specific trends and scale all estimates in the discussion to correspond to a 20
percentage points increase in Medicaid eligibility.
Estimates in Table 7 generally confirm the model’s prediction. Specifically, we find that
a 20 percentage point increase in Medicaid eligibility is associated with a 7.2 percentage points
reduction in the probability of being employed with private insurance and a 1.7 percentage points
increase in the probability of being employed with public insurance. A 20 percentage point
increase in Medicaid eligibility is also associated with a 2.6 percentage point increase in the
probability of not being employed with public insurance. All of these results are consistent with
theoretical predictions and estimates on which they are based are statistically significant.
However, estimates in Table 7 also indicate that the Medicaid eligibility expansions were
associated with an increase in uninsured, which is unexpected from a theoretical perspective,
although not all estimates are statistically significant. One explanation for this result is

25

measurement error. As noted, the health insurance and labor force information in the CPS refers
to the past year, which overlaps the period pre- and post-birth for most women in our sample. In
addition, in the case of health insurance, researchers suspect that many women respond as to
their status with reference to the current period (not the case for labor force). Thus, these data
problems may account for the anomalous estimates, but we cannot rule out the possibility that
these estimates may be indicative of a less than perfect research design despite the overall
consistency of our estimates and the explicit test of the research design we discuss next.
Finally, Table 8 presents estimates form a falsification analysis. Here we estimate
models among low-educated unmarried males between the ages of 18-39, for whom expansions
in Medicaid eligibility for pregnant women should have virtually no effect on labor supply.
Indeed, we do not find any economically meaningful or statistically significant effects of
Medicaid eligibility on their labor supply, which adds a degree of confidence to the specification
choice and suggests that the expansions are not correlated with time-varying state-specific
unobservable, conditional on all the observed covariates and fixed effects.
VII.

Discussion

State and Federal governments have dramatically expanded Medicaid over the past two
decades to provide insurance for an increasingly large proportion of poor and near-poor persons.
While expansion of Medicaid may impart several benefits besides providing insurance (e.g.,
consumption smoothing), an important rationale for expansion is that it will decrease the
proportion of the population that is uninsured and, as a result, increase use of health care services
and improve health.
Studies have found that the Medicaid expansions of the late 1980s and early 1990s were
associated with a significant and relatively large increase in Medicaid participation, but

26

substantially smaller decreases in the proportion uninsured because a large fraction of the newly
enrolled Medicaid participants previously were privately insured (Dave et al. 2011; Dubay and
Kenney 1997). Both of these studies, utilizing different datasets and methods, suggest a crowdout rate of about 50% -- that is, about half of the increase in Medicaid participation came from
individuals who previously had private insurance.12

As the Medicaid expansions had a smaller effect in reducing the number of uninsured
than in increasing Medicaid coverage (Dave et al., 2011), the ability of Medicaid to influence
infant health through increased access to care for uninsured mothers was lower than hoped. For
this reason, and because crowd‐out of private insurance reduces the cost‐effectiveness of
expanding public insurance, it is important to understand the mechanisms by which this
crowd‐out occurs.
Among pregnant women, the primary mechanism that leads to crowd‐out was
through a reduction of labor force participation. We find robust evidence that expansions in

Medicaid eligibility targeted at pregnant women were associated with a reduction in their labor
force participation, and the decrease in labor force participation, work effort, and income was
concentrated almost exclusively among low-educated and unmarried pregnant women -individuals who conventionally have higher Medicaid take-up rates and therefore more likely to
be affected by shifts in Medicaid policy. Specifically, we find that a 20 percentage point
increase in Medicaid eligibility was associated with a 6.9 percentage point (13% relative to
baseline work status) decline in employment among unmarried pregnant women. About 49.7%
of unmarried (and 74.0% of low-educated) employed pregnant women ages 18-39 in the 1986 to
1997 CPS had employer-provided health insurance. Combining this prevalence with our labor
12

A sizeable literature also suggests significant crowd-out effects among families and children, along the same order
of magnitude (see Gruber and Simon 2008).

27

supply estimates suggests that a 20 percentage point increase in Medicaid eligibility reduced
private coverage by about 3-4 percentage points among unmarried pregnant women and by about
5-6 percentage points among low-educated pregnant women. These magnitudes of decline in
private insurance coverage are in line with estimates from the crowd-out studies that have
specifically focused on pregnant women. Dave et al. (2011), for instance, find that the Medicaid
eligibility expansions over the same time period analyzed in this study reduced private insurance
coverage among pregnant women by 4-5 percentage points. Dubay and Kenney (1997),
analyzing simple trends, find that private insurance coverage among near-poor pregnant women
declined by 7.5 percentage points (relative to men) over 1988-1992.
We note that the reduction in labor supply associated with the Medicaid expansions can
come from working pregnant women who have private coverage, which would drive crowd-out
of private for public coverage, and also from working but uninsured pregnant women, in which
case the change in labor supply would not be associated with crowd-out – and indeed, we do find
some evidence of these shifts based on multinomial logit modeling of the joint probability of
employment and insurance outcomes. Nevertheless, these models also suggested that the largest
shift in mass among pregnant women was from employed with private coverage to nonemployed with public coverage. Furthermore, the consistency of our labor-supply estimates in
generating observed declines in private coverage plausibly points to shifts in employment as a
key driving mechanism behind the crowd-out of private coverage among pregnant women due to
the expansions in Medicaid eligibility.
We did not, however, address the duration of reductions in employment starting during
pregnancy or the net benefit for children who may have their mothers home during early life but
live at least for a while in families with lower income. The net effect of mother’s work force

28

participation on the welfare of mother and baby is unknown. We were also not able to explore
the effects of expansions in Medicaid eligibility to non-pregnant women or to men since these
populations were not extended Medicaid benefits during the time period analyzed. These
groups may be less likely to change labor force participation due to the availability of Medicaid
or other insurance outside of work, especially since they may have lower labor supply
elasticities in general (Evers, De Mooij, and Van Vuuren, 2008). We also did not investigate
the effect of changes in children’s Medicaid eligibility on parental labor supply. These may be
questions for future research.

29

References

Blank, R. 1989. “The Effect of Medical Need and Medicaid on AFDC Participation.” Journal of
Human Resources. Vol 24(1):54-87. Winter 1989.
Blau, David M. and Donna B. Gilleskie. 2008. “The Role of Retiree Health Insurance in the
Employment Behavior of Older Men.” International Economic Review 49(2): 475-514
Buchmueller, T., P. Cooper, K. Simon and J. Vistnes. 2005. “The Effect of SCHIP Expansions on Health
Insurance Decisions by Employers”. Inquiry 42(3):218-31.

Chatterji, Pinka and Sara Markowitz. 2013. “Effects of Early Maternal Employment on
Maternal Health and Well‐being. ” Journal of Population Economics 26(1): 285‐201.
Currie J, and J. Gruber. 1996. “ Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes in the
Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women..” Journal of Political Economy 104(6), pp.1263‐1296.
Cutler D., and J. Gruber. 1996. “Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private Insurance? “Quarterly
Journal of Economics 111(2): 391-430.
Dave D., S. Decker, R. Kaestner, and K. Simon. 2011. “The Effect of Medicaid Expansions on Health
Insurance Coverage of Pregnant Women: An Analysis Using Deliveries.” Inquiry 47(4): 315-330.

Decker S. L. and F. W. Selck. 2011. “The Effect of the Original Introduction of Medicaid
on Welfare Participation and Female Labor Supply.” Review of Economics of the
Household. 10(4): 541‐556.
DeLeire, Thomas, Leonard M. Lopoo, Kosali I. Simon. 2011. “Medicaid Expansions and Fertility
in the United States.” Demography 48(2): 725‐747.
Donald S.G. and K. Lang. 2007. “Inferences with Difference in Differences and Other Panel Data.” The
Review of Economics and Statistics 89(2): 221-233.
Dubay L, and G. Kenney. 1997. “Did the Medicaid Expansions for Pregnant Women Crowd out Private
Insurance?” Health Affairs 16(1): 185-193.
Evers, Michiel, Ruud De Mooij, and Daniel Van Vuuren. “The Wage Elasticity of Labour Supply: A
Synthesis of Empirical Estimates.” De Economist 156(1): 25-43.
Gruber J., and K. Simon. 2008. “Crowd out Ten Years Later: Have Recent Public Insurance Expansions
Crowded Out Private Health Insurance?” Journal of Health Economics 27(2): 201–217
Ham, J.C., and L. Shore-Sheppard. 2005. “The Effect of Medicaid Expansions for Low-Income Children
on Medicaid Participation and Private Insurance Coverage: Evidence from the SIPP.” Journal of Public
Economics 89 (1): 57-83
Joyce T., R. Kaestner, and F. Kwan. 1998. “Is Medicaid Pronatalist? The Effect of Eligibility Expansions
on Abortions and Births.” Family Planning Perspectives 30(3): 108-113.

30

Kapur, K. and J. Rogowski. 2007. “The Role of Health Insurance in Joint Retirement among Married
Couples.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 60(3): 397-407.
Lo Sasso, A.T., and T.C. Buchmueller. 2004. “The Effect of the State Children's Health Insurance
Program on Health Insurance Coverage.” Journal of Health Economics 23(5): 1059-82.
Madrian, B. 2007. The U.S. Health Care System and Labor Markets. In J. S. Little, editor, Wanting It
All: The Challenge of Reforming the U.S. Health Care System, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston: 137164.
Montgomery E. and J.C. Navin. 2000. “Cross-State Variation in Medicaid Programs and Female Labor
Supply.” Economic Inquiry 38(30): 402-418.
Meyer B. D., Rosenbaum D.T., 2001. “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the
of Single Mothers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3): 1063-1114.

Labor

Supply

Moffitt R., and B. Wolfe. 1992. “The Effect of the Medicaid Program on Welfare Participation and Labor
Supply.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 74(4): 615-626.
Moulton B.R. 1990. “An Illustration of a Pitfall in Estimating the Effects of Aggregate Variables in
Micro Units.” Review of Economics and Statistics 72(2): 334-338.
Shore-Sheppard L. 2008. “Stemming the Tide? The Effect of Expanding Medicaid Eligibility

on Health Insurance Coverage.” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 8(2): Article
6.
Shore-Sheppard L, Buchmueller T.C., Jensen G.A. 2000. “Medicaid and Crowding Out of
Private Insurance: A Re-examination Using Firm Level Data.” Journal of Health Economics,
19(1): 61-91.
Strumpf E. 2011. “Medicaid's Effect on Single Women's Labor Supply: Evidence from the Introduction
of Medicaid.” Journal of Health Economics 30(3): 531-48.
Strumpf, E. 2010. “Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance for Early Retirees: Impacts on Retirement,
Health, and Health Care.” International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics. 10(2): 105-147.
Tomohara A. and H.J. Lee. 2007. “Did State Children’s Health Insurance Program Affect Married
Women’s Labor Supply?” Journal of Family and Economic Issues 28: 668-683.
Winkler A.E. 1991. “The Incentive Effects of Medicaid on Women’s Labor Supply.” The Journal of
Human Resources 26(2): 308-337.
Yelowitz A. 1995. “The Medicaid Notch, Labor Supply, and Welfare Participation: Evidence from
Eligibility Expansions” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(4): 909-939.
Zavodny, M. and M. Bitler. 2010. “The Effect of Medicaid Eligibility Expansions on Fertility.” Social
Science and Medicine 71(5): 918-924.

31

Figure 1:

Fraction of Pregnant Women Eligible for Medicaid Coverage
CPS: 1985 – 1996

Fraction Eligible
0.350
0.307 0.311

0.300
0.273 0.274
0.246 0.250

0.250

0.260

0.227

0.200
0.176

0.150
0.121

0.100

0.097 0.099

0.050
1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996

32

Table 1
Weighted Means
CPS 1986 – 1997
Sample

Employed last year
Labor force participation last year
Weeks worked last year
Usual weekly hours worked last year
Wages
Log Wages
Simulated % Medicaid eligible
Unmarried
Less than high school
Black
Other race
Age
State unemployment rate
State poverty rate
State % men aged 25-64 and <200% with private
insurance

All

Unmarried

Less than
High School

Black

Other Race

0.656
0.677
24.451
22.741
8541.019
4.710

0.537
0.591
17.787
18.909
4514.989
3.382

0.523
0.554
17.396
18.028
3904.556
3.045

0.578
0.631
20.781
21.126
6278.060
4.005

0.602
0.626
23.077
22.163
9499.078
4.335

0.221
0.181
0.380
0.127
0.042
27.946
6.415
19.981

0.302
1.000
0.548
0.414
0.029
25.531
6.421
14.229

0.201
0.260
1.000
0.156
0.037
26.249
6.531
17.817

0.424
0.589
0.466
1.000
0.000
26.703
6.486
16.241

0.258
0.123
0.330
0.000
1.000
28.714
6.528
19.717

0.308

0.301

0.309

0.296

0.304

Notes: Weighted sample means are reported. There are 24,177 observations for women age 18-39 with a child less than one year old.

33

Table 2
Effect of Medicaid on Mothers’ Employment & Labor Force Participation
Outcome
Model

Employed last year

Labor force participation last year

Weeks worked last year

1

2

3

4

5

6

Simulated % Medicaid eligible

-0.2214***
(0.0656)

-0.2054***
(0.0697)

-0.2035***
(0.0532)

-0.1796***
(0.0586)

-0.3990*
(0.2195)

-0.3384
(0.2335)

Unmarried

0.0828***
(0.0127)
-0.1396***
(0.0116)
-0.0016**
(0.0006)
0.0581***
(0.0158)
-0.0115
(0.0240)

0.0826***
(0.0129)
-0.1395***
(0.0115)
-0.0016**
(0.0006)
0.0534***
(0.0173)
-0.0123
(0.0245)

0.0958***
(0.0139)
-0.1359***
(0.0113)
-0.0025***
(0.0006)
0.0731***
(0.0144)
-0.0055
(0.0194)

0.0959***
(0.0140)
-0.1353***
(0.0113)
-0.0025***
(0.0006)
0.0665***
(0.0151)
-0.0071
(0.0199)

0.2392***
(0.0525)
-0.3353***
(0.0290)
0.0119***
(0.0013)
0.1175***
(0.0361)
0.0213
(0.0456)

0.2411***
(0.0523)
-0.3349***
(0.0297)
0.0118***
(0.0013)
0.1018***
(0.0376)
0.0150
(0.0430)

% Men ages 25-64 and <200%
Poverty with private insurance

-0.0070**
(0.0028)
0.0285***
(0.0009)
-0.0489
(0.0498)

-0.0025
(0.0048)
0.0285***
(0.0009)
-0.0652
(0.0541)

-0.0029
(0.0028)
0.0259***
(0.0010)
-0.0542
(0.0528)

0.0029
(0.0050)
0.0259***
(0.0010)
-0.0734
(0.0565)

-0.0201***
(0.0074)
0.0891***
(0.0033)
-0.1551
(0.1289)

-0.0157
(0.0109)
0.0898***
(0.0032)
-0.2033
(0.1365)

State-specific linear time trend

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Less than high school
Age
Black
Other race
Unemployment rate
% Under poverty

Estimation
OLS
OLS
Negative Binomial
Notes: All models adjust for sampling weights. State and year effects are included, as well as controls for marital status, education, race, and state
unemployment rate, poverty rate, and percent of men aged 25-64 and under 200% of poverty who have private insurance. Standard errors are clustered by state
cells and are in parentheses. N = 22,182 women ages 18-39 with a child less than one year old. Asterisks denote significance as follows: ***significant at 1%,
** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%.

34

Table 3
Effect of Medicaid on Mothers’ Hours Worked and Wages
Outcome
Model

Usual weekly hours worked
last year

Usual weekly hours worked
last year
(Conditional on Hours>0)
3
4

1

2

Simulated % Medicaid eligible

-0.5225***
(0.1782)

-0.5108**
(0.2062)

-0.0801
(0.0559)

Unmarried

0.2239***
(0.0380)
-0.2501***
(0.0244)
-0.0026**
(0.0012)
0.1711***
(0.0375)
0.0680
(0.0537)

0.2232***
(0.0384)
-0.2493***
(0.0248)
-0.0027**
(0.0012)
0.1677***
(0.0397)
0.0708
(0.0543)

% Men ages 25-64 and <200%
Poverty with private insurance

-0.0149**
(0.0064)
0.0662***
(0.0043)
-0.1386
(0.1018)

State-specific linear time trend

No

Less than high school
Age
Black
Other race
Unemployment rate
% Under poverty

Log Wages
(0 wage included)

Log Wages
(Conditional on Wages>0)

5

6

7

8

-0.1182**
(0.0572)

-2.5799***
(0.7888)

-2.6247***
(0.8180)

-0.2499
(0.1867)

-0.4208*
(0.2162)

0.0520***
(0.0131)
0.0130**
(0.0062)
0.0006
(0.0007)
0.0754***
(0.0155)
0.0734***
(0.0125)

0.0521***
(0.0130)
0.0133**
(0.0062)
0.0006
(0.0007)
0.0840***
(0.0154)
0.0763***
(0.0133)

1.1919***
(0.1281)
-1.6232***
(0.1144)
-0.0073
(0.0086)
0.9230***
(0.2062)
0.1321
(0.3239)

1.1883***
(0.1313)
-1.6211***
(0.1148)
-0.0082
(0.0087)
0.9236***
(0.1999)
0.1405
(0.3265)

0.1594***
(0.0366)
-0.3501***
(0.0285)
0.0596***
(0.0025)
0.1570***
(0.0432)
0.1019**
(0.0393)

0.1598***
(0.0365)
-0.3507***
(0.0284)
0.0592***
(0.0026)
0.1982***
(0.0513)
0.1098***
(0.0371)

-0.0089
(0.0117)
0.0664***
(0.0043)
-0.1866*
(0.1069)

-0.0022
(0.0030)
0.0103***
(0.0010)
-0.0305
(0.0533)

-0.0039
(0.0043)
0.0102***
(0.0010)
-0.0295
(0.0531)

-0.0881**
(0.0341)
0.3695***
(0.0082)
-0.2441
(0.5720)

-0.0664
(0.0533)
0.3688***
(0.0081)
-0.2963
(0.5995)

-0.0231*
(0.0121)
0.1096***
(0.0036)
-0.1026
(0.1708)

-0.0265
(0.0167)
0.1099***
(0.0036)
-0.1286
(0.1841)

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Estimation
Negative Binomial
Negative Binomial
OLS
OLS
Notes: All models adjust for sampling weights. State and year effects are included, as well as controls for marital status, education, race, and state
unemployment rate, poverty rate, and percent of men aged 25-64 and under 200% of poverty who have private insurance. Standard errors are clustered by state
cells and are in parentheses. N = 22,182 women ages 18-39 with a child less than one year old; for models conditional on positive hours worked (wages),
N=14,477 (13,753). Asterisks denote significance as follows: ***significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%.

35

Table 4
Controlling for State*Age and Year*Age Effects
Outcome

Weeks worked last
year

1

Labor force
participation last
year
2

3

Usual weekly
hours worked last
year
4

Simulated % Medicaid eligible

-0.2072***
(0.0670)

-0.1842***
(0.0548)

-0.3800*
(0.2172)

-0.5038***
(0.1759)

Unmarried

0.0876***
(0.0120)
-0.1412***
(0.0117)
0.0022
(0.0021)
0.0539***
(0.0157)
-0.0132
(0.0240)

0.1007***
(0.0131)
-0.1385***
(0.0115)
0.0018
(0.0022)
0.0675***
(0.0147)
-0.0078
(0.0193)

0.2627***
(0.0532)
-0.3383***
(0.0296)
0.0278***
(0.0056)
0.1081***
(0.0386)
0.0170
(0.0468)

0.2386***
(0.0373)
-0.2553***
(0.0264)
0.0059*
(0.0034)
0.1652***
(0.0367)
0.0723
(0.0535)

% Men ages 25-64 and <200%
Poverty with private insurance

-0.0079***
(0.0027)
0.0283***
(0.0009)
-0.0416
(0.0494)

-0.0038
(0.0028)
0.0258***
(0.0010)
-0.0460
(0.0525)

-0.0223***
(0.0072)
0.0900***
(0.0033)
-0.1116
(0.1262)

-0.0176***
(0.0065)
0.0669***
(0.0044)
-0.1241
(0.0997)

State-specific linear time trend

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Model

Less than high school
Age
Black
Other race
Unemployment rate
% Under poverty

Employed last
year

Estimation
OLS
OLS
Negative Binomial Negative Binomial
Notes: All models adjust for sampling weights. State and year effects, and indicators for state*age and year*age are included, as well as controls for marital
status, education, race, and state unemployment rate, poverty rate, and percent of men aged 25-64 and under 200% of poverty who have private insurance.
Standard errors are clustered by state cells and are in parentheses. N = 22,182 women ages 18-39 with a child less than one year old. Asterisks denote
significance as follows: ***significant at 1%, **significant at 5%, * significant at 10%.

36

Table 5
Differential Effects by Marital Status & Education
Outcome
Model

Employed last year

Labor force participation last
year
3
4

1

2

Simulated % Medicaid eligible

-0.1404**
(0.0678)

-0.1207
(0.0736)

-0.1157**
(0.0538)

Unmarried

0.1416***
(0.0228)

0.1407***
(0.0231)

Unmarried * % Medicaid eligible

-0.2262***
(0.0717)

Weeks worked last year

Usual weekly hours worked
last year
7
8

5

6

-0.0889
(0.0589)

-0.2076
(0.1977)

-0.1313
(0.2159)

-0.3364**
(0.1712)

-0.3157
(0.1985)

0.1594***
(0.0243)

0.1579***
(0.0246)

0.3758***
(0.0843)

0.3813***
(0.0848)

0.3565***
(0.0615)

0.3550***
(0.0631)

-0.2235***
(0.0738)

-0.2447***
(0.0712)

-0.2390***
(0.0731)

-0.5250**
(0.2257)

-0.5393**
(0.2338)

-0.5116***
(0.1797)

-0.5084***
(0.1849)

-0.0921
(0.0614)

-0.0646
(0.0684)

-0.0813
(0.0546)

-0.0468
(0.0613)

-0.0403
(0.2065)

0.0677
(0.2162)

-0.1622
(0.1520)

-0.1046
(0.1850)

Less than High School

-0.0694***
(0.0143)

-0.0682***
(0.0144)

-0.0695***
(0.0149)

-0.0682***
(0.0147)

-0.1376***
(0.0375)

-0.1310***
(0.0377)

-0.0444
(0.0330)

-0.0393
(0.0323)

Less than High School *
% Medicaid eligible

-0.3403***
(0.0594)

-0.3453***
(0.0588)

-0.3213***
(0.0572)

-0.3255***
(0.0568)

-0.9676***
(0.1782)

-0.9983***
(0.1779)

-0.9976***
(0.1716)

-1.0194***
(0.1693)

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Simulated % Medicaid eligible

State-specific linear time trend

Estimation
OLS
OLS
Negative Binomial
Negative Binomial
Notes: All models adjust for sampling weights. State and year effects are included, as well as controls for marital status, education, race, and state
unemployment rate, poverty rate, and percent of men aged 25-64 and under 200% of poverty who have private insurance. Standard errors are clustered by state
cells and are in parentheses. N = 22,182 women ages 18-39 with a child less than one year old. Asterisks denote significance as follows: ***significant at 1%,
** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%.

37

Table 6
Differential Effects by 1st child and >1 children

1st Child

Sample

Not 1st Child

Employed
last year

Labor force
participation
last year

Weeks
worked last
year

Usual weekly
hours worked
last year

Employed
last year

Labor force
participation
last year

Weeks
worked last
year

Usual weekly
hours worked
last year

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Simulated %
Medicaid
Eligible

-0.2054**
(0.0978)

-0.2353**
(0.0953)

-0.3302*
(0.1871)

-0.4039**
(0.1821)

-0.1825**
(0.0757)

-0.4441*
(0.2694)

-0.5701**
(0.2222)

-0.2054**
(0.0978)

Observations

8165

8165

8165

8165

14017

14017

14017

14017

Estimation

OLS

OLS

Negative
Binomial

Negative
Binomial

OLS

OLS

Negative
Binomial

Negative
Binomial

Outcome

Model

Notes: All models adjust for sampling weights. State and year effects are included, as well as controls for marital status, education, race, and state
unemployment rate, poverty rate, and percent of men aged 25-64 and under 200% of poverty who have private insurance. Standard errors are clustered by state
cells and are in parentheses. Asterisks denote significance as follows: ***significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%.

38

Table 7
Effect of Medicaid on Joint Outcomes: Labor Supply & Health Insurance Status
Multinomial Logit Estimates
Panel A

Outcome

Employed Last Year
Health Insurance

Employed Last Year*Insurance Status

Yes
Private

Yes
Public

Yes
None

No
Private

No
Public

No
None

No Statespecific
Linear Trends

Simulated % Medicaid
Eligible

-0.3568***
(0.1009)

0.0903***
(0.0335)

0.0601
(0.0447)

-0.0013
(0.0578)

0.1419***
(0.0383)

0.0657***
(0.0247)

State-specific
Linear Trends

Simulated % Medicaid
Eligible

-0.3618***
(0.1117)

0.0850**
(0.0375)

0.0743
(0.0464)

-0.0007
(0.0629)

0.1323***
(0.0365)

0.0709**
(0.0291)

% in category in 1986

53.16%

4.84%

6.13%

20.08%

9.81%

5.99%

Panel B

Outcome

Lab. Force Part. Last
Year
Health Insurance

Labor Force Participation*Insurance Status

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Private

Public

None

Private

Public

None

No Statespecific
Linear Trends

Simulated % Medicaid
Eligible

-0.3335***
(0.1029)

0.1035***
(0.0372)

0.0573
(0.0446)

-0.0236
(0.0541)

0.1299***
(0.0327)

0.0664***
(0.0247)

State-specific
Linear Trends

Simulated % Medicaid
Eligible

-0.3297***
(0.1136)

0.0996***
(0.0385)

0.0738
(0.0464)

-0.0312
(0.0599)

0.1184***
(0.0319)

0.0691**
(0.0284)

% in category in 1986

53.91%

5.96%

6.65%

19.32%

8.69%

5.47%

Notes: Marginal effects from multinomial logit models are reported. All models utilize sampling weights, and control for state and year fixed effects in addition to the covariates
listed in Table 2. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and reported in parentheses. N=22,182 women ages 18-39 with a child less than one year old. Asterisks denote
significance as follows: ***significant at 1%, **significant at 5%, * significant at 10%.

39

Table 8
Effect of Medicaid on Males’ Labor Supply
Placebo Test

Males
Ages 18-39
Unmarried
Less than High School

Sample

Outcome

Pregnant Women
Simulated %
Medicaid Eligible
Estimation

Employed last
year

Labor force
participation
last year

Weeks worked
last year

Usual weekly
hours worked
last year

-0.0053
(0.0296)

0.0317
(0.0264)

-0.0659
(0.0500)

-0.0107
(0.0420)

OLS

OLS

Negative
Binomial

Negative
Binomial

Notes: All models utilize sampling weights, and control for state and year fixed effects and state-specific linear
trends in addition to the covariates listed in the text. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and reported in
parentheses. N=50,358 unmarried males 18-39 with less than a high school education. ***significant at 1%,
**significant at 5%, * significant at 10%.

40

