NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MULTICHANNEL SPILLOVERS FROM A FACTORY STORE
Yi Qian
Eric Anderson
Duncan Simester
Working Paper 19176
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19176

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2013

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Yi Qian, Eric Anderson, and Duncan Simester. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Multichannel Spillovers from a Factory Store
Yi Qian, Eric Anderson, and Duncan Simester
NBER Working Paper No. 19176
June 2013
JEL No. L0,M0
ABSTRACT
We study how the opening of a factory store impacts a retailer’s demand in its other channels. It is
possible that a factory store may damage a retailer's brand image and lead to substitution away from
its higher quality core channels. Alternatively, the opening of a factory store may have positive effects
as it may attract new buyers and serve as a form of brand advertising. In this paper, we use a natural
experiment that arises from a retailer introducing a factory store in 2002. We analyze data that spans
all customers and all channels from 1995 to 2007. This allows for careful pre and post analysis of
the factory store opening. We find that the introduction of the factory store led to substantial positive
spillovers to the core channels that lasted for multiple years. Customers purchase more items from
the higher priced, higher quality channels after the factory store is opened. These positive spillovers
represent approximately 17% of all of the incremental sales that result from the factory store opening
(the other 83% are contributed by sales in the factory store itself).

Yi Qian
Department of Marketing
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
yiqian@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Eric Anderson
Northwestern University
eric-anderson@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Duncan Simester
Sloan School of Management
MIT
1 Amherst Street, Room E40-177
Cambridge, MA 02142-0679
simester@mit.edu

1.

Introduction

Firms often extend their brands by offering products of varying qualities and prices.
Manufacturers like Proctor and Gamble and Levi's offer products that are higher priced/higher
quality (Charmin, Levis 501) and lower priced/lower quality (Charmin Basic, Levi's Signature).
Vertical extensions are also common among retailers. Brooks Brothers offers its products
through traditional stores, factory stores and “Brooks Brothers 346” stores, which offer
products that are lower quality and typically priced 25% below the traditional store. These
vertical line extensions may come with both costs and benefits. There is a risk that the vertical
line extension either cannibalizes sales of the core brand or erodes brand equity. Alternatively,
a vertical line extension may increase overall brand awareness and create positive spillovers for
the entire portfolio.
We study the phenomenon of vertical line extensions in the context of a multi‐channel retailer.
The retailer's primary distribution channels (the core channels) include regular retail stores and
a direct‐mail channel from which customers order over the telephone, Internet and mail. The
core channels typically offer in‐season merchandise that is sold at full price. In addition to these
core channels, the retailer also sells products through a number of factory stores, which
primarily sell imperfect items or excess inventory from previous seasons. In this sense, the
factory stores offer lower quality items at substantial discounts.
The firm’s expansion into factory stores provides a unique natural experiment. In November
2002 the company opened a new factory store approximately 1‐hour from a major
metropolitan area. We observe transactions over a period of 12 years, which includes several
years both before and after the factory store opens. To measure spillovers, we examine the
change in consumer spending through the company's core distribution channels (excluding the
factory store itself). This provides a clean test of whether there are positive or negative
spillovers in the core channels. Negative spillovers could stem from cannibalization (switching
from core channels to the factory store) or damage to brand equity. Positive spillovers could
stem from advertising and awareness effects.
Our analysis provides strong evidence of positive spillovers: customers who purchase from the
factory store increase the number of orders that they place in the core channels. This increased
spending is a large effect that endures for several years. We also observe a change in the
composition of customers’ orders: after the factory opens these customers are more likely to
purchase discounted items in the core channels. To further explore these results we perform
additional analysis at a more granular product level. These findings confirm that much of the
effect is due to spillovers in a truly different retail channel: the incremental purchases are
almost all in the firm’s direct channel (mail, telephone and the Internet) rather than other
1|Page

physical stores. We also see that the effect is not limited to additional purchases of existing
categories. Approximately 52% of the spillovers represent purchases from new categories that
customers had not purchased prior to the factory store opening.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we review related literatures.
In Section 3 we describe the data and in Section 4 we estimate the impact that the factory store
entry had on customers’ orders in the core channels. We provide additional results in Section
5, including how the factory store impacted the composition of customers’ orders, which of the
core channels had the largest spillovers, and a comparison of incremental purchases from new
categories versus categories customers had purchased from before. Section 6 concludes the
paper.
2.

Literature Review

Our findings contribute to the literatures on vertical line extensions, multi‐channel retailing,
product line pricing and design, and the impact of counterfeit products. We discuss each of
these literatures in turn.
The literature on vertical line extensions is relatively small (Heath et al. 2011). Randall, Ulrich,
and Reibstein (1998) study vertical brand extensions in the context of mountain bikes. They use
field data on prices and attributes to develop a hedonic regression that relates the price
premium offered by a brand to the length of the vertical product offering. Kirmani, Sood, and
Bridges (1999) use a combination of field and lab studies to examine how product ownership
moderates the impact of vertical line extensions. More recently, Lei et al. (2008) investigate
vertical service line extensions in the hotel industry using a series of lab experiments.
Collectively, the results of these papers are mixed with no clear pattern of positive or negative
spillovers to the core brand from a vertical line extension.
Heath et al. (2011) contribute to this literature by demonstrating a novel finding through a
series of laboratory studies. They show that line extensions have an asymmetric effect: higher
quality extensions have a larger absolute impact than lower quality extensions. A high quality
extension results in positive spillovers to brand reputation but the cost of negative spillovers is
typically smaller in absolute value. Moreover, offering additional variety via a lower quality
extension offsets some of the negative impact. Our results are consistent with this finding as we
find that the negative spillovers are small in magnitude but we extend this research by
documenting a positive spillover effect from a low quality extension.
A common, stylized fact from both academic research and industry reports is that customers
who shop through multiple channels typically spend more than those who shop through a
single channel (Neslin and Shankar 2009, Target Marketing 2005, Shop.org 2001, and Myers et
2|Page

al. 2004). Evidence supporting this finding has been reported in both consumer and business‐
to‐business markets (Kumar and Venkatesan 2005) and has been shown to extend beyond
spending to profits (Venkatesan et. al 2007). Our findings are also consistent with these results
as we show that customers who buy from the factory store increase their spending in the core
channels.
In a recent paper on multi‐channel retailing, Avery et al. (2012) conduct an empirical study of
retail channel expansion by a multichannel retailer. Their study is similar to ours in that they
consider how existing channels are affected by opening a new retail store. Our papers are
distinct in several regards. Most importantly, Avery et al. consider the opening of a full price
store rather than a factory store. In the short‐run they show there is substitution away from
direct channels towards the new retail store. In contrast, we show that there are positive
spillovers to the direct channels that endure for multiple years. Our dataset also enables us to
measure treatment effects at the customer level using a model that controls for both observed
and unobserved heterogeneity.
Our work also contributes to the literature on product line design (Villas‐Boas 1998), much of
which has focused on how to optimally price a product line (Mussa and Rosen 1978, Reibstein
and Gatignon 1984, Dobson and Kalish 1988, Moorthy 1988, and Zenor 1994, Anderson and
Dana 2009) or how to develop an optimal quantity discount schedule (Oren, Smith and Wilson,
1984). Our work is perhaps more closely related to theoretical research by Deneckere and
McAfee (1996), who examine optimal pricing of a fully functional product and a lower quality,
damaged good. In our empirical context, the retailer sells out‐of‐season and imperfect
products, which are analogous to the damaged goods studied by Deneckere and McAfee. While
we do not directly test predictions from Deneckere and McAfee's model, our empirical
approach complements their theoretical model.
Finally, the introduction of counterfeit products is also related to our research as counterfeit
products may be interpreted as vertical line extensions. Counterfeit products often mimic key
features of an established brand, but typically provide lower overall quality at a very low price.
One market where counterfeits have been extensively studied is the music industry (see
Liebowitz 2006; and Oberholzer‐Gee and Strumpf 2009) and much of the research documents
negative spillovers to the authentic products (Givon et al. 1995, Hui and Png 2003, Liebowitz
2006 and 2008; and Hong 2008). In contrast, work by Oberholzer‐Gee and Strumpf (2007) and
Mortimer et al. (2010) show the opposite: positive spillovers. In Mortimer et al. (2010), the
authors show that illegitimate redistribution of digital goods can increase revenue from non‐
digital complementary products, notably live performances. Research by Qian (2011) in the
Chinese footwear industry documents the heterogeneous impact of counterfeits on sales of
authentic branded products of different quality tiers. In particular, counterfeits can have both
3|Page

advertising effects and substitution effects that linger for several years. Since the counterfeit
and authentic products share the same brand, the advertising effect benefits both brands. Qian
finds that for high quality shoes, the advertising effect dominates the substitution effect and
there are positive spillovers. However, for lower quality shoes the opposite occurs and there
are negative spillovers. Finally, Richardson (2009) surveys a sample of consumers, and finds that
they purchased more branded purses when a counterfeit brand is offered. Our research
complements these findings in that we also find positive spillovers to the higher quality, full
priced products when a lower quality brand extension is introduced.
3.

Data

Data Description
We study data provided by a U.S. apparel retailer that sells mostly apparel through multiple
distribution channels, including regular retail stores and direct‐mail. Essentially all of the
products are private label products carrying the retailer’s own brand. Although competitors sell
close substitutes, products carrying this retailer’s private label brand are only available through
this retailer. The dataset includes all of the transactions that customers made between
November 1994 and December 2007. In November 2002, the company opened a new factory
store in an existing outlet mall within one hour's drive of a major metropolitan area. The
practice of locating factory stores approximately one hour from a major city is common
(Coughlan and Soberman 2005) as firms try to maintain some geographic separation between
factory stores and their traditional retail stores. This factory store primarily sells apparel (99%
of sales). The majority of the items are liquidated or outdated (86% of sales), with the median
discount approximately 25% off the full price.
We will label the period before October 2002 as the “pre‐entry” period and the period after
November 2002 as the “post‐entry” period. We restrict attention to the 815,486 customers
who had purchased from the firm prior to the factory store opening and who live within 150
kilometers driving distance of the new store. The firm defines this 150 kilometer radius as the
store’s “Retail Trade Area” (RTA).
Our data contains several demographics variables, including the customer’s age, whether they
are married, their estimated annual income, and the number of children in the household. Age
and income are normalized (a request from the company that provided the data). We also
know the household zip code and so we use both Google and Yahoo Maps to estimate the
driving distance (measured in kilometers) from each household to the factory store.
We construct several variables from the pre‐entry transaction data. These customer‐level
variables include:
4|Page

Tenure

The number of years between the customer’s first purchase
from the firm and the date that the factory store opens.

Recency

The number of years between the opening date and the most
recent purchase prior to that date.

Pre‐Entry Annual Order Rate

The average annual order rate (excluding the first order) in the
period between the date of the first order and the date the
factory store opened.

Pre‐Entry Order Size

The average size in dollars of the orders placed during the pre‐
entry period.

Pre‐Entry Items Per Order

The average number of items in orders placed during the pre‐
entry period.

Pre‐Entry Selling Price

The average price paid for each item purchased during the pre‐
entry period.

Pre‐Entry % Full Price Paid

The Selling Price divided by the Full Price and then averaged
across items purchased during the pre‐entry period.

Pre‐Entry Discount Frequency The fraction of items purchased at a discount during the pre‐
entry period.

Summary statistics for all of these variables are presented in Table 1. Note that these statistics
are for customers who had purchased from the brand through the core channels before the
factory store opened. In this study, we focus on how the factory store opening affected
purchasing by these existing customers. Each customer's purchase history will serve as a natural
control for the customer’s purchasing after the factory store opens.
Insert Table 1 about here.
Recall that prior to the factory store opening the customers in our sample had all made at least
one purchase from the firm. These purchases were made in what we will describe as the “core
channels,” including other retail stores and the firm’s direct mail channel (primarily telephone
orders). In the 24‐months before the introduction of the new factory store, the 815,486
customers made 9.4% of their purchases in other retail stores, and the remaining 90.6% of their
purchases in the direct channel.

5|Page

4.

Estimating the Factory Store Spillover Effects

Our analysis is conducted at a customer level. In particular, we calculate before and after
purchases by individual customers. We then compare the change in purchases according to
whether the customer made a purchase from the factory store (“adopters”) or never purchased
from the factory store in our data period (“non‐adopters”). Much of this customer‐level
analysis is focused on addressing the inherent differences in the characteristics of these two
customer groups.
Adopters and Non‐Adopters
We define the customers who purchased at least once from the factory store as “adopters”,
and those who never purchased from the factory store as “non‐adopters”. In Table 2 we
compare the demographic characteristics and the pre‐entry purchases by these two groups of
customers.
Insert Table 2 about here.
The findings reveal several important differences. The adopters live much closer to the factory
store and are more likely to be married, richer and older. They have significantly longer tenure
with the retailer, and historically (pre‐entry) have higher annual order rates and larger order
sizes. These differences confirm that we need to control for self‐selection to accurately
estimate the causal impact of opening the factory store. We will do so by combining
propensity‐score matching and difference‐in‐difference estimates to control for individual
customer differences.
Overview of Methods
Difference‐in‐difference estimation has become a widely adopted method for analyzing natural
experiments (Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan 2004). However, when the control group is
very different from the treatment group, the before‐after change in the control group can give
a poor prediction of the before‐after change in the treatment group. It is therefore important
to find similar customers to serve as the counterfactual for what these factory‐store shoppers
would do if they did not adopt the factory store.
We will use propensity score sub‐classification to establish strata (groups) of customers who
are comparable in all of our observable variables except their factory store status. We then
execute difference‐in‐difference estimations within each stratum. The advantage of this semi‐
parametric approach is that it controls for both observable differences and time‐invariant
unobservable differences. We can calculate the average treatment effects for the entire sample
of active customers as well as heterogeneous effects for each stratum of customers.
6|Page

We also introduce an additional control through the design of the customer sample. When
using a fixed panel of customers who have all made a prior purchase, we would expect that
over time some of these customers will become “inactive”. This attrition reflects changing
customer preferences and a range of other factors that could lead customers to stop
purchasing (including the reality that some customers literally die). For this reason using a
purchase from the factory store after it opens as our identifying variable may introduce a
potential confound; customers who make a purchase from the factory store are by definition
still active. Therefore, it is possible that the customers who did not adopt have a higher
proportion of customers who have become inactive by the end of the data period. We can
address this concern by restricting attention to customers who made at least one purchase
(from any channel) after the factory store opened. This ensures that the decision to purchase
after the factory store opened is common to both adopters and non‐adopters of the factory
store.
We next describe the propensity score approach used to match customers in the adopter and
non‐adopter samples.
Propensity Score Approach
The propensity score method for matching samples (Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983) has been
increasingly used in economics and other disciplines (see for example Busse et al. 2006; and
Qian 2007). The propensity score, which in this setting is the predicted propensity to adopt a
factory store, is interpreted as a sufficient statistic for all the relevant covariates that may
influence both the treatment (consumer's adoption of factory store) and the outcome (changes
in purchasing behaviors).
We begin by modeling the probability that a customer adopts (purchases) from the factory
store. Let Adopti equal one if a customer purchases from the factory store, and zero otherwise.
We estimate a logistic regression with Adopti as the dependent variable:
logit P(Adopti = 1) = αXi

(1)

The propensity score for each customer (Scorei) is simply the fitted values from this logistic
regression. The vector Xi includes the demographic variables and pre‐entry purchasing
characteristics of each customer i, together with their quadratic terms and interaction terms. A
complete list of the variables is reported in Table A1, together with goodness of fit measures.
The coefficients are available from the authors.
The Pre‐Entry Annual Order Rate, Pre‐Entry Discount Frequency, Recency, and Distance are
strong predictors of whether a customer will purchase from the factory store. Not surprisingly,
the further the customer lives from the factory store, the less likely the customer will make a
7|Page

purchase at the store. The results also show that factory store adopters are more likely to be
married. The probability of adopting the factory store increases with age and income, although
the effects are diminishing as indicated by the negative coefficients on the quadratic terms in
the model. The factory store adopters are also more likely to be customers who purchased
more recently and more frequently, and they tend to have had longer relationships with the
company (their first purchases were earlier). They also tend to be more price sensitive.
Effectiveness of Propensity Score Sub‐Classification
Rubin (2001) shows that propensity score sub‐classification to five strata is expected to
eliminate 95% of the biases in the final estimate resulting from differences in confounding
covariates. For this reason we focus on five strata, but later also conduct robustness checks
with up to 24 strata. We assign the customers to the five strata using the quintiles of the
propensity scores for the adopting customers. We label the strata in order, so that Stratum 1
includes the customers with the lowest propensity to adopt the factory store, while the Stratum
5 customers have the highest propensity to adopt.
In the Appendix (Table A2) we report the means and standard deviations for each covariate for
both the adopters and non‐adopters. Comparing across strata these means vary substantially.
Notably, consumers in Stratum 1 live significantly farther away from the factory store (about 80
km more in driving distance) than consumers in Stratum 5. Customers in Strata 1 and 2 also
have lower average incomes than customers in Strata 3 through 5, and purchase less frequently
and place smaller orders prior to the factory store entry. The Pre‐Entry % Full Price Paid and
Pre‐Entry Discount Frequency indicate that the average price sensitivity also increases by strata,
with the lowest price sensitivity in Stratum 1 and the highest in Stratum 5. This is intuitive as
more price sensitive customers have a higher propensity to adopt the factory store (and we
would expect them to be classified in the strata with the highest propensity score values).
Within each stratum the propensity score method helps to preserve homogeneity among
customers between the adopter and non‐adopter customers. Notably, within each stratum
there are no significant differences in the adopter and non‐adopter averages for any of the
covariates. We can be confident that any difference between adopters and non‐adopters in the
amount of change in their purchasing behavior after the factory store opens cannot be
attributed to differences in these covariates. In other words, all customers within each stratum
were (approximately) equally likely to adopt the factory store based on the set of observed
traits, and the realized adoption status can be considered independent of these observable
customer characteristics.
To estimate the impact of the factory store opening on purchases in the core channels we will
use a difference‐in‐difference approach. In particular, we will compare the difference in
8|Page

purchasing before and after the factory store opened for the adopters and non‐adopters in
each stratum (excluding any purchases from the factory store itself). This provides an
additional control for customer differences. In particular, our identifying assumption is that
without the factory store opening there would be no difference in the change in purchasing
from the core channels for adopters versus non‐adopters (we will later test this assumption).
We describe our difference‐in‐difference analysis next.
Difference‐In‐Difference Estimation within Strata
We estimate the effect of factory store adoption on the customers' shopping behaviors in the
core channels within each propensity score stratum. Customers' purchasing behaviors through
all the core channels excluding the factory store are used as the outcome measures so that we
can cleanly isolate the potential spillover effects of the factory store on the other channels. The
unit of analysis is a customer x period. For each customer we include both a 2‐year pre‐entry
period (November 2000 – October 2002) and a 2‐year post‐entry period (November 2002 –
October 2004). The sample includes all of the customers who made at least one purchase in
both the pre‐entry and post‐entry periods.
The dependent variable is the Number of Orders that customer i placed in period t. Notice this
is a “count” measure and so we estimate a quasi maximum likelihood (QML) Poisson model
with (conditional) customer fixed effects (Wooldridge 1999). This estimator is consistent under
very general conditions. In contrast to the regular Poisson model the estimator is consistent
even if there is over‐dispersion or under‐dispersion in the latent variable model. Moreover, the
robust variance‐covariance matrix allows for deviations from the Poisson distribution together
with arbitrary customer‐level fixed effects. We include the following system of independent
variables:
ln(λit) = β0 + β1 Adopti * Opent + β2 Opent

(2)

is the purchase rate for customer i in period t. Opent is a binary flag that is set equal to one
in the post‐entry period and zero in the pre‐entry period. Adopti is a binary variable identifying
customers who make a purchase in the factory store at any time in the post‐entry period. The
coefficient of interest is the interaction coefficient β1, which estimates the difference‐in‐
difference effect. Notice that the Adopt variable is co‐linear with the customer‐fixed effects
and so the main effect is subsumed by these fixed effects (for the same reason we did not
include customers’ estimated propensity scores as control variables).
We estimate this model separately for each of the five strata. The coefficients are reported in
Table 3 together with standard errors clustered by customer. The key finding is that in all five
strata the β1 interaction coefficients are positive and highly significant. This indicates that
adoption of the factory stores had a positive spillover on the number of orders placed in the
9|Page

core channels. Aggregating across the five strata we calculate that customers increase their
orders in the core channels by 0.35 orders per year.1 This average has a standard error of 0.02,
and is significantly different from zero at the 1% level.
Insert Table 3 about here.
To help evaluate these findings, the average number of orders that the adopters placed in the
factory store itself was 1.73 orders per year. Therefore, the positive spillovers contributed
approximately 17% of the incremental orders received.
The factory store was associated with the smallest increase in purchasing among adopters in
Stratum 5. Recall that these customers live closest to the factory store and had the highest pre‐
adoption purchase rates. Because these customers are close to the factory store it seems likely
that the transaction costs of visiting the factory store are low and this may have reduced their
spillover purchasing to the core channels.
Verifying the Identifying Assumption
The identifying assumption in our model is that in the absence of the factory store opening
there would have been no difference in the change in purchasing behavior of the adopters and
non‐adopters. A standard approach to evaluating this assumption is to investigate whether the
changes in purchasing behavior around the factory store opening are unique to these periods,
or whether they also occurred in other periods (see for example Busse, Silva‐Risso and
Zettelmeyer 2006; and Busse, Simester and Zettelmeyer 2010). We repeated the analysis using
the same sample of customers and five alternative time periods. Each of these alternative
periods included a two‐year pre‐period, and a two‐year post‐period. The actual data periods
and the findings for these replications are reported in the Appendix (Table A3). The
coefficients (for the Open * Adopt interaction) average just 0.78%, as compared to effect
sizes of 15.4%, 17.8%, 14.8%, 12.9% and 5.8% in Table 3. We conclude that the coefficients
estimated around the factory store opening are uncommonly large compared to what we
would expect from estimating the same model in different time periods.
Additional Robustness Checks
While the propensity score classification into five strata already ensures considerable overlap in
the covariate distributions for the adopters and non‐adopters, we replicated the analysis when
classifying the observations into finer groups, up to 24 strata. The distributions of the
propensity score within each stratum are indistinguishable for the adopters and non‐adopters
by the Kolmogorov‐Smirnov test. The detailed results for these replications are available from
1

This is calculated by multiplying the estimated average treatment effect across the five strata (15.5%) by the
baseline order rate (2.23).

10 | P a g e

the authors. They replicate our earlier findings: adopters of the new factory store increased
their annual orders in the core channels after the store entry compared to the non‐adopters.
The effects are statistically significant at the 5% or 1% levels. The trend that the positive
spillover effects are weakest for the customers living closest to the store also survives.
We also re‐estimated the models adding year fixed effects.2 Reassuringly, the pattern of results
remains unchanged. We have also considered other specifications. For example, we
investigated using a random effects specification instead of fixed effects. These changes had
little impact on the coefficients of interest.
It is at least theoretically possible that customers who purchased from the factory store were
treated differently by the firm. In particular, the firm regularly sends catalogs to its customers.
Although the firm did not have an explicit policy of making different mailing decisions for
customers who purchased from factory stores, it is possible that the algorithms it uses to make
mailing decisions led to customers who adopted the factory store receiving additional catalogs.
To control for this possibility we obtaining detailed data from the company describing which
customers received each of the firm’s catalogs. In Table 4 we re‐estimate the Poisson QML
models when explicitly controlling for the number of catalogs mailed to each customer each
year. The findings survive when we include this additional control.
Insert Table 4 about here.
Recall that in the findings in Table 3 we used two‐year pre‐entry and post‐entry periods. In
Table 5 we report the results when using pre‐entry and post‐entry periods of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6
years duration. The findings are robust to these different period lengths. They also reveal a
consistent pattern. The effect sizes are larger when we use periods of 4 to 6 years compared to
1 to 3 years. This suggests that the effect may have endured beyond the 2‐year window that
we used in Table 3. In the next sub‐section we explicitly investigate this issue by evaluating the
persistence of the effect.
Insert Table 5 about here.
Temporal Effects
To study how long the effect endured we modified Equation 2 as follows:
ln(λit) = ϒ0 + ϒ1t Adopti * Yeart + ∑t ϒ2t Yeart

(3)

The dependent variable Yit is again the Number of Orders from customer i in the core channels
in year t. Yeart is a set of binary flags identifying the 12 years under observation. Because the
2

Because the store‐entry dummy (Opent) is collinear with the year‐fixed effects the main effect for this variable
was omitted in the year fixed effects regressions

11 | P a g e

factory store opened in November we will start each annual period in November of the
previous year. For example, the year 2000 extends from November 1, 1999 through October
31, 2000. We use the Poisson QML model to estimate Equation (3) within each stratum. Recall
that this model includes (conditional) customer fixed effects.
The interpretation of this model is straightforward. The parameter vector

describes the

difference in the Number of Orders placed by adopters versus the non‐adopters in each stratum
in each of the 12 years. Because we omitted the dummy indicating the entry year 2002 from
the regression model, these effect sizes are all differences compared to the first year the
factory store was open. Notice that our definition of an adopter is fixed across the 12‐year
period (Adopti is not sub‐scripted by t). This ensures that any difference in the
and
across the years cannot be attributed to changes in the composition of these sub‐samples.
The findings are illustrated in Figure 1, where we report the

coefficients. The coefficients

for the interactions between the adoption dummy and the year dummies (

) are positive and

significant for several years after the factory store opens in 2002. This demonstrates a positive
structural break in the Number of Orders after the entry of the factory store.
Insert Figure 1 about here.
The trends in Figure 1 also clearly illustrate that the positive spillovers peaked more than two
years after the entry of the new factory store for most strata and lasted for at least four years.
We conclude that the positive spillovers from the factory store on adopters' spending in the
core channels were felt almost immediately after the store entry and persisted throughout the
sample period.
Summary
Recall that in the introduction of the paper we recognized that retailers face an important
trade‐off when introducing a new distribution channel, particularly one that sells discounted,
lower‐quality products. There is a risk that the vertical line extension cannibalizes sales of the
core brand or erodes the brand equity of the core brand. Our evidence that the introduction of
a factory store increased purchases in the firm’s core channels indicates that any
cannibalization or brand erosion effects were outweighed by positive spillovers.
There are also at least three reasons to believe that the positive spillovers that we have
reported may be conservative. First, our model defines the date of adoption as the date of
store opening for all customers. In practice the actual date varied, with some customers
making their first purchase in the factory store many months after the store opened. In these
interim periods the model treats customers who have not yet adopted as if they had adopted.
This will tend to reduce the size of any adoption effects. However, this approach offers some
12 | P a g e

important advantages. As we discussed above, we can compare the decisions of adopters and
adopters over time, without having to worry about changes in the composition of these sub‐
samples. Even more importantly, when estimating the impact of adoption we simply need to
control for the propensity to adopt, we do not need to control for any self‐selection introduced
by the timing of the adoption decision.
The second reason that we may believe that our findings are conservative is that we
constructed the sample to ensure that all of the customers made a purchase from the firm after
the entry of the factory store (they also all purchased before the factory store opened). Recall
that this restriction was designed to ensure that customers in the two samples were all active
after the factory store was opened. However, we note that one way that a positive spillover
from the factory store could be manifested is in an increased probability that customers remain
active. By restricting attention to customers who were all active after the factory store opened,
we eliminate the potential for this positive spillover. In doing so we may be under‐estimating
the extent of the positive spillover effects.
Finally, it is possible that some adopters of the factory store may be misclassified as non‐
adopters. The firm invests considerable effort to match customers in its retail stores with
customers from its catalog and Internet channels. They do so by asking for identifying
information at the point of sale and matching customers’ credit card numbers. Some of this
matching is done for them by specialized firms that use sophisticated matching algorithms.
However, the matching process is not perfect. As a result, it is possible that some of the
customers we treat as non‐adopters may actually have purchased in the factory store (the
reverse in which we treat customers as adopters when they are non‐adopters is a much less
likely occurrence). These misallocation errors will tend to reduce estimates of the differences
in the behavior of the two groups of customers.
In the next section we explore a series of additional results, including how the entry of the
factory store affected the composition of customers’ orders, and how the findings varied across
the core channels.
5.

Additional Results

Composition of the Orders
To investigate how the entry of the factory store affected the composition of customers’ orders
through the core channels we constructed three new dependent variables:
Items Per Order

The number of items per order.

13 | P a g e

Selling Price

The average price paid.

Discount Frequency

The fraction of items purchased at a discount.

These three measures were calculated separately for the 2‐year pre‐entry and post‐entry
periods for each customer. Notice that the measures are only well‐defined if customers placed
an order. Therefore in this analysis we restrict attention to customers who placed at least one
order in the core channels in both the pre‐entry and post‐entry periods.3 This yields two
observations for each customer for each measure.
None of these dependent measures are count measures and so we use OLS rather than the
QML Poisson model to estimate how the factory store entry contributed to changes in these
three measures. In particular, for each measure we estimated the following model within each
stratum:
Yit = τ0 + τ1Openi * Adopti + τ2 Openi + ∑i τi Customeri

(4)

The Customeri terms are customer fixed effects. In Table 6 we report the coefficients of interest
( ) together with standard errors clustered at the customer‐level.
Insert Table 6 about here.
Factory store adoption is not associated with a significant change in the average price that
customers paid for orders purchased through the core channels. There is some evidence of an
increase in the number of items per order, with a significant effect in Strata 1 and 3 and a
marginally significant effect in Stratum 2. However, the largest impact that the factory store
had on the composition of customers’ orders in the core channel appears to be customers’
purchases of discounted items. The fraction of items purchased at a discount in the core
channels increased by approximately 2% (from a base of 10%).
This evidence that the factory store increased the proportion of discounted items purchased
through the core channels is consistent with a series of papers showing that promotions may
increase customers’ price or deal sensitivities (Mela et al. 1997, 1998; Jedidi et al. 1999;
Anderson and Simester 2004). It is possible that the discounts customers obtained through the
factory store made customers more reluctant to purchase at full price in the future. A related
group of theories argues that customers evaluate a transaction against a reference price (Thaler
1985, Kalyanaram and Winer 1995). If discounts in the factory store lowered customers’
reference prices, these customers may be more likely to seek out lower‐priced items in the

3

Recall that our sample in Section 4 includes all of the customers who placed at least one order before and after
the factory store entry in any channel.

14 | P a g e

future. These two theories are complementary; the reference price argument may provide an
explanation for the shift in deal sensitivities.
Channel Differences
Our analysis has measured the impact of the factory store opening on sales in all of the firm’s
core channels (excluding the factory store itself). These core channels include two distinct
channels: (1) other retail stores and (2) the firm’s direct channel. The direct channel is
essentially a catalog‐driven channel, with customers placing orders over the telephone, via
mail, and in the firm’s Internet site. As we discussed in Section 2 the direct channel is
considerably larger than the retail store channel, representing over 90.6% of orders.
In Table 7 we distinguish between orders placed in the retail store and direct channel. In
particular, for each customer we count the number of orders placed in the retail stores pre and
post‐entry of the factory store (excluding the factory store itself). We then re‐estimate
Equation 2 using these measures. Similarly we also count the number of pre and post‐entry
orders in the direct channel and separately re‐estimate Equation 2 with these measures.
Table 7 about here
Given that our identifying event is the adoption of the factory store we might anticipate that
the strongest effects would be observed at other retail stores. Because customers have
demonstrated a willingness to purchase through a (physical) factory store it might initially seem
that any spillovers would be more likely in other physical stores. However, the retailer does not
have other retail stores located close to the new factory store’s RTA (where all of the customers
in our study live). For these customers purchasing in other retail stores is relatively
inconvenient. The findings are consistent with this: almost all of the incremental orders are
placed in the direct channels, and there is no significant increase in orders in the firm’s other
retail stores. More specifically, approximately 96% of the spillovers to the core channel
occurred in the direct channel, with just 4% occurring in other retail stores.
This finding confirms that the impact of factory stores is truly “cross‐channel”; the incremental
spillover from a new physical store extends to a completely different channel. For many of
these customers ordering in the direct channel is the only convenient incremental purchasing
mechanism outside the factory store and so if other physical retail stores were located in this
RTA then the cross‐channel effects may not be as strong. However, the results clearly establish
that a retail line extension can generate cross‐channel spillovers.

15 | P a g e

Category Differences
We also investigate the extent to which the positive spillovers varied across categories. A
natural question is whether the spillovers led customers to make incremental purchases in new
categories that they had not purchased from prior to the factory store opening.
To investigate the impact on purchases in new categories requires a different identification
approach. In particular, we can no longer conduct a difference‐in‐difference analysis as all
customers have zero pre‐entry orders in these categories. Instead we are limited to observing
post‐entry demand, which also prevents us from including fixed effects for each individual.
Therefore, to evaluate whether the spillovers extend to purchases in new categories versus
existing categories, we estimated a random effects Poisson model using only post‐entry
purchases. We use the same sample of customers and compare post‐entry purchases in the
core channels for customers who adopted and did not adopt the factory store. The identifying
assumption in these models is that these customers would have made the same post‐entry
purchases in the core channels if the factory store had not opened. This is a stronger
assumption than in the difference‐in‐difference models that we use in the rest of the paper,
and puts considerable reliance on the propensity score matching. For this reason we do not
formally report these results (they are available from the authors). However, we do note that
our focus is on comparing the impact on purchases from new categories and categories that
customers had purchased from prior to the factory store opening. It seems likely that any
limitations in these models are likely to be common to both sets of models.
The findings indicate that 48% of the spillovers to the core channels came from incremental
purchases in categories that customers had purchased from before. The other 52% of the
spillovers came from incremental purchases in new categories. These findings suggest that
adoption of the factory story led to incremental breadth of purchases (trial of additional
categories) rather than just increased depth of purchases from the same categories.
Summary
Our results reveal that the opening of a factory store by an apparel retailer led to an increased
propensity to purchase discounted items in the core channels among customers who adopted
the factory store. We also observe that the increase in orders placed in the core channel after
the factory store opened was primarily attributable to incremental orders through the firm’s
direct channel, rather than additional orders in other retail stores. Because there were no
other retail stores located close to these customers the small impact on sales in this channel is
unsurprising. However, the results do confirm that a retail line extension in one channel can
lead to positive spillovers in another channel.

16 | P a g e

6.

Conclusion

In this paper, we analyzed a natural experiment to measure spillovers from introducing a lower
priced, lower quality channel on other channels. The results demonstrate that the factory store
led to positive spillovers on purchases by existing customers through the higher priced higher
quality core channels. We estimate that approximately 17% of all of the incremental sales from
the factory store opening are due to spillovers to the core channel. Failing to recognize these
positive spillovers would greatly under‐estimate the impact of the factory store. The analysis
reveals that the effect primarily results from an increase in the frequency of orders through the
core channels, rather than a change in the size of those orders. The positive spillovers persist
throughout our multi‐year data period and almost all comprise incremental orders in the firm’s
direct channels (mail, telephone and Internet), rather than additional purchases in other retail
stores.
Introduction of a lower price lower quality product has often been viewed as a threat to higher
price higher quality co‐branded products. However, we find virtually no evidence of
cannibalization or substitution away from the core channel. This is a robust result that survives
replication using different estimation approaches. This finding suggests the extending a brand
downward in the price‐quality spectrum may not necessarily damage the higher quality core
brand. The absence of cannibalization may in part reflect the firm’s careful separation of the
factory store from the core channels. The factory store is located geographically distant from
the existing customers and offers merchandise that is out of season. In the apparel industry,
these differences may be sufficient to prevent cannibalization and facilitate segmented pricing.
A limitation of our study is that we cannot fully explain why customers place additional orders
via the core channel. This is not unique to this study as other researchers (Avery et al. 2012)
have also struggled to identify a specific mechanism. In our context, we speculate that the new
channel created both awareness and trial of new products and these may have enhanced the
perceived value of the brand. Future work is needed to fully understand the source of positive
spillovers in multichannel retailing.
7.

References

Anderson, Eric T. and James Dana (2009), “When is Price Discrimination Profitable,”
Management Science, 55(6), 980‐989.
Anderson, Eric T., and Duncan I. Simester (2004), “Long‐Run Effects of Promotion Depth on New
Versus Established Customers: Three Field Studies,” Marketing Science, 23(1), 4‐20.
Anderson, Eric T., Karsten Hansen and Duncan I. Simester (2009), “The Option Value of Returns:
Theory and Empirical Evidence,” Marketing Science, 28(3), 405‐423.
17 | P a g e

Arndt, J. (1967), “Role of Product‐Related Conversations in the Diffusion of a New Product,”
Journal of Marketing Research, 4(3), 291‐295.
Avery, Jill, Thomas J. Steenburgh, John Deighton, & Mary Caravella (2012), “Adding Bricks to
Clicks: Predicting the Patterns of Cross‐Channel Elasticities Over Time,” Journal of Marketing, 76
(May), 96–111.
Berger, J., A. Sorensen, and S. Rasmussen (2010), “Positive Effects of Negative Publicity,”
Marketing Science, 29(5), 815‐827.
Betrand, Marianne Esther Duflo and Sendhil Mullainathan 92004), “How Much Should We Trust
Differences‐in‐Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1), pp. 249‐75.
Blackshaw, P. (2008), Satisfied Customers Tell Three Friends, Angry Customers Tell 3,000:
Running a Business in Today’s Consumer‐Driven World, Broadway Business, New York.
Busse, Meghan, Jorge Silva‐Risso and Florian Zettelmeyer (2006), “$1,000 Cash Back: The Pass‐
Through of Auto Manufacturer Promotions,” American Economic Review, 96(4), 1253‐1270.
Busse, Meghan, Duncan I Simester and Florian Zettelmeyer (2010), “The Best Price You’ll Ever
Get: The 2005 Employee Discount Promotions in the U.S. Automobile Industry,” Marketing
Science, 29(2), 268‐290.
Chevalier, Judith. A., and Dina Mayzlin (2006), “The Effect of Word of Mouth on Sales: Online
Book Reviews,” Journal of Marketing Research, 43(3), 345‐354.
Coleman, J. S., E. Katz, H. Menzel (1966), Medical Innovation: A Diffusion Study, Bobbs‐Merrill,
Indianapolis.
Coughlan, Anne and David A. Soberman (2005), “Strategic Segmentation Using Outlet Malls,”
International Journal of Research in Marketing, 22, 61‐86.Deneckere, Raymond and Preston
McAfee (1996), “Damaged Goods,” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, Volume 5,
Number 2, Summer 1996, 149‐174
Deneckere, R. and P. McAfee (1996) “Damaged Goods,” Journal of Economics & Management
Strategy, Volume 5, Number 2, Summer 1996, 149‐174.
Dobson, Gregory and Shlomo Kalish (1988), “Positioning and Pricing a Product Line,” Marketing
Science, 7(2), 107‐125.
Gabszewicz, J. and J.‐F. Thisse (1979), “Price Competition, Quality and Income Disparities,”
Journal of Economic Theory, 20, 340‐359.
Givon, M. and E. Muller (1995), “Software Piracy ‐‐ Estimation of Lost Sales and the Impact on
Software Diffusion,” Journal of Marketing, 59 (1): 29‐37.
Godes, David and Dina Mayzlin (2009), “Firm‐Created Word of Mouth Communication:
Evidence from a Field Test,” Marketing Science, 28(4), 721‐739.

18 | P a g e

Goldenberg, J., B. Libai, S. Moldovan, E. Muller (2007), “The NPV of Bad News,” International
Journal of Research in Marketing, 24(3), 186‐200.
Heath, Timothy, Devon DelVecchio, and Michael S. McCarthy (2011), “The Asymmetric Effects
of Extending Brands to Lower and Higher Quality,” Journal of Marketing, 75(3), 3–20.
Hong, S.‐H. (2008), “Measuring the Effect of Napster on Recorded Music Sales,” Manuscript
available at https://netfiles.uiuc.edu/hyunhong/www/research.htm.
Hui, Kai‐Lung and I.P.L. Png (2003), “Piracy and the Legitimate Demand for Recorded Music,”
Contributions to Economic Analysis and Policy, 2(1), Article 11.
Iyengar, R., C. Van den Bulte, T. W. Valente (2008), “Opinion Leadership and Social Contagion in
New Product Diffusion,”' Marketing Science Institute Report 08‐120, Marketing Science
Institute, Cambridge, MA.
Jedidi, Kamel, Carl F. Mela and Sunil Gupta (1999), “Managing Advertising and Promotion for
Long‐Run Profitability,” Marketing Science, 18(1), 1–22.
Kalyanaram, Gurumurthy and Russell S. Winer (1995), “Empirical Generalizations from
Reference Price Research,” Marketing Science, 14(3), Part 2, G161–G169.
Kirmani, Amna, Sanjay Sood and Sheri Bridges (1999), “The Ownership Effect in Consumer
Responses to Brand Line Stretches,” Journal of Marketing, 63, 88‐101.
Kumar V. and Rajkumar Venkatesan (2005), “Who Are Multichannel Shoppers and How Do they
Perform?: Correlates of Multichannel Shopping Behavior,” Journal of Interactive Marketing, 19
(Spring), 44‐61.
Lei, Jing, Ko de Ruyter, and Martin Wetzels (2008), ‘‘Consumer Responses to Vertical Service
Line Extensions,’’ Journal of Retailing, 84 (3), 268‐280.
Liebowitz, S. J. (2006), ``Economists Examine File‐Sharing and Music Sales,'' in Industrial
Organization and the Digital Economy, eds. G. Illing and M. Peitz. Cambridge: MIT Press, 145‐
174.
Liebowitz, S. J. (2008), ``Research Note: Testing File Sharing's Impact on Music Album Sales in
Cities,'' Management Science, 54, 852‐859.
Mela, Carl F., Sunil Gupta and Donald R. Lehmann (1997), “The Long‐Term Impact of Promotion
and Advertising on Consumer Brand Choice,” Journal of Marketing Research, 34(2), 248–261.
Mela, Carl F., Kamel Jedidi and Douglas Bowman (1998), “The Long‐Term Impact of Promotions
on Consumer Stockpiling Behavior,” Journal of Marketing Research, 35(May), 250–262.
Moorthy, Sridar (1988), “Product and Price Competition in a Duopoly,” Marketing Science, 7(2),
141‐168.

19 | P a g e

Mortimer, J. and J. H., C. Nosko, and A. Sorensen (2010), “Supply Responses to Digital
Distribution: Recorded Music and Live Performance,” Information Economics and Policy,
forthcoming.
Mussa, M. and S. Rosen (1978), “Monopoly and Product Quality,” Journal of Economic Theory,
18, 301‐317.
Myers, Joe, Evan Van Metre, and Andrew Pickersgill (2004), "Steering Customers to the Right
Channels," The McKinsey Quarterly: McKinsey on Marketing, October.
Neslin, Scott and Venkatesh Shankar (2009), “Key Issues in Multichannel Customer
Management: Current Knowledge and Future Directions,” Journal of Interactive Marketing,
23(1), 70‐81.
Oberholzer‐Gee, Felix and Koleman Strumpf (2007), “The Effect of File Sharing on Record Sales:
An Empirical Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 115(1), 1‐42.
Oberholzer‐Gee, Felix and Koleman Strumpf (2009), “File‐Sharing and Copyright,” in Joshua
Lerner and Scott Stern (Eds.) Innovation Policy and the Economy, Volume 10, MIT Press,
Cambridge MA.
Oren, S., S. Smith and R. Wilson (1984), “Pricing a Product Line,” Journal of Business, 57, S73‐
S99.
Qian, Yi (2007), “Do National Patent Laws Stimulate Domestic Innovation In A Global Patenting
Environment? A Cross‐Country Analysis of Pharmaceutical Patent Protection: 1978‐2002,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(3), 436‐453.
Qian, Yi (2008), “Impacts of Entry by Counterfeiters,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4),
1577‐1609.
Qian, Yi (2011), “Counterfeiters: Foes or Friends,” NBER Working Paper 16785.
Randall, Taylor, Karl Ulrich and David Reibstein (1998), “Brand Equity and Vertical Product Line
Extent,” Marketing Science, 17(4), 356‐379.
Reibstein, David J., and Gatignon Hubert (1984), “Optimal Product Line Pricing: The Influence of
Elasticities and Cross‐Elasticities,” Journal of Marketing Research, 21(3), 259–267.
Richardson, R. (2009), “Simultaneous Distinction, Democratization and Omnivorism Effects: A
Longitudinal Analysis of Dynamic Symbolic Boundaries in Counterfeit Consumption Networks,”
PhD Dissertation, Harvard Business School, Cambridge MA.
Rosenbaum, P. and D. Rubin (1983), “The Central Role of the Propensity Score in Observational
Studies for Causal Effects,” Biometrika, 70, 41‐55.
Shop.org (2001), “Multichannel Report 2001”, www.shop.org .
Target Marketing (2005), “How to Find Profitable Multichannel Shoppers,” October 1,
www.targetmarketingmag.com .
20 | P a g e

Thaler, Richard (1985), “Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice,” Marketing Science, 4(3),
199–214.
Van den Bulte, Christophe and Stefan Wuyts (2007), Social Networks and Marketing, Marketing
Science Institute, Cambridge MA.
Venkatesan, Raj, V. Kumar and Nalini Ravishanker (2007), “Multichannel Shopping: Causes and
Consequences,” Journal of Marketing, 71(2), 114‐132.
Villanueva, Julian, Shijin Yoo, and Dominique M. Hanssens (2008), “The Impact of Marketing‐
Induced Versus Word‐of‐Mouth Customer Acquisition on Customer Equity Growth,” Journal of
Marketing Research, 45, 48‐59.
Villas Boas, Miguel (1998), “Product Line Design for a Distribution Channel,” Marketing Science,
17(2), 156‐169.
Zenor, Michael (1994), “The Profit Benefits of Category Management,” Journal of Marketing
Research, 31(2), 202‐213.

21 | P a g e

Table 1
Summary Statistics

Mean

Standard
Deviation

43.23

10.91

Married

0.69

0.46

Income

3.81

2.55

Number of Children

0.59

0.92

81.80

30.73

Tenure

5.54

2.09

Recency

2.30

2.21

Pre‐Entry Annual Order Rate

1.38

1.83

110.47

83.94

2.39

1.89

49.83

28.13

Pre‐Entry % Full Price Paid

0.96

0.07

% of Discounted Items

0.10

0.20

Age

Distance to Factory Store (km)

Pre‐Entry Order Size
Pre‐Entry Items per Order
Pre‐Entry Selling Price

The sample includes the 815,486 customers who live within 150 miles of the
factory store and who have made at least one purchase from the brand prior to
the entry of the factory store. The unit of analysis is a customer. Income and
Age are presented as index values at the company's request (to protect
privacy). Pre‐Entry % Full Price Paid is calculated as the Selling Price divided by
the Full Price and then averaged across items. Discount Frequency is calculated
as the fraction of items purchased on sale (below full price).

22 | P a g e

Table 2
Demographics and Pre‐Entry Purchasing by Adopters and Non‐Adopters of the Factory Store
Non‐Adopters

Adopters

Age

43.27
(0.01)

42.03
(0.05)

1.24**
(0.05)

Married

0.68
(0.001)

0.76
(0.001)

‐0.08**
(0.001)

Income

3.76
(2.52)

4.44
(2.61)

‐0.69**
(0.02)

Number of Children

0.59
(0.92)

0.65
(0.94)

‐0.07**
(0.01)

83.14
(30.97)

45.29
(27.66)

37.85**
(0.17)

Tenure

5.52
(2. 09)

5.98
(1.96)

‐0.46**
(0.01)

Recency

2.34
(2.22)

1.28
(1.72)

1.05**
(0.01)

Pre‐Entry Annual Order Rate

1.37
(1.97)

2.23
(2.38)

‐0.86**
(0.01)

109.10
(90.69)

121.11
(72.74)

‐12.02**
(0.46)

2.36
(2.09)

2.63
(1.54)

‐0.26**
(0.01)

50.02
(29.34)

49.13
(25.15)

0.88**
(0.16)

Pre‐Entry % Full Price Paid

0.96
(0.07)

0.94
(0.08)

0.02**
(0.001)

Pre‐Entry % Discounted Items

0.09
(0.20)

0.16
(0.21)

‐0.06**
(0.001)

789,236

26,250

Distance to Factory Store (km)

Pre‐Entry Order Size
Pre‐Entry Items per Order
Pre‐Entry Selling Price

Sample Sizes

Difference

This table compares demographics and pre‐entry purchases from the core channels and the
factory store by the 815,486 customers who live within 150 miles of the factory store. Statistics
are calculated separately for the adopters and non‐adopters of the factory store. Standard errors
are in parentheses. **Significantly different from zero, p<0.01. * Significantly different from zero,
p<0.05.

23 | P a g e

Table 3
Impact of Factory Store Entry on Annual Order Rate in Core Channels by Stratum
Stratum 1

Stratum 2

Stratum 3

Stratum 4

Stratum 5

Open * Adopt

0.154**
(0.022)

0.178**
(0.020)

0.148**
(0.018)

0.129**
(0.017)

0.058**
(0.019)

Open

0.099**
(0.003)

‐0.005
(0.004)

‐0.068**
(0.006)

‐0.100**
(0.008)

‐0.200**
(0.013)

Fixed Effects

customer

customer

customer

customer

customer

Log Likelihood

‐207,495

‐72,541

‐33,989

‐19,598

‐10,887

Sample Size

402,258

125,618

56,200

31,336

15,890

This table reports the findings from estimating Equation 2 using QML Poisson. The dependent variable measures
the annual number of core channel orders. The unit of observation is a customer x period. The sample includes all
of the customers living within 150km of the factory store who had made at least one purchase before and after the
factory store entry. We aggregate the data into 2 equal‐length periods: pre‐entry (November 2000 through
October 2002) and post‐entry (November 2002 through October 2004). Standard errors are in parentheses
(clustered at the customer level). **Significantly different from zero, p<0.01. * Significantly different from zero,
p<0.05.

24 | P a g e

Table 4
Controlling for Catalog Mailings
Stratum 1

Stratum 2

Stratum 3

Stratum 4

Stratum 5

Open * Adopt

0.152**
(0.022)

0.178**
(0.020)

0.148**
(0.018)

0.130**
(0.017)

0.058
(0.019)

Open

0.099**
(0.003)

‐0.005
(0.004)

‐0.067**
(0.006)

‐0.099**
(0.008)

‐0.198**
(0.013)

Catalogs

0.034**
(0.002)

0.038**
(0.004)

0.031**
(0.006)

0.039**
(0.007)

0.038**
(0.009)

Fixed effects

customer

customer

customer

customer

customer

Log Likelihood

‐207,437

‐72,532

‐33,980

‐19,593

‐10,886

Sample Size

402,258

125,618

56,200

31,336

15,890

This table reports the findings from re‐estimating Equation 2 using QML Poisson with the addition of an
independent variable to control for the number of catalog mailings. The dependent variable measures the number
of core channel orders. The unit of observation is a customer x period. The sample includes all of the customers
living within 150km of the factory store who had made at least one purchase before and after the factory store
entry. We aggregate the data into 2 equal‐length periods: pre‐entry (November 2000 through October 2002) and
post‐entry (November 2002 through October 2004). Standard errors are in parentheses (clustered at the customer
level). **Significantly different from zero, p<0.01. * Significantly different from zero, p<0.05.

25 | P a g e

Table 5
Replication Using Different Length Pre and Post Periods
Stratum 1

Stratum 2

Stratum 3

Stratum 4

Stratum 5

1 year pre
and post

0.110**
(0.029)

0.145**
(0.026)

0.110**
(0.022)

0.086**
(0.022)

0.025
(0.024)

2 years pre
and post

0.154**
(0.022)

0.178**
(0.020)

0.148**
(0.018)

0.129**
(0.017)

0.058**
(0.019)

3 years pre
and post

0.193**
(0.020)

0.200**
(0.018)

0.143**
(0.016)

0.132**
(0.016)

0.064**
(0.017)

4 years pre
and post

0.209**
(0.018)

0.207**
(0.017)

0.153**
(0.015)

0.129**
(0.015)

0.071**
(0.017)

5 years pre
and post

0.212**
(0.017)

0.204**
(0.016)

0.154**
(0.015)

0.130**
(0.015)

0.076**
(0.017)

6 years pre
and post

0.213**
(0.017)

0.200**
(0.016)

0.158**
(0.015)

0.128**
(0.015)

0.081**
(0.017)

This table reports the Open*Adopt interaction coefficients (τ1) when estimating Equation 2 using QML Poisson with
different length pre and post‐entry periods. The dependent variable measures the annual number of core channel
orders. The unit of observation is a customer x period. The sample includes all of the customers living within
150km of the factory store who had made at least one purchase before and after the factory store entry. The data
includes a pre‐entry and a post‐entry period of equal length where the length of the periods varies across the
rows. In all cases the pre‐entry period finishes in October 2002 and the post‐entry period starts in November
2002). Standard errors are in parentheses (clustered at the customer level). **Significantly different from zero,
p<0.01. *Significantly different from zero, p<0.05.

26 | P a g e

Table 6
The Impact of the Factory Store Entry on the Composition of Customers’ Orders
Stratum 1

Stratum 2

Stratum 3

Stratum 4

Stratum 5

Items per Order

0.204**
(0.051)

0.080
(0.043)

0.092*
(0.046)

0.059
(0.053)

0.040
(0.048)

Selling Price

1.072
(0.909)

‐0.224
(0.871)

0.957
(0.825)

‐1.531
(0.819)

‐0.174
(0.812)

% Discounted Items

0.022**
(0.006)

0.026**
(0.006)

0.021**
(0.006)

0.016**
(0.006)

0.010
(0.007)

56,078

31,284

15,868

Sample Size

400,710

125,300

The table reports the Open*Adopt interaction coefficients (τ1) estimated from Equation 4 or each of these three
dependent variables. Standard errors are in parentheses (clustered by customer). The unit of observation is a
customer x period. The sample includes all of the customers living within 150km of the factory store who had
made at least one purchase before and after the factory store entry in the core channel (in the previous tables we
include customers who made at least one pre and post‐entry purchase in any channel). We aggregate the data into
2 equal length periods: pre‐entry (November 2000 through October 2002) and post‐entry (November 2002
through October 2004). **Significantly different from zero, p<0.01. * Significantly different from zero, p<0.05.

27 | P a g e

Table 7
The Impact of the Factory Store Entry on the Number of Orders
Direct Channels versus Retail Stores (Excluding the Factory Store)
Stratum 1

Stratum 2

Stratum 3

Stratum 4

Stratum 5

Retail Stores

0.054
(0.056)

0.082
(0.057)

‐0.056
(0.055)

‐0.023
(0.063)

0.033
(0.082)

Direct Channels

0.092**
(0.021)

0.143**
(0.017)

0.123**
(0.016)

0.102**
(0.016)

0.030
(0.017)

Sample Size

402,258

125,618

56,200

31,336

15,890

The table reports the Open*Adopt interaction coefficients (β1) from estimating Equation 2 using QML Poisson. The
dependent variable measures the annual number of orders from either the retail stores (excluding the factory store) or
the direct channels. The unit of observation is a customer x period. The sample includes all of the customers living
within 150km of the factory store who had made at least one purchase before and after the factory store entry. We
aggregate the data into 2 equal length periods: pre‐entry (November 2000 through October 2002) and post‐entry
(November 2002 through October 2004). Standard errors are in parentheses (clustered at the customer level).
**Significantly different from zero, p<0.01. *Significantly different from zero, p<0.05.

28 | P a g e

Figure 1. Average Annual Change in Order Rate for Adopters (Compared to Non‐Adopters)

25%

20%

% Change in Annual Orders

15%

10%

5%

0%
‐6

‐4

‐2

0
‐5%

2

4

6

Year Relative to Factory Store Entry

‐10%
Stratum 1

Stratum 2

Stratum 3

Stratum 4

Stratum 5

This figure reports the ϒ1t coefficients from Equation 3, which estimate the difference in the annual order rates for
adopters versus non‐adopters of the factory store compared to 2002 (the first year the factory store opened). We
distinguish between customers in the five strata. The sample sizes are 4,884,383, 1,040,982, 452,977, 239,892and
116,004 for the five strata (respectively). All of these customers live within 150 kilometers of the factory store and
made at least one purchase from the firm both before and after the factory opened.

29 | P a g e

Appendix Table A1. Variables Used to Estimate the Propensity for Adopting the Factory Store
Demographics

Historical Purchasing

Other Variables

Age

Pre‐Entry Annual Order Rate

Number of catalog promotions received

Married

Pre‐Entry Order Size

Distance (inversed)

Income

Pre‐Entry Items per Order

Every 2‐way interactions of the variables above

One Child

Pre‐Entry Selling Price

3‐way interaction: Income*Recency*Tenure

Two or more Children

Pre‐Entry % Full Price Paid

Frequency of other retail promotions received

Distance to Factory Store

Pre‐Entry Discount Frequency

Squared terms of each variable

Tenure
Recency
Goodness of Fit
R2 = 0.386
Log likelihood = ‐134,249
Sample size = 815,486
This table lists all of the variables used to estimate Equation 1 (using a logistic model).

30 | P a g e

Appendix Table A2. Demographics and Pre‐Entry Purchasing by Adopters and Non‐Adopters by Strata

Stratum 1

Stratum 2

Stratum 3

Stratum 4

Stratum 5

Non‐
Adopters

Adopters

Non‐
Adopters

Adopters

Non‐
Adopters

Adopters

Non‐
Adopters

Adopters

Non‐
Adopters

Adopters

Age

43.29
(0.01)

43.33
(0.11)

43.03
(0.03)

42.61
(0.11)

42.77
(0.04)

42.04
(0.11)

42.57
(0.06)

41.54
(0.10)

41.67
(0.09)

40.62
(0.10)

Married

0.67
(0.47)

0.70
(0.46)

0.75
(0.43)

0.74
(0.44)

0.77
(0.42)

0.77
(0.42)

0.78
(0.41)

0.79
(0.41)

0.81
(0.39)

0.82
(0.39)

Income

3.63
(0.003)

3.80
(0.03)

4.21
(0.01)

4.31
(0.03)

4.53
(0.01)

4.58
(0.03)

4.78
(0.01)

4.76
(0.03)

5.01
(0.02)

4.98
(0.03)

Number of Children

0.58
(0.91)

0.56
(0.87)

0.59
(0.91)

0.57
(0.89)

0.62
(0.93)

0.63
(0.94)

0.66
(0.95)

0.65
(0.94)

0.78
(1.02)

0.84
(1.03)

94.45
(24.02)

82.90
(21.80)

58.20
(16.43)

56.64
(16.24)

42.71
(13.94)

41.97
(13.98)

30.26
(12.11)

29.28
(11.91)

18.78
(11.23)

16.65
(10.93)

Tenure

5.56
(1.88)

5.70
(1.89)

6.02
(1.80)

5.98
(1.83)

6.17
(1.74)

6.12
(1.77)

6.27
(1.69)

6.26
(1.70)

6.46
(1.61)

6.54
(1.56)

Recency

2.62
(0.002)

2.08
(0.02)

1.46
(0.004)

1.40
(0.02)

1.26
(0.01)

1.25
(0.02)

1. 05
(0.01)

1.02
(0.01)

0.69
(0.01)

0.60
(0.01)

Pre‐Entry Annual Order
Rate

1.03
(1.20)

1.29
(1.41)

1.80
(1.81)

1.82
(1.86)

2.11
(2.05)

2.16
(2.10)

2.36
(2.21)

2.38
(2.21)

3.05
(2.59)

3.31
(2.69)

107.16
(78.59)

111.66
(79.23)

117.76
(70.06)

117.35
(68.76)

122.38
(71.17)

124.56
(70.08)

126.85
(70.05)

127.64
(69.48)

133.15
(69.24)

131.92
(62.71)

Distance to Factory Store

Pre‐Entry Order Size
Pre‐Entry Items per Order

2.53
(0.003)

2.64
(0.023)

2.60
(0.005)

2.63
(0.020)

2.66
(0.007)

2.71
(0.020)

2.70
(0.009)

2.76
(0.021)

2.79
(0.015)

2.76
(0.016)

Pre‐Entry Selling Price

50.08
(28.65)

50.53
(29.98)

49.01
(23.02)

49.44
(28.53)

48.75
(21.94)

49.33
(22.49)

48.43
(20.94)

48.77
(21.12)

47.19
(16.99)

46.82
(17.37)

Pre‐Entry % Discount

0.03
(0.07)

0.04
(0.08)

0.05
(0.08)

0.06
(0.08)

0.06
(0.08)

0.06
(0.08)

0.06
(0.08)

0.06
(0.08)

0.08
(0.08)

0.09
(0.08)

Pre‐Entry Discount
Frequency

0.09
(0.18)

0.11
(0.20)

0.14
(0.20)

0.14
(0.20)

0.16
(0.20)

0.16
(0.20)

0.17
(0.20)

0.17
(0.20)

0.21
(0.21)

0.23
(0.21)

Sample Sizes

379,228

4,471

96,891

4,733

39,342

4,731

18,757

4,731

6,400

4,732

This table compares demographics and pre‐entry purchases from the core channels. Statistics are calculated separately for the adopters and non‐adopters of
the factory store in each stratum, among the existing customers whose demographics are fully observed. Standard errors are in parentheses.

31 | P a g e

Appendix Table A3. Verifying the Identifying Assumption

Stratum 1

Stratum 2

Stratum 3

Stratum 4

Stratum 5

0.154**
(0.022)

0.178**
(0.020)

0.148**
(0.018)

0.129**
(0.017)

0.058**
(0.019)

1994‐1996 and 1996‐1998

0.018
(0.022)

‐0.025
(0.019)

0.040
(0.021)

‐0.020
(0.019)

0.048*
(0.020)

1995‐1997 and 1997‐1999

0.033
(0.020)

‐0.008
(0.018)

0.015
(0.016)

‐0.008
(0.016)

0.013
(0.017)

1996‐1998 and 1998‐2000

0.036
(0.020)

0.035
(0.018)

0.003
(0.016)

‐0.001
(0.016)

0.022
(0.017)

1997‐1999 and 1999‐2001

‐0.011
(0.020)

‐0.030
(0.018)

0.024
(0.018)

‐0.006
(0.017)

0.034
(0.018)

1998‐2000 and 2000‐2002

‐0.024
(0.021)

0.001
(0.018)

0.031
(0.018)

‐0.005
(0.017)

0.048*
(0.019)

Factory Store Opening Event
2000‐2002 and 2002‐2004
Alternative Periods

This table reports the Open*Adopt interaction coefficients (β1) from estimating Equation 2 using QML Poisson. The
dependent variable measures the number of core channel orders. The unit of observation is a customer x period.
The sample includes all of the customers living within 150km of the factory store who had made at least one
purchase before and after the factory store entry. The data period includes the 2 periods: pre and post, where the
dates for each period vary by row. Standard errors are in parentheses (clustered at the customer level).
**Significantly different from zero, p<0.01. * Significantly different from zero, p<0.05.

32 | P a g e

