                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




HOW DOES PROVIDER SUPPLY AND REGULATION INFLUENCE HEALTH CARE MARKET?
      EVIDENCE FROM NURSE PRACTITIONERS AND PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS

                                           Kevin M. Stange

                                        Working Paper 19172
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19172


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2013




 The dataset used in this paper was constructed in collaboration with Dr. Deborah Sampson of the Boston
 College School of Nursing. Helpful feedback was also provided by seminar participants at the RWJ
 Health Policy Scholars 2009 and 2010 Annual Meetings, the University of Michigan (Ford School
 of Public Policy, School of Public Health, Economics Department), the Upjohn Institute, the 2011
 Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management Annual Meeting, the University of Chicago,
 and the 2012 American Society of Health Economists meeting. I am grateful for the excellent research
 assistance provided by Morgen Miller in particular, and also by Phil Kurdunowicz, Jennifer Hefner,
 Sheng-Hsiu Huang, and Irine Sorser. Support from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the University
 of Michigan RWJ HSSP small grant program and the Rackham Spring/Summer Research Grant program
 is gratefully acknowledged. Lastly, I thank Christal Ramos and David Ashner of the AAPA and numerous
 state Boards of Nursing, Medicine, Licensing, and Health for providing data and responding to many
 inquiries and questions. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
 reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2013 by Kevin M. Stange. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
 may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
 the source.
How Does Provider Supply and Regulation Influence Health Care Market? Evidence from
Nurse Practitioners and Physician Assistants
Kevin M. Stange
NBER Working Paper No. 19172
June 2013
JEL No. I11,J44

                                           ABSTRACT

Nurse practitioners (NPs) and physician assistants (PAs) now outnumber family practice doctors in
the United States and are the principal providers of primary care to many communities. Recent growth
of these professions has occurred amidst considerable cross-state variation in their regulation, with
some states permitting autonomous practice and others mandating extensive physician oversight. I
find that expanded NP and PA supply has had minimal impact on the office-based healthcare market
overall, but utilization has been modestly more responsive to supply increases in states permitting
greater autonomy. Results suggest the importance of laws impacting the division of labor, not just
its quantity.


Kevin M. Stange
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
5236 Weill Hall
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
kstange@umich.edu
I.      Introduction

  The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) of 2010 contains a number of provisions

  predicated on the belief that adequate availability of primary care providers is crucial if expanded

  insurance coverage is to translate into greater healthcare access. The ACA calls for a significant

  expansion of the National Health Service Corps (NHSC), more primary care residency positions,

  and increases in Medicare and Medicaid reimbursement for primary care services, among

  others. 1 These provisions of the ACA represent just the latest manifestation of public concern for

  the number, quality, and geographic distribution of healthcare providers in the United States.

  This concern stretches back more than a century, when Flexner’s (1910) conclusion that the

     United States had an oversupply of poorly-trained physicians resulted in a substantial contraction

     in the number of medical schools and new physicians at the start of the 20th century (Blumenthal,

  2004). Subsequent policy attempts to influence the healthcare workforce has taken many forms,

  from funding for graduate medical education via Medicare to the establishment in 1972 of the

  NHSC and its recent expansions through the ACA and the American Recovery and

  Reinvestment Act of 2009.

            A recent development in this old policy issue is the emergence of nurse practitioners

  (NPs) and physician assistants (PAs) as part of the solution. 2 Though around since the 1960s,

  only after experiencing rapid growth in the 1990s have these professions become sizable enough

  to provide a large scale complement or alternative to physician care (Figure 1). With more than

  85,000 PAs and 150,000 NPs eligible to practice, their ranks now exceeds the number of general



  1
    American Association of Medical Colleges (2010) summarizes the workforce provisions of the
  ACA.
  2
    A recent report by the Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured (2011), for instance,
  highlights the potential of NPs and PAs to address the primary care physician shortage.



                                                     2
and family practice MDs and is approaching the number of primary care physicians, estimated to

be about 260,000. 3 In many communities, physician assistants and nurse practitioners are already

the principal providers of primary care and their ranks are projected to grow even further

(Auerbach, 2012).

       Supply growth has occurred against the backdrop of considerable cross-state variation in

what NPs and PAs are permitted to do, with some states permitting autonomous practice while

others mandating extensive physician oversight and collaboration. In fact, one of the four key

messages in a recent Institute of Medicine study was that “nurses should practice to the full

extent of their education and training,” noting that a “variety of historical, regulatory, and policy

barriers have limited nurses’ ability to generate widespread transformation” to the healthcare

system (Institute of Medicine, 2011). Significant occupational restrictions thus may limit the

extent to which expansions in the number of providers has translated into meaningful changes in

healthcare outcomes. Though several states have broadened scope-of-practice laws and expanded

prescriptive authority – innovations that should enable NPs and PAs to operate more

independently from physicians – substantial restrictions on the substitutability of NP and PA for

physician care still remains in many states.

       These workforce and regulatory changes have significantly altered how primary care is

delivered in this country, but the consequences for health care markets have not yet been studied.

Previous research on the effects of physician supply is mostly cross-sectional (limiting causal

inference), has found mixed results, and may not inform the likely effects of NPs and PAs. To

fill this gap, I exploit variation in NP and PA concentration and regulatory environment across

areas and over time, made possible by a newly-constructed panel dataset on the number of

3
 These figures come from the American Academy of Physician Assistants, American Academy
of Nurse Practitioners, and the author’s analysis of the Area Resource File.



                                                  3
licensed NPs and PAs at the county level. I employ two complementary identification strategies

to address the possible endogeneity of NP and PA supply. A county fixed effects approach

exploits within-county variation in provider supply over time while an instrumental variables

approach exploits cross-sectional geographic variation in provider supply that is due to the

historical location of educational infrastructure for training registered nurses and PAs.

       My findings suggest that, on average, greater supply of NPs and PAs has had minimal

impact on utilization, access, use of preventative health care services, or prices. However,

primary care utilization is modestly more responsive to provider supply in states that grant NPs

the greatest autonomy. I find no evidence that increases in provider supply decreases prices, even

for visits most likely to be affected by NPs and PAs: primary care visits in states with a favorable

regulatory environment for NP and PAs. My estimates are sufficiently precise to rule out fairly

small changes in price and utilization. I can rule out increases in the likelihood of having at least

one visit of 0.75 (1.12) percentage points associated with a large 50% increase in NP (PA)

supply and an elasticity of 0.03 (0.08) on the intensive utilization margin. Results using the

county fixed effects and 2SLS approaches are very similar. I also examine the direct effect of

occupational regulation by exploiting changes in state-level prescribing laws over time. I find

that expansions in prescriptive authority for NPs are associated with modest increases in

utilization and expenditure, though no consistent pattern emerges for expansions to PA

prescriptive authority. Neither change appears to consistently reduce visit prices.

       This study is the first to quantify the effects of increased supply of non-physician

clinicians on access, costs, and patterns of utilization for a broad population-based sample.

Previous research has focused on very specific settings or populations or has not accounted for

fixed differences between areas that may be correlated with regulations, provider supply and




                                                  4
  outcomes. Understanding the effects of one of the largest changes in the delivery of healthcare in

  the past few decades is a first-order question for health policy. This paper also represents one of

  the first analyses of the consequences of occupational regulation on output markets. How

  changes in occupational boundaries affect demand for and supply of services as well as prices

  and quality is not well understood. Findings about the impact of scope-of-practice regulations

  have implications for many other sectors, both within and outside of health care, that have seen a

  blurring of occupational boundaries and an increase in licensing. Dental hygienists, paralegals,

  and tax professionals now perform many duties historically performed by dentists, lawyers, and

  accountants. The occupational regulatory environment moderates these shifts in the division of

  labor, but has not been studied extensively.

      The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. The next section provides a brief

  background on NPs and PAs, summarizes related literature, and describes anticipated effects.

  Section III introduces the data, including the new dataset on county-level NP and PA supply and

  state-level regulations that was assembled for this project. Section IV describes my empirical

  strategy. Results are presented in Sections V and VI and Section VII concludes.

II.   Background

   A. Nurse practitioners and physician assistants: background and recent changes

  Nurse practitioners (NPs) and physician assistants (PAs) are health care professionals that

  perform tasks similar to many physicians. Both professions emerged in the 1960s as a way for

  individuals with existing healthcare expertise to provide higher-level care more autonomously to

  underserved areas. NPs are registered nurses (RNs) that have received advanced training which

  permits them to diagnose patients, order and interpret tests, write prescriptions, and provide

  treatment for both acute and chronic illnesses. NPs have typically completed a two-year nurse




                                                   5
practitioner masters program, passed a national exam, and are licensed by state boards of

nursing. NPs practice in settings similar to physicians: doctors’ offices, hospitals, outpatient

clinics, community clinics, or their own practice (in some states). Physician assistants can

perform any duties delegated to them by physicians, though in practice the range of activities

performed by PAs is very similar to NPs. PAs have typically graduated from a two-year PA

program (usually housed in a medical school), passed a national exam, and are licensed by state

boards of medicine.

       Like physicians, NPs and PAs are not evenly distributed across the county, though

historically NPs and PAs are more likely to provide care for the underserved and locate in rural

areas than physicians (Larson et. al, 2003, Grumbach et. al, 2003, and Everett et. al , 2009). For

states with provider supply data available (described in a later section), I estimate that the

number of NPs per primary care physician increased from 0.25 in 1996 to 0.49 in 2008 and the

number of PAs per primary care MD increased from 0.13 to 0.29, though there is considerable

cross- and within-state variability these trends.

       The level of physician supervision or collaboration required of NPs and PAs and their

permitted tasks (referred to as “scope-of-practice” laws) is determined by state law and thus

varies tremendously by state. The West and New England regions are thought to be the most

favorable to non-physician clinicians, but there is variation within regions and across the two

professions (US Health Resources and Service Administration, 2004). Individual state licensing

laws regulating health professions have also been changing in many states to permit NPs and

PAs to practice more independent (Fairman 2008). The ability to write prescriptions is one

important component of independence that has changed dramatically over the past two decades,




                                                    6
as depicted in Figure 2 from 1996 to 2008. Currently NPs and PAs can prescribe at least some

controlled drugs in almost all states, up from 5 and 11, respectively, as recently as 1989.

 Care provided by nurse practitioners and physician assistants is reimbursed by insurers in two

ways (US Department of Health and Human Services, 2011). Reimbursement can be made

directly through these providers’ own National Provider Identifier (NPI), often at a fraction of

the physician reimbursement rate. For instance, Medicare reimburses direct-billed services

provided by NPs and PAs at 85% of the physician rate, as do many private insurers and many

state Medicaid programs (Chapman, Wides, and Spetz, 2010). Alternatively, if NP or PA care is

provided as part of an episode of care provided by a physician, the services can be reimbursed at

100% through the physician’s NPI, which is referred to as reimbursement for NP or PA care

provided “incident-to” physician care. Two key criteria are that the physician must be on-site

when the service is performed and that the physician must treat the patient on the patient’s first

visit, though different payers and states interpret these requirements quite differently. Thus

organizations where the higher rate is sufficient to offset the cost of additional physician

oversight time may find it desirable to bill most NP and PA-provided care through the

physician’s NPI number. There is no dataset that is able to document what fraction of NP- and

PA-provided care is billed under the NPI of an NP/PA, but Skillman et al (2012) estimate that

only 76% of NPs in 2010 had an NPI. This would be an upper bound of the fraction of visits that

are billed through the NP’s NPI (similar estimates for PAs are not available).

 B. Expected effects of non-physician supply and regulation

An expansion of non-physician clinicians could impact the health care market both through

prices and utilization. On the price side, more NPs and PAs may lower prices indirectly by

injecting more competition into the market for primary care services (regardless of provider




                                                  7
type). Economic theory predicts that an increase in the supply of a key input to production

(labor) should lower output prices if markets are competitive. As imperfect substitutes for

physicians, more NPs and PAs could also lower output prices directly by enhancing labor

productivity through a more extensive division of labor. 4 The efficient division of labor is

determined, in part, by coordination costs between workers (Becker and Murphy, 1992), which

may be low if NPs and PAs work collaboratively with physicians. However, the primary care

market is unlikely to be competitive, so increased provider supply could be associated with no

changes or even increases in price if greater NP and PA supply makes consumers’ provider

search more difficult and each providers’ demand curve less elastic (Pauly and Satterthwaite,

1981) or if it shifts bargaining power from insurance companies to health care providers.

       Utilization may also respond to greater provider presence through several channels,

though the combined effect is theoretically ambiguous. Greater supply may increase utilization

for people who previously went without care because they were not able to find a primary care

provider. However, additional non-physician providers may partially "crowd-out" physicians if

physician supply responds to the increased competition. The net effect on provider availability is

likely to be positive, though the magnitude will depend on the extent to which the NPs and PAs

increase the number of primary care providers rather than merely substitute for physicians. There

is also the possibility that NPs or PAs may make more referrals to specialists or that physicians

may substitute to performing more specialized or complex procedures, both of which would

increase the utilization of (more costly) specialist care and increase expenditures. However,

greater use of primary care and NPs’ greater focus on prevention may also reduce the need for

some health services, thus reducing utilization.

4
 Scheffler, Waitzman, and Hillman (1996) estimate that 70-80% of the work done by primary
care physicians could be done by nurse practitioners.



                                                   8
       Since these providers have different training than the physicians they substitute for, the

growth of NPs and PAs may also impact quality of care (either real or perceived). Evidence

suggests that patients treated by NPs have similar outcomes as those treated by physicians, but

some critics still voice concern about non-physicians’ ability to detect rare or severe illnesses. 5

Even if physicians and non-physicians provide care of equal clinical quality, perceived quality

differences between provider types could also lead to changes in utilization as the mix of

providers is altered. Furthermore, NPs are trained in a nursing model which places more

emphasis on prevention and health behavior, and typically spend more time with patients.

Consequently, expanded NP supply may also increase rates of immunization, screening, and

routine checkups. Physician assistants, by contrast, are trained in the medical model and work

closely with physicians, so differences between MDs and PAs on the prevention dimension of

utilization may be smaller.

       Theoretical work on occupational regulation generally concludes that stricter regulation

increases prices, but has ambiguous effects on utilization due to offsetting effects via supply

(regulation restricts supply, reducing quantity) and demand (regulation assures quality and

motivates human capital investment, increasing quantity) (Leland, 1979, Shaked and Sutton,

1981, and Shapiro, 1986). While this theoretical work focused on the strictness of occupational

entry requirements, it is reasonable to apply the result to task regulation as well. Locales that

permit NPs and PAs to perform more tasks independent from physicians should experience

lower prices, but ambiguous effects on utilization.

       Thus a loosening of scope-of-practice laws for NPs and PAs is expected to reinforce

expansions in provider supply. I expect larger effects of non-physician supply on utilization and

5
 See Mundinger et al (2000) and Lenz et al (2004) for the results from one randomized trial and
Horrocks, Anderson, Salisbury (2002) and Laurant et al (2004) for broader reviews.



                                                  9
prices in states that permit NPs and PAs to practice more autonomously, as this allows

production to be closer to the possibilities frontier. A similar logic implies that the effect of

supply will be largest for the tasks (or types of visits) for which NPs, PAs, and physicians are

most substitutable.

    C. Previous research on the effects of provider supply

Previous research has documented the aggregate growth of nurse practitioners and physician

assistants and discussed the importance for primary care delivery, but has not quantified the

consequences. 6 Previous analysis of the effects of provider supply has focused exclusively on

physicians, finding fairly mixed evidence of the relationship between provider supply and

utilization, prices, and expenditure.

         Several studies have found that more primary care physicians is associated with more

primary care visits, less emergency department use, greater use of preventive health measures,

fewer hospitalizations for ambulatory-sensitive conditions (suggesting better primary care

access) and lower mortality (Chang, Stukel, Flood, and Goodman, 2011, Laditka, Laditka, and

Probst, 2004, Guttman et al, 2010, Continelli, McGinnis, and Holmes, 2010). However,

Grumbach, Vranizan, and Bindman (1997) find no such relationship between provider

concentration and self-reported measures of access. These studies examine the relationship

between provider supply and outcomes in a single cross-section and thus might be subject to

omitted variable bias if provider supply is correlated with unobserved demand factors.

     On the expenditure side, Chang et. al. (2011) finds no consistent association between

provider supply and Medicare spending, though Baicker and Chandra (2004a, 2004b) do find



6
 See Cooper, Henderson, and Dietrich (1998), Cooper, Laud, Dietrich (1998), Hooker and
McCaig (2001), Hooker and Berlin (2002), Druss, Marcus, Olfson, Tanielian, Pincus (2003), US
GAO (2008), and Scheffler (2008) for descriptive work on the trends in NPs and PAs.



                                                  10
that areas with more specialist rather than generalist MDs have higher health care expenditures.

Chernew, Sabik, Chandra, and Newhouse (2009) find that a greater concentration of primary

care physicians is not associated with lower spending growth, despite being correlated with

lower spending levels at a point in time. An earlier line of research found a positive association

between physician supply and prices, interpreting it either as evidence of physician-induced

demand or diminished consumer information when physician supply increases (Pauly and

Satterhwaite, 1981). Despite their prevalence, no prior work provides direct estimates of the

market-wide effects of NPs or PAs on healthcare markets.

D. Previous research on occupational regulation

There is also relatively little research on the labor and output market effects of occupational

restrictions. 7 Extant research has focused on the consequence of stricter entry regulations for a

single licensed profession, rarely looking at the effects of regulations delineating the division of

labor between various licensed professions. I am not aware of any previous work that examines

how occupational regulation moderates the growth of input supply to influence output markets.

          Higher entry barriers have typically been associated with higher prices and lower

quantity, though quality effects are mixed. For instance, Kleiner and Kudrle (2000) find that

stricter licensing raises the price of dental services and earnings of dentists, but is not associated

with better oral health. Schaumans and Verboven (2008) find that entry restrictions and regulated

mark-ups for pharmacies result in a welfare loss for consumers by inflating prices and

significantly reducing the number of pharmacies and physicians. Hotz and Xiao (2011) find that

stricter child care regulations reduces supply of child care (particularly in low-income markets),

but also increases the quality of services provided (particularly in higher income markets). Thus



7
    For an overview of the theoretical and empirical literature, see Kleiner (2000 and 2006).



                                                  11
child care regulation creates a tradeoff between higher quality care for high income families but

restricted supply in low income markets.

       Research on laws regulating which functions a licensed profession can do is sparse and

only a handful of studies exploit variation in laws over time to address the potential omitted

variable bias in cross-sectional approaches. 8 Dueker, Jacox, Kalist, and Spurr (2005) find that

greater prescriptive authority for advance practice nurses (APNs) is associated with lower

earnings for APNs and physicians, but higher wages of physician assistants. The present study is

most closely related to Kleiner and Park (2010) and Kleiner, Marier, Won Park, and Wing

(2011), which examine the labor market impact of scope-of-practice regulations for dental

hygienists and NPs, respectively. In the former, the authors find that laws that permit hygienists

to operate independent from dentists increase hygienists’ wages and result in lower wages and

employment growth for dentists. The latter study finds that wages of NPs increase and the price

of well-child visits decreases when NPs were permitted to do more tasks in the mid-2000s.

    These studies suggest that the growth of NP and PA independence (indicated by, for instance,

these professions’ ability to write prescriptions) should have both labor and output market

consequences, but no previous study has explored the output market side extensively. Nor has

the role of occupational regulations in moderating the effects of input supply been examined. 9

Relative to Kleiner, Marier, Won Park, and Wing (2011), the present study examines utilization



8
  White (1978), Adams, Ekelund, and Jackson (2003), and Sass and Nichols (1996) assess the
effects of scope-of-practice laws on several health professions. They find mixed evidence on
wages and utilization, though each exploits cross-area variation in a single cross-section, so they
are unable to control for omitted factors that may be correlated with both laws and outcomes.
9
  Several studies suggest that a favorable practice environment is correlated with the supply of
non-physician clinicians, including NPs and PAs. See Sekscenski et. al. (1992), Cooper,
Henderson, and Dietrich (1998), US DHHS (2004), and Weston (1980) for cross-sectional
evidence. In a longitudinal study, Kalist and Spurr (2004) found that more favorable state laws
do encourage more people to enter advance practice nursing in the 1990s.



                                                12
    and access, focuses on the interactive effects of provider supply and regulation, and looks at a

    much broader set of health care outcomes.

III.      Data

    A. New data on health care providers and regulations

    A huge barrier to research on NPs and PAs has been a lack of data on the number of these

    providers at the sub-national level over time. To fill this gap, in collaboration with Deborah

    Sampson from Boston College School of Nursing, I assembled a new dataset containing the

    number of licensed nurse practitioners and physician assistants at the county level annually for

    the years 1990-2008 using individual licensing records obtained from relevant state agencies.

    The years for which data is available varies across states, so our county panel is unbalanced: NP

    and PA supply data is available for 23 states covering 52% of the U.S. population in 1996, but

    increases to 35 states covering 80% in 2008. 10 Data on the number of primary care physicians

    was obtained from the Area Resource File. Throughout I refer to all general practice, family

    practice, generalist pediatric, general internal medicine, and general obstetrician/gynecologist

    physicians as “primary care” and include only these providers in our measures of physician

    supply.

          Occupational regulations in each state are characterized in two ways. First, I quantify the

    overall practice environment for NPs and PAs in the state at a single point in time (2000) using

    an index constructed by the Health Services Resource Administration (HRSA, 2004). This index

    ranks states separately for NPs and PAs along three dimensions: (1) legal standing and

    requirement for physician oversight/collaboration on diagnosis and treatment; (2) prescriptive

    authority (type of drugs, requirements for MD oversight); (3) reimbursement policies (e.g.



    10
         Appendix A describes the data collection in more detail.



                                                      13
Medicaid reimbursement rates and requirements for private insurers). These three dimensions are

then combined into a single index with a possible range from zero to one. 11 This time-invariant

index is used to assess whether outcomes are more responsive to NP and PA supply in areas with

more favorable environments for these providers. To be able to assess the direct effect of

regulation on outcomes (rather than the indirect effect via supply responsiveness), as a second

measure I also constructed indicators for whether nurse practitioners and physician assistants are

permitted to write prescriptions for any controlled substances in a given state and year.

Prescriptive authority is one aspect of provider regulation that has seen considerable change over

the past two decades and is also cleanly measured across years in my sample period.

B. Outcomes

I study the health care experience of participants in thirteen waves of the Household Component

of the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) from 1996 to 2008. The MEPS is a 2 year

panel of households drawn from the National Health Interview Survey, which I treat as a

repeated cross-section in each year. Characteristics of respondents' county and state were

merged onto the MEPS files using individuals’ state and county FIPS codes. 12 Since historical

data on NP and PA supply could only be constructed for some states and for some years, the

final dataset has 293,100 person-year observations (compared to 404,400 for all state-years),

though the analysis sample is slightly smaller due to missing values for some key covariates.



11
   The weights for the three components differ slightly by provider type. NP index = 35% legal,
35% reimbursement, 30% prescribing. PA index = 35% legal, 25% reimbursement, 40%
prescribing. The total indices range from 0.43 (South Carolina) to 0.94 (New Mexico) for NPs
and 0.37 (Ohio) to 0.94 (North Carolina) for PAs. Appendix A describes these indices in more
detail.
12
   Geographic identifiers are not part of the public-use MEPS files, so this merging was
performed by AHRQ and all subsequent analysis was conducted under security protocols at the
Michigan Census Research Data Center. Reported sample sizes are rounded to the nearest
hundred to conform to Census Research Data Center confidentiality protocols



                                                14
       Summary statistics are presented in Appendix B. On average, individuals in the sample

live in counties with 90 primary care physicians, 30 NPs, and 17 PAs per 100,000 population.

Seventy-nine (seventy-three) percent live in states that permit NPs (PAs) to write prescriptions

for controlled substances. On average they make 2.8 office-based health care visits per year, with

62% having at least one. Approximately half of these visits are for primary care whose total

expenditure (from all payers) is $153 per year (in 2010 dollars, including those with zero

expenditure). 13 Similar to the national trend, the NP and PA to population ratios for my sample

more than doubled from 1996 to 2008. Despite these extreme changes in the health care

workforce, there has been surprisingly little change in most measures of office-based health care

utilization during this time period.

       To assess the price impact of workforce and regulatory changes, I pool the MEPS office-

based medical provider visits files from 1996 to 2008. The visits files contain a separate

observation for each visit, call, or interaction with office-based health care providers by MEPS

participants during the survey period. I restrict the sample to visits to physicians, nurse or nurse

practitioners, or physician assistants and also exclude visits categorized as for mental health,

maternity, eye exam, laser eye surgery, or other reasons. After these restrictions, my analysis

sample includes 803,200 visits by individuals living in counties for which physician, nurse

practitioner, and physician assistant supply data is available in the survey year.

       One limitation of the MEPS visits data is that visits to NPs and PAs are often classified as

physician visits due to question framing and misreporting and physician specialty is only

available since 2002. 14 Therefore I do not look extensively at visit provider type as reported in



13
  All dollar variables have been adjusted for inflation using the CPI-U and are in 2010 dollars.
14
  As described by Morgan et. al. (2007), the MEPS underreports care by NPs and PAs because
only visits during which a physician is not ever seen are further categorized by type of non-



                                                 15
  MEPS, and instead focus on market-level effects across all provider types. In order to identify

  visits that are potentially most affected by NP and PA supply growth and regulation, for each

  visit I construct a measure of the predicted likelihood that the visit would be to a primary care

  provider, given observed individual and visit-level characteristics. The most common high

  likelihood visits includes flu shots, no condition checkups, and visits for a sore throat. 15

      Twenty percent of visits are unrelated to a specific medical condition and relatively few

   include any specific treatment or service. The vast majority of visits are categorized as general

   check-ups, well-child exams, or for the diagnosis/treatment of a specific condition. I estimate

   that the average visit has a 51% likelihood of being to a primary care provider which implies that

   in expectation, slightly more than half of office-based visits are for primary care. The average

   visit costs $119 across all years, with visit charges approximately $100 more.

IV.   Empirical Approach

   A. Fixed effects specification

   To estimate the causal effect of NP and PA supply and its interaction with the regulatory

   environment on health care access, utilization, and expenditure, I estimate the following

   regression model using OLS:

                              y=
                               ijt β1NPjt + β 2 PAjt + β x X ijt + β z Z jt + δ j + δ t + ε ijt         (1)

  where yijt is an outcome (number of visits, total expenditure, have usual source of care, etc) for

  individual i in county j at time t. 16 As measures of provider concentration (NPjt and PAjt ) I use



  physician (NPs or PAs) and because respondents tend to over report the presence of physicians at
  visits.
  15
     Appendix A describes this procedure in more detail.
  16
     Medical expenditure and utilization is right skewed with a long right tail and a large mass at
  zero, which can cause simple OLS estimates to be miss-specified and imprecise (Jones 2000). I
  separately analyze the extensive and intensive margins of utilization and expenditure using OLS,
  taking the log of right-skewed outcomes and omitting persons with zero visits from the intensive



                                                            16
the log of the number of NPs and PAs per 100,000 population in area j at time t. 17 Fixed and

time varying factors at the individual level, such as income category, age, race, insurance type,

and self-reported health status are controlled for with Xijt. To control for fixed unobserved

determinants of outcomes across areas and over time that may be correlated with NP/PA

concentration or practice indices, I also include county and year fixed effects δj and δt. The

vector Ζjt controls for time-varying factors at the county level that may be correlated with both

provider supply and outcomes. In this vector, most specifications control for the number of

primary care physicians per capita, to account for the possible crowd-out of physicians by greater

NP and PA presence. In practice, I find little evidence of crowd-out or crowd-in, so the results

are insensitive to whether physician supply is included. My preferred specification also controls

for state-specific linear time trends and a host of time-invariant county characteristics (measured

at baseline) interacted with linear time trends. Some specifications also control for the predicted

number of non-primary-care doctor visits made by an individual in the survey year. εijt is an error

term that is assumed to be uncorrelated with all the right hand side variables. 18

       The key parameters of interest are β1 and β2, the change in outcome y associated with a

one unit increase in NP or PA concentration, holding the included control variables constant. In

order to quantify the effect of state regulation on the responsiveness of outcomes to supply, I let

these parameters vary with the state practice index in state s in 2000. The coefficients on the

margin analysis. Marginal effects and standard errors are nearly identical when binary outcomes
are estimated using a logit model (instead of OLS) and results are qualitatively very similar if the
intensive and extensive margins of utilization are estimated together using a Poisson or negative
binomial count model.
17
   This log specification imposes heterogeneity of treatment effect by treatment intensity. For
instance, counties whose NP/pop ratio increases from 1 to 2 are assumed to have a larger change
in the outcome than a county whose NP/pop ratio increases from 40 to 41.
18
   To allow for the possibility of correlated errors among people sharing a similar regulatory
regime, standard errors are clustered by state in all analysis. Clustering by county produces
standard errors that are comparable.



                                                 17
index interaction terms represent differences in outcome response to increased provider supply

between states that are fully supportive of NP and PA independent practice and those whose

regulatory environment is completely restrictive. For example, if additional NP supply only

results in greater utilization if NPs are permitted wide autonomy to practice, then this term will

be positive and significant. 19

        To estimate effects on the prices of basic health care services, I estimate a similar

regression model using OLS:

                       y=
                        mijt β1NPjt + β 2 PAjt + βQQmijt + β x X ijt + β z Z jt + δ j + δ t + ε mijt   (2)

where ymijt is the log price of visit m made by individual i in county j at time t. In addition to the

control variables used in (1), some specifications also include visit-specific characteristics, Qmijt,

such as indicators for specific treatments or services provided during the visit, fixed effects for

conditions (if any) associated with the visit, or the predicted likelihood that a visit is primary

care. εmijt is an error term that is assumed to be uncorrelated with all the right hand side variables.

In order to permit the price response to additional supply to vary between types of visits and with

the state practice environment, I also interact provider supply with predicted likelihood of

primary care, the state practice index, and with both simultaneously. If NPs and PAs have a

greater (negative) price effect on visits that are the most substitutable for primary care physicians

or in states permitting greater autonomy of NPs and PAs, then the coefficients on these

interactions should be negative.




19
  An alternative interpretation of index interaction terms, which I cannot rule out, is response
heterogeneity by baseline provider supply level as areas with more favorable NP and PA practice
environments also tend to have more of these providers (Sekscenski et. al., 1992).



                                                           18
        To examine the direct effect of occupational regulations on outcomes, rather than the

indirect effect that operates through provider supply, I also estimate OLS regressions of the

form:

                        =y ijt β1NPLaw st + β 2 PALaw st + β x X ijt + β z Z jt + δ j + δ t + ε ijt
                                                                                                      (3)

where most variables are defined as before, but now NPLawst (PALawst) is an indicator variable

that equals one if state s permits NPs (PAs) to prescribe any controlled substances in year t.

Identification of the parameters of interest now comes from changes in laws within states over

time. Since changes in laws may also correlate with provider supply growth, some specifications

also include the log of the number of NPs and PAs per 100,000 population in area j at time t.

B. Identification challenges with fixed effects specification

The first concern with the OLS approach described above is that changes in NP or PA

concentration or laws may be correlated with other determinants of health care outcomes,

causing biased estimates of β . Table 1 identifies the observable factors that predict variation in

provider supply across areas and over time. Estimates are from population-weighted regressions

of county-level provider supply on fixed county characteristics and these characteristics

interacted with time (linearly). Cross-sectional variation in provider supply is much more highly

correlated with observable county characteristics than provider growth. In fact, several of the

strongest predictors of the level of provider density (number of MDs, HMO penetration, and

industry mix) are not predictive of NP or PA supply growth. Nonetheless, provider growth did

occur differentially between areas with different demographics and economic circumstances.

For this reason, the preferred specification includes separate linear trends for each state and

linear trends that vary with these time-invariant county characteristics. These linear trends

eliminate bias resulting from areas with, for example, high poverty rates (or HMO penetration)




                                                       19
having lower utilization growth and lower NP growth, for example. It should be noted that time-

invariant area characteristics – such as the high concentration of NPs and PAs in rural areas

which may have low prices – are not a source of bias when county fixed effects are included in

the model, though this basic source of bias is present is most of the previous work discussed

earlier. More problematic for my approach is if changes in provider supply or laws are correlated

with unobservable, time-varying factors. For example, increasing demand may increase prices

and also attract more practitioners. This would cause a positive bias in the estimated effect of

provider supply on price, which may even suggest that expanded supply increases price.

Alternatively, increasing demand may lead to higher utilization and also attract more

practitioners, creating a positive bias in the estimated effect of provider supply on access. The

fixed effects model addresses this source of bias in so far as the presence of observed medical

conditions (which is controlled for) is associated with increased demand, but I am not able to

rule out the contribution of changes in unobserved demand factors.

       Legislative endogeneity is a specific form of time-varying omitted variable bias when

looking at the direct effect of practice environment via equation (3). State (or county) fixed

effects will absorb any fixed differences between states that correlate with the timing of

adoption, such as the tendency of states with high demand for health care to pass prescribing

laws earlier in the sample period. However, if prescribing laws are changed as a consequence of

time-varying factors within states, such as increased political power of nurse groups or atypical

health care needs, then the model may be picking up the consequences of these trending factors

rather than changes in the laws themselves. I cannot rule this possibility out, but I will note that

many of these legislative changes are the end result of a long series of political battles fought




                                                 20
between groups over many years or decades (Iglehart, 2013) and so the precise timing of passage

is likely driven by idiosyncratic political factors rather than specific health care needs.

   A second concern is measurement error in the measures of provider supply. Some research

suggests that county may not be the best geographic level to measure the number of health care

providers (Rosenthal, Zaslavsky, and Newhouse, 2005). Classical measurement error will

attenuate estimates towards zero. The main results are robust to using workforce supply and

fixed effects at the Health Service Area level (an aggregation of counties in the same state) rather

than county. Unfortunately the MEPS does not contain geographic information below the county

level, so I am unable to explore more localized measures of provider availability. Error may also

be present in the measure of physician density, as reporting errors and delays are common in the

AMA Masterfile, the source of physician data in the Area Resource File (Staiger, Auerbach, and

Buerhaus, 2009; Freed, Nahra, Wheeler, 2006). Thus changes in physician density may not be

adequately controlled for in the analysis.

   A third concern relates to the possible endogeneity of NP and PA practice autonomy in

specifications that interact provider supply with practice indices. These models assume that NP

and PA practice indices are uncorrelated with other determinants of the responsiveness of

demand to provider supply. This assumption would be violated if states with the most pent up

demand (which are likely to be highly responsive to provider supply) are more likely to grant

autonomy to NPs and PAs. I am unable to test for pent-up demand, but this source of bias would

cause me to overstate the effect of NP and PA autonomy on responsiveness to supply.

C. Instrumental variables specification

To address some of these concerns, I also exploit cross-sectional variation in NPjt and PAjt

induced by proximity to historical relevant training infrastructure in a two stage least squares




                                                  21
     (2SLS) framework. I instrument for NPjt and PAjt using the number of bachelor’s RN programs

     in the county in 1963 and the number of PA programs in the county in 1975 per 100,000 current

     population as excluded instruments. Two conditions must hold for 2SLS to provide consistent

     estimates of β1 and β2. First, the excluded instruments must affect provider supply (the

     “relevance” condition), which is testable and discussed later. Second, provider supply must be

     the only channel through which the instruments affect (or are correlated with) the outcomes (the

     “exclusion” assumption). While not testable, I argue that this assumption is plausible in this

     setting. A bachelor’s RN degree is a prerequisite for NP training, though most RN training

     programs only granted diplomas in the early 1960s and subsequent demand for nurses was

     primarily met through Associates degree programs. While the demand for healthcare may be

     correlated with the presence of any RN training program, there is little reason to believe that it

     should be correlated with the specific type of RN training program given that graduates of all

     programs take the same licensure test and jobs upon graduation. The PA instrument is analogous

     to comparing counties that were the earliest to train PAs with other counties, since the first wave

     of PA programs were nationally certified in the early 1970’s. 20 The 2SLS specification exploits a

     completely different source of variation in provider supply than the fixed effects specification

     and also possibly eliminates attenuation bias caused by provider supply measurement error.

V.        Fixed Effects Results

     A. Utilization

     Table 2 examines the relationship between provider supply and utilization. I first examine total

     provider supply, before distinguishing by provider type. Though total provider supply is weakly

     positively correlated with the likelihood of having any office-based visits, this correlation is

     20
       The first program was started at Duke University in North Carolina in the 1960s as a means to
     integrate returning navy corpsman with medical experience into the civilian healthcare system.



                                                      22
diminished somewhat (and loses statistical significance) once individual characteristics, fixed

county characteristics, and linear time trends are controlled for in column (2). Separating

physicians from non-physician providers (column 3) and separating all three types of providers

(column 4) gives a qualitatively similar result: provider supply has minimal relationship with

office-based health care utilization, either on the extensive or intensive margin. The point

estimates from the preferred specification (4) suggests that a 10% increase in the NP to

population ratio is associated with a 0.03 percentage point decrease in the fraction of individuals

having at least one office-based provider visit. The precision of the estimates permits me to rule

out positive effects greater than 0.75 percentage points associated with even a large 50% increase

in NP density (i.e. moving from the sample average of 62.30% to 63.05%) or effects larger than

1.12 percentage points for a similar increase in PA density. On the intensive margin, the point

estimates imply an elasticity of office-based visits with respect to provider supply of 0.001 for

NPs and 0.03 for PAs, with the confidence interval ruling out elasticities greater than 0.032 and

0.076, respectively. 21

        Columns (5) and (6) examine the robustness to different sets of controls. Column (5) only

includes individual person-level controls and county fixed effects. Results are similar in

magnitude, precision, and fit to the model with extensive time trends, suggesting my null results

are not driven by over-controlling for temporal variation. Column (6) does not control for

physician supply. One channel through which changes to NP and PA supply could operate is

though a displacement effect on physician supply. Comparisons between specifications (4) and

(6) highlight the importance of this displacement channel. In fact, the point estimates on NP and



21
  Marginal effects implied by Poisson and Negative Binomial count models are similar, as are
the elasticities implied by OLS estimates from a model using total number of visits (including
zeros) as the outcome variable. These results are presented in Table B5 in the appendix.



                                                23
PA supply are nearly identical with or without controlling for physician supply, so physician

displacement does not appear to be important.

       To address the possibility of omitted variable bias due to time-varying area characteristics

and measurement error attenuation bias, column (7) presents two-stage least squares (2SLS)

estimates that exploit cross-sectional variation in provider supply induced by proximity to the

historical training infrastructure. Greater bachelors RN program density in the 1960s is

associated with greater NP supply (but not PA supply) today, while the opposite is true for the

density of PA schools in 1975. 22 It is reassuring that cross-instrument effects are minimal (e.g.

bachelors RN program density does not correlate with PA supply), which would be the case if

latent healthcare demand was correlated with both RN and PA school location and provider

supply. For both measures of utilization, the 2SLS point estimates for NP supply are larger (and

more positive) and less precise than the fixed effects estimates, though they are never

significantly different from zero or from the fixed effects estimates. For PA supply, the 2SLS

point estimates are negative and never significantly different from zero or from the fixed effects

estimates. The point estimates imply that a 10% increase in the NP to population ratio is

associated with a 0.4 percentage point increase in the fraction of individuals having at least one




22
  Table B7 in the appendix presents the first stage relationships between provider supply and
these instruments. The F-statistics on the excluded instruments are 8.8 and 11.5 for NP and PA
supply, respectively. As the NP F-statistic is not above the rule-of-thumb value of 10, some
caution is warranted. Controlling for physician supply weakens the relationship further and
reduces the F-statistics such that 2SLS estimates may be biased due to weak instruments.
However, physician supply may control for unobserved determinants of demand that happen to
correlate with training infrastructure (making the exclusion assumption more plausible). Given
that the fixed effect analysis showed no relationship between physician supply and outcomes, the
preferred specification omits physician supply. Results are qualitatively similar when controls for
contemporaneous physician supply and the historical presence of other types of RN programs are
included (presented in Appendix Table B8).



                                                 24
office-based provider visit (95% CI: -0.08 to +0.89 percentage points) and an intensive-margin

elasticity of 0.051 (-0.061 to +0.163).

       Critics of current state practice laws argue that a restrictive practice environment limits

the ability of non-physician providers to practice to the fullest extent of their training, limiting

the substitutability between physician and non-physician care. Tables 3 and 4 address this issue

by examining the importance of regulatory environment to the relationship between utilization

and provider supply. Positive point estimates on the supply-index interactions do suggest that

utilization is more (positively) responsive to provider supply in more NP and PA-friendly states.

However, at the extensive margin (column (1)), neither interaction is significant at the 5% level

and I cannot reject that the extensive margin response to supply is equal to zero even in the most

favorable practice environments. On the extensive margin (column (2)), the estimates imply an

elasticity of 0.08 for both NP and PA supply in states with the most favorable environments.

Columns (3) and (4) examine the determinants of primary care visits. This variable is constructed

by summing the predicted likelihood that each visit is a primary care visit across all visits made

by each individual. The estimated total number of non-primary care visits, analyzed in columns

(5) and (6), is constructed similarly. Across all areas, the average response of both types of visit

to provider supply is minimal. However, the number of primary care visits is more responsive to

NP supply in states that permit NPs greater autonomy than those with restrictive environments

(column (4)). Since we may expect that additional providers have a greater impact for certain

patient segments, I also examined utilization separately by type of insurance coverage. I find no

evidence that provider supply is more important for the two groups most likely to face access

problems (Medicaid recipients and the uninsured), though practice environment estimates are




                                                  25
imprecise. 23 For most of these subpopulations, the conditional correlation between provider

supply and utilization is small and statistically insignificant, as are the coefficients on the

practice environment interactions.

          Table 4 presents estimates that separate the practice index into its three components:

reimbursement policies, legal restrictions on practice, and prescriptive authority. These

specifications replace the overall index (a weighted average of these three components) with the

component-specific indices one-by-one. Positive coefficients on the interactions between NP

supply and the prescriptive authority and legal standing indices suggest these are the components

of the NP index (rather than reimbursement parity) that explain its importance to NP supply

effects. The patterns for the components of the PA index are broadly consistent, though all these

results should be interpreted cautiously, as estimates are imprecise.

          Estimates suggest that provider concentration – whether NPs or PAs – has minimal

impact on utilization (both extensive and intensive margin) once time-invariant area

characteristics and linear time trends are controlled for. The estimates are sufficiently precise that

I can rule out increases in the likelihood of having at least one visit of 0.75 (1.12) percentage

points associated with a 50% increase in NP (PA) supply and an elasticity of 0.03 (0.08) on the

intensive utilization margin. However, utilization does appear to be more responsive to NP

supply changes in states that permit these non-physician clinicians greater autonomy, particularly

in the realm of prescriptive authority.

B. Prices

Theory predicts that an expansion of the supply and autonomy of NPs and PAs should reduce

prices in the market for services for which they provide the greatest substitute for physician care.



23
     See Tables B6 in the Appendix for these results.



                                                  26
Table 5 reports estimates of equation (2) where log of visit price is the dependent variable. The

table presents two alternative measures of price: total charges for the visit and total amount paid

by all sources (different types of insurance, out-of-pocket, etc.). Since amount paid is largely

dictated by reimbursement rates set by Medicare and other insurers, it may not take competitive

pressures into account, limiting observed price responsiveness. Providers are free to set charges

as they wish, which may make them more responsive to market forces. On the other hand,

charges are an imperfect measure of resource-allocating price since they are not fully paid.

Encouragingly, results are qualitatively similar using either measure of price.

       Visit prices and provider supply are very weakly positively correlated in the raw data

(column 1). However, if NPs and PAs have expanded in areas with rising demand for care due to

increased health needs, then this could create a positive omitted variable bias between visit prices

and NP or PA concentration. Column (2) controls for individual characteristics, indicators for 20

different treatments or procedures performed during the visit, and the estimated likelihood that

the visit is to a primary care provider, based on person demographics, the type of visit, and

associated conditions. The estimates suggest that primary care visits are predicted to cost 40%

less than visits that can only be performed by specialists. This control has little effect on the

estimated price elasticities, which remain small and insignificant. 24

       Since many visits are to specialist physicians, we may not expect there to be large price

impacts of greater availability of nurse practitioners and physician assistants, who work largely

in primary care. We would expect to see the largest price effects on visits for which NP and PA

care is the most substitutable for physician care. Specification (3) explores this possibility by

interacting NP and PA supply with the estimated likelihood that a given visit is primary care.

24
  Including fixed effects for one of 600 clinical conditions (or none) associated with the visit
instead of the predicted likelihood the visit is primary care produces similar results.



                                                  27
Negative point estimates on these interactions would suggest that the prices respond more

(negatively) to expanded provider supply for visits that are more likely to be to a primary care

(rather than specialist) provider. This pattern is not seen in the data. Greater NP supply is

associated with a positive price change for visits that are likely to be primary care, compared to

an insignificant zero or negative change for non-primary care visits. Point estimates for PA

supply are indeed negative and approaching statistical significance in some specifications,

though still very small. The pattern is unchanged regardless of whether total charges or total

amount paid (column 4) is used as the measure of price. Figure 3 applies this approach even

more flexibly. I estimate equation (2) separately for twenty quantiles of predicted probability of

primary care. There is no obvious relationship between the estimated price elasticity and

predicted likelihood of being a primary care visit. At all ranges of visit types, from general

check-ups (high likelihood of being primary care) to cancer diagnosis (low likelihood), the

estimated price elasticity bounces around zero. This is true both for NP and PA supply and

regardless of how price is measured. Columns (5) to (8) probe the robustness of this null result.

Column (5) excludes respondents with Medicare or Medicaid insurance coverage, whose prices

may be less subject to market forces, as reimbursement rates are set by the Medicare and

Medicaid programs. These results are indistinguishable from the preferred specification in

column (3). Columns (6) and (7) examine two common types of visits expected to be easily

performed by NPs and PAs: regular check-ups and well-child exams with no associated medical

conditions. Again, provider supply has minimal association with price. Column (8) presents

2SLS estimates that exploit cross-sectional variation in provider supply induced by proximity to

the historical training infrastructure, as was done previously to examine utilization. 25 The 2SLS



25
     The excluded instruments are the number of bachelor’s RN programs in the county in 1963



                                                 28
results are very consistent with the fixed effects estimates: provider supply has minimal effect on

visit prices overall, though the 2SLS estimates are much less precise. 26

       The final two columns of Table 5 permit the price elasticity to vary with predicted

likelihood of being primary care, state practice environment index, and their interaction. If there

is to be any significant price effect, we may expect to find it among visits for which provider

type is highly substitutable and state laws are the least restrictive. Even for this specific group of

visits, the estimated price elasticity is wrong-signed or very small: +0.06 for NP supply and -

0.06 for PA supply, though the latter is statistically significant. Overall, it appears that provider

supply has minimal impact on visit price, even for services expected to be easily shifted from

physician to non-physician care.

C. Expenditure on office-based visits

   Table 6 examines the impact of NP and PA supply on health care expenditure for total office-

based provider visits. 27 Expenditure tends to be positively (though insignificantly) correlated

with provider supply, even after the preferred set of controls (individual characteristics,

physician supply, linear time trends, county fixed effects) are included. Across all individuals

and areas, the point estimates imply an (insignificant) 0.032% increase in expenditure associated

with a 1% increase in PA supply and an (insignificant) 0.003% increase associated with a

similarly-sized expansion of NP supply. Point estimates of expenditure elasticities are largest for

NP supply and Medicaid recipients and PA supply and the uninsured. Though most of the



and the number of PA programs in the county in 1975 per 100,000 current population. First stage
estimates are presented in Table B7.
26
   I also constructed 2SLS estimates separately by quintile of predicted likelihood of being made
to a primary care provider. Even for visits that NPs and PAs would be expected to be the most
substitutable for physician care, there is no evidence of price impacts of greater NP or PA
supply. See Appendix Table B9.
27
   Extensive margin effects are very similar to those reported in Table 2 for total visits.



                                                  29
practice index interactions are positive, none of the elasticities implied by the point estimates for

the most NP- and PA-favorable states are significant at conventional levels.

D. Qualitative measures of access, preventive care, and health

   Even if broad measures of utilization and expenditure are unresponsive to expanded NP and

PA supply and scope-of-practice, it is possible that these changes alter individuals’ interaction

with the health system or the nature of the care they receive. Table 7 presents OLS estimates of

equation (1) with an indicator for several other health care and health outcomes as the dependent

variables. Columns (1) and (2) examine whether the individual has a “usual source of care,” the

one qualitative measure of access that was consistently assessed in the MEPS through the entire

analysis period. Twenty-two percent of my sample does not have a usual source of care. When

only year fixed effects are controlled for, a greater number of providers of either type is

associated with an increased likelihood of have having a usual source of care. However, this

pattern seems to be driven by county and individual characteristics that differ across areas, since

this relationship is greatly diminished with controls. Specification (2) controls for changes in

population characteristics that may be correlated both with provider concentration and access,

fixed county characteristics, and linear time trends by state and county characteristic. The point

estimates are also small in magnitude: I can rule out an increase in the likelihood of having a

usual source of care of 0.3 percentage points associated with a 10% increase in NP or PA supply.

   Columns (3) through (8) examine the relationship between provider supply and several

important preventive care outcomes. Greater availability of non-physician clinicians, particularly

nurse practitioners, may expand the use of preventive care services both due to greater provider

availability to perform low-value (e.g. poorly reimbursed) services and also because nurse

practitioners’ training emphasize prevention. Estimates suggest that a greater supply of non-




                                                 30
physician clinicians is not associated with a greater likelihood of getting a flu shot, checking

blood pressure or cholesterol, having a breast exam, or having a pap smear in the past 12 months.

The final column examines whether respondents report being in very good or excellent health.

The relationship between this measure of health and provider supply is positive, but very weak

and insignificant. 28

VI.     Direct impact of regulation

     This paper is primarily concerned with how the regulatory environment moderates the effect

of increases in NP and PA supply on various outcomes. Though provider supply has a relatively

weak association with utilization and access, I do find that provider supply is more positively

correlated with utilization in states that permit NPs to be more substitutable for physicians. That

is, there is some evidence that this form of occupational regulation weakly impacts the healthcare

market by moderating the effects of provider supply. It is also possible that the regulatory

environment has a direct impact on these same outcomes. The previous analysis controlled for

the direct effect of states’ regulatory environment (at a point in time) through the inclusion of

county fixed effects. In order to quantify the direct impact of the regulatory environment while

still controlling for cross-sectional differences between areas that may be correlated with

regulation and health care outcomes, I exploit changes in one component of regulation –

prescriptive authority – within states over time.

     Table 8 presents estimates of models that regress health care utilization, access, prices, and

expenditure on time-varying indicators for whether NPs and PAs are permitted to write

28
   In results not reported here, I also find that the coefficients on interactions between provider
supply and NP and PA state practice indices are insignificant for all these outcomes. The direct
and interactive effects are also small and insignificant for all insurance subgroups for the
likelihood of having a usual source of care. Lastly, 2SLS estimates of these outcomes are all
insignificant with mixed signs (some positive, some negative), though much less precise than the
fixed effects estimates reported here.



                                                    31
prescriptions for controlled substances, controlling for state fixed effects and individual

characteristics. Since information about prescriptive authority is available for all states and years,

these models use nearly the entire sample of individuals in the MEPS. The even rows

additionally control separately for the log of number of NPs, PAs, and primary care physicians.

Changes in provider supply may be part of the causal effect of changes in practice environment

(Kalist and Spurr, 2004), so these specifications isolate any effects that operate through other

channels (and could reduce bias if the correlation between provider supply and laws is spurious).

When examining price of individual visits, these models also include controls for all procedures

and treatments provided during the visit and indicators for one of 600 conditions associated with

the visit (including none).

    I find that granting NPs the ability to prescribe has a very modest impact on the intensive

utilization margin: NP prescriptive authority is associated with 3% more visits conditional on

having at least one. For PAs, the opposite is true: granting PAs the ability to prescribe is actually

associated with 5% fewer visits conditional on having at least one, though this result is sensitive

to whether supply is controlled for. Expansive NP prescriptive authority is positively associated

with increases in the likelihood of having at least one visit, but this is statistically

insignificant.NP prescriptive authority is modestly associated with greater visit charges, though

this does not translate into greater prices paid. PA prescriptive authority is not associated with

changes in visit prices by either measure. Thus, permitting NPs and PAs to do more also does not

appear to create price pressure on office-based visits. Given the minimal price impact of the

regulation, the patterns for expenditure follow those for utilization pretty closely. There is a

positive, though modest, association between NP prescriptive authority and expenditure (both on

the extensive and intensive margin). Together these results suggest that changes in NP and PA




                                                   32
prescriptive authority – one key component of the overall regulatory environment – have only

modest impact on the market for health care services.

VII.   Discussion and Conclusion

    This paper is the first to assess the output market effects of the enormous increase in supply

of nurse practitioners and physician assistants, the interaction of this growth with occupational

restrictions, and an expansion of these providers’ scope-of-practice. My findings suggest that,

across all areas, greater supply of NPs and PAs has had minimal impact on utilization, access,

preventative health services, and prices. However, primary care utilization is moderately

responsive to NP provider supply in areas that grant non-physician clinicians the greatest

autonomy to practice independently. I find no evidence that increases in provider supply

decreases prices, even for visits most likely to be affected by NPs and PAs: primary care visits in

states with a favorable regulatory environment for NP and PAs. I also find that expansions in

prescriptive authority for NPs are associated with modest increases in utilization and

expenditure, though no consistent pattern emerges for expansions to PA prescriptive authority.

Neither change appears to consistently reduce visit prices.

    The results of this paper suggest that even considerable changes in the nature of who is

providing health care can result in only modest changes in important outcomes such as access,

overall utilization, prices, and expenditure. There is also suggestive evidence that occupational

regulation may play some role in input substitutability and thus moderate the relationship

between input availability and the aggregate supply of primary health care. An important

implication is that licensing laws – which determine the division of labor and thus how labor

inputs translate to services – may be as important as policies that expand supply directly. My




                                                33
results call for a reconsideration of the nature of federal healthcare workforce efforts, which have

mostly focused on supply expansion rather than altering how existing labor is used.

    Why a greater number of providers has not significantly altered the healthcare market

remains an unanswered question. One possibility is that existing providers – physicians, NPs,

and PAs – reduce their work hours in response to provider expansion, limiting the effective

supply increase to less than the number of providers would suggest. There is evidence that

physicians reduce the number of hours spent on patient care in response to public health

insurance expansions (Garthwaite, 2012), so it is reasonable to expect a similar response to a

greater number of providers. Understanding how changes in provider supply and regulation alter

work hours and earnings of existing providers is an important topic to be explored, albeit with

different data.

    A second possibility is that current reimbursement policies – which create incentives for

physician involvement in services provided by NPs and PAs in order to bill at a higher rate –

limit efficient substitution between providers, preventing cost (and price) reductions and

utilization increases from materializing. While I do not observe a differential response in states

with greater reimbursement parity between physicians, NPs, and PAs, the test is admittedly

weak. Related, a lack of direct billing by lower-cost NPs and PAs may combine with rigid

insurance payment schemes (particularly by the Medicare and Medicaid programs) to make

prices unresponsive to provider supply. Minimal price effects are seen when looking at visit

charges (which are not directly dictated by insurance plans) and when excluding people with

public insurance, but reimbursement-driven rigidity in price-setting is one plausible explanation

for minimal price response.




                                                 34
    A third possibility is that the number of providers may be less important than the

organizational structure in which their services are delivered. Community health clinics (CHCs)

have been shown to have substantial effects on healthcare access and health outcomes (Bailey

and Goodman-Bacon, 2012), but isolated provider supply expansions absent the outreach and

other services provided by CHCs may be less effective. A related possibility is that physicians

and non-physicians still have very different views about the role of the latter in health care

delivery, limiting gains from provider supply despite recent legislative changes. Donelan et al

(2013) find that MDs and NPs still possess very different views on hospital admitting privileges,

equal pay, and quality of care provided by NPs and that 8 out of 10 NPs work in a practice with

an MD. Scope-of-practice laws expand the frontier of what NPs and PAs can do, but do not

require that practices take full advantage of this frontier. Finally, it is possible that patients’

interactions with the healthcare system have been altered in ways that that are not easily captured

by overall measures of utilization and prices. For instance, greater NP and PA supply may

facilitate the provision of team-based care and task specialization that improves the quality of

and patients’ satisfaction with care without altering the overarching patterns of utilization.

Changes in task specialization is one explanation proposed for the modest economic impacts

observed for immigration (Peri and Sparber, 2009). All of these are fruitful areas for further

exploration, with important implications for the design and implementation of healthcare

workforce policy.




                                                   35
References


Adams, A. Frank, Robert B. Ekelund Jr., John D. Jackson, 2003.”Occupational Licensing of a
Credence Good: The Regulation of Midwifery” Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 69, No. 3: pp.
659-675.

American Association of Medical Colleges, 2010. Health Care Reform and the Health
Workforce: Workforce Provisions Included in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.
https://www.aamc.org/download/142078/data/health_workforce_provisions_and_health_care_ref
orm.pdf. Accessed May 26, 2010.

Auerbach, David, 2012. “Will the NP Workforce Grow in the Future?: New Forecasts and
Implications for Healthcare Delivery.” Medical Care, Vol. 50, No. 7: pp. 606-610.

Baicker, Katherine and Amitabh Chandra, 2004a. "The Productivity of Physician Specialization:
Evidence from the Medicare Program." American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings
93(2): 357-361.

Baicker, Katherine and Amitabh Chandra, 2004b. "Medicare Spending, the Physician
Workforce, and Beneficiaries Quality of Care." Health Affairs, April 2004: 184-197.

Bailey, Martha and Andrew Goodman-Bacon, 2012. The War on Poverty’s Experiment in Public
Medicine: Community Health Centers and the Mortality of Older Americans. Unpublished
manuscript, University of Michigan.

Becker, Gary, S. and Kevin M. Murphy, 1992. “The Division of Labor, Coordination Costs, and
Knowledge.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107 (4): 1137-1160.

Blumenthal, David, 2004. “New Steam from an Old Cauldron – The Physician Supply Debate.”
The New England Journal of Medicine, 350 (17): 1780-1787.

Chapman, Susan, Cynthia Wides, and Joanne Spetz, 2010. “Payment Regulations for Advanced
Practice Nurses: Implications for Primary Care.” Policy, Politics, & Nursing Practice. Vol.
11(2): 89-98.

Chang, Chiang-Hua, Therese A. Stukel, Ann Barry Flood, and David C. Goodman, 2011.
“Primary Care Physician Workforce and Medicare Beneficiaries’ Health Outcomes,” Journal of
the American Medical Association, Vol. 305 (20): 2096-2105.

Chernew, Michael E., Lindsay Sabik, Amitabh Chandra, and Joseph P. Newhouse, 2009. “Would
Having More Primary Care Doctors Cut Health Spending Growth?” Health Affairs, Vol 28 (5):
1327-1335.

Continelli, Tracey, Sandra McGinnis, and Timothy Holmes, 2010. “The effect of local primary
care physician supply on the utilization of preventive health services in the United States.”
Health and Place 16 (2010): 942-951.




                                              36
Cooper, Richard, Tim Henderson, Craig Dietrich, 1998. "Roles of Nonphysician Clinicians as
Autonomous Providers of Care." Journal of the American Medical Association, Vol 280(9): 795-
802.

Cooper, Richard, Prakash Laud, and Craig Dietrich, 1998. "Current and Projected Workforce of
Nonphysician Clinicians." Journal of the American Medical Association, Vol 280 (9): 788-794.

Donelan, Karen, Catherine DesRoches, Robert Dittus, Peter Buerhaus, 2013. “Perspectives of
Physicians and Nurse Practitioners on Primary Care Practice. New England Journal of Medicine,
368;20: 1898-1906.

Druss, Benjamin, Steven Marcus, Mark Olfson, Terri Tanielian, and Harold Alan Pincus, 2003.
"Trends in Care by Nonphysician Clinicians in the United States," The New England Journal of
Medicine, Vol 348 (2): 130-137.

Dueker, Michael, Ada Jacox, David Kalist, and Stephen Spurr, 2005. "The Practice Boundaries
of Advanced Practice Nurses: An Economic and Legal Analysis." Journal of Regulatory
Economics, 27(3): 309-329.

Everett, Christine, Jessica Schumacher, Alexandra Wright, and Maureen Smith, 2009. Physician
Assistants and Nurse Practitioners as Usual Source of Care. Journal of Rural Health, 25 (4):
407-414.

Fairman, J. 2008. Making Room in the Clinic; Nurse Practitioners and the Evolution of Modern
Health Care. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.

Flexner, Abraham (1910), Medical Education in the United States and Canada: A Report to the
Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, Bulletin No. 4., New York City: The
Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, pp. 346, retrieved June 27, 2011.

Freed, GL, TA Nahra, JR Wheeler, 2006. “Counting physicians: inconsistencies in a commonly
used source for workforce analysis.” Acad Med, Vol 81(9): 847-52.

Garthwaite, Craig, 2012. “The Doctor Might See You Now: The Supply Side Effects of Public
Health Insurance Expansions.” forthcoming in American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.

Grumbach, Kevin, L. Gary Hart, Elizabeth Mertz, Janet Coffman, and Lorella Palazzo, 2003.
"Who is Caring for the Underserved? A Comparison of Primary Care Physicians and
Nonphysician Clinicians in California and Washington." Annals of Family Medicine, Volume
1(2): 97-104.

Grumbach, Kevin, Karen Vranizan, and Andrew Bindman, 1997. “Physician Supply and Access
to Care in Urban Communities.” Health Affairs, 16 (1): 71-86.

Guttman, Astrid, Scott Shipman, Kelvin Lam, David Goodman, and Therese Stukel, 2010.
“Primary Care Physician Supply and Children’s Health Care Use, Access, and Outcomes:
Findings from Canada.” Pediatrics 125 (6): 1119-1126.




                                             37
Hooker, Roderick and Linda Berlin, 2002. "Trends in the Supply of Physician Assistants and
Nurse Practitioners in the United States." Health Affairs, Vol 21(5): 174-181.

Hooker, Roderick and Linda McCaig, 2001. "Use of Physician Assistants and Nurse
Practitioners in Primary Care, 1995-1999." Health Affairs, Vol 20 (4): 231-238.

Horrocks, Sue, Elizabeth Anderson, and Chris Salisbury, 2002. "Systematic review of whether
nurse practitioners working in primary care can provide equivalent care to doctors." British
Medical Journal, Volume 324(6): 819-823.

Hotz, V. Joseph and Xiao, Mo, 2011. The Impact of Regulations on the Supply and Quality of
Care in Child Care Markets, American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Iglehart, John, 2013. “Expanding the Role of Advanced Nurse Practitioners – Risks and
Rewards.” New England Journal of Medicine. May 16, 2013. Vol. 368; 20: 1935-1941.

Institute of Medicine. 2011. The Future of Nursing: Leading Change, Advancing Health.
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.

Jones, Andrew M., 2000. “Health econometrics.” In: Culyer, A., Newhouse, J. (Eds.), Handbook
of Health Economics. Elsevier, Amsterdam.

Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured, 2011. Improving Access to Adult Primary
Care in Medicaid: Exploring the Potential Role of Nurse Practitioners and Physician Assistants.
Issue Paper. March 2011.

Kalist, David and Stephen Spurr, 2004. "The Effect of State Laws on the Supply of Advanced
Practice Nurses," International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics, 4: 271--281.

Kleiner, Morris M, 2000. “Occupational Licensing,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
14(4):189-202.

Kleiner, Morris M, 2006. Licensing Occupations: Enhancing Quality or Restricting
Competition? Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

Kleiner, Morris and Kudrle, Robert, 2000. Does Regulation Affect Economic Outcomes? The
Case of Dentistry , Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 63, No. 2, October 2000, pp. 547-582.

Kleiner, Morris M, Allison Marier, Kyoung Won Park, and Coady Wing, 2011. “Relaxing
Occupational Licensing Requirements: Analyzing Wages and Prices for a Medical Service.”
Unpublished working paper.

Kleiner, Morris M. and Kyoung Won Park, 2010. “Battles Among Licensed Occupations:
Analyzing Government Regulations on Labor Market Outcomes for Dentists and Hygienists”
NBER Working Paper No. 16560.




                                              38
Laditka, James, Sarah Laditka, and Janice Probst, 2005. “More May be Better: Evidence of a
Negative Relationship between Physician Supply and Hospitalization for Ambulatory Care
Sensitive Conditions” Health Services Research 40(4): 1148-1166.

Larson EH, Palazzo L, Berkowitz B, Pirani MJ, Hart LG., 2003. "The contribution of nurse
practitioners and physician assistants to generalist care in Washington State." Health Serv Res.
2003;38(4):1033--1050.

Laurant, M, Reeves D, Hermens R, Braspenning J, Grol R, Sibbald B., 2004. Substitution of
doctors by nurses in primary care. Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews 2004, Issue 4. Art.
No.: CD001271.

Leland, Hayne E., 1979. “Quacks, Lemons, and Licensing: A Theory of Minimum Quality
Standards.” The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 87, No. 6 (Dec., 1979), pp. 1328-1346

Lenz et al, 2004. "Primary Care Outcomes in Patients Treated by Nurse Practitioners or
Physicians: Two-Year Follow-up" Medical Care Research and Review, Vol 61 (3).

Morgan, Perri A., Justine Strand, Truls Ostbye, and Mark A. Albenese, 2007. “Missing in
Action: Care by Physician Assistants and Nurse Practitioners in National Health Surveys.”
Health Services Research, 42 (5): 2022-2037.

Mundinger et al , 2000. "Primary Care Outcomes in Patients Treated by Nurse Practitioners or
Physicians: A Randomized Trial", JAMA Vol 283 (1) January 5, 2000.

Pauly, Mark and Mark Satterthwaite, 1981. The Pricing of Primary Care Physicians Services: A
Test of the Role of Consumer Information.” The Bell Journal of Economics, 12 (2): 488-506.

Peri, Giovanni and Chad Sparber, 2009. “Task Specialization, Immigration, and Wages”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1 (3): 135-169.

Rosenthal, Meredith, Alan Zaslavsky, and Joseph Newhouse, 2005. “The Geographic
Distribution of Physicians Revisited.” Health Services Research 40(6, Part I): 1931-1952.

Sass, Tim R. and Mark W. Nichols, 1996. “Scope-of-Practice Regulation: Physician Control and
the Wages of Non-Physician Health Care Professionals,” Journal of Regulatory Economics,
9:61-81.

Schaumans, C. and Verboven, F. (2008), Entry and regulation: evidence from health care
professions. The RAND Journal of Economics, 39: 949–972

Scheffler, R.M, 2008. Is There a Doctor in the House? Market Signals and the Physician Supply
Cycle. Stanford University Press: Palo Alto.

Scheffler, R.M., N.J. Waitzman, and J.M. Hillman, 1996. "The Productivity of Physician
Assistants and Nurse Practitioners and Health Workforce Polcy in the Era of Managed Health
Care," Journal of Allied Health 25(3): 207-217.




                                                39
Sekscenski, Edward S., Stephanie Sansom, Carol Bazell, Marla E. Salmon, and Fitzhugh Mullan,
1994. "State Practice Environments and the Supply of Physician Assistants, Nurse Practitioners,
and Certified Nurse-Midwives", The New England Journal of Medicine Vol 331(19):1266-1271.

Shaked, Avner and John Sutton, 1981. “The Self-Regulating Profession.” Review of Economic
Studies, 48, 217-234.

Shapiro, Carl, 1986. ‘Investment, moral hazard and occupational licensing’. Review of
Economic Studies, 53: 843–62.

Skillman, Susan, Louise Kaplan, Meredith Fordyce, Peter McMenamin, Mark Doescher, 2012.
Understanding Advance Practice Registered Nurse Distribution in Urban and Rural Areas of the
United States Using National Provider Identifier Data, WWAMI Rural Health Research Center
Final Report #137. February 2012.

Staiger, Auerbach, and Buerhaus, 2009; US Department of Health and Human Services, Health
Resources and Service Administration, 2004. A Comparison of Changes in the Professional
Practice of Nurse Practitioners, Physician Assistants, and Certified Nurse Midwives: 1992 and
2000. (February).

US Department of Health and Human Services, Medicare Learning Network, 2011. Medicare
Information for Advanced Practice Registered Nurses, Anesthesiologist Assistants, and
Physician Assistants. September, 2011.

US Government Accountability Office, 2008. "Primary Care Professionals: Recent Supply
Trends, Projections, and Valuation of Services."

White, William, 1978. “The Impact of Occupational Licensure of Clinical Laboratory
Personnel.” The Journal of Human Resources. 13 (1): 91-102.




                                              40
                                        Figure 1. Aggregate Trends in Health Care Providers, 1980-2008




Sources: Health Resources and Service Administration Area Resource File, National Survey Sample of
Registered Nurses, American Academy of Physician Assistants.




                                                                           41
                                             Figure 2. States where NPs and PAs can Prescribe Controlled Substances, 1996‐2008

            States Where NPs Can Prescribe Controlled Substances, 1996                                                                             States Where PAs Can Prescribe Controlled Substances, 1996

                       WA                                       ND                                                                                              WA                                       ND
                                            MT                                 MN                                                                                                    MT                                 MN
                                  ID                                                                                                 ME                                    ID                                                                                              ME
                                                                SD                   WI                                                                                                                  SD                       WI
                       OR                                                                           MI                         NH
                                                                                                                              VT                                OR                                                                            MI                     NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VT
                                                 WY                                                                      NY                                                               WY                                                                   NY
                                                                NE             IA                                              MA
                                                                                                                              CTRI                                                                        NE            IA                                           MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CTRI
                                                                                                                      PA                                                                                                                                    PA
                                                                                         IL    IN        OH               NJ                                                                                                      IL     IN        OH           NJ
                                       UT                                                                                                                                        UT
                             NV                       CO             KS        MO                                 WV DCMDDE                                           NV                       CO             KS         MO                             WV DCMDDE
                                                                                                   KY              VA                                                                                                                    KY              VA
                        CA                                                                                                                                       CA
                                                                 OK                            TN              NC                                                                                             OK                         TN             NC
                                       AZ         NM                            AR                                                                                              AZ             NM                         AR
                                                                                                              SC                                                                                                                                       SC
                                                                                      MS       AL       GA                                                                                                                     MS       AL        GA
                                                                TX                  LA                                                                                                                   TX                  LA

                  AK                                                                                         FL                                            AK                                                                                       FL
                                                  HI                                                                                                                                           HI




               States Where NPs Can Prescribe Controlled Substances, 2002                                                                       States Where PAs Can Prescribe Controlled Substances, 2002

                            WA                                       ND                                                                                    WA                                       ND
                                                 MT                                 MN                                                                                          MT                                 MN
                                       ID                                                                                                 ME                          ID                                                                                              ME
                                                                     SD                       WI                                                                                                    SD                   WI
                            OR                                                                               MI                     NH
                                                                                                                                   VT                      OR                                                                           MI                      NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               VT
                                                      WY                                                                      NY                                                     WY                                                                   NY
                                                                      NE            IA                                              MA
                                                                                                                                   CTRI                                                             NE             IA                                           MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CTRI
                                                                                                                           PA                                                                                                                          PA
                                                                                              IL        IN        OH           NJ                                                                                            IL    IN        OH            NJ
                                             UT                                                                                                                            UT
                                  NV                       CO             KS         MO                                WV DCMDDE                                 NV                       CO             KS        MO                              WV DCMDDE
                                                                                                        KY              VA                                                                                                         KY               VA
                             CA                                                                                                                             CA
                                                                          OK                            TN           NC                                                                              OK                            TN           NC
                                            AZ             NM                        AR                                                                                    AZ         NM                            AR
                                                                                                                    SC                                                                                                                         SC
                                                                                           MS       AL        GA                                                                                                          MS      AL     GA
                                                                     TX                  LA                                                                                                         TX                  LA

                       AK                                                                                          FL                                 AK                                                                                      FL
                                                           HI                                                                                                                         HI



               States Where NPs Can Prescribe Controlled Substances, 2008                                                                       States Where PAs Can Prescribe Controlled Substances, 2008

                            WA                                       ND                                                                                    WA                                       ND
                                                 MT                                 MN                                                                                          MT                                 MN
                                       ID                                                                                                 ME                          ID                                                                                              ME
                                                                     SD                       WI                                                                                                    SD                   WI
                            OR                                                                               MI                     NH
                                                                                                                                   VT                      OR                                                                           MI                       NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VT
                                                      WY                                                                      NY                                                     WY                                                                   NY
                                                                      NE            IA                                              MA
                                                                                                                                   CTRI                                                             NE             IA                                      MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CTRI
                                                                                                                           PA                                                                                                                       PA
                                                                                              IL        IN        OH           NJ                                                                                            IL    IN        OH         NJ
                                             UT                                                                                                                            UT
                                  NV                       CO             KS         MO                                WV DCMDDE                                 NV                       CO             KS        MO                           WV DCMDDE
                                                                                                        KY              VA                                                                                                         KY            VA
                             CA                                                                                                                             CA
                                                                          OK                            TN           NC                                                                              OK                            TN           NC
                                            AZ             NM                        AR                                                                                    AZ         NM                            AR
                                                                                                                    SC                                                                                                                         SC
                                                                                           MS       AL        GA                                                                                                          MS      AL     GA
                                                                     TX                  LA                                                                                                         TX                  LA

                       AK                                                                                          FL                                 AK                                                                                      FL
                                                           HI                                                                                                                         HI




Source: Author’s tabulations from The Nurse Practitioner, Annual Legislative Update (various years) and Abridged State Regulation of Physician Assistant
Practice, distributed by the American Academy of Physician Assistants.




                                                                                                                                           42
           Figure 3. Estimated Elasticity of Price with respect to Change in Provider Supply, by Likelihood of Visit being Primary Care




Notes: Figure plots the coefficients on log(NP per population) and log(PA per population) in a regression of log(price) on these provider supply measures, year
fixed effects, and county fixed effects, run separately by predicted likelihood of visit being a primary care visit. Predicted likelihood of being a primary care visit
was estimated by predicting whether each individual office visit was to a primary care provider based on broad visit category, the individual characteristics
listed above, and the medical condition (if any) associated with the visit. See text for further explanation. Results including log(MD per population) are very
similar. Models were run using two different measures of visit price: total charges and amount paid.




                                                                                  43
Table 1. Time-invariant County Characteristics that Correlate with Provider Density and Growth

                                                               (1)                                  (2)
                                                      log(NP per population)               log(PA per population)
                                                                 Interaction with                     Interaction with
                                                  Main effect           time           Main effect           time
log(MDs per population) (in 1995)                  0.310***             0.003           0.309***             0.000
                                                    (0.057)           (0.005)            (0.054)           (0.005)
HMO penetration (1998)                             0.725***            -0.001            -0.293*             0.018
                                                    (0.150)           (0.013)            (0.150)           (0.014)
Log of population density (1992)                   -0.046**            0.003*             -0.023          0.007***
                                                    (0.020)           (0.002)            (0.018)           (0.002)
% Persons in poverty (1989)                          1.290*         -0.198***           -1.476**            0.003
                                                    (0.751)           (0.063)            (0.725)           (0.079)
Median household income ($1,000, 1990)             0.018***         -0.001***             -0.004            -0.000
                                                    (0.005)           (0.000)            (0.006)           (0.000)
Infant mortality rate (1988)                         0.004           -0.003**              0.012            -0.000
                                                    (0.013)           (0.001)            (0.012)           (0.001)
% Workforce in health (1990)                       4.431***             0.083           3.999***            -0.039
                                                    (1.139)           (0.099)            (1.082)           (0.114)
% Workforce in manufacturing (1990)               -1.553***            -0.019          -0.948***            0.003
                                                    (0.325)           (0.028)            (0.304)           (0.026)
Unemployment rate (1990)                            -0.019*         -0.004***             0.022*             0.000
                                                    (0.011)           (0.001)            (0.011)           (0.001)
% White (1990)                                     1.141***           -0.045*             0.438*          0.055***
                                                    (0.264)           (0.024)            (0.258)           (0.020)
% Hispanic (1990)                                 -0.856***             0.014              0.008          0.050**
                                                    (0.165)           (0.015)            (0.205)           (0.022)
% High school or greater                             0.375          -0.177***            0.998**             0.032
                                                    (0.387)           (0.034)            (0.416)           (0.043)
PAs can prescribe controlled                      -0.228***          0.021***             -0.029          0.016***
   drugs in state (in 1995)                         (0.047)           (0.004)            (0.049)           (0.004)
NPs can prescribe controlled                       0.132***            -0.001           0.319***         -0.012***
   drugs in state (in 1995)                         (0.043)           (0.003)            (0.047)           (0.004)
Constant                                             0.201           0.296***              0.310            -0.049
                                                    (0.624)           (0.055)            (0.534)           (0.044)
F-test for coefficients on above variables = 0
(excluding constant and linear time trend)           50.84             10.17              22.56            7.01

Observations                                                  17,235                              17,235
R-squared                                                     0.537                               0.418
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clusted by county. Asterisks denote significance at the p < 10% (*), 5%
(**), and 1% (***) level. Time is normalized to zero in 2002 so main effects can be interpreted as the average in the
mid-point of the sample period. Provider density ratios are per 100,000 population. Sample includes 1695 counties for
13 years (1996-2008), but data is not available for all years so the panel is unbalanced. Observations are weighted by
county population in all specifications.




                                                         44
Table 2: OLS Estimates of Provider Density on Number of Office-based Visits




                                                                                                 Individual
                                                                                                  controls,     Full
                                         No controls                  Full controls              County FE    controls       2SLS
                                                (1)            (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)           (7)
Panel A. Dept variable: Have at least one office-based visit during year
   log(MD+NP+PA per population)              0.029**          0.025
                                              (0.013)        (0.020)
   log(NP+PA per population)                                               0.006
                                                                         (0.011)
   log(NP per population)                                                             -0.003        0.003      -0.004       0.041
                                                                                      (0.011)      (0.012)     (0.011)     (0.025)
   log(PA per population)                                                              0.008        0.003       0.008       -0.009
                                                                                      (0.010)      (0.011)     (0.010)     (0.030)
   log(MD per population)                                                 0.016        0.013       0.0002
                                                                         (0.019)      (0.020)      (0.022)

N (rounded)                                  292,500        290,900      289,200      281,500     282,800      281,500     281,500
Adjusted R-squared                            0.001          0.159        0.159        0.160       0.159        0.160       0.155

Panel B. Dept variable: Log(number of office-based visits in year)
   log(MD+NP+PA per population)              0.001           -0.027
                                            (0.014)         (0.026)
   log(NP+PA per population)                                              0.022
                                                                         (0.019)
   log(NP per population)                                                               0.001      -0.001       0.002        0.051
                                                                                       (0.016)    (0.019)      (0.016)     (0.057)
   log(PA per population)                                                               0.031       0.026       0.029       -0.040
                                                                                       (0.023)    (0.023)      (0.023)     (0.076)
   log(MD per population)                                                -0.023       -0.035**    -0.027*
                                                                         (0.016)       (0.017)    (0.014)

N (rounded)                                  182,200        181,100      180,100      175,100     176,000      175,100     175,100
Adjusted R-squared                            0.0004         0.195        0.195        0.195       0.195        0.195       0.190


Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Specification (1) includes year
fixed effects only. Individual controls include male, age, age squared, dummies for race/ethnicity, dummies for four income
categories, dummies for public, private, or no insurance, and dummies for three self-reported health categories. Specifications
(3) to (6) also include state X time linear trends and time-invariant county characteristics interacted with linear time trends.Time-
invariant county characteristics that are interacted with time (linearly) include the fraction of persons in poverty (1989), infant
mortality rate (1988), fraction of workorce in health (1990), fraction of workorce in manufacturing (1990), unemployment rate
(1990), fraction white (1990), fraction with high school education (1990), fraction hispanic (1990), population density (1992), and
HMO penetration rate (1998). Excluded instruments in 2SLS estimates are the number of BA RN programs in 1963 in county per
population and the number of PA programs in 1975 in county per population. See text for further explanation.




                                                                  45
Table 3: OLS Estimates of Interaction between Provider Density and Regulatory Environment Index on Utilization



                                                At least one office-based                           Log(Number of office-based visits)
                                                     visit during year           All visits          Primary care visits             Non-primary care
                                                              (1)                   (2)               (3)          (4)                (5)         (6)
log(NP per population)                                      -0.069               -0.217**            0.001     -0.255***            -0.017      -0.037
                                                           (0.069)                (0.100)           (0.017)      (0.075)           (0.020)     (0.103)
log(PA per population)                                   -0.088*                   -0.093            0.020         -0.038          0.034*         -0.058
                                                         (0.046)                  (0.128)           (0.018)       (0.117)          (0.019)       (0.133)
log(NP per population) X NP Index                         0.089                  0.295**                         0.348***                         0.026
                                                         (0.104)                 (0.143)                          (0.099)                        (0.140)
log(PA per population) X PA Index                        0.132*                    0.170                           0.079                          0.125
                                                         (0.069)                  (0.167)                         (0.149)                        (0.171)
log(MD per population)                                    0.014                   -0.034*            -0.027        -0.027           -0.011        -0.009
                                                         (0.020)                  (0.018)           (0.020)       (0.019)          (0.016)       (0.017)

Controls                                                   Full                     Full              Full          Full             Full         Full

N (rounded)                                              281,500                 175,100           160,700       160,700          114,500       114,500
Adjusted R-squared                                        0.160                   0.195             0.115         0.115            0.196         0.196

F-test for provider supply coefficient = 0 when practice index = 1 (100%)
    Nurse practitioners (p-value)                          0.601                   0.115                           0.001                         0.800
    Physician assitants (p-value)                          0.089                   0.099                           0.267                         0.127



Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). All specifications include year fixed effects, individual
controls, state X time linear trends, and time-invariant county characteristics interacted with linear time trends. Individual controls include male, age,
age squared, dummies for four income categories, dummies for race/ethnicity, dummies for public, private, or no insurance, and dummies for three
self-reported health categories. Time-invariant county characteristics that are interacted with time (linearly) include the fraction of persons in poverty
(1989), infant mortality rate (1988), fraction of workorce in health (1990), fraction of workorce in manufacturing (1990), unemployment rate (1990),
fraction white (1990), fraction with high school education (1990), fraction hispanic (1990), population density (1992), and HMO penetration rate
(1998). Number of primary and non-primary care visits was estimated by predicting whether each individual office visit was to a primary care provider
based on broad visit category, the individual characteristics listed above, and the medical condition (if any) associated with the visit. See text for
further explanation.




                                                                                     46
Table 4: OLS Estimates of Provider Density and Interaction with Components of Regulatory Index on Utilization

                                                                                Component-specific Index
                                                Overall index        Reimbursment       Legal            Prescribing
Panel A: log(Total number of visits)
log(NP per population)                             -0.217**              -0.021               -0.119             -0.135***
                                                    (0.100)              (0.077)              (0.075)              (0.044)
log(PA per population)                              -0.093              0.172**               -0.028               -0.030
                                                    (0.128)             (0.083)               (0.065)              (0.038)
log(NP per population) X NP Index                  0.295**                0.026                0.171              0.196**
                                                   (0.143)               (0.095)              (0.113)             (0.075)
log(PA per population) X PA Index                    0.170              -0.163*                0.078                0.095
                                                    (0.167)             (0.093)               (0.086)              (0.060)
NPxHigh P-val                                       0.115                 0.853                0.243                0.142
PAxHigh P-val                                       0.099                 0.717                0.143                0.049

Panel B: log(Number of primary care visits)
log(NP per population)                             -0.219**              -0.007               -0.132*            -0.155***
                                                    (0.084)              (0.054)              (0.075)              (0.033)
log(PA per population)                              -0.033              0.200***             0.083**              -0.047*
                                                    (0.084)              (0.047)             (0.033)              (0.027)
log(NP per population) X NP Index                  0.291**                0.001                0.180              0.217***
                                                   (0.129)               (0.073)              (0.119)              (0.058)
log(PA per population) X PA Index                    0.055             -0.220***             -0.102**              0.082*
                                                    (0.109)              (0.053)              (0.046)              (0.041)
NPxHigh P-val                                       0.138                 0.885                0.346                0.068
PAxHigh P-val                                       0.466                 0.061                0.339                0.110




Notes: All specifications include year fixed effects, log(MD per population), individual controls, county fixed effects, state X
time linear trends, and time-invariant county characteristics interacted with linear time trends. Primary care specifications
also include log(number of non-primary care visits). Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses (*** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Individual controls include male, age, age squared, dummies for race/ethnicity, dummies for four
income categories, dummies for public, private, or no insurance, and dummies for three self-reported health categories.
Time-invariant county characteristics that are interacted with time (linearly) include the fraction of persons in poverty
(1989), infant mortality rate (1988), fraction of workorce in health (1990), fraction of workorce in manufacturing (1990),
unemployment rate (1990), fraction white (1990), fraction with high school education (1990), fraction hispanic (1990),
population density (1992), and HMO penetration rate (1998). Number of primary and non-primary care visits was
estimated by predicting whether each individual office visit was to a primary care provider based on broad visit category,
the individual characteristics listed above, and the medical condition (if any) associated with the visit. See text for further
explanation.




                                                                47
Table 5: OLS Estimates of Provider Density and Interaction with Regulatory Environment Index on Visit Prices

                                                                                                                                    log(total charges)
                                                                                                                    Exclude                     Well child
                                                                                                                   Medicare &    Check-up:        exam:
                                                              log(total charges)            log(total paid)         Medicaid    No condition   No condition       2SLS          log(total charges)    log(total paid)
                                                          (1)         (2)        (3)              (4)                 (5)            (6)           (7)             (8)                  (9)                (10)

log(NP per population)                                   0.009       0.036      -0.017        -0.042**               0.001         -0.019          0.005          -0.011               -0.092              -0.041
                                                        (0.020)     (0.031)    (0.030)         (0.020)              (0.028)       (0.026)         (0.056)        (0.063)              (0.179)             (0.089)
log(PA per population)                                   0.007       0.004      -0.009         -0.009                0.004         -0.030          0.001           0.055                0.012               0.038
                                                        (0.022)     (0.023)    (0.016)         (0.019)              (0.025)       (0.023)         (0.063)        (0.064)              (0.077)             (0.088)
log(NP per population) X Predicted Primary Care                                0.042*          0.042*               0.048*                                                             0.022               0.035
                                                                               (0.025)         (0.022)              (0.024)                                                           (0.041)             (0.034)
log(PA per population) XPredicted Primary Care                                 -0.038*         -0.005               -0.047*                                                           -0.016               0.034
                                                                               (0.022)         (0.018)              (0.023)                                                           (0.060)             (0.058)
log(NP per population) X NP Index                                                                                                                                                      0.105               0.003
                                                                                                                                                                                      (0.223)             (0.122)
log(PA per population) X PA Index                                                                                                                                                      -0.030              -0.069
                                                                                                                                                                                      (0.096)             (0.106)
log(NP per population) X Predicted Primary Care                                                                                                                                        0.024               0.005
     X NP Index                                                                                                                                                                       (0.036)             (0.033)
log(PA per population) XPredicted Primary Care                                                                                                                                         -0.029              -0.044
     X PA Index                                                                                                                                                                       (0.060)             (0.058)
Predicted likelihood of primary care                              -0.513*** -0.548***         -0.495***            -0.561***                                                        -0.541***           -0.499***
                                                                    (0.015)   (0.073)           (0.061)              (0.079)                                                          (0.070)             (0.056)
Additional controls
 Individual, MD density, Procedures, County FE            No         Yes         Yes             Yes                  Yes           Yes             Yes           See                  Yes                 Yes
 State X Time, County Characteristics X Time              No         No          Yes             Yes                  Yes           Yes             Yes          Notes                 Yes                 Yes

F-test for provider supply coefficient = 0 when primary care = 1 (100%) and practice index = 1 (100%)
    Nurse practitioners (p-value)                                               0.381            0.999               0.082                                                            0.263               0.975
    Physician assitants (p-value)                                               0.011            0.405               0.053                                                            0.019               0.129

Adjusted R-squared                                       0.026      0.113      0.114            0.077                0.124        0.053             0.122        0.105                0.114               0.077
rounded N                                               762,500    761,300    756,900          734,600              527,300       96,100           13,100       756,900              756,900             734,600




Notes: All specifications include year fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Individual controls include male, age, age squared, dummies for four
income categories, dummies for public, private, or no insurance, and dummies for three self-reported health categories. Time-invariant county characteristics that are interacted with time (linearly) include the
fraction of persons in poverty (1989), infant mortality rate (1988), fraction of workorce in health (1990), fraction of workorce in manufacturing (1990), unemployment rate (1990), fraction white (1990), fraction
with high school education (1990), fraction hispanic (1990), and HMO penetration rate (1998). Predicted likelihood of being a primary care visit was estimated by predicting whether each individual office visit was
to a primary care provider based on broad visit category, the individual characteristics listed above, and the medical condition (if any) associated with the visit. Excluded instruments in 2SLS estimates are the
number of BA RN programs in 1963 in county per population and the number of PA programs in 1975 in county per population. 2SLS specifications include year and state fixed effects, individual controls, and time-
invariant county characteristics, the predicted likelihood that a visit is primary care, and procedure dummies. See text for further explanation.




                                                                                                              48
Table 6. OLS Estimates of Provider Density and Interaction with Regulatory Environment Index on Total Office-Based Visit Expenditure

                                                                                Dependent variable = log(total amount paid)
                                                   All individuals          Medicare             Medicaid                Private                    Uninsured
                                                   (1)          (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)              (9)        (10)
log(NP per population)                            0.003      -0.287*    -0.006   -0.443*     0.052      -0.554      0.010       0.074           -0.004    -0.869*
                                                 (0.026)     (0.148)    (0.046)   (0.261)  (0.092)     (0.371)     (0.033)     (0.213)         (0.055)    (0.441)
log(PA per population)                            0.032       -0.085     0.015    -0.217    -0.035 -0.507*** 0.047*            -0.013          0.186**      0.607
                                                 (0.027)     (0.128)    (0.063)   (0.272)  (0.049)     (0.180)     (0.028)     (0.174)         (0.086)    (0.383)
log(NP per population) X NP Index                             0.393*               0.591                 0.826                 -0.087                      1.188*
                                                             (0.212)              (0.378)              (0.519)                 (0.272)                    (0.607)
log(PA per population) X PA Index                              0.160               0.316               0.648**                  0.083                      -0.580
                                                             (0.167)              (0.342)              (0.277)                 (0.221)                    (0.558)
log(MD per population)                          -0.069** -0.068**       -0.037    -0.033    -0.082      -0.072    -0.059** -0.057**             -0.208     -0.238
                                                 (0.026)     (0.028)    (0.043)   (0.043)  (0.062)     (0.061)     (0.024)     (0.024)         (0.148)    (0.148)

Adjusted R-squared                               0.173       0.173      0.096       0.096       0.196       0.196       0.149       0.149      0.108       0.108
Rounded N                                       171,300 171,300        30,300       30,300      41,100      41,100     108,700     108,700     14,000      14,000
F-test for provider supply coefficient = 0 when practice index = 1 (100%)
    Nurse practitioners (p-value)                              0.140                   0.265                   0.143                   0.848                  0.085
    Physician assitants (p-value)                              0.129                   0.307                   0.180                   0.220                  0.891



Notes: All specifications include year fixed effects, individual characteristics, county fixed effects, linear time trends for each state, and linear time trends by
time-invariant county characteristics. Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Individual controls include
male, age, age squared, dummies for four income categories, dummies for public, private, or no insurance, and dummies for three self-reported health
categories. Time-invariant county characteristics that are interacted with time (linearly) include the fraction of persons in poverty (1989), infant mortality rate
(1988), fraction of workorce in health (1990), fraction of workorce in manufacturing (1990), unemployment rate (1990), fraction white (1990), fraction with
high school education (1990), fraction hispanic (1990), and HMO penetration rate (1998).




                                                                                  49
Table 7: OLS Estimates of Provider Density and Interaction with Regulatory Environment Index on Usual Source of Care, Preventative Outcomes, and Health (Linear Probability Mode

                                                                                             Had the following in the previous 12 months
                                                                                                                                                              Average of 5    Health is very
                                                                                           Blood pressure     Cholesterol    Pap smear        Breast exam      preventive       good or
                                                Have usual source of care      Flu shot         check            check      (women 18+)      (women 18+)       outcomes         excellent
                                                     (1)         (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)              (7)              (8)             (9)
log(NP per population)                            0.041**      0.007            -0.008         -0.010            0.009         0.018             0.020            0.000           0.008
                                                  (0.018)      (0.014)         (0.016)         (0.009)          (0.009)       (0.012)           (0.012)          (0.008)         (0.020)
log(PA per population)                            0.015*        0.009           0.013           0.011            0.015         0.002             0.001            0.006           0.022
                                                  (0.009)      (0.009)         (0.010)         (0.010)          (0.015)       (0.018)           (0.019)          (0.011)         (0.014)
log(MD per population)                                         0.032            0.006           0.011            0.004         -0.010            0.012            0.010           0.008
                                                               (0.022)         (0.013)         (0.017)          (0.015)       (0.020)           (0.039)          (0.013)         (0.010)

Controls                                            None           Full          Full            Full             Full           Full             Full             Full            Full

N (rounded)                                        265,500      264,200        172,600         171,400         166,000          90,500          90,800           175,300         281,500
Adjusted R-squared                                  0.006        0.191          0.209           0.159           0.230            0.089           0.072            0.230           0.110


Notes: All specifications include year fixed effects, individual characteristics, county fixed effects, linear time trends for each state, and linear time trends by time-invariant county
characteristics. Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Individual controls include male, age, age squared, dummies for four income
categories, dummies for race/ethnicity, dummies for public, private, or no insurance, and dummies for three self-reported health categories (except (7)). Time-invariant county
characteristics that are interacted with time (linearly) include the fraction of persons in poverty (1989), infant mortality rate (1988), fraction of workorce in health (1990), fraction of
workorce in manufacturing (1990), unemployment rate (1990), fraction white (1990), fraction with high school education (1990), fraction hispanic (1990), population density (1992),
and HMO penetration rate (1998).




                                                                                               50
Table 8. OLS Estimates of NP and PA Prescriptive Authority on Various Outcomes

                                                                  Coefficient on             Control for Level of fixed     N
                                                          NP Prescribe      PA Prescribe       supply       effects     (rounded)
Utilization (individuals)
    Office-based provider visit > 0                (1)        0.005             0.004             N           State        400,500
                                                             (0.006)           (0.006)
                                                   (2)       0.013*             0.001             Y          County        282,800
                                                             (0.007)           (0.009)
   log(Office-based provider visits)               (3)        0.019            -0.009             N           State        272,600
                                                             (0.013)           (0.013)
                                                   (4)       0.031**          -0.053***           Y          County        189,400
                                                             (0.013)            (0.014)
   Have usual source of care                       (5)        -0.002            0.002             N           State        371,100
                                                             (0.006)           (0.005)
                                                   (6)        -0.002           -0.010             Y          County        265,500
                                                             (0.007)           (0.007)
Visit prices (visits)
    log amount paid (check-up visits)              (7)        0.014             0.005             N           State        313,100
                                                             (0.011)           (0.010)
                                                   (8)        -0.002            0.004             Y          County        218,300
                                                             (0.013)           (0.018)
   log amount paid (diagnose/treat visits)         (9)        0.017            -0.007             N           State        573,100
                                                             (0.015)           (0.013)
                                                  (10)        -0.004           -0.005             Y          County        395,100
                                                             (0.013)           (0.011)
   log total charges (check-up visits)            (11)      0.035***            0.010             N           State        321,800
                                                             (0.013)           (0.011)
                                                  (12)       0.029*            -0.015             Y          County        224,300
                                                             (0.016)           (0.018)
   log total charges (diagnose/treat visits)      (13)       0.035*            -0.005             N           State        590,300
                                                             (0.019)           (0.016)
                                                  (14)        0.005            -0.014             Y          County        406,900
                                                             (0.020)           (0.012)
Expenditures (individuals)
   Office-based expenditure > 0                   (15)        0.007             0.004             N           State        400,500
                                                             (0.006)           (0.005)
                                                  (16)       0.015**            0.000             Y          County        282,800
                                                             (0.007)           (0.008)
   log(Office-based expenditure)                  (17)       0.043**           -0.010             N           State        267,300
                                                             (0.021)           (0.017)
                                                  (18)       0.027*           -0.065***           Y          County        185,700
                                                             (0.015)            (0.014)



Notes: Each row is a separate regression of the outcome on indicators for whether NPs and PAs were permitted to prescribe
controlled substances in that state-year, controlling for male, age, age squared, dummies for four income categories, dummies
for public, private, or no insurance, dummies for three self-reported health categories, and either state or county fixed effects.
Even rows additionally control separately for the log of number of NPs, PAs, and primary care physicians. Models for visit-level
prices also include indicators for all procedures and treatments provided on the visit and indicators for one of 600 conditions
associated with the visit. Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).




                                                                    51
                                   Appendix A: Data Appendix


Nurse Practitioner and Physician Assistant Supply Data
In collaboration with Deborah Sampson from Boston College School of Nursing, I
assembled a new dataset containing the number of licensed nurse practitioners, physician
assistants, and physicians (by specialty) at the county level annually for the years 1990-
2008. This data was constructed from individual licensing records obtained from state
Boards of Nursing, Medicine, Health, Commerce and other relevant state licensing
agencies. The typical license record includes the provider’s name, mailing address
(typically home), license number, license type, issue date, expiration date, and status. We
aggregated these individual records to construct total counts of the number of active PA
and NP licenses in each county in each year for as many years as possible. 1 Data on the
number of physicians (by specialty) was obtained from the Area Resource File.
        Our aggregation currently makes three main assumptions. First, only licensees’
current (or most recent, if the license is expired) address is kept on file, so we have
applied this address to all years of license activity. 2 Second, licenses with out-of-state
addresses are assumed not to be actively practicing in the state. Many providers are
licensed in multiple states, though primarily practice in only one. Since address
information was less complete for out-of-state licenses and there is more uncertainty
about county of practice, we do not include out-of-state licenses in our county counts.
This likely understates the number of providers, particularly for border counties and
small states. This undercounting will not bias our estimates if it remains fixed over time
since our analysis includes county fixed effects. Lastly, our measures reflect active
licenses not necessarily actively practicing practitioners. It is possible that providers will



1
  For several states we obtained number of active licensed providers by county over time directly from
annual summary reports published by the states, rather than individual license records.
2
  For instance, if a licensed NP lived in Washtenaw County (MI) from 1990 to 2002 and Wayne County
(MI) from 2003 to present, they would be counted in the total for Wayne County for the entire 1990-present
time period. This no-mobility assumption is more problematic for years further back in time or far from the
license expiration date.




                                             Appendix - 1
maintain an active license even if they are not actively practicing. If this pattern changes
over time, our trends may over or understate the true trends in provider supply.
       We successfully collected at least some historical license data on both NPs and
PAs from 35 states. We found that many states did not retain or would not provide
records on inactive/expired licenses, or these licenses were missing key fields (e.g.
address or issue date). Our sample is geographically diverse, with representation from
most parts of the country. Our weakest coverage is in the upper mountain/plains states
and the lower Mississippi River states. The years for which data is available varies across
states, so our county panel is unbalanced: NP and PA supply data is available for 23
states covering 52% of the U.S. population in 1996, but increases to 35 states covering
80% in 2008.


NP and PA Practice Index
An overall index of the professional practice environment for NPs and PAs in each state
in 2000 was obtained from the Health Services Resource Administration (HRSA, 2004).
This index ranks states separately for NPs and PAs along three dimensions: (1) legal
standing and requirement for physician oversight/collaboration on diagnosis and
treatment; (2) prescriptive authority; and (3) reimbursement policies. These three
dimensions are then combined into a single index for each profession with a possible
range from zero to one. For each of the three indices, the legislation and policies of each
state are scored along many specific criteria. For instance, the “legal” index (35% of total
for NPs, 35% for PAs) includes components related to whether autonomous practice is
possible, the required type of practice agreements with physicians, rules regulating
review by physicians, and board oversight, among others. While the specific components
and weights differ between NPs and PAs, collectively they all measure the extent of
autonomy the two professions have from physician oversight and control. The
prescriptive authority index (30% for NPs, 40% for PAs) includes measures of the type of
drugs NPs and PAs can prescribe, the requirements for physician oversight, whether the
NP or PA uses their own DEA number, and whether they sign the prescription or can sign




                                       Appendix - 2
for samples, among others. The reimbursement index (35% for NPs, 25% for PAs)
includes points based on Medicaid reimbursement rates and requirements for private
insurers to reimburse for NP or PA services. A detailed listing of the score of each state
along every specific criteria can be found in HRSA (2004).


State Laws on Prescriptive Authority
We also constructed indicators for whether nurse practitioners and physician assistants
are permitted to write prescriptions (any, some controlled substances, levels V through II
controlled substances) in a given state and year. Prescriptive authority was coded from
various issues of the journal Nurse Practitioner and from Abridged State Regulation of
Physician Assistant Practice, distributed by the American Academy of Physician
Assistants.


Data on Nursing and PA Schools
Data on all current and closed PA schools and programs, including their location,
opening and closing dates was obtained from the Physician Assistant Education
Association and the Accreditation Review Committee on Education for the Physician
Assistant (ARC-PA). Information on the location of basic RN training programs in 1963,
by type (diploma, Associates, Bachelors) was obtained from State Approved Schools of
Professional Nursing, 1963 (National League for Nursing).


Predicting Likelihood of Primary Care
For each visit in the MEPS office-based visits files I construct a measure of the predicted
likelihood of seeing a primary care provider, given observed individual and visit-level
characteristics. Specifically, I estimate the following equation using a probit model using
data from 2002-2008:
                     =
               PrimaryCareimjt VisitCategory imjt + Conditionimjt + β x X ijt + ε imjt

The outcome, PrimaryCare, is an indicator for whether the visit was to a family practice,
general practice, or internal medicine physician, pediatrician, nurse or nurse practitioner,




                                            Appendix - 3
or physician assistant. VisitCategory is a set of dummy variables for each of five types of
visits: general check-up or well-child visit, diagnosis or treatment, emergency, post-op
follow-up visit, or shots (the baseline category). Condition is a set of 600 dummy
variables for the condition associated with the visit (including none). Individual factors
such as income category, age, education, and health risks are included in 𝑋𝑖𝑗𝑡 . Estimates
for this model are presented in the third column of Table B4 in Appendix B. The model is
then used to predict the likelihood that each individual visit (in all years) would be to a
primary care provider based on these characteristics. Importantly, this predicted value
does not depend on provider supply. For instance, all “check-ups” not associated with
any specific condition by 40 year old men with the same income and insurance will have
the same predicted likelihood of being primary care, regardless of the NP and PA supply
in their county in the year of the visit. The most common high likelihood visits includes
flu shots, no condition checkup, and sore throat.




                                        Appendix - 4
Appendix B: Additional Tables




        Appendix - 5
Table B1. Summary Statistics, Person Sample
                                                                        analysis sample                 full dataset
                                                                       mean          sd               mean          sd
Provider supply and regulation
   MD per population (x100,000)                                       89.619        44.211           88.879         46.38
   NP per population (x100,000)                                       30.166        20.629                    N/A
   PA per population (x100,000)                                       17.082        10.979                    N/A
   NP practice index (2000)                                           0.744         0.134             0.738         0.129
   PA practice index (2000)                                           0.772         0.107             0.737         0.141
   NPs can prescribe controlled substances in stateXyear              0.790         0.408             0.724         0.447
   PAs can prescribe controlled substances in stateXyear              0.733         0.442             0.674         0.469
Individual characteristics
   Male                                                               0.477         0.499            0.477          0.499
   Age                                                                33.682        22.261           34.038         22.358
   Income category 1 (lowest)                                         0.258         0.437            0.253          0.435
   Income category 2                                                  0.171         0.376            0.167          0.373
   Income category 3                                                  0.294         0.456            0.297          0.457
   Income category 4 (highest)                                        0.277         0.448            0.283           0.45
   Have private insurance                                             0.587         0.492            0.603          0.489
   Have public insurance                                              0.246         0.431            0.238          0.426
   Have no insurance                                                  0.167         0.373            0.158          0.365
   Health very good                                                   0.603         0.489            0.599           0.49
   Health good                                                        0.247         0.431            0.245           0.43
   Health bad                                                         0.117         0.321            0.121          0.326
   Hispanic                                                           0.316         0.465            0.258          0.437
   Non-Hispanic white                                                  0.48         0.500            0.530          0.499
   Non-Hispanic black                                                 0.145         0.352            0.158          0.365
   Other race                                                         0.059         0.235            0.054          0.227
Health care utilization and expenditure
   Office-based visits > 0                                            0.623         0.485            0.631          0.483
   Number of office-based visits                                      2.781         5.517            2.831          5.479
   Primary care office-based visits > 0                               0.572         0.495            0.575          0.494
   Number of primary care office-based visits                         1.456         2.702             1.47          2.674
   Charges for primary care office-based visits > 0                   0.571         0.495            0.573          0.495
   Total charges for primary care office-based visits                 274.24       1,035.25          268.60         972.92
   Amount paid for primary care office-based visits > 0               0.561         0.496            0.563          0.496
   Total amount paid for primary care office-based visits             152.84        365.66           151.34         356.82
   Have usual source of care                                          0.780         0.414            0.788          0.409
   Flu shot in last 12 months                                         0.272         0.445            0.276          0.447
   Blood pressure check in last 12 months                             0.773         0.419            0.782          0.413
   Pap smear in last 12 months                                        0.569         0.495            0.568          0.495
   Breast exam in last 12 months                                      0.615         0.487            0.617          0.486
   Cholesterol check in last 12 months                                0.526         0.499            0.523          0.499
County characteristics
   % in poverty (1989)                                                13.819         7.07            13.989         7.339
   Median income (1989)                                               31,167        7,830            30,551         8,173
   Infant mortality rate (1989)                                        9.98         2.364            10.165         2.449
   % workforce in health industry (1990)                              8.065          2.06            8.152          2.093
   % workforce in manufacturing (1990)                                16.971        7.351            17.586         7.662
   Unemployment rate                                                  5.793          2.88            5.864          2.784
   % white                                                            77.934        14.416           79.111         15.108
   % education HS+                                                    74.525        9.218            74.147         9.518
   % Hispanic ethnicity                                               15.194        17.574           12.266         16.542
   HMO penetration (1998)                                             0.307         0.171            0.285          0.175
   Population density (1992)                                          2,082         6,060            1,893          5,488
   # PA schools in 1975 / 100,000 population                          0.012         0.045            0.015           0.09
   # BA RN schools in 1963 / 100,000 population                       0.047         0.126             0.05          0.133
   # AA RN schools in 1963 / 100,000 population                       0.032         0.094            0.027          0.107
   # Diploma RN schools in 1963 / 100,000 population                  0.268         0.472            0.286          0.503

Sample size (rounded to 100)                                          293,100                        404,400
Notes: Analysis sample includes all individuals living in counties for which physician, nurse practitioner, and physician assistant
supply data is available in their survey year. Provider supply measures are calculated at the county level. Physician supply only
includes non-federal office-based physicians in family/general practice, general pediatrics, general internal medicine, and general
ob/gyn.




                                                                          Appendix - 6
Table B2. Summary Statistics, Office-based Visit Sample

                                                          analysis sample                   full dataset
                                                        mean            sd              mean             sd
No condition associated with visit                       0.20          0.40              0.20          0.40
Predicted likelihood that visit is primary care          0.51          0.10              0.51          0.10
Visit category = checkup or well-child                   0.29          0.46              0.29          0.45
Visit category = diagnosis/treatment                     0.54          0.50              0.54          0.50
Visit category = emergency                               0.01          0.09              0.01          0.09
Visit category = followup                                0.12          0.33              0.12          0.33
Visit category = shots                                   0.04          0.20              0.04          0.20
See doctor                                               0.92          0.27              0.92          0.27
Provider was RN/NP                                       0.07          0.25              0.07          0.26
Provider was PA                                          0.01          0.11              0.01          0.10
Chemotherapy                                             0.01          0.07              0.01          0.07
Drug treatment                                           0.00          0.06              0.00          0.06
IV Therapy                                               0.00          0.05              0.00          0.05
Kidney dialysis                                          0.02          0.12              0.02          0.12
Occupational therapy                                     0.00          0.04              0.00          0.04
Physical therapy                                         0.03          0.16              0.03          0.16
Psycho therapy                                           0.01          0.11              0.01          0.11
Radiation therapy                                        0.00          0.06              0.00          0.07
Received shot                                            0.02          0.13              0.02          0.14
Speech therapy                                           0.00          0.02              0.00          0.02
Anesthesia                                               0.00          0.07              0.00          0.07
EEG                                                      0.00          0.04              0.00          0.04
EKG                                                      0.02          0.15              0.02          0.15
Lab tests                                                0.25          0.44              0.25          0.44
Mammogram                                                0.01          0.08              0.01          0.07
MRI                                                      0.01          0.09              0.01          0.09
Other services                                           0.12          0.33              0.12          0.32
Received vaccine                                         0.03          0.17              0.03          0.17
Sonogram                                                 0.01          0.12              0.01          0.11
X-rays                                                   0.06          0.23              0.06          0.23
Total amount paid for visit (all sources)               118.76        152.44            116.79        151.52
Total charges for visit                                 218.84        356.19            213.16        351.57

Sample size (rounded to 100)                              803,200                      1,114,900

Notes: Only office-based visits for which provider was doctor, registered nurse or nurse practitioner, or
physician assistant are included. Also excludes visits categorized as mental health, maternity, eye exam, laser
eye surgery, and other. Analysis sample further restricted to visits by individuals living in counties for which
physician, nurse practitioner, and physician assistant supply data is available in their survey year.




                                                  Appendix - 7
Table B3. Summary Statistics by Year, Person Sample

                                                                         1996       1997        1998        1999       2000        2001        2002       2003        2004       2005        2006        2007      2008
Provider supply and regulation
   MD per population (x100,000)                                         81.04      92.08      89.383      87.693     87.774      89.922      88.167     90.479       91.52      90.322     89.127      90.298     92.137
   NP per population (x100,000)                                         17.16     22.578      22.596      25.276     26.674      27.791      28.812     29.982       31.68      32.965     34.838      36.855     39.643
   PA per population (x100,000)                                         9.326     11.979        12.2      12.863      13.74       14.88      15.916     17.074      18.247      19.121     20.459      21.957     23.909
   NPs can prescribe controlled substances in stateXyear                0.328      0.760       0.624       0.629      0.699       0.747       0.756      0.747       0.894       0.901      0.902       0.936      0.928
   PAs can prescribe controlled substances in stateXyear                0.638      0.488       0.678       0.655      0.617       0.718        0.71      0.712       0.749       0.749      0.744       0.936      0.928
Individual characteristics
   Male                                                                 0.476      0.473       0.478       0.479      0.478        0.48       0.478      0.475       0.474       0.475      0.475        0.48      0.479
   Age                                                                  33.16     33.691      33.103      33.352     33.581      33.972      33.567     33.013      33.388      33.606     34.243      34.683     33.912
   Income category 1 (lowest)                                           0.257      0.254       0.245       0.222       0.21       0.214       0.239      0.281       0.289       0.284      0.283       0.257      0.277
   Income category 2                                                    0.162      0.159       0.167       0.158      0.166        0.17       0.173      0.177       0.176       0.176      0.172       0.171      0.173
   Income category 3                                                    0.294      0.308       0.308       0.316      0.312       0.317       0.307      0.285       0.274       0.277      0.276       0.292      0.288
   Income category 4 (highest)                                          0.286      0.279        0.28       0.304      0.312       0.299       0.282      0.257       0.261       0.263      0.269        0.28      0.262
   Have private insurance                                               0.647      0.643       0.606       0.655      0.646        0.64       0.604      0.554       0.555       0.545      0.541        0.55      0.545
   Have public insurance                                                0.181      0.205        0.22       0.191      0.194          0.2      0.233      0.273       0.273       0.283       0.29       0.279      0.278
   Have no insurance                                                    0.172      0.152       0.174       0.155      0.159        0.16       0.163      0.173       0.172       0.172      0.169       0.171      0.176
   Health very good                                                     0.614      0.624       0.617       0.633      0.624       0.619       0.601      0.591       0.587       0.578      0.578       0.596      0.617
   Health good                                                          0.233      0.232       0.236       0.238      0.245       0.238       0.255      0.253       0.255        0.26      0.258        0.25      0.231
   Health bad                                                           0.118      0.115       0.119       0.099      0.098       0.112       0.113      0.122        0.12       0.125      0.128        0.12      0.111
   Hispanic                                                             0.303      0.264       0.337       0.337      0.325          0.3      0.309       0.33       0.325       0.326      0.317       0.302      0.328
   Non-Hispanic white                                                    0.55      0.562          0.5      0.504      0.502       0.527       0.494      0.462       0.468       0.455      0.453       0.458      0.394
   Non-Hispanic black                                                   0.104      0.132       0.127       0.123      0.138       0.133       0.138      0.143       0.141       0.152      0.165       0.163      0.185
   Other race                                                           0.044      0.041       0.036       0.036      0.035        0.04       0.059      0.065       0.066       0.066      0.065       0.077      0.093
Health care utilization and expenditure
   Office-based visits > 0                                              0.622      0.624       0.611       0.613      0.621       0.637       0.635       0.63       0.621        0.62      0.624        0.62      0.612
   Number of office-based visits                                        2.797      2.841       2.726       2.603      2.724       2.882       2.892      2.828       2.845          2.8     2.783       2.756       2.58
   Primary care office-based visits > 0                                 0.571      0.571        0.56       0.557      0.564       0.584       0.584       0.58       0.572       0.573      0.574        0.57      0.563
   Number of primary care office-based visits                           1.499      1.509       1.445       1.373      1.413       1.514       1.508      1.495       1.469       1.461      1.439        1.41      1.376
   Non-primary care office-based visits > 0                             0.411      0.411       0.397       0.397      0.414       0.426       0.419      0.408       0.407       0.401      0.412       0.409      0.387
   Number of non-primary care office-based visits                       1.298      1.332       1.281        1.23      1.311       1.368       1.385      1.334       1.375       1.339      1.344       1.346      1.204
   Charges for primary care office-based visits > 0                     0.567       0.57       0.558       0.556      0.563       0.583       0.583      0.579       0.571       0.572      0.572       0.568      0.561
   Total charges for primary care office-based visits                  198.36     205.25      211.37      206.49     228.73      264.60      284.13     276.66      302.45      302.76     310.70      316.76     325.36
   Amount paid for primary care office-based visits > 0                 0.559      0.557       0.547       0.548       0.55       0.569       0.573      0.569       0.563       0.562      0.563       0.559      0.553
   Total amount paid for primary care office-based visits              131.78     129.27      129.39      125.50     135.85      156.52      165.19     159.87      162.62      162.11     162.08      160.10     160.27
   Have usual source of care                                            0.790      0.810       0.787       0.783      0.794       0.797       0.782      0.771       0.777       0.771      0.781       0.773      0.763
   Flu shot in last 12 months                                           0.247      0.262       0.258      N/A         0.252       0.263       0.264      0.292       0.206       0.265      0.293       0.312      0.323
   Blood pressure check in last 12 months                               0.748      0.772       0.764      N/A          0.78       0.781       0.777      0.772       0.777       0.771      0.774       0.777      0.765
   Pap smear in last 12 months                                          0.571      0.605       0.599      N/A         0.611       0.599       0.587      0.567       0.559       0.539      0.542       0.546      0.553
   Breast exam in last 12 months                                        0.602      0.635       0.636      N/A         0.653       0.644       0.631      0.611       0.604       0.592      0.597       0.602      0.607
   Cholesterol check in last 12 months                                  0.453      0.494       0.497      N/A         0.524       0.516       0.514      0.517        0.52       0.532      0.545       0.568      0.563

Sample size (rounded to 100)                                            12,300     18,400      15,700      16,200     17,000      24,700     30,000       26,300       27,000     26,900      27,400   24,800     26,500
Notes: Analysis sample includes all individuals living in counties for which physician, nurse practitioner, and physician assistant supply data is available in their survey year. Provider supply measures are
calculated at the county level. Physician supply only includes non-federal office-based physicians in family/general practice, general pediatrics, general internal medicine, and general ob/gyn.




                                                                                                          Appendix - 8
Table B4: Determinents of Whether a Visit was to a Primary Care Provider (Probit model)

                                          Dept variable: Provider was primary care provider
                                           (1)                 (2)                   (3)
Broad visit category (omitted = "shots")
   Check-up                            -0.33993***          -0.31285***           -0.32029***
                                          (0.004)              (0.004)               (0.004)
   Diagnose or treat                   -0.42432***          -0.38006***           -0.38165***
                                          (0.003)              (0.004)               (0.004)
   Emergency                           -0.27555***          -0.26050***           -0.20946***
                                          (0.007)              (0.007)               (0.008)
   Follow-up                           -0.47956***          -0.43636***           -0.41842***
                                          (0.002)              (0.003)               (0.003)
Individual characteristic
   male                                                     0.03145***            0.03117***
                                                               (0.001)               (0.001)
   age                                                      -0.01596***           -0.01476***
                                                               (0.000)               (0.000)
   age squared                                              0.00012***            0.00011***
                                                               0.000                 0.000
   Poverty category 1                                       0.09324***            0.10206***
                                                               (0.002)               (0.002)
   Poverty category 2                                       0.09016***            0.09674***
                                                               (0.002)               (0.002)
   Poverty category 3                                       0.06067***            0.06160***
                                                               (0.002)               (0.002)
   Private insurance                                        -0.09580***           -0.09402***
                                                               (0.003)               (0.003)
   Public insurance                                         -0.07239***           -0.06270***
                                                               (0.003)               (0.003)
   Health very good                                         0.01898***            0.02247***
                                                               (0.002)               (0.002)
   Health good                                                0.00305*               0.0022
                                                               (0.002)               (0.002)
Condition associated with visit
   No condition                                             0.05408***               0.20927
                                                              (0.002)                (0.135)
   Condition fixed effects                  No                  No                     Yes

Observations (rounded)                    672,200             668,400                666,800
psuedo-R2                                  0.029               0.107                  0.198

Notes: All specifications include year fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered by state in
parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Sample includes only observations from 2002-
2008, for which specialty of physician seen is available. Primary care provider includes general
and family practice physician, internal medicine physician, pediatrician, nurse or nurse
practitioner, and physician assistants. Reported coefficients are marginal effects.


                                                    Appendix - 9
Table B5: Estimates of Provider Density on Number of Office-based Visits, Alternative Models

                                                        Dependent variable: Number of office-based provider visits
                                                          OLS                                    Poisson                                Negative binomial
                                              X>0          lnX         E[X]           X>0          lnX         E[X]               X>0          lnX        E[X]
                                              (1)           (2)         (3)            (4)         (5)          (6)               (7)          (8)         (9)
Panel A: Only Provider Supply
   log(NP per population)                    -0.003         0.001       -0.130          -0.008       -0.036      -0.100         -0.009       -0.050     -0.143
                                             (0.011)       (0.016)      (0.095)         (0.007)      (0.032)     (0.090)        (0.008)      (0.040)    (0.115)
   log(PA per population)                     0.008         0.031        0.152           0.012        0.054       0.149          0.009        0.048      0.138
                                             (0.010)       (0.023)      (0.107)         (0.008)      (0.037)     (0.102)        (0.007)      (0.036)    (0.105)

N (rounded)                                 281,500       175,100       281,500                     281,500                                 281,500
Adjusted R-squared                           0.163         0.201         0.142
-Log likelihood                                                                                     -835,663                                -559,007

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). All models include the full controls described in previous
tables. Columns (1) to (3) represent three different regressions. Column (3) uses total number of office visits (including zero) as the dependent variable.
Columns (4) to (6) depict different marginal effects for a single Poisson count model and columns (7) to (8) represent different marginal effects for a single
Negative Binomial count model.




                                                                           Appendix - 10
Table B6: OLS Estimates of Provider Density and Interaction with Regulatory Environment Index on Utilization, by Insurance Type



                                    Have at least one office-based visit                   log(Total office-based visits in year)                   log(Primary care office-based visits in year)
                                Medicare Medicaid Private Uninsured                      Medicare Medicaid Private Uninsured                       Medicare Medicaid        Private    Uninsured
                                   (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)                   (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)                     (5)        (6)          (7)           (8)
Panel A: No interactions with regulatory environment
log(NP per population)           -0.015      -0.002     -0.007     -0.008                   0.000       0.020       0.001    -0.028                  0.022       0.001      -0.003        -0.077
                                 (0.017)    (0.031)     (0.008)    (0.015)                 (0.034)     (0.073)     (0.020)   (0.070)                (0.039)     (0.068)     (0.033)      (0.054)
log(PA per population)           0.024*       0.018      0.009     -0.006                   0.023      -0.007       0.035     0.090                  0.005       0.009       0.000        0.026
                                 (0.014)    (0.019)     (0.016)    (0.027)                 (0.043)     (0.037)     (0.024)   (0.072)                (0.028)     (0.029)     (0.019)      (0.040)

Panel B: Interactions with regulatory environment
log(NP per population)             0.044     -0.302      -0.091      0.067                 -0.248      -0.456      -0.023    -0.225                 -0.103      -0.476      -0.179        -0.237
                                  (0.085)    (0.189)     (0.066)    (0.075)                (0.218)     (0.314)     (0.104)   (0.293)                (0.189)     (0.288)     (0.130)      (0.262)
log(PA per population)            -0.059     -0.032      -0.091      0.007                 -0.135     -0.362**     -0.037     0.433                  0.089      -0.206      -0.017        0.121
                                  (0.042)    (0.075)     (0.064)    (0.121)                (0.188)     (0.163)     (0.157)   (0.340)                (0.112)     (0.163)     (0.101)      (0.190)
log(NP per population) X NP Ind -0.081        0.409       0.112     -0.104                  0.336       0.649       0.032     0.267                  0.170       0.647       0.239        0.223
                                  (0.110)    (0.263)     (0.088)    (0.100)                (0.286)     (0.395)     (0.126)   (0.458)                (0.282)     (0.387)     (0.196)      (0.341)
log(PA per population) X PA Ind 0.112         0.070       0.137     -0.019                  0.214      0.488*       0.099    -0.476                 -0.113       0.299       0.023        -0.131
                                  (0.067)    (0.095)     (0.085)    (0.156)                (0.249)     (0.243)     (0.205)   (0.494)                (0.144)     (0.210)     (0.129)      (0.260)

F-test for provider supply coefficient = 0 when practice index = 1 (100%)
   Nurse practitioners (p-value 0.226         0.199       0.415       0.203                0.266       0.070        0.775     0.820                  0.499       0.146       0.406        0.886
   Physician assitants (p-value 0.064         0.184       0.102       0.801                0.310       0.141        0.262     0.801                  0.596       0.096       0.864        0.905

N (rounded)                       34,800     64,100     162,000     47,100                 30,400      42,200      110,000   15,400                 26,100      18,400      67,400        6,600

Notes: All specifications include year fixed effects, county fixed effects, log(MD per population), individual controls, state X time linear trends, and time-invariant county characteristics interacted with
linear time trends. Primary care specifications also include log(number of non-primary care visits). Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Individual
controls include male, age, age squared, dummies for four income categories, dummies for race/ethnicity, dummies for public, private, or no insurance (when not collinear), and dummies for three self-
reported health categories. Time-invariant county characteristics that are interacted with time (linearly) include the fraction of persons in poverty (1989), infant mortality rate (1988), fraction of
workorce in health (1990), fraction of workorce in manufacturing (1990), unemployment rate (1990), fraction white (1990), fraction with high school education (1990), fraction hispanic (1990),
population density (1992), and HMO penetration rate (1998). Number of primary and non-primary care visits was estimated by predicting whether each individual office visit was to a primary care
provider based on broad visit category, the individual characteristics listed above, and the medical condition (if any) associated with the visit. See text for further explanation.




                                                                                                   Appendix - 11
Table B7. Relationship Between Historical Educational Infrastructure and Provider Density (First Stage)

                                                                           Individual-level regressions                                                  Visit-level regressions
                                                             log(NP per population)             log(PA per population)                  log(NP per population)              log(PA per population)
                                                           (1)        (2)         (3)         (1)        (2)         (3)              (1)        (2)         (3)          (1)        (2)         (3)

# BA RN schools in 1963 / 100,000 population            0.627***    0.355** 0.362**    0.081   -0.135    -0.146                    0.693***    0.364** 0.377**    0.127   -0.106    -0.117
                                                         (0.211)    (0.145)  (0.145)  (0.207)  (0.198)  (0.200)                     (0.209)    (0.165)  (0.163)  (0.233)  (0.226)  (0.229)
# PA schools in 1975 / 100,000 population                 0.384      -0.072   -0.083 1.242*** 0.976*** 0.967***                      0.266      -0.167   -0.176 1.294*** 1.037*** 1.021***
                                                         (0.342)    (0.276)  (0.277)  (0.367)  (0.322)  (0.323)                     (0.341)    (0.290)  (0.288)  (0.425)  (0.392)  (0.393)
# AA RN schools in 1963 / 100,000 population                                -0.294**                     0.016                                          -0.287*                    -0.044
                                                                             (0.140)                    (0.173)                                         (0.147)                    (0.186)
# Diploma RN schools in 1963 / 100,000 population                            -0.038                      0.034                                           -0.050                     0.027
                                                                             (0.046)                    (0.050)                                         (0.042)                    (0.049)
log(MD per population)                                             0.489*** 0.500***          0.350*** 0.341***                               0.479*** 0.493***          0.350*** 0.344***
                                                                    (0.065)  (0.065)           (0.066)  (0.067)                                (0.066)  (0.066)           (0.070)  (0.071)

Individual controls                                       Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes               Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
County controls                                           Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes               Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
Predicted likelihood visit is primary care                N/A         N/A        N/A         N/A        N/A         N/A               Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
Procedure dummies                                         N/A         N/A        N/A         N/A        N/A         N/A               Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes

F-test for excluded instrument                            8.839      5.993      6.265       11.45       9.206       8.95             10.94       4.87       5.329       9.28        7.00        6.74

Adjusted R-squared                                       0.692       0.742      0.743       0.632      0.661       0.662            0.704       0.750      0.752       0.631       0.661       0.661
rounded N                                               286,100     286,100    286,100     286,100    286,100     286,100          781,300     781,200    781,200     778,100     777,300     777,300



Notes: All specifications include year and state fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered by county in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Individual controls include male, age, age
squared, dummies for four income categories, dummies for race/ethnicity, dummies for public, private, or no insurance, and dummies for three self-reported health categories. Time-invariant county
controls include the fraction of persons in poverty (1989), infant mortality rate (1988), fraction of workforce in health (1990), fraction of workforce in manufacturing (1990), unemployment rate
(1990), fraction white (1990), fraction with high school education (1990), fraction hispanic (1990), population density, and HMO penetration rate (1998).




                                                                                           Appendix - 12
Table B8: 2SLS Estimates of Provider Density on Utilization, Expenditure, and Access

                                                                                                 Total primary
                                                                          Primary Non-primary care amount Have usual                            Blood
                                                      Total visits       care visits care visits      paid     source of                       pressure                   Breast
                                                    >0          log( )     log( )      log( )        log( )      care              Flu shot     check      Pap smear      exam      Chol. check
                                                    (1)          (2)         (4)        (5)            (9)       (10)                (11)        (12)         (13)         (14)        (15)
Panel A: Fixed Effects Estimates
   log(NP per population)                          -0.003       0.001      -0.005        -0.017         -0.007         0.007        -0.008       -0.010       0.018        0.020       0.009
                                                  (0.011)      (0.016)    (0.027)       (0.020)        (0.009)        (0.014)      (0.016)      (0.009)      (0.012)      (0.012)     (0.009)
   log(PA per population)                           0.008       0.031      0.007       0.03369*         0.009          0.009        0.013        0.011        0.002        0.001       0.015
                                                  (0.010)      (0.023)    (0.013)       (0.019)        (0.014)        (0.009)      (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.018)      (0.019)     (0.015)

Panel B: 2SLS Estimates: First and second stage do not control for log(MD per population)
   log(NP per population)                          0.041       0.051       0.046       0.050            0.049         -0.034        0.036        0.027       -0.011        0.004       -0.055
                                                 (0.025)     (0.057)     (0.048)      (0.055)          (0.076)        (0.039)      (0.034)      (0.020)      (0.039)      (0.039)     (0.045)
   log(PA per population)                         -0.009      -0.040      -0.082      -0.026           -0.088         -0.006       -0.020        0.002        0.024        0.018       0.015
                                                 (0.030)     (0.076)     (0.072)      (0.076)          (0.085)        (0.040)      (0.031)      (0.034)      (0.049)      (0.040)     (0.042)

Panel C: 2SLS Estimates: First and second stage control for log(MD per population)
   log(NP per population)                          0.066        0.089     0.040          0.096          0.012         -0.074        0.047        0.065       -0.012        0.006       -0.109
                                                  (0.053)      (0.111)   (0.093)        (0.110)        (0.139)        (0.089)      (0.065)      (0.046)      (0.077)      (0.074)     (0.093)
   log(PA per population)                          0.001        -0.022    -0.085         -0.004         -0.104         -0.023       -0.015       0.019        0.024        0.019       -0.008
                                                  (0.040)      (0.096)   (0.093)        (0.094)        (0.105)        (0.056)      (0.037)      (0.049)      (0.062)      (0.048)     (0.059)

Panel D: 2SLS Estimates: First and second stage control for AA and Diploma RN programs per population in 1963 and for log(MD per population)
   log(NP per population)                         0.066        0.091      0.038      0.100          0.007        -0.080       0.053        0.066              0.008        0.029       -0.103
                                                 (0.052)      (0.112)    (0.093)    (0.111)        (0.140)      (0.091)      (0.063)      (0.046)            (0.076)      (0.072)     (0.091)
   log(PA per population)                         0.003        -0.020     -0.085     -0.002         -0.111       -0.029       -0.013       0.021              0.029        0.026       -0.008
                                                 (0.041)      (0.098)    (0.095)    (0.096)        (0.109)      (0.058)      (0.038)      (0.050)            (0.066)      (0.053)     (0.060)

N (rounded)                                       281,500     175,100     160,700      114,500        157,500        264,200       172,600      171,400      90,500       90,800      166,000

Notes: Excluded instruments in 2SLS estimates are the number of BA RN programs in 1963 in county per population and the number of PA programs in 1975 in county per population. Fixed
effects estimates include year and county fixed effects, log(MD per population), individual controls, county characteristics interacted with linear time trends, and state-specific linear time
trends. 2SLS specifications include year and state fixed effects, individual controls, and time-invariant county characteristics. Robust standard errors clustered by county in parentheses (***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Individual controls include male, age, age squared, dummies for four income categories, dummies for race/ethnicity, dummies for public, private, or no
insurance, and dummies for three self-reported health categories. Time-invariant county characteristics include the fraction of persons in poverty (1989), infant mortality rate (1988),
fraction of workorce in health (1990), fraction of workorce in manufacturing (1990), unemployment rate (1990), fraction white (1990), fraction with high school education (1990), fraction
hispanic (1990), population density (1992), and HMO penetration rate (1998).




                                                                                          Appendix - 13
Table B9: 2SLS Estimates of Provider Density on Visit Prices

                                                                                Log(total charges)                                                                     Log(amount paid)
                                                                   Quintile of predicted likelihood that visit is primary care                            Quintile of predicted likelihood that visit is primary care
                                                  All visits    Lowest         2nd             3rd               4th       Highest          All visits   Lowest        2nd            3rd         4th         Highest
                                                     (1)          (2)          (3)              (4)              (5)         (6)               (7)         (8)          (9)          (10)         (11)          (12)
Panel A: Fixed Effects Estimates
   log(NP per population)                           0.036                                                                                   -0.012
                                                   (0.031)                                                                                  (0.025)
   log(PA per population)                           0.004                                                                                    0.010
                                                   (0.023)                                                                                  (0.017)

Panel B: 2SLS Estimates: First and second stage do not control for log(MD per population)
   log(NP per population)                          -0.011        0.037      -0.052           -0.021          -0.052        0.062             0.019        0.010       -0.012        0.033        -0.026       0.089
                                                  (0.063)       (0.110)     (0.143)          (0.075)         (0.071)      (0.081)           (0.051)      (0.107)     (0.103)       (0.066)      (0.066)      (0.087)
   log(PA per population)                           0.055        0.011       0.211            0.064           0.061        -0.043            0.003        0.035        0.085        -0.027        0.018       -0.040
                                                  (0.064)       (0.116)     (0.177)          (0.094)         (0.072)      (0.087)           (0.055)      (0.126)     (0.112)       (0.106)      (0.063)      (0.088)

Panel C: 2SLS Estimates: First and second stage control for log(MD per population)
   log(NP per population)                          0.025         0.054      0.023             0.106          -0.043        0.086             0.048        0.048       0.009         0.172        -0.026       0.108
                                                  (0.127)       (0.202)    (0.269)           (0.200)         (0.129)      (0.170)           (0.102)      (0.190)     (0.180)       (0.194)      (0.116)      (0.181)
   log(PA per population)                          0.071         0.020      0.250             0.127           0.064        -0.033            0.017        0.055       0.096         0.044         0.017       -0.033
                                                  (0.084)       (0.153)    (0.228)           (0.162)         (0.085)      (0.114)           (0.073)      (0.166)     (0.145)       (0.182)      (0.072)      (0.113)

Panel D: 2SLS Estimates: First and second stage control for AA and Diploma RN programs per population in 1963 and for log(MD per population)
   log(NP per population)                          0.034         0.029      0.034        0.148           -0.027      0.096            0.057               0.059       0.030         0.197        -0.024       0.109
                                                  (0.127)       (0.197)    (0.260)      (0.225)         (0.132)     (0.171)          (0.103)             (0.193)     (0.171)       (0.209)      (0.118)      (0.180)
   log(PA per population)                          0.078         -0.004     0.258        0.170            0.065      -0.034           0.020               0.051       0.108         0.068         0.012       -0.036
                                                  (0.087)       (0.159)    (0.232)      (0.183)         (0.084)     (0.115)          (0.075)             (0.171)     (0.148)       (0.193)      (0.072)      (0.114)

N (rounded)                                       756,900       150,000      151,000         151,800         151,400      152,700           734,600      147,000     147,200      147,500      146,000      147,100

Notes: Excluded instruments in 2SLS estimates are the number of BA RN programs in 1963 in county per population and the number of PA programs in 1975 in county per population. Fixed effects estimates
include year and county fixed effects, log(MD per population), individual controls, county characteristics interacted with linear time trends, and state-specific linear time trends. 2SLS specifications include year
and state fixed effects, individual controls, and time-invariant county characteristics. All specifications include the predicted likelihood that a visit is primary care and procedure dummies. Robust standard
errors clustered by state in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1). Individual controls include male, age, age squared, dummies for four income categories, dummies for race/ethnicity, dummies for
public, private, or no insurance, and dummies for three self-reported health categories. Time-invariant county characteristics include the fraction of persons in poverty (1989), infant mortality rate (1988),
fraction of workorce in health (1990), fraction of workorce in manufacturing (1990), unemployment rate (1990), fraction white (1990), fraction with high school education (1990), fraction hispanic (1990),
population density (1992), and HMO penetration rate (1998). Predicted likelihood of being a primary care visit was estimated by predicting whether each individual office visit was to a primary care provider
based on broad visit category, the individual characteristics listed above, and the medical condition (if any) associated with the visit. See text for further explanation.




                                                                                                       Appendix - 14
