                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         ALLOCATING HOUSEHOLD TIME:
                   WHEN DOES EFFICIENCY IMPLY SPECIALIZATION?

                                          Robert A. Pollak

                                        Working Paper 19178
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19178


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2013




This is the second of two theoretical papers on household time allocation in general and specialization
in particular. Preliminary versions of portions of these papers were presented at the PAA in New York,
SOLE in Chicago, IZA in Bonn, ESPE in Chicago, the AEA in New Orleans, the University of Missouri,
Duke University, Collegio Carlo Alberto in Torino, the University of Cergy-Pontoise, the University
of Chicago, Mount Holyoke College, Cornell, UCLA, the University of Massachusetts in Amherst,
the University of Maryland conference on International Perspectives on Time Use, and Uppsala University.
I am grateful to Paula England, Shelly Lundberg, Mark Rosenzweig, Leslie Stratton, Yoram Weiss,
and Randy Wright for conversations and comments. This research was supported in part by the University
of Bergen and the Research Council of Norway as part of the AGEFAM project, and by the Eunice
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health & Human Development, National Institutes of
Health (RO1HD056207-01A2). I am grateful to them for their support, but I alone am responsible
for the views expressed. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Robert A. Pollak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Allocating Household Time: When Does Efficiency Imply Specialization?
Robert A. Pollak
NBER Working Paper No. 19178
June 2013, Revised March 2014
JEL No. D13,J22

                                              ABSTRACT

When does efficiency in the household imply specialization? For example, if we recognize two sectors,
“market” and “household,” when does efficiency imply that one spouse specializes in the market and
the other in the household? If efficiency did imply specialization, then egalitarian marriages would
be inefficient and an equity-efficiency tradeoff inescapable. This paper clarifies the roles that household
technology and human capital play in reaching conclusions about specialization.

The critical assumption that leads to the specialization conclusion in Becker's Treatise on the Family
is that spouses' time inputs are perfect substitutes in household production. With no further assumptions
(other than efficiency and the absence of process preferences) perfect substitutes imply specialization.
Although some of Becker's proofs appear to rely on households optimally adjusting spouses' stocks
of market and household human capital, the specialization conclusion does not: with perfect substitutes,
efficiency implies specialization even when each spouse's stocks of human capital are fixed, regardless
of the levels at which they are fixed. Other assumptions about household technology also imply the
specialization conclusion. I prove that (again in the absence of process preferences) if the household
technology is "additive" and exhibits constant returns to scale, then efficiency implies specialization.


Robert A. Pollak
Washington University in St. Louis
Arts and Sciences
and the Olin Business School
Campus Box 1133
1 Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
and NBER
pollak@wustl.edu
                                                                                                             3


1.       Introduction

         When does efficiency in the household imply specialization? More specifically, if

we recognize two sectors, "market" and "household," when does efficiency imply "sector

specialization"? Becker (1981, 1991) raised the issue of specialization in his Treatise on the

Family.1 This paper revisits it.

         Specialization has two distinct meanings. Informally, "specialization" is shorthand

for time allocation and the division of labor in multiple-person households. Formally, as in

the "specialization theorems" in Chapter 2 of Becker's Treatise, "specialization" is an

extreme time allocation in which, for example, one spouse works only in the household and

the other works only in the market. More precisely, specialization is a "corner solution" to

the household's time allocation problem in which one spouse (and perhaps both spouses)

works in only one sector. This paper is about "specialization theorems" and thus about

specialization in the second, formal sense.

         If efficiency did imply specialization, then egalitarian marriages would be inefficient

and an equity-efficiency tradeoff inescapable.2 The chain connecting distribution in

marriage to the specialization claim has two links: (1) the assumption that distribution

between spouses depends on bargaining in marriage and (2) the assumption that bargaining

power in marriage depends on earnings or wages. If equity depends on parity in bargaining


1
  Hereafter I cite the Treatise as Becker (1991). Specialization is discussed in Chapter 2 of the Treatise,
entitled "Division of Labor in Households and Families," which first appeared in the 1981 edition. Many
papers credit Becker (1965), "A Theory of the Allocation of Time," with raising the specialization issue,
perhaps because in retrospect the division of labor and specialization seem obvious grist for the household
production mill. But what seems obvious in retrospect was not obvious in prospect. Becker (1965) devotes
only a single paragraph to multiple-person households; the rest of that paper, like Chapter 1 of the Treatise,
assumes single-person households, so issues of specialization and the division of labor cannot arise. A
decade later, Pollak and Wachter (1975) missed the opportunity to develop the household production model in
the "obvious" direction of the division of labor and specialization.
2
  I define specialization formally and distinguish between specialization and strong specialization in section
2.
                                                                                                          4


power and bargaining power depends on earnings or wages, then equity requires that both

spouses work in the market. But if efficiency implied specialization and both spouses work

in the market, it follows that one spouse must do all the housework. Hence, if efficiency

implies specialization, these two assumptions imply that efficient couples must choose

between unequal bargaining power and an “inequitable” division of household work: equity

and efficiency would be incompatible.3 Although economists will be reluctant to accept the

claim that an unequal division of household work is prima facie evidence of unfairness, the

failure of one spouse to accumulate market human capital does have implications for future

bargaining power. These distributional implications account for the continuing ability of the

specialization claim to generate controversy.4 The availability of data, especially U.S. data

from the American Time Use Survey (ATUS), has been a major impetus to empirical time

use research by sociologists and economists.5

        In the Treatise, Becker identifies a class of household technologies for which

efficiency implies specialization, namely, technologies in which the time inputs of husbands


3
  Although the core of Becker's specialization argument is gender neutral, Becker famously argues that the
efficient pattern of specialization is gendered, with wives allocating time to household production and
husbands allocating time to the market. Becker's argument is two-pronged. The first prong is the claim that
gender serves as a focal point for premarital investments in sector-specific human capital: before entering
the marriage market, females invest in household human capital and males in market human capital. The
second prong shifts the focus from wives to mothers. The claim is that even without specialized premarital
investments in household human capital, mothers, because of their ability to breast-feed infants, would
slide down a slippery slope toward specialization in household production. That is, even if fathers and
mothers were initially equally productive in home and market, the ability of mothers to breast-feed leads to
an equilibrium in which the efficient pattern of specialization is gendered with mothers specializing in the
household and fathers in the market. In this paper I focus on the core specialization claim, not on the
provocative but somewhat peripheral gendering claim.
4
  On bargaining in marriage, see Manser and Brown (1980), McElroy and Horney (1981), and Lundberg
and Pollak (1993). On egalitarian marriage, see Wax (1998). For the flavor of the extensive sociology
literature on the division of labor in households, see Hochchild and Machung (1989), Brines (1994),
England and Folbre (2005), and Bianchi, et al. (2012).
5
   For a description of the ATUS, see Hamermesh, Frazis, and Stewart (2005). Unfortunately, the ATUS
reports the time use of only one respondent in each sampled household, making it difficult to investigate
the division of labor within couples. Examples of recent work of time use by economists include Aguiar
and Hurst (2007, 2009), Guryan, Hurst, and Kearney (2008), Hamermesh and Lee (2007), Ramey and
Ramey (2010), Ramey (2009), and Ramey and Neville (2009).
                                                                                                        5


and wives are perfect substitutes.6 Although human capital appears to play a crucial role

in Becker's analysis of specialization, it actually does not. In Pollak (2012) I show that if

spouses' time inputs are perfect substitutes, then efficiency implies specialization even if

each spouse's stocks of market or household human capital are fixed at arbitrary levels. In

this paper I show that there is an additional class of household technologies for which

efficiency implies specialization. More specifically, I show that if the household

technology is "additive" and exhibits constant returns to scale, then efficiency implies

specialization. As with perfect substitutes, additivity and constant returns to scale imply

specialization even if each spouse's stocks of market or household human capital are fixed at

arbitrary levels.      Finally, I examine the relationship between human capital and

specialization, arguing that whether human capital tips the scales in favor of specialization

depends on the strength of human capital effects on wages and on productivity in the

household.

        If the "efficiency implies specialization claim" (the "specialization claim," for

short) were true for all technologies, then the observed pattern of widespread

nonspecialization (i.e., both husbands and wives work in both the market sector and the

household sector) would be evidence of widespread inefficiency. Lundberg and Pollak

(2007) show that the last half of the 20th century witnessed a substantial convergence in

the time allocation patterns of men and women. According to the CPS, in 2008 the labor

force participation rate for married men between 35 and 44 was slightly over 95 percent;

the corresponding rate for married women is almost 74 percent. The gap in time

allocated to housework narrowed, although it remains substantial. According to the 2005


6
  Following Becker, I focus on married couples. With some modification, the analysis applies to other
types of multiple-person households.
                                                                                            6


American Time Use Survey (ATUS), married men spend an average of slightly less than

11 hours a week doing housework; the corresponding rate for married women is about 16

hours a week. For many couples husbands and wives work in both the market sector and

the household sector, and the time allocation pattern of these couples does not exhibit

sector specialization. The time allocation patterns of these couples are not necessarily

inefficient because the "efficiency implies specialization" claim does not hold for all

household technologies. For example, the specialization conclusion need not hold when

the household technology exhibits decreasing returns to scale or when there is more than

a single household production activity (e.g., cooking, laundry, yard work, household

repairs).

        The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces notation and defines terms. In

Section 3 I prove that, in the absence of process preferences, additivity and constant

returns to scale imply the specialization conclusion. Section 4 argues that decreasing

returns to scale in household production is plausible and shows that, even with additivity,

the specialization conclusion need not hold when household technology exhibits

decreasing returns. Section 5 considers multiple activities in the household sector and

"activity specialization." I show that when there are m household activities, the sector

specialization claim fails even with perfect substitutes: it is easy to construct examples in

which efficiency requires one spouse to allocate time to m* household activities, the

other spouse to allocate time to the remaining m-m* activities, and both spouses to

allocate time to the market. Section 6 discusses human capital and specialization. I show

that in a dynamic setting, human capital can tip the scale in favor of specialization;

whether it does so, however, depends on the strength of human capital effects on wages
                                                                                                        7


and on productivity in the household. Section 7 is a brief conclusion. In the appendix I

discuss the specialization theorems from the Treatise on the Family.

2.      Specialization, Process Preferences, Perfect Substitutes, Additivity

        Time allocation in multiple-person households depends on three elements:

preferences, constraints, and the household's "governance structure."7 For definiteness, I

focus on married couple households, so that preferences means the preferences of both

spouses. The constraints reflect the wage rates of both spouses, the prices of market

goods, the household technology, and spouses' individual technologies.                     Individuals'

technologies include the technologies to which the spouses would have access if they left

the marriage.       These technologies are important because in virtually all models

individuals' technologies (i.e., the technologies to which they would have access if they

left the marriage) determine the spouses' outside options and, in some models, also

determine bargaining power. The "governance structure" determines the mapping from

preferences and constraints into allocations of goods, commodities, and time. Examples

of governance structures include Becker's altruist model and cooperative Nash

bargaining. Chiappori's (1988, 1992) "collective model" can be interpreted as a reduced

form corresponding to any model with a single-valued, Pareto-efficient solution.

        In Pollak (2012) I discuss these three elements of the time allocation model as

well as the meaning of specialization. Except in special cases, conclusions about time

allocation (e.g., specialization) depend on all three elements -- preferences, constraints,

and the governance structure -- and cannot be inferred from the constraints or a subset of

the constraints (e.g., household technology).


7
 I ignore information structure which, as Randy Wright pointed out when he discussed a very early version
of this paper, is an additional basic element.
                                                                                                           8


         The distinction between goods and commodities is central to the household

production model. Becker (1965) wrote: "Households will be assumed to combine time

and market goods to produce more basic commodities that directly enter their utility

functions." I denote the household production function for the commodity z by g[th,tw,y],

where th and tw denote the time inputs of the husband and wife into the production of z; y

denotes the market goods used to produce z.8

         For a commodity produced within the household, either both spouses allocate time

to its production ("bilateral production") or only one spouse allocates time to its production

("unilateral production"). Bilateral production and unilateral production are properties of the

spouses' time allocation and, except in special cases, they depend on preferences,

constraints, and the governance structure. If a commodity is produced unilaterally, the

relevant domain of the household production function consists of the values at which th =

0 or tw = 0.9 Thus, g[th,0,yh] and g[0,tw,yw] are the unilateral production functions.

         "Essentiality" assumptions formalize the notion that positive output requires

positive time inputs from one or both spouses.

Strong Essentiality Assumption:

          g[0,tw, yw] = g[th,0, yh] = 0 for all {th,tw,yh,yw}.10

That is, positive output requires positive time inputs from both spouses, as in the Cobb-

Douglas household production function:
                                      γ
         g[th, tw,y] = Athβh twβw y .




8
  My notation here differs from that in the Treatise and also from that in Pollak (2012).
9
  The claim that unilateral production is efficient requires comparing alternatives involving unilateral
production with alternatives involving bilateral production.
10
   Equivalently, if th tw = 0, then g[th,tw,y] = 0 for all y.
                                                                                                             9


Weak Essentiality Assumption:

          g[0,0,y] = 0 for all y.


That is, positive output requires positive time inputs from at least one spouse. Throughout

this paper, I assume that the household production function satisfies weak essentiality

and, sometimes, that it also satisfies strong essentiality.

         One or both spouses may work in the market, earning money to purchase market

goods. I denote the total time that each spouse allocates to work by {Th, Tw} and the time

that each spouse allocates to market work by {th0, tw0} so

         th + th0 = Th

and

         tw +tw0 = Tw.

In my examples, I generally assume Th= Tw. This assumption is consistent with the

empirical “isowork” finding of Burda, Hamermesh, and Weil (2013) that "in rich non-

Catholic countries, men and women [and married men and married women] average about

the same amount of total work." I assume that there is only a single market good and

normalize its price to 1.11 The quantity of the market good is given by


         x = whth0 + wwtw0 + x* = wh(Th - th) + ww(Tw - tw) + x*

where {wh, ww} are the spouses' wage rates and x* is nonlabor income.12

         Market goods play two roles. They are (or may be) inputs into the production of

commodities, and they are (or may be) arguments of the spouses' utility functions. I allow



11
  Unless the relative prices of market goods vary, we lose nothing by ignoring the multiplicity of market goods
and restricting attention to a single, aggregate market good. As I argue in section 5, we lose quite a lot by
ignoring the multiplicity of commodities.
                                                                                                             10


for the possibility that market goods enter the spouses' utility functions directly,

unmediated by household time.13 14

     To define "specialization," it is best to begin with its opposite.

     Nonspecialization: With two sectors, home and market, we say there is

nonspecialization if and only if both spouses allocate time to both sectors.15

     Specialization: At least one spouse allocates time to only one sector.16 That is,

specialization is any time allocation other than nonspecialization. (i.e., any time

allocation in which both spouses do not allocate time to both sectors). This definition of

specialization is consistent with standard usage in the economics of the family and

analogous to usage familiar in international economics.




12
   Becker (1965, 1991) emphasizes the role of nonlabor inputs (e.g., calories, nutrients, sleep) as well as
human capital as determinants of market wage rates and earnings. I ignore these effects because they do
not affect the validity of the specialization claim.
13
   Although I have not done so, it is sometimes convenient to treat the market sector as if it were another
household activity, while recognizing that the "technology" for "producing" the market good has a different
structure than most household production activities. The usual assumption that spouses' wage rates are
constants (i.e., independent of the time inputs of the spouses to the market sector) implies that the marginal
product of labor in market work (i.e., the wage rate) is constant. Hence, under the usual assumption that
individuals face market wage rates that are independent of the number of hours they allocate to market
work, the implied "production function" for the market good is linear. Progressive taxes destroy the
linearity of this relationship.
          I have assumed that the market good enters the spouses' utility functions directly. If we insist that
the arguments of the utility functions are "commodities," then we need to introduce an additional household
production activity with the property that g[th, tw,y] = y for all {th,tw,y}. This would, of course, violate the
weak essentiality assumption. As Gershuny (2000) points out, Becker (1965) emphasized that consuming
market goods takes time, an insight that has been largely eclipsed by the subsequent emphasis on household
production rather than consumption technology. Gronau (1977, p. 1100) makes this point.
14
   Following Becker (1965), I ignore leisure and focus on the allocation of each spouse's total work time
between market work and household work. Gronau (1977) introduced leisure into a single-person
household production model. As Becker (1965) points out, with multiple household production activities,
leisure is simply an additional time-intensive activity.
15
   The interpretation and analysis of the specialization claim is sensitive to whether we recognize more than
one household activity. To focus on sector specialization, I assume that there is only one household
production activity. This assumption is consistent with the discussion of specialization in Chapter 2 of the
Treatise which recognizes only one household production activity. I discuss multiple household production
activities in section 5. The discussion of household production in Chapter 1 of the Treatise, like the classic
discussion in Becker (1965), recognizes multiple household production activities.
16
   "Specialization" might be called "weak specialization."
                                                                                                       11


        Strong specialization: Each spouse allocates time to only one sector. Strong

specialization includes not only the case in which spouses allocate time to different sectors

(e.g., husbands work only in the market; wives work only in the household), but also the

case in which both spouses allocate all of their time to the same sector (e.g., both spouses

allocate all of their time to the household). I call this case "superstrong specialization."17

     Nonspecialization implies bilateral household production, but specialization opens up

the possibility of unilateral household production. Putting aside superstrong

specialization for the present, there are three cases with specialization:


     1. if both spouses work in the household, then only one spouse works in the market;

        in this case, we have bilateral household production;


     2. if both spouses work in the market, then only one spouse works in the household;

        in this case we have unilateral household production;18


     3. each spouse allocates time to only one sector (i.e., strong specialization); in this

        case, we have unilateral household production.



        With process preferences, individuals care how they spend their time.19 The

validity of the specialization claim depends on assuming away process preferences or


17
   Superstrong specialization may at first seem pathological because we usually apply the household
production model to working-age couples in which at least one spouse works in the market and at least one
spouse works in the household. Retired or disabled couples in which both spouses work in the household
and neither works in the market are obvious examples of superstrong specialization. Whether unemployed
couples exemplify superstrong specialization depends on whether we classify job search as market work.
18
   Fixed costs associated with market work (e.g., commuting costs) make it less likely that specialization
will involve both spouses working in the market (case 2). Among the few models that include fixed costs
associated with market work are Cogan (1981) and Donald and Hamermesh (2009).
19
   In labor economics, the concept of process preferences, although not the terminology, goes back to
Adam Smith. Juster and Stafford (1991) call these "psychic benefits" or "process benefits." "Process
preferences" is a better term because it accommodates negative effects ("disbenefits") as well as positive
                                                                                                           12


restricting them so that they strengthen rather than weaken the incentives to specialize.

When there are two or more household activities, process preferences may take the form

of a preference for cooking rather than cleaning.20 When there is only one household

activity, process preferences may take the form of a preference for dividing time in some

ratio between the market and the household, or an individual may enjoy working in the

market more than working in the household, or vice versa. Regardless of the household

production technology, if both spouses have sufficiently strong preferences for allocating

time to both sectors, then Pareto efficiency will require that they do so. 21

         The default assumption in the new home economics is the absence of process

preferences. Without process preferences, individuals care only about the nominal outputs

of home production (a clean house; a home-cooked meal) but not about how they spend

their time (cleaning; cooking). With two sectors, market and household, the absence of

process preferences implies that market work and household work are perfect substitutes

in both spouses' utility functions.22 Each spouse cares about his or her total work time,

but each is indifferent among all combinations of market work and household work that

correspond to the same total; in terms of (dis)utility, "work is work." For the remainder

of this paper, I assume the absence of process preferences.




effects. Rosen (1986) provides a modern discussion of non-pecuniary benefits and "equalizing differences"
in wages.
20
   In the context of one-person households, Pollak and Wachter (1975, p. 256) emphasize that the allocation
of time may depend on the direct utility associated with time spent in an activity: “time spent in many
production activities is a direct source of utility as well as an input into a commodity."
21
   As Folbre (2004) points out, economists generally interpret Pareto efficiency in a way that ignores
outcomes for children, except to the extent that these outcomes enter into their parents' utility functions. A
broader notion of Pareto efficiency would take account of the preferences, interests, or well-being of
children.
22
   Perfect substitutes in the spouses’ utility functions is quite different from perfect substitutes in the
household production function. Except when explicitly noted, in this paper perfect substitutes refers to the
household production function.
                                                                                                       13


        With perfect substitutes, an "efficiency factor" converts the time input of the wife

into units comparable to the time input of the husband. That is, the marginal rate of

(technical) substitution of the husband's time for the wife's time is constant. Although

none of Becker’s specialization theorems explicitly assumes perfect substitutes, the

surrounding discussion and the proofs of several of the specialization theorems rely on

perfect substitutes.23 Formally, perfect substitutes imply a household production

function of the form

        g[th,tw,y] = G[th + α(y)tw,y]

where the "efficiency factor," α(y), converts the time input of the wife into units

comparable with the time input of the husband. In Pollak (2012) I analyze in detail the

implications of the perfect substitutes assumption and argue that the assumption that

spouses' time inputs are perfect substitutes is implausible. In the absence of process

preferences, if spouses' time inputs are perfect substitutes then, with no further

assumptions about technology, efficiency implies specialization.


        The perfect substitutes assumption is problematic for two reasons. First, because

it is implausible, the perfect substitutes assumption severely limits the applicability of the

specialization claim.24       Second, because perfect substitutes imply specialization, the

perfect substitutes assumption makes redundant the explicitly stated hypotheses of the

specialization theorems in the Treatise and makes human capital irrelevant to the

specialization claim. More precisely, in the absence of process preferences, if spouses'


23
   In Pollak (2012) I erroneously claimed that although Becker (1991) uses the perfect substitutes case to
motivate his discussion of specialization, "his specialization theorems do not assume that spouses' time
inputs are perfect substitutes." This is flat-out wrong. Most of Becker's specialization theorems assume
perfect substitutes and the interpretations of the remaining theorems depend on the perfect substitutes
assumption.
24
   Lundberg (2008) and Pollak (2012) elaborate this point.
                                                                                                         14


time inputs are perfect substitutes, then efficiency implies specialization. Full stop. That

is, with perfect substitutes, additional assumptions (other than the absence of process

preferences) are not needed to reach the specialization conclusion. But perfect substitutes

is not the only assumption about household technology for which efficiency implies

specialization. In section 3 I show that, in the absence of process preferences, if the

household technology is “additive” and exhibits constant returns to scale, then efficiency

requires specialization. Formally,

Additivity Assumption: The household technology is of the form

         g[th, tw,y] = max {gh[th,0,yh] + gw[0,tw,yw]}

         subject to yh + yw ≤ y.

         If the household technology is additive and both spouses engage in household

production, then the total output they produce is the sum of the outputs they could

produce separately.25 More precisely, the additivity assumption postulates that total

output is the sum of the outputs the spouses could produce unilaterally when nonlabor

inputs are allocated between them so as to maximize output. 26 Additivity implies that

the output of each spouse is independent of the time the other spouse allocates to

household production. For some nonadditive household technologies (e.g., the Cobb-

Douglas), time inputs by both spouses are essential. But even if time inputs by both

spouses are not required to produce positive output, bilateral household production may

be efficient. The additivity assumption rules out a wide range of household technologies,

including the Cobb-Douglas. Later in this section I prove that with nonadditivity,


25
    This informal definition implicitly assumes that output is produced without nonlabor inputs. The formal
definition is more complicated because of the need to deal with nonlabor inputs.
26
   In Pollak (2012) I incorrectly claim that Becker's analysis of specialization "implicitly assumes that
household technology satisfies the additivity assumption."
                                                                                           15


efficiency may require bilateral household production and, for some wage rates,

nonspecialization. With additivity, bilateral production implies that spouses produce

"side-by-side," each using his or her unilateral technology. When there are no nonlabor

inputs, the additivity assumption simplifies to

       g[th, tw] = g[th, 0] + g[0, tw].

In Pollak (2012) I show that additivity and perfect substitutes are compatible only in a

narrow class of cases.

       The additivity assumption requires scrupulously maintaining the distinction

between the household production function and the spouses' unilateral production

functions. For example, the Cobb-Douglas household production function is given by

                                 γ
       g[th, tw,y] = Athβh twβw y .


The unilateral production functions corresponding to the Cobb-Douglas household

production function are given by


       g[th,0, yh] = 0


and


       g[0,tw, yw] = 0.


That is, the unilateral production functions corresponding to the Cobb-Douglas household

production function produce 0 output -- not a surprise, because the Cobb-Douglas

household production function yields 0 output unless both spouses' time inputs are

positive.
                                                                                            16


        With additivity, the spouses' unilateral production functions contain all the

information required to construct the household production function. That is, with

additivity the spouses’ unilateral production functions are a sufficient statistic for the

household production function. For example, if we assume that the household production

function is additive, and if we begin with Cobb-Douglas unilateral production functions

                           δ        εh
        gh[th,0,yh] = Ah th h yh


and

                               δw        εw
        gw[0,tw,yw] = Aw tw         yw


then the household production function is given by

                                              δ   εh         δw    εw
                g[th, tw,y] = max { Ah th h yh         + Aw tw    yw }


subject to


        yh + yw ≤ y.


The implied household production function is not Cobb-Douglas and does not exhibit

strong essentiality.

        Additivity is a useful special case for household production for two reasons.

First, because additivity is tractable it provides a ready source of transparent examples

and counterexamples. Second, the additive case provides an alternative to Becker's

interpretation of the assumption that spouses are "intrinsically identical." Becker

interprets "intrinsically identical" to mean that spouses' time inputs are perfect substitutes
                                                                                                         17


in household production. The additive case in which spouses have identical unilateral

production functions provides an alternative interpretation of "intrinsically identical."

        Although additivity may have been plausible for international trade in the 18th and

early 19th centuries, it is implausible for households.27 For households, we want to leave

open the possibility that bilateral production yields output greater than the sum of the

outputs the spouses could produce unilaterally. For example, spouses might produce

greater output if they were able to divide household production into component tasks,

mirroring within the household the division of labor that Adam Smith observed in the pin

factory.


        Without additivity, efficiency may require nonspecialization. The Cobb-Douglas

household production function provides a simple example. Suppose that the household

technology is given by

                                     γ
        g[th, tw,y] = Athβh twβw y


where A = 1, γ = 0, and βh = βw = 1/2. That is, the household commodity is produced by

time alone and the spouses are equally productive. Suppose that Th = Tw = 1, so that each

spouse has one unit of time to be allocated between household production (th, tw) and

market work (th0 , tw0) = (1 - th, 1 - tw}. With no nonlabor income and the price of the

market good normalized to 1, the market good is given by


        x = whth0+ wwtw0 = wh(1- th) + ww(1 - tw).


27
  Additivity is a standard assumption in international economics. The Ricardian model of comparative
advantage begins with each country's unilateral production function for each good (e.g., cloth; wine). The
world's production function is the sum over all countries of these unilateral production functions. This
assumes that all factors other than labor are mobile. Unless we also assume that the unilateral production
                                                                                                             18


         Suppose the spouses' wage rates are wh = ww = 1, and consider the symmetric

nonspecialized time allocation th = tw = 1/4 . This time allocation implies z = 1/4 and x =

3/2, so the vector (z,x) = (1/4, 3/2) is feasible. But the vector (z,x) = (1/4, 3/2) cannot be

produced with specialization, contrary to any general claim that efficiency requires

specialization. When wh = ww = 1, both spouses must allocate time to the market to

satisfy whth0+ wwtw0 = wh(1- th) + ww(1- tw) = 3/2. And both spouses must allocate time to

household production to produce z = 1/4.


         This counterexample to the general specialization claim is not a razor's edge case.

It is easy to see that efficiency requires nonspecialization as we vary the parameters (βh ,

βw, wh, ww ) where βw = 1 - βh in a neighborhood of (βh , βw, wh, ww ) = (1/2, 1/2, 1,

1).


3.       A New Specialization Theorem

         In this section I prove a new specialization theorem.28

Theorem: In the absence of process preferences, if the household technology is additive and

exhibits constant returns to scale, then efficiency implies specialization.29

         This establishes that the class of technologies for which efficiency implies

specialization is broader than perfect substitutes.30


functions of all countries are identical, this assumption is not as restrictive as at first appears because
nonmobile factors can be incorporated in the unilateral production functions.
28
   For the remainder of this paper, I assume the absence of process preferences.
29
   This assumes that the efficient allocation of time to maximize g[th, tw,y] holding direct consumption of
the market good constant is unique. Nonuniqueness arises, for example, if spouses have identical wage
rates and identical constant returns to scale production functions. With nonuniqueness, any output vector
that can be produced efficiently with nonspecialization can be produced efficiently with specialization. See
footnote 31.
30
   If output is produced by labor alone (i.e., without market goods as inputs), then additivity and constant
returns to scale imply that the unilateral production functions are given by gh[th,0,yh] = Ah th and gw[0,tw,yw]
= Aw tw. With additivity these unilateral production functions imply that spouses labor inputs are perfect
substitutes.
                                                                                        19


Proof: Suppose, on the contrary, that nonspecialization is efficient. Efficient allocations

maximize the output of the household commodity, subject to appropriate constraints (see

below). Hence, the program

        M = M[th,yh,tw,yw] = max {gh[th,0,yh] + gw[0,tw,yw]}

subject to the constraint


        yh + yw + x** ≤ wh(Th - th) + ww(Tw - tw) + x*


has an interior solution -- that is, a soluton satisfying


        0 < th < Th and 0 < tw < Tw .


        The term x** is the required output of the market good that is consumed directly.

Thus, x** = 0 corresponds to the case in which the market good does not enter the

spouses' utility functions, but serves only as an input into the production of the

commodity, z.


        From the first order conditions
          h
        ∂g [th,0,yh]
        ——————
        ∂th
        ───────── ═         wh
           h
        ∂g [th,0,yh]
        ——————
        ∂yh

    Because gh[th,0,yh] is homogeneous of degree 1, the marginal rate of substitution is

homogeneous of degree 0.          Hence, for values of {th,yh} satisfying the first order

conditions we have
                                                                                                     20


     yh = μh(wh)th .


     By an analogous argument


     yw = μw(ww)tw .


     Substituting for yh and yw in the constraint yields


     wh(Th - th) + ww(Tw - tw) = μh(wh)th + μw(ww)tw + x** - x*.


Because the constraint is linear in {th,tw}, we can solve it for tw as a linear function of th.


         Substituting for yh and yw in the maximand yields

         M = M*[th,wh,tw,ww] = max {gh[th,0,μh(wh)th] + gw[0,tw,μw(ww)tw]}.

Because the unilateral production functions are homogeneous of degree 1, this becomes

         M = M*[th,wh,tw,ww] = max { th gh[1,0,μh(wh)] + tw gw[0,1,μw(ww)]}.

That is, the maximand is a linear function of {th,tw}.

         Because the constraint implies that tw is a linear function of th, we can eliminate tw

from the maximand and write it as a linear function of th. Hence, the program has a

corner solution (i.e., either th = 0 or th = Th).31 This implies specialization, contrary to our

initial assumption of nonspecialization. ■




31
  This argument implicitly assumes that gh[1,0,μh(wh)] ≠ gw[0,1,μw(ww). Equality corresponds to the case
discussed in footnote 29 in which the efficient allocation of time is not unique.
                                                                                                              21




4.       Returns to Scale

         Increasing returns and decreasing returns raise different issues. In this section I

discuss both increasing returns and decreasing returns under the assumption that spouses'

stocks of human capital are fixed. Becker (1991, Theorem 2.4) claims that if households can

optimally adjust spouses' stocks of human capital, then perfect substitutes and increasing

returns imply strong specialization (i.e., one spouse works only in the market and the other

only in the household, or both spouses work only in the same sector). I show in section 6

that the validity of Becker's strong specialization claim depends on additional, unstated

assumptions about the strength of human capital effects on wage rates and on productivity in

the household. In section 4a I establish a result I will use in section 6. Specifically, in section

4a I show that if spouses' stocks of human capital are fixed, then perfect substitutes and

increasing returns do not imply strong specialization.

         In section 4b I investigate whether the specialization theorem of section 3 (i.e., with

additivity and constant returns, efficiency implies specialization) holds when we replace

constant returns with decreasing returns.32 I show that this generalization of the theorem

does not hold: with decreasing returns efficiency may require bilateral household

production and, for some wage rates, nonspecialization. I argue that decreasing returns

are plausible if individuals' productivities decline as spouses become tired or bored with

an activity. That is, with additivity and decreasing returns, efficiency may require

nonspecialization.




32
  I ignore the perfect substitutes case because with perfect substitutes, efficiency implies specialization
regardless of assumptions about returns to scale.
                                                                                                           22




4a.       Increasing Returns to Scale and Strong Specialization

          In this section I construct a transparent counterexample to demonstrate that when

each spouse's stocks of human capital are fixed, with perfect substitutes and increasing

returns, efficiency need not require strong specialization.33 The intuition is straightforward

and has nothing to do with increasing returns: suppose that allocating the time of either

spouse exclusively to household sector results in "too much" of the household commodity

and "not enough" of the market good. Hence, efficiency requires that the spouse who

allocates time to the household sector also allocates time to the market sector, ruling out

strong specialization.34

          With strong specialization there are 4 possible patterns of time allocation, (th, tw),

and, corresponding to each, an "output vector," (z,x). Two of these four patterns of time

allocation correspond to superstrong specialization (i.e., both spouses allocate all of their

time to the same sector).35 Superstrong specialization implies that the corresponding output

vectors are of the form (0,x) or (z,x*), where x* is nonlabor income.36 That is, either both

spouses work in the market and neither works in the household, or both spouses work in the

household and neither works in the market. In the two remaining patterns of strong

specialization, one spouse works only in the household and the other works only in the

market.


33
   While I assume here that spouses' stocks of human capital are fixed, Becker assumes that spouses' stocks of
human capital are optimally adjusted. Hence, my counterexample here does not contradict Becker's strong
specialization claim.
34
   This assumes strictly positive production of the household commodity. "Too much" and "not enough" reflect
implicit assumptions about preferences. The simplest such assumption is that the spouses have identical
homothetic preferences so that production decisions are independent of Pareto weights and bargaining power.
35
   Recall that strong specialization includes superstrong specialization.
36
   The argument could be simplified by assuming that the household must pay for market goods with
current earnings, but this assumption would rule out couples in which both spouses were fully retired.
                                                                                                        23


        To proceed further, I introduce assumptions that allow me to discuss time

allocation and Pareto-efficient consumption patterns without becoming bogged down in

extraneous issues involving spouses' preferences, the household governance structure,

and bargaining. Specifically, I assume that both the household commodity and the market

good are household public goods and that spouses have identical fixed-coefficient

preferences.37 The focus on this special case is legitimate because I am not proving a

general theorem but constructing a counterexample to the claim that with perfect

substitutes and increasing returns, efficiency implies strong specialization.

        The case of superstrong specialization in which (th = 0, tw = 0), which corresponds to

the output vector (0,x), is easily dispatched. This time allocation cannot be Pareto efficient

because (i) there are feasible consumption vectors in which both the household commodity

and the market good are strictly positive and (ii) with fixed-coefficient preferences, any such

a consumption vector dominates every consumption vector in which z = 0. I now consider

the three remaining cases.

        All three of the remaining cases allow strictly positive consumption of both the

home-produced commodity and the market good. The first of these corresponds to the case

of superstrong specialization in which the output vector is of the form (z,x*).38 The second

corresponds to the time allocation in which the husband allocates time only to the market

and the wife allocates time only to the household, (th = 0, tw = 1). The third corresponds to


37
   If spouses have fixed-coefficient preferences then any consumption vector with positive consumption of
both the market good and the household commodity is preferred to every consumption vector in which z =
0 or x = 0. This is true for all CES preferences with an elasticity of substitution between the fixed-
coefficient and Cobb-Douglas cases. The assumptions that spouses have identical preferences and that the
household commodity and the market good are household public goods implies that spouses always agree
about which consumption vector, output vector, and time allocation is best. In this case the governance
structure is irrelevant because the spouses never disagree.
38
   Provided nonlabor income is not 0, this is consistent with positive consumption of both the household
commodity and the market good.
                                                                                                             24


the mirror image case in which the wife allocates time only to the market and the husband

allocates time only to the household, (th = 1, tw = 0).39

         I now sketch a counterexample. The intuition is straightforward. If the strong

specialization claim holds for all increasing returns technologies and all well-behaved

preferences, it must hold for:

(1) all increasing returns technologies that imply feasible sets with frontiers that are close to

linear

(2) all preferences that allow little or no substitution between the market good and the

household commodity (e.g., fixed-coefficient preferences), and in which the desired ratio of

the market good to the household commodity is large.

         Suppose output is produced by time alone and that the unilateral production

functions are of the form

          g[th,0] = Ah (th)δh and g[0, tw] = Aw (tw)δw.

Increasing returns corresponds to the case in which the exponents δh and δw are greater

than 1. The implied feasible set is nonconvex, but if δh and δw are close to 1, then the

feasible set is close to convex and its frontier close to linear.

         Suppose preferences are given by

         U(z,x) = min {r z, x},

where r is a preference parameter. With a linear budget constraint, as the preference

parameter r gets large, the optimal x gets large relative to z. With fixed coefficient



39
   The second case may dominate the third, or vice versa, in the sense that the consumption vector implied by
one may dominate the consumption vector implied by the other. When this is the case, efficiency implies that
we can disregard the time allocation corresponding to the dominated consumption vector. Dominance arises if,
for example, the husband's wage rate is greater than the wife's, the wife's productivity in the household is
greater than the husband's, and Th = Tw. In this case, strong specialization with the wife allocating time only
to the market and the husband allocating time only to the household is inefficient.
                                                                                                             25


preferences, however, boundary solutions (i.e., those in which either z = 0 or x = 0) are

never optimal.

         This counterexample shows that, unlike the conclusions of Becker's other

specialization theorems, the strong specialization conclusion of Theorem 2.4 does not hold

when each spouse's stocks of human capital are fixed at arbitrary levels. The intuition is

straightforward: with strong specialization, the scope for reallocating time is tightly

constrained: only 4 patterns of time allocation are consistent with strong specialization.

Thus, if the strong specialization conclusion of Theorem 2.4 is correct, the ability of

households to adjust spouses' stocks of human capital must be crucial. In section 6 I show

that when households can optimally adjust spouses' stocks of human capital, whether perfect

substitutes and increasing returns imply strong specialization depends on the strength of

human capital effects on wage rates and on productivity in the household.

4b.      Decreasing Returns to Scale and Specialization40

         In this section I show that, with additivity and decreasing returns, Pareto

efficiency can require nonspecialization.41 That is, the specialization theorem of section 3

ceases to hold when constant returns is replaced by decreasing returns. I then argue that

decreasing returns are plausible. Specifically, if individuals become tired or bored as they

devote more time to an activity (e.g., child care), and if fatigue or boredom causes them

to become less productive, then the unilateral production functions and the household

production function are likely to exhibit decreasing returns to scale.42


40
   For the remainder of this section I assume additivity.
41
   I do not discuss perfect substitutes because with perfect substitutes Pareto efficiency implies
specialization regardless of assumptions about returns to scale.
42
   The assumption that productivity declines as individuals become tired or bored is distinct from process
preferences, although both productivity and preference effects can operate simultaneously. Whether they
operate separately or together, productivity effects and preference effects may cause a Pareto-efficient
household to allocate less time to activities with which individuals become tired or bored. The disutility
                                                                                                          26


         To illustrate decreasing returns to scale, suppose that output is produced by time

alone, and that the unilateral production functions are of the form

            g[th,0] = Ah (th)δh and g[0, tw] = Aw (tw)δw.

Decreasing returns corresponds to the case in which the exponents δh and δw are less

than 1. For definiteness, I assume δh = δw = ½ and Ah = Aw .

         If there is no nonlabor income (x* = 0), in the market sector we have


         x = whth0+ wwtw0 = wh(Th - th) + ww(Tw - tw).


Assuming Th = Tw= 1, this becomes


         x = wh(1- th) + ww(1 - tw).

         Suppose the spouses' wage rates are wh = ww = 1, and consider the symmetric

nonspecialized time allocation th = tw = 1/4. It is straightforward to calculate that (z, x) =

(1, 3/2).

         This output cannot be produced with specialization. It is easy to verify that it

cannot be produced with strong specialization. There are two cases of weak

specialization to consider: (1) both spouses allocate time to the market and only one

allocates time to home production and (2) both spouses allocate time to home production

and only one allocates time to the market.

         (1) Suppose only one spouse (for definiteness, the wife) allocates time to home

production. Then to produce z = 1, she must allocate all of her time to home production.

But when all remaining time (i.e., in this example, all of the husband's time) is allocated




effects of fatigue and boredom require recognizing process preferences by treating time allocated to an
activity as an additional argument of individuals' utility functions.
                                                                                                           27


to the market sector, he cannot earn enough to purchase x = 3/2. Instead we have x =

whth0 = 1 < 3/2.

         (2) Now suppose only one spouse (for definiteness, the husband) allocates time to

the market. Even if the husband allocates all of his time to the market sector, he cannot

earn enough to purchase x = 3/2. Instead we have x = whth0 = 1 < 3/2. Because the

example is symmetric, the same is true if we reverse the roles of husband and wife.

         In this example, efficiency requires nonspecialization (i.e., both spouses must

allocate time to both sectors). This nonspecialization example is not a razor's edge case:

efficiency requires nonspecialization as the parameters (δh , δw, wh, ww) vary in a

neighborhood of (δh , δw, wh, ww) = (1/2, 1/2, 1, 1). That is, even with additivity, if both

spouses' unilateral production functions exhibit decreasing returns, then efficiency may

require nonspecialization.43

         Decreasing returns are plausible. The effect of fatigue or boredom on productivity

is well documented and provides the primary rationale for regulating the working hours

of airline pilots, air-traffic controllers, and truck drivers.44 When output is produced by

time alone, the negative productivity effects of fatigue and boredom imply that increases

in hours worked yield less than proportional increases in output. When output requires

both time and nonlabor inputs, the implications for returns to scale depend on how

nonlabor inputs enter the production function. The leading case, however, is one in which


43
   The effect of a progressive tax on individuals' earnings is similar to decreasing returns to scale and can
also lead to efficient nonspecialization even when the household technology exhibits constant returns. But
with constant returns in the household technology, a progressive tax on joint earnings (i.e., the sum of
individuals' earnings) cannot lead to efficient nonspecialization because taxation of joint earnings makes
spouses' time in market work perfect substitutes in the "production" of the market good.
44
   Worker health and safety provide a secondary rationale for limiting work hours (e.g., exhausted interns
and residents are more likely to stick themselves with needles, exposing them to blood-borne infectious
diseases). Iglehart (2010) argues that the evidence supporting the claim that limiting the hours of medical
interns and residents increases patient safety is very weak.
                                                                                                               28


fatigue or boredom imply decreasing returns. Two examples illustrate the possibilities

and confirm that decreasing returns is the leading case. (1) Suppose that the household

technology exhibits constant returns when time is measured in efficiency units and that,

as individuals grow tired or bored, each additional hour produces fewer and fewer

efficiency units. For definiteness, suppose that time in efficiency units is related to hours

by tσ where 0 < σ < 1; hence, if time is substitutable for nonlabor inputs when time

inputs are measured in hours, then the production function exhibits decreasing returns. (2)

Now suppose that the household technology exhibits increasing returns when time inputs

are measured in efficiency units. In this case, whether the production function exhibits

decreasing, constant, or increasing returns when time inputs are measured in hours

depends on the relative strength of the efficiency-units effect and the increasing returns

effect as well as on the substitutability of time for nonlabor inputs. The efficiency-units

effect may be offset by nonlabor inputs becoming more productive as their use

increases.45

5.         Multiple Household Production Activities

           With multiple household production activities, the sector specialization claim may

fail even if spouses' time inputs are perfect substitutes in every household production

activity. Suppose the household sector consists of m distinct activities, m > 1.46 It is easy to

construct examples in which both spouses allocate time to the market, one spouse allocates

time to m* household activities, and the other spouse allocates time to the remaining m-m*


45
     The Cobb-Douglas provides a transparent example, but I omit the details.
46
  I assume that the household operates all m activities at positive levels and ignore the prior issue of which
activities operate at positive levels and which at zero levels. If spouses’ preferences are such that any vector
with positive consumption of every commodity is preferred to every consumption vector in which one or more
commodities are consumed at 0 levels, then a Pareto-efficient household will operate all m activities at positive
levels.
                                                                                                           29


activities, where m* ≠ 0 and m* ≠ m. Because the market is the only "activity" to which

both spouses allocate time, this pattern of time allocation exhibits specialization. 47 But it

does not exhibit sector specialization because both spouses allocate time to the household

sector and both spouses allocate time to the market sector.48

         Because sector specialization is defined in terms of spouses' time allocation, the

analysis of sector specialization does not require an aggregate measure of the output of the

household sector. I finesse the issue of what constitutes a household production activity by

treating the set of activities as a primitive.

         The definitions of "bilateral" and "unilateral" extend to multiple household activities

in the obvious way. The household sector is bilateral if both spouses allocate time to it, and

unilateral if only one spouse allocates time to it. The household sector is unilateral only

when all household activities are unilateral and all are performed by the same spouse. These

definitions imply that with multiple household activities, the household sector is itself

bilateral if one or more household activities is bilateral, or if some household activities are

carried out unilaterally by the husband and others unilaterally by the wife. Subdividing a

bilateral activity (e.g., "cooking") into two unilateral activities (e.g., "cooking indoors" and

"cooking outdoors") has no effect on whether the household sector itself is bilateral or

unilateral.49

         Efficiency may require unilateral production in the household sector for two distinct

reasons. First, if the spouses are equally productive in each household activity but their



47
   Alternatively, the Pareto-efficient pattern of time allocation might be one in which both spouses allocate
time to the same household activity and only one spouse works in the market. This pattern of time
allocation implies sector specialization.
48
   Lundberg (2008) points out that, with multiple household activities, if spouses' time inputs are perfect
substitutes, then efficiency requires activity specialization but not sector specialization.
                                                                                                                30


wage rates differ, then efficiency may require the lower-wage spouse to perform all

household activities. This conclusion continues to hold when spouses' productivities are

similar but not identical provided spouses' wage rates are sufficiently different. Second, if

economies of scope knit together all household activities, then efficiency may require the

same spouse to perform all of them.

         Economies of scope are a property of the technology for producing two or more

commodities and arise from complementarities among activities.50 Economies of scope can

arise in single-person as well as in multiple-person households. Additivity, on the other

hand, can arise only in multiple person households but can arise when there is only one

household commodity.51

         Economies of scope provide a technology-based explanation of why, with many

household activities, efficiency may dictate that the same spouse perform a suite of linked

activities. A number of researchers, including Becker, allude to economies of scope in

household production, although without necessarily using the term. Usually the context is

child care. For example, Becker (1991) writes: "...a mother can more readily feed and watch

her older children while she produces additional children than while she engages in most

other activities. This complementarity between bearing and rearing children has been

important because, until the last century, practically all women spent most of their prime

49
   Indexes of "activity specialization" depend on specifying what constitutes an activity and, hence, may be
affected by subdividing activities. See Bonke, Deding, Lausten, and Stratton (2008) for a rare discussion of
activity specialization.
50
   Thus, economies of scope involve joint production. In the context of a multiproduct firm, the cost of
producing the output vector (z1, z2) is less than the sum of the costs of producing (z1, 0) and (0,z2). Panzar and
Willig (1981) provide a formal cost-function definition of economies of scope and discuss the relationship
between economies of scope and multiproduct firms. The standard assumption that household technology can
be represented by separate production functions for each commodity precludes joint production and, hence,
economies of scope. In a one person household, let C(z1, z2, y) denote the time required to produce the
commodity vector (z1, z2) where y is the vector of nonlabor inputs. Then economics of scope imply C(z1, z2, y)
< min {C(z1, 0, y1) + C(0, z2, y2)} subject to y1 + y2
51
   The definition of additivity in section 2 assumes no joint production.
                                                                                                            31


adult lives with children" (p. 38). Fafchamps and Quisumbling (2008) make a similar point,

referring explicitly to economies of scope: "One common example of economies of scope is

child care and house-based chores: many chores can be completed while at the same time

attending to a child" (p. 3198). Hadfield (1993), criticizing Becker's analysis of the

gendering of specialization, writes "...nor is there an analysis of how women's self-evident

advantages in childbearing extend (presumably through economies of scope and

complementarity) to create advantages in the full range of childcare household activities"

(97).52




52
     Unlike Hadfield, my concern is with specialization itself, not with the gendering of specialization.
                                                                                                        32


6.      The Roles of Human Capital

        Human capital has been the principal vehicle for introducing dynamics into

household production models, although the relative importance of household human capital

and market human capital is far from clear.53 Household physical capital and technical

progress in household production received little attention before Greenwood, Seshadri and

Yorukoglu (2005). To the extent that new household technology has been embodied in new

capital goods (e.g., electric washing machines as "engines of liberation"), the explicit

introduction of physical capital opens important new opportunities for empirical research.

New opportunities on the theoretical side are fewer because, in the absence of market

imperfections and transaction costs, the flow of services from physical capital can be treated

just like the flow of inputs of market goods.

        Although Becker's argument in the Treatise that "efficiency implies specialization"

appears to depend on households optimally adjusting spouses' stocks of human capital, it

actually does not.54 The specialization conclusion follows directly from the perfect

substitutes assumption, and holds when each spouse's stocks of human capital are fixed,

regardless of the level at which they are fixed.55

        Human capital or, more precisely, the ability of households to adjust spouses' stocks

of human capital, presents two new issues. First, when there are two kinds of human capital,

household and market, we can investigate human capital specialization as well as time




53
   Becker and Murphy (2007) argue that "general skills are much more important in the household than in the
marketplace."
54
   Human capital plays no role in Becker (1965).
55
   As I showed in section 4, Becker's claim that perfect substitutes and increasing returns to scale imply
strong specialization (Theorem 2.4) does not hold when each spouse's stocks of human capital are fixed at
arbitrary levels. The strength of human capital effects determine whether it holds when households
optimally adjust spouses' stocks of human capital.
                                                                                                 33


specialization. Second, in a dynamic setting human capital strengthens the incentives for

time specialization.

        The definition of human capital specialization is analogous to the definition of time

specialization. For example, with two types of human capital, "nonspecialization" is the

case in which both spouses invest in both types of human capital. If time specialization is

efficient and human capital is sector specific (i.e., market and household rather than, for

example, cognitive and noncognitive), then human capital specialization is also efficient: in

an efficient household, a spouse who allocates time to only one sector invests only in human

capital that is specific to that sector.

        For technologies that imply specialization when each spouse's stocks of human

capital are fixed at arbitrary levels (e.g., perfect substitutes; additivity and constant returns to

scale) human capital specialization is a consequence of time specialization, not its cause.

But for household technologies that do not imply time specialization when each spouse's

stocks of human capital are fixed at arbitrary levels, human capital specialization is both a

consequence and a cause of time specialization: specialized time allocation and specialized

investment in sector-specific human capital go hand-in-hand. They are simultaneously

determined and mutually reinforcing.

        For technologies that do not imply specialization when each spouse's stocks of

human capital are fixed at arbitrary levels, the strength of human capital effects may play a

crucial role in determining whether specialization is efficient. Although Becker does not

discuss the strength of human capital effects, his functional form assumptions imply that

these effects are strong. But if human capital has only weak effects on wage rates and on

productivity in the household, then for given preferences and a given governance structure,
                                                                                                          34


all human capital vectors may imply the same pattern of specialization or nonspecialization.

That is, the mere presence of human capital does not automatically transform technologies

for which nonspecialization is efficient into technologies for which specialization is

inefficient.56

         The household's ability to optimally adjust even a single type of human capital can

provide incentives for sector specialization.            For example, suppose that each spouse's

household human capital is fixed but the household can adjust each spouse's stock of market

human capital. In this case, market human capital, through its effect on wage rates, may

provide sufficient incentives for specialization.57 Except in special cases, economic theory

alone cannot establish whether specialization is efficient, but it can identify the modeling

assumptions and parameter values that determine whether specialization is efficient.

Whether these modeling assumptions hold and whether the parameter values lie within the

critical range that corresponds to specialization is an empirical question.

         To say more about how human capital affects the incentives for specialization

requires specifying the relationship between human capital, wage rates, and productivity in

the household. Following Becker, I assume two types of human capital. But unlike Becker,

who assumes sector-specific human capital (i.e., market human capital which affects only

wage rates; household human capital which affects only productivity in the household), I

begin by allowing both types of human capital to affect both wage rates and productivity in

the household.       This would be the case, for example, if one type of human capital

corresponds to cognitive (c) and the other to noncognitive (n) skills, or if one type


56
   When stocks of human capital are variable, it is convenient to imagine a household technology
corresponding to each human capital vector.
57
   The situation is much the same if there is only one type of human capital that has, for example, a greater
effect on wage rates than on productivity in the household.
                                                                                                            35


corresponds to verbal and the other to mathematical skills. I denote the husband's human

capital vector by (Hch, Hnh), and the wife's by (Hcw, Hnw).

         How does human capital enter the household production function? With sector-

specific human capital, the simplest assumption is that human capital is "time augmenting"

in the sense that the time that each spouse allocates to a sector is multiplied by a function of

that spouse's sector-specific human capital.58 I generalize this beyond the case in which

human capital is sector specific by introducing sector-specific aggregator functions that

convert the spouses' human capital vectors into indexes that multiply the spouses' time

inputs.59 I denote the functions that aggregate the husband's human capital by ψh = ψh[Hch,

Hnh] and ψh0 = ψh0[Hch, Hnh], and those that aggregate the wife's human capital by ψw =

ψw[Hcw, Hnw] and ψw0 = ψw0[Hch, Hnh]. These assumptions allow us to measure the time

inputs that each spouse allocates to each sector in efficiency units: for the husband, {ψh[Hch,

Hnh]th, ψh0[Hch, Hnh]th0} and for the wife {ψw[Hcw, Hnw]tw, ψw0[Hcw, Hnw]tw0}.

         Using this parametric approach, we can formalize both the substitutability of one

type of human capital for the other in each sector and the strength of human capital effects.

Substitutability determines the extent to which a particular type of human capital is

associated with a particular sector. Sector-specific human capital is the extreme case in

which neither type of human capital can substitute for the other.60 The other extreme is the

linear case in which the two types of human capital are perfect substitutes.




58
   This is Becker's assumption.
59
   A more general approach to incorporating human capital into the household production function is to allow
some or all of the production function parameters to depend on the human capital vectors of both spouses, {Hch,
Hnh, Hcw, Hnw}. An even more general approach treats human capital as an argument of the household
production function: g[th, tw,y,Hch,Hnh,Hcw,Hnw].
60
   Uncertainty (e.g., about divorce or the death of one's spouse) creates incentives to invest in "general"
rather than sector specific human capital.
                                                                                            36


        The strength of human capital effects depends on the range of the four aggregator

functions. For example, suppose that one of the aggregator functions is bounded below by

φ- and above by φ+. This assumption does not limit amount of human capital, but if the

interval [φ-, φ+] is small, it severely limits the effect of human capital (e.g., on wage rates

and on productivity in the household).

        Given the spouses' wage rates, suppose efficiency implies bilateral household

production for all admissible values of φ (i.e., φ- ≤ φ ≤ φ+). This implies that, given market

wage rates, the effect of human capital on productivity in the household is small, perhaps

sufficiently small that bilateral household production is efficient for all relevant wage rates

and household technologies.

        This formulation generalizes Becker's in two respects. First, Becker assumes that

human capital is sector specific. In my notation, sector-specific human capital corresponds

to the case in which {ψh[Hch]th, ψh0[Hnh]th0} and {ψw[Hcw]tw, ψw0[Hnw]tw0}. Second,

Becker assumes that the aggregator functions are of the form

        ψh[Hch] = Hch

        ψh0[Hnh] = Hnh

        ψw[Hcw] = Hcw

        ψw0[Hnw] = Hnw.

This functional form assumption, combined with the (time) essentiality assumption of

section 2, implies that specialized household human capital is essential for household

production. This functional form assumption is not a harmless normalization but a strong

substantive assumption about the role of human capital. Because it maximizes human

capital effects, it almost certainly exaggerates their strength.
                                                                                                            37


        We have little empirical evidence about the importance of specialized human capital

in household sector.        We know that many older people rely on their children and

grandchildren for computer support. We also know anecdotes about elderly widowers who

don't know how to cook and elderly widows who don't know how to balance a checkbook. I

cannot resist a Winston Churchill anecdote: "At one point ... Clementine [Winston

Churchill's wife] decides that her husband can't stay at Chartwell [their country house] for

the weekend as all the servants are away. 'I shall cook for myself. I can boil an egg. I've

seen it done,' Churchill retorts."61

        Anecdotes aside, the importance of activity-specific or sector-specific human capital

in household production is an open empirical question. Market wage rates in occupations

that involve household production skills (e.g., cleaning, child care) may provide some

evidence. Labor market returns to experience in these occupations are generally low.

Becker's current assessment of the importance of sector-specific human capital may differ

from the view he expressed in the Treatise. Becker and Murphy (2007) write:

        However, returns to education and other training could still be greater in households
        [than in the market] if persons investing in such human capital acquired general
        skills that were particularly useful at household tasks. This is likely for investments
        in education since education improves a person's skills at processing information,
        preparing for future events, and managing multiple tasks. These skills are especially
        important in the modern household because these households perform many
        complicated tasks that must be coordinated (p. 33).




61
  Quoted by D. J. Taylor in a review of two books on Churchill in Times Literary Supplement, 14 November
2011; the quotation is from Cita Stelzer, Dinner with Churchill: The Prime Minister's Tabletop Diplomacy,
Short Books, 2011).
                                                                                                                  38


While the specialization argument in the Treatise presupposes sector-specific human capital,

Becker and Murphy emphasize the importance of general rather than sector-specific human

capital.62

         To summarize: although human capital is unnecessary for the specialization

conclusion when spouses’ time inputs are perfect substitution, or with additivity and

constant returns to scale, human capital can increase the incentives for specialization. But

when the household technology does not necessarily lead to specialization, the mere

presence of human capital does not lead to specialization. Whether human capital actually

tips the scale in favor of specialization depends on the strength of the effect of human capital

on wages and on productivity in the household.

7.       Conclusion

         Economic theory alone cannot tell us whether efficiency implies specialization.

For some household technologies efficiency implies specialization regardless of spouses'

preferences, regardless of the household governance structure, and regardless of

assumptions about the role of human capital.                        Becker showed that for household

technologies in which spouses' time inputs are perfect substitutes, efficiency implies

specialization. I have shown that for household technologies that are additive and exhibit

constant returns to scale, efficiency implies specialization. Both of these results depend

on assuming the absence of process preferences and assuming two sectors, household and

market. Neither result depends on assuming that households optimally adjust spouses'

stocks of human capital: the specialization conclusion holds when spouses' stocks of


62
  Becker's assumption that human capital is sector specific is an expositional devise: "I have assumed that each
type of human capital raises efficiency at only a single activity, but we do not need to hold to this limitation" (p.
36).
                                                                                                        39


human capital are fixed at arbitrary levels. For technologies for which efficiency does not

imply specialization regardless of spouses' preferences and regardless of the household

governance structure, human capital increases the incentives for specialization. Whether

these incentives actually lead to specialization, however, depends on the strength of human

capital effects as well as on spouses' preferences and the governance structure.

        Even when specialization is efficient, couples may fail to specialize. For

example, inefficiency may arise if spouses are unwilling or unable to make binding

intertemporal commitments. Becker makes this point in the Treatise, interpreting

marriage and divorce laws as societies' attempts to provide the assurance needed to

support efficient specialization and investment in human capital. Lundberg and Pollak

(2003) develop and analyze a two-period model in which spouses' inability to make

binding intertemporal commitments can lead to dynamic inefficiency in the context of the

"two earner couple location problem." Lundberg (2008) analyzes dynamic inefficiency

in a two-period model in which the failure to accumulate market human capital in the

first period disadvantages a spouse in second-period bargaining.

        Without binding agreements in the marriage market about allocation within

marriage, specialization has strong distributional consequences. If distribution within

marriage depends on bargaining in marriage and if bargaining power depends on wages

or earnings, then equality in marriage requires that both spouses work in the market. But

if efficiency implied specialization and both spouses work in the market, then efficiency

implies that one spouse do all the housework. Many regard this as clear evidence that

equity and efficiency are incompatible.63 For those of us concerned with equity as well as


63
  The specialized time allocation in which one spouse only works in the household also leaves the stay-at-
home spouse vulnerable in the long-run because of her failure to accumulate market human capital. We can
                                                                                                         40


efficiency and who think that bargaining takes place within marriage, it is good news that

efficiency need not require specialization.




avoid this dynamic vulnerability by assuming, as Becker does in Chapter 4 of the Treatise, that prospective
spouses make binding agreements in the marriage market that determine distribution in marriage. Lundberg
and Pollak (2009) propose and analyze a marriage-market model in which prospective spouses cannot
make binding agreements in the marriage market. Instead, the marriage market determines who marries
and who marries whom, but distribution in marriage is determined by bargaining in marriage.
                                                                                    41


References

Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst, "Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of Time
over Five Decades," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 122, No. 3, (August 2007),
969-1006

Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst, "A Summary of Trends in U.S. Time Use: 1965-2005,"
Social Indicators Research, Vol. 98, No. 1, (August 2009), 57-64.

Becker, Gary S., "A Theory of the Allocation of Time," Economic Journal, Vol. 75, No.
299, (September 1965), 493-517.

Becker, Gary S., A Treatise on the Family, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981;
Enlarged edition, 1991.

Becker, Gary S. and Kevin M. Murphy, "Education and Consumption: The Effects of
Education in the Household Compared to the Marketplace," Journal of Human Capital, Vol.
1, No. 1, (Winter 2007), 9-35.

Bianchi, Suzanne M., Liana C. Sayer, Melissa A. Milkie, and John P. Robinson,
"Housework: Who Did, Does or Will Do It, and How Much Does It Matter?" Social
Forces, Vol. 91, No. 1, (September 2012), 55-63.

Bonke, Jens, Mette Deding, Mette Lausten, and Leslie Stratton, "Intrahousehold
Specialization in Housework in the United States and Denmark," Social Science
Quarterly, Vol. 89, No. 4, (December 2008), 1023-1043.

Brines, Julie, "Economic Dependency, Gender, and the Division of Labor at Home,"
American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 100, No. 3, (November 1994), 652-688.

Burda, Michael, Daniel S. Hamermesh, and Philippe Weil, "Total Work and Gender: Facts
and Possible Explanations," Journal of Population Economics, Vol. 26, No. 1, (January
2013), 239-261.

Chiappori, Pierre-André, "Rational Household Labor Supply," Econometrica, Vol. 56,
No. 1, (January 1988), 63-89.

Chiappori, Pierre-André, "Collective Labor Supply and Welfare," Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 100, No. 3, (June 1992), 437-467.

Cogan, John F., "Fixed Costs and Labor Supply," Econometrica, Vol. 49, No. 4, (July
1981), 945-963.

Donald, Stephen G., and Daniel S. Hamermesh, "A Structural Model of the Fixed Time
Costs of Market Work," Economics Letters, Vol. 104, No. 3, (September 2009), 125-128.
                                                                                     42


England, Paula and Nancy Folbre, "Gender and Economic Sociology," Chapter 27 in Neil
J. Smelser and Richard Swedberg, eds., Handbook of Economic Sociology, 2nd ed.,
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2005, 627-649.

Fafchamps, Marcel and Agnes R. Quisumbling, "Household Formation and Marriage
Markets in Rural Areas," Chapter 51 in T. Paul Schultz and John Strauss, eds., Handbook
of Development Economics, Vol. 4, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2008, 3187-3248.

Folbre, Nancy, "A Theory of the Misallocation of Time," in Nancy Folbre and Michael
Bittman, eds., Family Time: The Social Organization of Care, London: Routledge, 2004,
7-24.

Gershuny, Jonathan, Changing Times: Work and Leisure in Postindustrial Society,
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri, and Mehmet Yorukoglu, "Engines of Liberation,"
Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 72, No. 1, (January 2005), 109-133.

Gronau, Reuben, "Leisure, Home Production, and Work -- the Theory of the Allocation of
Time Revisited," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 85, No. 6, (December 1977), 1099-
1124.

Guryan, Jon, Erik Hurst, and Melissa Kearney, "Parental Education and Time with
Children" Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 22, No. 3, (summer 2008), 23-46.

Hadfield, Gillian K., "Households at Work: Beyond Labor Market Policies to Remedy the
Gender Gap," Georgetown Law Journal, Vol. 82, (November 1993), 89-107.

Hamermesh, Daniel S., Harley Frazis, and Jay Stewart, "Data Watch: The American
Time Use Survey," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 19, No. 1, (Winter 2005),
221-232.

Hamermesh, Daniel S. and Jungmin Lee, "Stressed out on Four Continents: Time Crunch
or Yippie Kvetch?" Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 89, No. 2, (May 2007),
374-383.

Hochchild, Arlie and Anne Machung, The Second Shift: Working Families and the
Revolution at Home, New York: Viking, 1989.

Iglehart, John K., "The ACGME's Final Duty-Hours Standards -- Special PGY-1 Limits
and Strategic Napping," New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 363, No. 17, (October
21, 2010), 1589-1591.

Juster, F. Thomas and Frank P. Stafford, "The Allocation of Time: Empirical Findings,
Behavioral Models, and Problems of Measurement," Journal of Economic Literature, Vol.
29, No. 2, (June 1991), 471-522.
                                                                                        43


Lundberg, Shelly, "Gender and Household Decision-Making," in Francesca Bettio and
Alina Verashchagina, eds., Frontiers in the Economics of Gender, New York: Routledge,
2008, 116-133.

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, "Separate Spheres Bargaining and the Marriage
Market," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 101, No. 6, (December 1993), 988-1010.

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, "Efficiency in Marriage," Review of Economics of
the Household, Vol. 1, No. 3, (September 2003), 153-168.

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, "American Family and Family Economics,"
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 21, No. 2, (Spring 2007), 3-26.

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, "Marriage Market Equilibrium and Bargaining in
Marriage," March 5, 2009.

Manser, Marilyn and Murray Brown, "Marriage and Household Decision-Making: A
Bargaining Analysis," International Economic Review, Vol. 21, No. 1, (February 1980),
31-44.

McElroy, Marjorie B. and Mary J. Horney, "Nash-Bargained Household Decisions:
Toward a Generalization of the Theory of Demand," International Economic Review,
Vol. 22, No. 2, (June 1981), 333-349.

Panzar, John C. and Robert D. Willig, "Economies of Scope," American Economic Review,
Vol. 71, No. 2, (May 1981), 268-272.

Pollak, Robert A., "Allocating Time: Individuals' Technologies, Household Technology,
Perfect Substitutes, and Specialization," NBER Working Paper 17529, October 2011.
Annals of Economics and Statistics, Nos. 105-106, (January/June 2012), 75-97.

Pollak, Robert A., and Michael L. Wachter, "The Relevance of the Household Production
Function and Its Implications for the Allocation of Time," Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 83, No. 2, (April l975), 255-277.

Ramey, Garey and Valerie Ramey, "The Rug Rat Race," Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, Spring 2010, 129-176.

Ramey, Valerie "Time Spent in Home Production in the 20th Century United States,"
Journal of Economic History, Vol. 69, (March 2009), 1-47.

Ramey, Valerie and Francis Neville, "A Century of Work and Leisure," American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Vol. 1, No. 2, (July 2009), 189-224.
                                                                                     44


Rosen, Sherwin, "The Theory of Equalizing Differences," Chapter 12 in Orley C.
Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, eds. Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 1,
Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1986, 641-692.

Wax, Amy L., "Bargaining in the Shadow of the Market: Is There a Future for Egalitarian
Marriage?" Virginia Law Review, Vol. 84, No. 4, (May 1998), 509-672.
                                                                                                            45


Appendix: Becker's Specialization Theorems

         In this appendix I discuss the five specialization theorems from Chapter 2

("Division of Labor in Households and Families") of the Treatise. The question is: how

do these theorems rule out cases in which efficiency requires nonspecialization? The

answer, which is not apparent from the statements of the theorem themselves, is the

perfect substitutes assumption.

         Before stating the specialization theorems formally, Becker emphasizes that his

discussion assumes perfect substitutes: "A major assumption of the present section

[Specialization in Households] is that at the beginning everyone is identical; differences

in efficiency are not determined by biological or other intrinsic differences....Since all

persons are assumed to be intrinsically identical, they supply the same kind of time to the

household and market sectors. Therefore, the effective time of different members would

be perfect substitutes even if they accumulate different amounts of household capital..."

(p. 32; italics in original).64

         Theorem 2.1 is about time specialization and Theorem 2.2 about human capital

specialization. The formal statements of the theorems do not mention perfect substitutes

and they impose assumptions that become redundant when the perfect substitutes

assumption is added to the hypothesis.

         Because these two theorems have identical hypotheses (i.e., "different

comparative advantages"), I state both theorems before discussing them.

Theorem 2.1 “If all members of an efficient household have different comparative

advantages, no more than one member would allocate time to both the market and


64
  I do not discuss whether the assumption that all persons are "intrinsically identical" implies that spouses'
time inputs are perfect substitutes. Instead, I proceed as if Becker assumes perfect substitutes.
                                                                                               46


household sectors. Everyone with a greater comparative advantage in the market than

this member's would specialize completely in the market, and everyone with a greater

comparative advantage in the household would specialize completely there" (p. 33).

Theorem 2.2 "If all members of a household have different comparative advantages, no

more than one member would invest in both market and household capital. Members

specializing in the market sector would invest only in market capital, and members

specializing in the household sector would invest only in household capital" (p. 34).

           If we include perfect substitutes in the hypothesis of Theorem 2.1, then the time

specialization conclusion holds even if we remove "different comparative advantages"

from its hypothesis. That is, efficiency and perfect substitutes imply specialization and

"different comparative advantages" becomes redundant.65 The specialization conclusion

of Theorem 2.1 holds even when each spouse's stocks of human capital are fixed at

arbitrary levels, and Becker's proof does not rely on adjusting spouses’ stocks of human

capital.

           If households optimally adjust spouses' stocks of human capital, then time

specialization implies human capital specialization, so Theorem 2.2 follows from

Theorem 2.1. As Becker writes: "...members specializing entirely in the market sector

have strong incentives to invest in market capital (H1) and no incentive to invest in

household capital (H2). Similarly, members specializing in the household sector have

strong incentives to invest in H2 and no incentive to invest in H1" (p. 34).

           Theorem 2.1 holds even if we do not include perfect substitutes in its hypothesis:

different comparative advantages imply specialization. But the interpretation of the
                                                                                                          47


theorem as implying that specialization is pervasive depends on the implicit assumption

that "different comparative advantages" is the normal case and that "equal comparative

advantages" is an unlikely coincidence.

         To see that the two theorems hold without assuming perfect substitutes, compare

the definition of comparative advantage with the first order conditions for production

efficiency. Before stating Theorem 2.1, Becker defines comparative advantage: “The

comparative advantage of a [household] member can be defined by the relation between

the ratio of his marginal products in the market and household sectors, and the ratios of

other members" (p. 33). That is, equal comparative advantages means

         ∂g[th,tw,y]                        ∂g[th,tw,y]
         —————                              —————
         ∂th                                ∂tw
         ───────            =              ───────
         wh                                  ww


The first order conditions for production efficiency arise from maximizing output

         g[th,tw,y]

subject to the constraint


         yh + yw + x** ≤ wh(Th - th) + ww(Tw - tw) + x*.

If this maximization problem has an interior solution, then the first order conditions are

         ∂g[th,tw,y]
         ───────          = λwh
         ∂th



and


65
  This assumes the absence of process preferences. It also requires carving out an exception for the case in
which both specialization and nonspecialization are efficient (e.g., spouses have identical wages rates and
are equally productive in the household).
                                                                                             48


       ∂g[th,tw,y]
       ───────        = λww
       ∂tw



Eliminating λ and rearranging, yields the equal comparative advantage condition. In

effect, the theorem says: If we don’t have an interior solution (i.e., a solution in which

both spouses allocate time to both sectors), then we have a boundary solution (i.e., a

solution in which at least one spouse does not allocate time to both sectors). This

paraphrase of Theorem 2.1 is not a criticism: theorems, after all, are tautologies. But the

interpretation of Theorem 2.1 as implying that specialization is pervasive depends on

imposing perfect substitutes or some other strong assumption.



Theorem 2.3 “At most one member of an efficient household would invest in both

market and household capital and would allocate time to both sectors” (p. 34).

       Theorem 2.3 depends on the perfect substitutes assumption. Indeed, unless we

reinterpret Theorem 2.3 to include perfect substitutes as an hypothesis, it would have no

hypothesis at all. Becker's proof of Theorem 2.3 depends on perfect substitutes and also

appears to depend on assuming that the household optimally adjusts spouses' stocks of

market and household human capital. In fact, however, the conclusion follows directly

from the perfect substitutes assumption and holds even when each spouse's stocks of

human capital are held fixed at arbitrary levels.

       Theorem 2.4 makes a claim about strong specialization:

Theorem 2.4 “If commodity production functions have constant or increasing returns to

scale, all members of efficient households would specialize completely in the market or
                                                                                                       49


household sectors and would invest only in market or household capital” (p. 35; italics in

original).

        As I showed in section 4a, the conclusion of Theorem 2.4 does not hold when

each spouse's stocks of human capital are held fixed at arbitrary levels.66 But here, as

elsewhere, Becker assumes that the household optimally adjusts spouses' stocks of human

capital. As I argue in section 6, the analysis of specialization when the household

optimally adjusts spouses' stocks of human capital requires assumptions about the

strength of human capital effects on wage rates and on productivity in the household.

        Theorem 2.5 addresses the case in which the number of household members

exceeds the number of commodities.

Theorem 2.5 "All but possibly one member of households with more members than

independent commodities would completely specialize their investments and time to the

market or to a particular commodity. Moreover, with constant or increasing returns to

scale, all members of efficient households must be completely specialized" (p. 36; italics

in original).

        The first sentence of the theorem is about weak specialization and the second

about strong specialization. If we restrict our attention to the case in which the household

consists of two members and there is a single home produced commodity, the first

sentence becomes Theorem 2.3 and the second sentence Theorem 2.4. Thus, the

theorem’s value added emerges only when we expand the analyses and consider

households with more than two individuals.




66
  The hypothesis of Theorem 2.4 is unusual: the standard assumption is that production functions are
concave, and concavity implies constant or decreasing returns to scale.
