                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        INCENTIVE CONTRACTS




                          Edward P. Lazear




                       Working Paper No. 1917




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                              May 1986




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
in Labor Studies. Any                                      program
                       opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Econoink Research.
                                                 Working Paper # 1917
                                                 May 1986




                           Incentive Contracts




                                 ABSTRACT




     Labor relations involve incentive problems. The market solves
these problems by developing a variety of institutions. This paper
describes and assesses the various forms of incentive contracts.




                                            Professor Edward P. Lazear
                                            Graduate Sthool of Business
                                            University of thicago
                                            1101 Fast 58th Street
                                            Chicago, Ui 60637
      Incentives are the essence of economics. The most basic concept, demand,

 considers how to induce a consumer to buy more of a particular good, i.e., how

 to give him an incentive to purchase. Similarly, supply relationships are

 descriptions of how agents respond with more output or labor to additional

 compensation.

      Incentive contracts arise because individual love leisure. In order to

 induce them to forgo some leisure, or put alternatively, to put forth effort,

 some form of compensation must be offered. The theme of the essay is that

 different forms of incentive contracts deal with some aspects of the problems

 better than others. The strength of' one type of contract is the weakness of

another. The labor market trades off these strengths and weaknesses and

thereby selects a set of institutions. In what follows, the development of

the literature on incentive contracts is briefly discussed. The emphasis is

on concepts, rather than specific papers or authors, so the bibliography is

far from exhaustive.

     To discuss incentive contracts, the most general concepts must be

narrowed. This essay does that in two ways: First, attention here is

restricted to the labor market. At a more general level, incentive contracts

can relate to other areas as well. For example, the government may want to

have a space satellite built at the lowest possible cost. To do so,

incentives must be set appropriately or the producer may charge too much or

fail to meet desired quality standards. This problem is analogous to those

that arise in the labor context, but for the most part, they are ignored,

except when isomorphic with the labor market paradigm. Similarly, the law and

economics literature is another area where incentive problems are studied,

usually in the context of accident liability. (See, for example, Green

(1976), Shavefl (1980), Polinsky (1981).) These specific questions are
                                      —3—



 ignored as well, except as they border on the labor market context. Second,

 the focus is on observability problems. Standard labor supply functions,

 where hours of work can be observed and paid, are incentive contracts.

 However, standard labor supply issues are eliminated from consideration since

 they are dealt with in other essays in the New Palgrave.



 I. General FrameWork

     An employer in a competitive environment must induce a worker to perform

at the efficient level of effort or face extinction. The reason is simple: If

one employer can, through clever use of an incentive contract, get a worker to

perform at a more efficient level, that firm's cost will be lower. Lower

costs imply that higher wages can be paid to workers and all workers will be

stolen from inefficient firms. As a result, the objective function that is

taken as standard for the firm is:


                             Max F(Q; E) — C(S)   ,                           (1)
                              F

where Q is output and E is worker effort. Thus, F(Q; E) is the compen-

sation schedule that the firm announces to the worker; C(S) is the worker's

cost of effort function, to be thought of as the dollar cost associated with

supplying effort level E.

     The competitive nature of the firm in factor and product markets implies

that the firm must maximize worker net wealth as in (1) subject to the zero

profit constraint:

                                  QrF(Q;5) .                                  (2)

Output is defined so that each unit sells for one dollar (the numeraire).

Thus, (2) merely says that output, Q, must be paid entirely to the worker

otherwise another firm could steal the worker away by paying more.
     The incentive problem arises because the worker takes the compensation

scheme F(Q; F) as given and chooses effort to maximize expected utility.

Once the worker has accepted the Job, his problem is:


                             Max F(Q; E) — C(E)                               (3)
                              F

The worker's effort supply function comes from solving the first—order

condition associated with (3) or


                            C'(E) r         +     '                           (U)


which says that the worker sets the marginal cost of effort equal to its

marginal return to him. The transformation of output into effort, i.e.,

Q/aE, depends on the production function. A convenient specification is


                                                                              (5)


so that output is the sum of effort, E, and luck, v.

     An incentive contract selects F(Q; E) subject to the zero profit

constraint, (2), taking into account that the worker behaves according to (4).

There are an infinite variety of incentive contracts that are subsumed by

F(Q; F). To make things clear, we consider two polar extremes—-the salary and

the piece rate.1

     Let us define a salary as compensation that depends only on input so that

F(Q; F) takes the form S(E). An hourly wage is an example. Irrespective of

the amount that is produced during the hour, the worker receives a fixed

amount that depends only on the fact that he supplies F of effort for the

hour. (Of course, difficulty in measuring F may be a compelling reason to



     1An elaboration of some of the pcints contained herein can be found in
Lazear (1986a).
                                      -5—




 avoid this form of incentive contract.) At the other extreme is a piece rate

 where compensation depends only on output so that F(Q; E) takes the form of

 R(Q). There, no matter how much or how little effort the worker exerts, his

 compensation depends only on the number of units produced. Both salaries and

 piece rates are incentive contracts; the first provides incentives by paying

workers on the basis of input. The second provides incentives by paying on

 the basis of output. More sophisticated incentive contracts, which blend the

two or use multiperiod approaches are discussed later.



II. The Principal—Agent Problem

     At the center of the incentive contract literature is the "principal-

agent" problem. The principal, say, an employer, wants to induce its agent,

say, a worker, to behave in a way that is beneficial to the employer. The

problem is that the principal's knowledge is imperfect; either he cannot see

what the agent does (as in the case of a taxi driver who can sleep on the job)

or he cannot interpret the actions (as in the case of an auto mechanic who

replaces a number of parts to correct a perhaps simple malfunction). The

incentive contracts that can be used to address the problem were discussed

early by Ross (1972), Mirrlees (1976), Calvo and Wellisz (1978), and by Becker

and Stigler (197L). The last in particular, uses a sampling approach. For

example, a politician can be required to post a large bond on taking office.

If he is caught engaging in some malfeasant behavior, he forfeits the bond.

This contract is based on output, which is observed infrequently or

imperfectly. Other kinds of incentive contracts are discussed in the

following sections.
                                         —6—




 III. Payment by Output


 A. Sharecropping

        One of the earliest examples of incentive contracts that is based on

 output is sharecropping. In sharecropping, the owner contracts to split the

 output of' the land in some proportion with the individual who farms and lives

 on it.    It was also one of the first incentive schemes that was clearly

 analyzed (see Johnson, 1950 and later Cheung, 1968 and Stiglitz, 19714). The

 original problem as formulated in sharecropping can be seen as follows:

        Payment is cpnditional only on Q and by some fixed proportion so that

the worker receives yQ. Using (14) and (5), compensation of this sort implies

that the worker's first-order condition is


                                    C'(E) r y


so that the worker sets the marginal cost of effort equal to    'v'.    But (5)

implies that the marginal value of effort is $1, which exceeds         y so that the

worker puts forth too little effort. This is inefficient. Additionally, if

the farmer can obtain land without limit, he pushes his sharecropping acreage

to the point where the next unit of land has zero marginal product. This is

clearly inefficient, but can be remedied if landowners can select share-

croppers and terms according to the amount of land each works. Both the owner

and worker could be made better off if the worker could be induced, by another

incentive contract, to produce where C'(E)      1.

       Renting the land to the farmer and allowing the farmer to keep all of the

output accomplishes this. Under rental, the worker's compensation is
[Q —   Rent].   By (14) and (5), the worker is induced to set C'(E) r 1; the

marginal cost and marginal value of output are equated. Of course, rental

does not solve all of the problems. Absent in the production function in (5)
                                          —7—




 is that maintenance may be required. For example, if the farmer does not

 fertilize the land, it may   not   produce as well in the future. A renter, who

 can move on to the next plot after the soil is drained of minerals, has little

 incentive to put resources into the land. Thus, the solution is to sell the

 land to the farmer. Then the individual who works the land has the correct

 incentives, either because he will continue to use it in the future or because

 the sale price will reflect the quality of the land. But sale of the land

begs most of the questions. The sale may not come about because of the

farmer's capital constraints, because of his lack of entrepreneurial skill, or

because of his distaste for risk.2

     The sharecropping paradigm applies to industrial production as well.

Profit sharing arrangements are, in many respects, like sharecropping. This

is especially true when there is only one worker. Partnerships are similar.

The same incentive problems arise. A worker who can quit and move on to

another firm without penalty does not have the sante desire to maintain the

equipment as the firm's owner. Again the solution is to sell the capital to

the worker, but this simply redefines the owner. Then there is no principal-

agent problem because there is no agent. This can be considered in more

detail in the next section.


B. Piece Rates

     Piece rate compensation is not much different from sharecropping, the

latter being a special case of the former (see Stiglitz, 1g75). The owner

allows the worker (or farmer) to use his capital (or land) and pays the worker

according to some function of output. In the simplest scheme, a linear piece



     2Note that risk is shifted from owners to farmers even in sharecropping
and renting. Only labor contracts based exclusively on effort shift the risk
entirely to the owner.
                                             -8—




    rate is used and the worker is paid rate R per unit Q so that compensation

    is RQ. The worker's maximization problem (3) and (LI) implies that the worker

    sets C'(E)   R. The firm's zero profit constraint in (2) implies that Q            r


    RQ or that R r 1. Thus, the piece rate is efficient because the worker sets

    the marginal cost of effort equal to its marginal social value, $1.

        The issue is only slightly more complicated if capital is involved.        A

 linear piece rate with an intercept, i.e., compensation equal to A +
                                                                      RQ,
 will do the job. This incentive contract achieves first—best efficiency. The

 worker's first—order condition, (U), still guarantees that he sets         C'(E) r Fl.

 The intercept drops out. But the zero profit constraint now becomes:


                       Q -   rental   cost of capital r   A + RQ



 The firm must "charge" the worker for the cost of using the capital, but how

should this be done? R can be reduced below 1 or A can be set to a

negative number. The answer is that A              -(Rental cost of capital) and
B      1. Since (14) does not contain A, the worker does not respond to changes

in A. However, reducing B below 1 causes the worker to reduce effort.

Thus, the efficient incentive contract, which also maximizes worker wealth

subject to the firm's zero profit constraint, requires that B            1. Zero
profit requires that A r —(Rental cost of capital).

       A major advantage to the use of piece rates as an incentive contract is

that it tolerates heterogeneity of worker ability. More able, i.e., lower

effort cost workers choose higher levels of effort, but are paid more. There

is no inefficiency involved in having workers of both types in the firm. Of

course, if capital is important so that the worker is "charged" A for the

right to work on a machine, only workers above some threshold ability level

will choose to work. But workers self—sort. There is no need for the firm to
                                       —9—




 do anything other than pay the efficient piece rate, in this case H r 1.

      Linear piece rates are no longer appropriate incentive contracts if

 workers are risk averse. In general, a nonlinear scheme will do better, but

 will fail to achieve first—best solutions. As long as asymmetric information

 exists, so that individual actions cannot be observed and contracted upon,

 Pareto optimal risk sharing is precluded. (See Holmstrom, 1979 and Harris and

 Raviv, 1979.)


 C. Payment by Relative Output

     The study of relative compensation has become increasingly important.

There are two approaches in this literature. The first, from Lazear and Rosen

 (1981), characterizes the labor market as a tournament, where one worker is

pitted against another. The one with the highest level of output receives the

winning prize, i.e., the high—wage jab, while the other gets the losing prize,

i.e., the low—wage job. By increasing the spread between the winning and

losing prizes, incentives are provided to work hard. The optimum spread

induces workers to move to the point where the marginal cost of effort exactly

equals the marginal (social) return to it. The major advantages to payment by

tournament method are two: First, tournaments require only that relative

comparisons be made. It may be cheaper to observe that one worker produces

more than another than to determine the actual amount that each produces.

Second, compensation by rank "differences out" common noise. For example,

sales may be low because the economy is in a slump, which has nothing to do

with worker effort. Risk aversion operates against penalizing or rewarding

workers for factors over which they have no control. But since the slump

affects both workers equally, relative comparisons are unaffected. The best

worker still produces more, even though both produce small amounts.
                                        -10-




        Tournament—type incentive contracts induce workers to behave efficiently

  if they are risk neutral. They are easy to use, but carry one major disad-

 vantage. Workers increase the probability of winning, not only by doing well

 themselves, but also by causing the opponent to do poorly. Thus, tournaments

 discourage cooperation. This results in wage compression, which works to

 discourage the aggressive behavior of workers who are competing for the same

 job (see Lazear, 1986). Other work in the area of tournament-type incentive

 contracts includes Nalebuff and Stiglitz (1983), Green and Stokey (1983), and

 Carmichael (1983).

       The second approach, from E{olmstrom (1982), suggests that if levels of

output can be observed, then payments can be based, at least in part, on a

team average. As Holmstrom points out, a tournament is not a sufficient

statistic so that using a team average allows the firm to better address risk

aversion. This incentive device also takes out common noise. A peer average

picks up disturbances that are common to the industry and allows the firm to

cater to the tastes of risk-averse workers.



Ill.   Payment by Input


A. Observability of Effort

       It is commonly alleged that payment of a salary or hourly wage does not

provide workers with the appropriate incentives. Whether or not this is true

depends on the connection between the measurement of time and measurement of

effort. To see this, suppose that effort can be observed perfectly, but that

output cannot be observed at all. For example, suppose that it is easy to

measure the number of calories burned up by a worker during his work day, but

it is impossible to separate his output from that of his peers. Payment by

effort is a first—best incentive contract. The compensation scheme that pays
                                        -1 -



 the worker $1 per unit of effort exerted induces him to set C'(E)       1, which
 as we have seen, is first best. Jote further that this is first best even for

 risk-averse workers since compensation does not vary with random productivity

 shocks,    v (see Hall and Lilien, 1979).

        The allegation that effort pay does not provide incentives is based on

 the difference between hours of work and effort. If hours were a perfect

 proxy for effort, then payment of an hourly wage would be an optimal incentive

 contract. But because workers can vary work per hour, the connection breaks

down. Payment per hour provides appropriate incentives for choice of the

number of hours, but does not deal with what is done within the hour.


B. Payment by Effort and Worker Sorting

        Piece rates induce workers to sort appropriately. Above, it was argued

that workers who cannot produce a sufficiently high level of output will not

come to a firm that "charges" for use of capital. Salaries (or hourly wages)

that pay on the basis of an imperfect measure of effort encourage the lower-

quality workers to come to the firm. Lazear (1986a) demonstrates that a

separating equilibrium (see, e.g., Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1976 and Salop and

Salop, 1976) exists where high—quality workers choose to work at firms that

pay piece rates and low-quality ones choose salaries. The difference in

quality across firms might lead one to conclude that movement to output—based

incentive contracts increases total output. In fact, the reverse may well be

true.    In the same sense that screening in Spence (1973) is socially

unproductive, forcing salary firms to adopt piece rate incentive contracts

wastes resources on a potentially useless signal.


C. Incentive Contracts and Product Quality

    Sometimes quantity is easier to observe than quality. The problem with
                                           -12-



  incentive contracts that are based on output quantity is that they induce the

 worker to go for speed and to ignore quality. If quality can be observed,

 then the worker can be compensated appropriately for quantity and quality.

 The appropriate compensation function is essentially the consumer's demand for

 the product as it varies with quality and quantity. But if quality cannot be

 observed, payment by input "solves" the quantity/quality problem. If the

 worker is paid, say, by hour, and merely instructed to produce goods of' a

 given quality, he has no incentive to deviate from that instruction.    Compen-
 sation is based only on input so there is no desire to rush the job. Of

 course, this requires a method of monitoring effort cheaply. (See Lazear,

 1986a for a full discussion of the tradeoffs.)



V. Other Issues in Incentive Contracting


A. Efficient Separation and Long—Term Investments

     A properly structured incentive contract must induce the correct amount

of long—term investment. The problem is most clearly seen in the context oC

specific human capital as in Becker (1962, 1975). Specific human capital iá

only valuable when the worker is employed at the current firm. As such,

workers are reluctant to invest in specific capital because the firm
                                                                        may
capriciously fire the worker, in which case the investment is lost.

Similarly, firms are reluctant to invest because the worker may capriciously

quit. The incentive contract that Becker suggests is a sharing of investment

costs and returns by both workers and firms. (Hashimoto and lu, 1980 model

this more precisely.) Kennan (1979) points out that a particular kind of

severance pay solves the investment problem. It is akin to the liability

rules that are efficient in auto accident problems. But as Hall and Lazear

(1984) argue, these rules may   actually   induce too much investment. Since a
                                       —13—



  worker is compensated for the full investment whether work occurs or not, he

 has no incentive to account for situations that make a separation optimal.

 E.g., if it were optimal to sever the work relationship 25% of the time, the

 worker should behave as if a specific investment that yields $1 return
                                                                          only
 yields $.75.   A full—reimbursement severance pay arrangement ensures a full

 $1, irrespective of the status of work, and induces too much investment.

      More general issues of efficient separation arise in the labor market

 context and incentive contracts must be structured to deal with these

 problems. Hall and Lazear (1984) consider a variety of different incentive

 contracts and conclude that none generally achieves first best. One that come

 close to doing so are is Vickrey (1961) bilateral auction approach. There,

 compensation and work are separated so that the worker and firm have

 incentives to reveal the true relevant values. Another scheme is coordinated

severance pay, suggested by d'Aspremont and Gerard-Varet (1979).   Sufficiently
high penalties on the firm associated with a worker's refusal to work induces

the firm to behave in a manner that is apparently first best.


B. Intertemporal Incentive Contracts

     Sometimes, the fact that workers live for more than one period allows

ccntracts to be structured in a way that solves incentive problems. This is

the subject of Lazear (1979, 1981). The problem is that as a worker

approaches the end of his career, he has an incentive to shirk because the

costs, even of being fired, are reduced as his retirement date draws near. A

way to discourage shirking is to tilt the age-earnings profile and couple it

with a contingent pension. Young workers are paid less than their marginal

products; old workers are paid more. In equilibrium, shirking is discouraged

and workers receive exactly their lifetime marginal products. The distortion

in the timing of the payments implies that workers do not voluntarily choose
                                          _1Lk.




     to work the correct number of hours. Thus, hours constraints are required, an

  extreme form of which is mandatory retirement. Other work that has refined or

  provided empirical support for that concept is Kuhn (1986) and Hutchens

  (1986a, b).

         There are other papers that focus on the intertemporal aspects of

  incentive contracts. The first, Fama (1980) argues that the market provides a

 discipline on workers. In a spot market, the wage that another firm is

 willing to offer a worker next period depends on how well he did last period.

 Fama shows that this can act as a perfect incentive device, Of course, no

 end—game problems are addressed by this mechanism, but it does demonstrate the

 possibility of incentive provision even without explicit or implicit

 contracts. The second idea is attributable to Rogerson (1985). The emphasis

 here is on risk sharing, but the work has some features in common with Fama

 (1980). In particular, memory plays a strong role in these incentive

 contracts, so that an outcome that affects the current
                                                             wage also affects the
 future wage.


C.
       Intertempora]. Strategic Behavior by Firms

       Once intertemporaj. contracts are considered, it is necessary to examine

the issue of opportunistic behavior
                                       by firms. It may be that a firm does not
know a worker's cost of effort function,
                                             C(E). Actions that the worker takes
may reveal information about that function. The firm can use that information

in subsequent periods against the worker.      As a result, the worker attempts to

disguise C(E), leading to inefficiencies. Such is the case for salesmen,

whose next period quota depends on this period's performance. In Lazear

(1986a) it is shown that a properly structured contract in a competitive labor

market can undo the effects of this kind of'
                                                  strategic behavior. This is a
specific example of the general theorem on revelation presented in Harris and
                                      —15—



 Townsend (1981).   It is also related to the literature on planned economies,

 since bureaucrats tend to make things look worse than they are to lessen next

 period's requirements or to increase next period's budget allocation (see,

e.g., Weitzman, 1976, 1980, and Fan, 1975).


D. Insurance

     Finally, there is a closely related literature that examines insurance

contracts. That literature focuses, for the most part, on the tradeoff

between insurance and efficiency in the labor market. Some of the more

important papers in that literature include Harris and Holmstrom (1982),

Grossman and Hart (1983), and Green and Kahn (1983).



VI. Conclusion

     Although incentive problems are pervasive, the market has found a number

of solutions. These involve payment by output of the piece rate or share-

cropping variety, payment by relative output exemplified by labor market

tournaments, payment by measured input, such as hours of work, and multi-

period incentive contracts. The contracts do not always achieve the first

best, especially when risk aversion is an issue. Still, the rich variety of

institutions that addresses incentive problems and the large amount of

literature devoted to study attests to the problem's importance in the labor

market context.
                                        —16—




                                     REFERENCES




  Becker, Gary S. "Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis,"
        Journal of Political Economy 70 (October 1962): 9—49.

 Becicer, Gary S. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with
       Special Reference to Education, 2d ed., Columbia University Press for
       National Bureau of Economic Research, 1975.

 Becker, Gary S., and and Stigler, George J. "Law Enforcement, Malfeasance,
       and Compensation of Enforcers," Journal of Legal Studies 3 (January
       1974): 1—18.

 Calvo, G., and Wellisz, S. "Supervision, Loss of Control, and Optimum Size of
       the Firm," Journal of Political Economy 86 (October 1978): 943-52.

 Carmichael, H. Lorne. "The Agent—Agents Problem; Paymen by Relative Output,"
       Journal of Labor Economics 1 (January 1983): 50—65.

 Cheung, Steven N. S., The Theory of Share Tenancy: With Special Application to
       Asian Agriculture and the First Phase of Taiwan Land Reform. Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press, 1969.

 d'Aspremont, Claude, and Gerard—Varet, Louis, André. "Incentives and
       Incomplete Information," Journal of Public Economics 11 (February 1979):
       25—45.

Fama,   Eugene. "Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm," Journal of
        Political Economy (April 1980).
Fan,,   L—S., "On the Reward System," American Economic Review 65   (March 1975):
        226-29.
Green, Jerry R. "On the Optimal Structure of Liability Laws," Bell Journal of
      Economics 7 (Autumn 1976): 553—714,

Green, Jerry R., and Kahn, Charles. "Wage Employment Contracts," Quarterly
      Journal of Economics 98 (1983): 173—88.

Green, Jerry IL, and Stokey, Nancy L. "A Comparison of Tournaments and
      Contracts," Journal of Political Economy 91 (June 1983): 349—64.

Grossman, Sanford, and Hart, Oliver. "Implicit Contracts under Asymmetric
      Information," Quarterly Journal of Economics 71 (1983): 123—57.

Hall, Robert E., and Lazear, Edward P. "The Excess Sensitivity of Layoffs and
      Quits to Demand," Journal of Labor Economics 2 (April 1981!): 233—57.

Hall, Robert E., and Lilien, David. "Efficient Wage Bargains Under Uncertain
      Supply and Demand," American Economic Review 69 (December 1979): 868—79.
                                     —17—




Harris, Milton, and Hälmstrom, Bengt. "A Theory of Wage Dynamics," Review of
      Economic Studies 149 (July 1982): 315—33.

Harris, Milton, and Raviv, Artur. "Optimal Incentive Contracts with Imperfect
      Information," J.E.T. 24 (1979).

Harris, Milton, and Townsend, Robert. "Resource Allocation under Asymmetric
      Information," Econometrica 49 (January 1981): 33-64.

Hashimoto, Masanori, and Yu, Ben. "Specific Capital, Employment Contracts,
      and Wage Rigidity," Bell Journal of Economics (Autumn 1980): 536—49.

Hölmstrom, Bengt. "Moral Hazard and Observability," Bell Journal of Economics
      10 (Spring 1979): 74—91.

Hölmstrom, Bengt. "Moral Hazard in Teams," Bell Journal of Economics 13
      (Autumn     1982):   324-40.

Hutchens, Robert. "Delayed Payment Contracts and a Firm's Propensity to Hire
      Older Workers," forthcoming, Journal of Labor Economics, January
      1986. (a)

Hutchens, Robert. "An Empirical Test of Lazear's Theory of Delayed Payment
      Contracts," Working paper, Cornell University Institute for Labor and
      Industrial Relations, 1986.(b)

Johnson, D. Gale. "Resource Allocation Under Share Contracts," Journal of
      Political Economy 58 (1950): 111—23.

Kennan, John. "Bonding and the Enforcement of Labor Contracts," Economic
      Letters 3 (1979): 61—66.

Kuhn, Peter J. "Wages, Effort, and Incentive Compatability in Life—Cycle
      Employment Contracts," Journal of Labor Economics 4 (January 1986): 28—
      49.

Lazear, Edward P. "Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?" Journal of Political
      Economy 87 (December 1979): 1261—64.

Lazear, Edward P. "Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity and Hours
      Restrictions," American Economic Review 71 (September 1981): 606-20.

Lazear, Edward P. "Pay Equality and Industrial Politics," Mimeographed.
      University of Chicago, 1986.

Lazear, Edward P. "Salaries and Piece Rates," Journal of Business,
      forthcoming, 1986.(a)

Lazear, Edward P., and Rosen, Sherwin. "Rank—Order Tournaments as Optimum
      Labor Contracts," Journal of Political Economy 89 (1981): 841—64.

Mirrlees, James A. "The Optimal Structure of Incentives with Authority within
      an Organization," Bell Journal of Economics 7 (Spring 1976): 105-31.
                                     -18-




 Nalebuff, Barry J., and Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Prizes and Incentives: Toward a
       General Theory of Compensation and Competition," Bell Journal of
       Economics Ut (Spring 1983): 21—13.

 Polinsky, A. Mitchell. "Strict Liability vs. Negligence in a Market Setting,"
       American Economic Review (May 1980): 363—67.

 Rogerson, William P. "Repeated Moral Hazard," Econometrica 53 (January 1985):
      69—76.

 Ross, Stephen A. "The Economic Theory of Agency: The Principal's Problem,"
       American Economic Review 63 (May 1973): 134—39.

Rothschild, Michael, and Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Equilibrium in Competitive
      Insurance Markets: An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information,"
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 90 (November 1976): 529_J49•

Salop, Joanne, and Salop, Steven. "Self-Selection and Turnover in the Labor
      Market," Quarterly Journal of Economics 90 (November 1976): 619-27.

Shavell, Stephen. "Strict Liability versus Negligence," Journal of Legal
      Studies (January 1980): 1—25.

Spence, A. Michael. "Job Market Signalling," Quarterly Journal of Economics
      87 (August 1973): 355—74.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Incentive and Risk Sharing in Sharecropping," Review of
      Economic Studies 41 (April 1974): 219—56.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Incentives, Risk, and Information: Notes Toward a Theory
      of Hierarchy," Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science 6
      (Autumn 1975): 552—79.

Vickrey, William. "Counterspeculation, Auctions, and Competitive Sealed
      Tenders," Journal of Finance 16 (1961): 1—17.

Weitzman, Martin. "The New Soviet Incentive Model," Bell Journal of Economics
      (Spring 1976); 251—57.

Weitzman, Martin. "The 'Ratchet Principle' and Performance Incentives," Bell
      Journal of Economics (Spring 1980): 302—08.
