                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   THE POLICY ELASTICITY

                                         Nathaniel Hendren

                                        Working Paper 19177
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19177


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2013




I would like to thank Raj Chetty, Amy Finkelstein, Don Fullerton, Peter Ganong, Adam Guren, Louis
Kaplow, Wojciech Kopczuk, Erzo Luttmer, Emmanuel Saez, and seminar participants at Chicago
Booth School of Business, Brown University, The University of Chicago, the Columbia Tax Policy
Workshop, and the Minneapolis Federal Reserve for helpful comments. Financial support from
the NBER Health and Aging Fellowship, under the National Institute of Aging Grant Number T32-
AG000186 is gratefully acknowledged. Alex Olssen provided excellent research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Nathaniel Hendren. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Policy Elasticity
Nathaniel Hendren
NBER Working Paper No. 19177
June 2013, Revised January 2014
JEL No. D6,H0,I3

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper illustrates how one can use causal effects of a policy change to measure its welfare impact
without decomposing them into income and substitution effects. Often, a single causal effect suffices:
the impact on government revenue. Because these responses vary with the policy in question, I term
them policy elasticities, to distinguish them from Hicksian and Marshallian elasticities. The model
also formally justifies a simple benefit-cost ratio for non-budget neutral policies. Using existing causal
estimates, I apply the framework to five policy changes: top income tax rate, EITC generosity, food
stamps, job training, and housing vouchers.


Nathaniel Hendren
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center Room 235
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
nhendren@gmail.com
                                             The Policy Elasticity
                                                    Nathaniel Hendren∗

                                                       January, 2014



                                                          Abstract

              This paper illustrates how one can use causal effects of a policy change to measure its welfare
          impact without decomposing them into income and substitution effects. Often, a single causal
          effect suffices: the impact on government revenue. Because these responses vary with the policy
          in question, I term them policy elasticities, to distinguish them from Hicksian and Marshallian
          elasticities. The model also formally justifies a simple benefit-cost ratio for non-budget neutral
          policies. Using existing causal estimates, I apply the framework to five policy changes: top income
          tax rate, EITC generosity, food stamps, job training, and housing vouchers.


1        Introduction
There is a long history in economics of estimating marginal deadweight loss or marginal excess burden
(MEB) to study the normative implications of government policy changes. Done properly, calcula-
tion of MEB requires decomposition of the behavioral response to policy changes into income and
substitution effects. Only the compensated (substitution) effect is desired for such a welfare analysis.1
        A large and growing literature in economics focuses on estimating the causal effects of government
policy changes. This rise in experimental and quasi-experimental methods have made significant
    ∗
     Harvard University and NBER (e-mail: nhendren@fas.harvard.edu). I would like to thank Raj Chetty, Amy Finkel-
stein, Don Fullerton, Peter Ganong, Adam Guren, Louis Kaplow, Wojciech Kopczuk, Erzo Luttmer, Emmanuel Saez, and
seminar participants at Chicago Booth School of Business, Brown University, The University of Chicago, the Columbia
Tax Policy Workshop, and the Minneapolis Federal Reserve for helpful comments. Financial support from the NBER
Health and Aging Fellowship, under the National Institute of Aging Grant Number T32-AG000186 is gratefully acknowl-
edged. Alex Olssen provided excellent research assistance.
   1
     See, e.g., Harberger (1964); Mas-Colell et al. (1995); Feldstein (1999); Chetty (2009b). The resulting importance of
the compensated elasticity for marginal welfare analysis is discussed in the recent JEL survey:
          Graduate textbooks teach that the two central aspects of the public sector, optimal progressivity of the tax-
          and-transfer system, as well as the optimal size of the public sector, depend (inversely) on the compensated
          elasticity of labor supply with respect to the marginal tax rate. (Saez, Slemrod, and Giertz (2012))
And also in the JEL, Feldstein (2012) writes his critique of the Mirrlees review (Mirrlees et al. (2011)), an influential
analysis of tax policy influenced heavily by optimal tax theory and empirical work:
          While decisions on the appropriate size of government must be left to the political process, economists can
          assist that decision by indicating the magnitude of the total marginal cost of increased government spending.
          That cost depends on the structure of taxes, the distribution of income, and the compensated elasticity of
          the tax base with respect to a marginal change in tax rates.



                                                               1
advances in addressing the positive question of what policy changes do to behavior. But, translating
causal effects into a normative evaluation of the policy change runs into an immediate hurdle, expressed
succinctly by Goolsbee (1999): “The theory largely relates to compensated elasticities, whereas the
natural experiments2 provide information primarily on the uncompensated effects”. Rarely do policy
changes hold everyone’s utility constant. Thus, the prevailing wisdom is that the causal effects of a
policy change are not the behavioral responses that are desired for a normative analysis of that same
policy change.
       This paper clarifies how causal effects of policy changes can be used directly in welfare analysis of
government policy changes. Instead of calculating MEB, one can measure each individual’s willingness
to pay out of their own income for a given policy change. The only behavioral response required for
calculating this measure of welfare is the causal impact of the policy – a decomposition into income
effects, substitution effects, or any other mechanism is not required. Real-world policy changes are
often complex; therefore, these causal effects will in general be neither a pure Hicksian nor Marshallian
elasticity. Because these desired responses vary with the policies in question, I term them policy
elasticities. These are simply the difference in behavior if the policy is undertaken relative to the
counterfactual world in which the policy is not undertaken, precisely the textbook definition of the
causal effect of the policy.
       Moreover, in the broad class of models in which government taxation is the only pre-existing
distortion, a single causal effect is sufficient: the causal impact of the behavioral response to the
policy on the government’s budget.3 The causal effect of the policy on the government budget matters
because of the envelope theorem, which implies that behavioral responses to marginal policy changes
don’t affect utility directly. However, to the extent to which the prices faced by individuals do not
reflect their resource costs (e.g. if there are marginal tax rates on labor earnings), behavioral responses
impose a resource cost on society that has no impact on the agent’s utility. If the government is the
only distortion between private prices and social (resource) costs, the impact of the behavioral response
on the government’s budget is the only behavioral response required for welfare estimation.4
       Of course, this envelope theorem logic is not new – it underscores almost all previous literature in
empirical welfare economics including Harberger (1964)’s triangle and the sufficiency of the taxable
income elasticity in Feldstein (1999).5 However, these papers often focus on calculating MEB, which
relies on the compensated, not causal effect on the government budget. Here, I show that not can one
use the causal effects, but the resulting welfare framework has arguably more desirable features, such
as the ability to aggregate to measures of social welfare using the social marginal utilities of income.6
   2
     In Goolsbee’s case, the natural experiment was a change in top income marginal tax rates.
   3
     To be precise, this causal effect is sufficient for all components of the second derivative of the utility function. See
Footnote 32.
   4
     If the government is not the sole distortion in the market, one needs to estimate the causal impact on the other
externalities as well as this fiscal externality. This includes not only traditional externalities such as pollution, but also
externalities on one’s self caused by imperfect optimization. Even in these more general models, the causal effects are
sufficient for all behavioral responses; a decomposition into income and substitution effects is not required. See Section
D.
   5
     See also Kleven and Kreiner (2005) for a nice discussion of the MEB approach and Eissa et al. (2008); Eissa and
Hoynes (2011) for applications to the EITC.
   6
     In contrast, aggregation of MEB measures to social welfare requires knowledge of the income effects of the policy


                                                              2
    An interesting feature of many government policy changes is that they are not budget neutral,
at least in the short run. In such cases, one can compute a simple “benefit/cost” ratio equal to the
marginal social welfare impact of the policy per unit of government revenue expended. To the best
of my knowledge, this measure of the marginal value of public funds (MVPF) was initially proposed
by Mayshar (1990).7 Here, I show that it has the unique feature that the only behavioral responses
required for their measurement are the causal effects of the non-budget neutral policy in question. This
contrasts with more traditional definitions of the marginal cost of public funds (MCPF) that seek to
augment the standard willingness to pay for the public expenditure (given by a Samuelson condition)
with the distortionary cost of raising the required tax revenue (Ballard and Fullerton (1992)).8
    In practice, the MVPF has a very simple representation. For policies which affect taxes, trans-
                                                                              1
fers, or provide market goods, the benefit-cost ratio is simply             1−BR ,   where BR is the impact of the
behavioral response to the policy on the government budget per dollar of government expenditure.
Intuitively, policies that have positive effects on the government budget have lower effective costs. For
the provision of public goods, one needs to adjust the formula for the ratio of the willingness to pay
for the public good or service relative to the beneficiaries’ income (as noted by Samuelson (1954)).
    I illustrate the framework to study the welfare impact of changes to five U.S. policies: the top
marginal income tax rate, the generosity of the earned income tax credit (EITC), food stamps (SNAP),
job training programs (JTPA), and housing vouchers (Section 8). To do so, I use existing causal effects
to calculate the MVPF for these policies. For example, to study the impact of raising the top marginal
income tax rate, I rely on the large literature studying the behavioral responses to such increases. Saez
et al. (2012) and Giertz (2009) suggest mid-range estimates that 25-50% of the mechanical revenue
that is raised from increasing the top marginal income tax rate is lost due to the behavioral response
to the policy.9 This suggests a MVPF of taxing top earners of $1.33-$2. For the EITC generosity,
there is a large literature studying the impact of EITC expansions on labor earnings (Hotz and Scholz
(2003)). Existing causal estimates suggest increasing EITC generosity leads to a cost that is ~14%
above the mechanical cost due to behavioral responses. This suggests a MVPF of increasing EITC
generosity of $0.88.
    In addition to not requiring decompositions of causal effects, the MVPF also has the unique feature
that comparisons across policies can be accomplished using the social marginal utilities of income.10
This is useful because ratios of social marginal utilities have a simple interpretation in terms of Okun’s
leaky bucket experiment (Okun (1975)): how much resources is society willing to lose to transfer from
one person to another?11
change (Section 2.7).
   7
     See equation 9 on page 267 of Mayshar (1990); also, see Slemrod and Yitzhaki (1996, 2001) for similar definitions.
   8
     As shown in Section 2.9, the MCPF requires measuring the behavioral response to a hypothetical policy that both
increases expenditure and closes the budget by increased taxation. So, while the MEB requires compensated (utility
constant) responses to policies, the traditional definition of the MCPF requires measurement of behavioral responses to
budget neutral policies.
   9
     Saez et al. (2012) suggest a midpoint of around 20-25% while Giertz (2009) suggests a midpoint of around 50%
  10
     MEB calculations such as those in Eissa et al. (2008) and Eissa and Hoynes (2011) for EITC expansions, cannot be
aggregated using the social marginal utilities of income. One would first need to adjust the social marginal utilities with
the income effects that were removed to calculate the MEB (see footnote 11).
  11
     In contrast, comparisons of MEB across policies requires adding back in the income effects that were removed in the


                                                            3
    For example, consider the MVPFs from the EITC expansions and the top marginal income tax
schedule. Combining these suggests additional redistribution is desired if and only if one prefers $0.44-
0.66 in the hands of an EITC beneficiary relative to $1 in the hands of the rich (earnings > $400K).
From a positive perspective, the existing causal estimates of the behavioral responses to taxation
suggests the U.S. tax schedule implicitly values an additional $0.44-0.66 to an EITC recipient as
equivalent to $1 to someone subject to the top marginal income tax rate.

Relation to Previous Literature             This paper is related to a large set of previous literature studying
the marginal welfare impact of policy changes and in particular the definition of the marginal value of
public funds adopted inMayshar (1990), Slemrod and Yitzhaki (1996, 2001) and Kleven and Kreiner
(2006)). Relative to this literature, the primary contribution of this paper is a clarification. I illustrate
why this particular definition of the MVPF does not require a decomposition of the causal effect of the
policy, and why other commonly used marginal welfare definitions rely on behavioral responses other
than the causal effect, such as the compensated effect (as in the MEB analysis of Kleven and Kreiner
(2005); Eissa et al. (2008); Eissa and Hoynes (2011)) or the causal effect of an augmented policy that
includes a hypothetical tax increase to close the government budget constraint (as in the traditional
Atkinson-Stern-Stiglitz-Dasgupta definition of the MCPF in Stiglitz and Dasgupta (1971); Atkinson
and Stern (1974); see also Ballard and Fullerton (1992)).12
    The paper is also related to the literature on optimal taxation. While original optimal tax formulas
generally sought to write optimal tax formulas using underlying structural price and income elasticities
(e.g. Diamond and Mirrlees (1971) and Saez (2001)), more recent optimal tax literature has noted that
often one need not decompose behavioral responses into underlying structural components (e.g. Piketty
and Saez (2013)), which can aid both in the theoretical expression and empirical implementation of
optimal tax formulas. Relative to this literature, there is one key distinction in the present paper.
Optimal taxation formulas generally solve a first order condition to write the optimal tax rates as
functions of estimable elasticities. By construction, these elasticities measure the response to policy
changes locally around the optimum. Hence, it is important that the elasticities are stable (or one might
even say “structural”) so that extrapolation of estimates using local variation provides an estimate
around the optimum. In contrast, estimating the welfare impact of policy changes (e.g. the MVPF)
relies on causal effects defined locally around the status quo, and thus is arguably more likely to align
with causal effects that are estimated in practice.
    Finally, this paper is also related to the recent literature on sufficient statistics (Chetty (2009b))
and in particular the sufficiency of the taxable income elasticity (Feldstein (1999); Chetty (2009a)).
It is well known that the taxable income elasticity is no longer sufficient in cases when there are
responses to the policy on multiple tax bases with different marginal tax rates (e.g. capital and
first place to form the MEB. This problematic feature of MEB was initially derived by Diamond and Mirrlees (1971).
See also Auerbach and Hines (2002) for a simple illustration of this on page 1370, equation 3.24. In this sense, the
aggregation of welfare across people is more easily accomplished when using the causal effects for conducting welfare as
opposed to the MEB framework.
   12
      In this sense, it is related to Auerbach (1985) who noted the different conceptual experiments underlying the MEB
versus MCPF.


                                                           4
labor income (Saez et al. (2012)) or intensive versus extensive margin responses (Kleven and Kreiner
(2006))). However, the present analysis shows that the causal impact of the behavioral response on
the government budget (e.g. tax revenue) as opposed to the tax base (e.g. taxable income) remains
sufficient even in cases where the behavioral response by individuals occurs on multiple tax margins.
This suggests focusing on the tax revenue impacts, as opposed to taxable income, may be the most
general empirical approach for welfare analysis.
         The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the model, outlines the welfare frame-
work, and compares it to existing literature. Section 3 applies the framework, using existing causal
estimates, to study the desirability of changing the top marginal income tax rate, EITC generosity,
food stamps, job training, and housing vouchers. Section 4 concludes. The Online Appendix provides
some derivations of the welfare formulas and also discusses extensions of the model to non-marginal
welfare analysis (Appendix B), externalities (Appendix C), general equilibrium effects (Appendix D),
and provides further clarification of the role of the Hicksian elasticity in previous literature (Appendix
E).


2         Model
Individuals in the economy consume goods, engage in labor supply activities, and enjoy the benefits
of public goods and services. The government imposes taxes and transfers, in addition to providing
goods and services. This section formalizes this in a standard, yet generalized, model to generate
individuals’ indirect utility functions over the choices of government policies and then aggregates
these individual utilities using social welfare weights. The generality captures many realistic issues
faced in empirical applications and also allows the model to nest many models in previous literature.
Despite the generality of the model, the paper will motivate a very simple benefit-cost ratio in equation
(15) that can in principle be measured using a single causal effect and will be estimated for five policies
in Section 3.

2.1        Setup
More formally, there exist a continuum of individuals of equal mass in the population, indexed by i ∈ I.
These individuals make two choices: they choose a vector of JX goods to consume, xi = {xij }Jj=1
                                                                                              X
                                                                                                 , and a
vector of labor supply activities, li = {lij }Jj=1
                                                L 13
                                                   . There also exists a government that does three things:
it provides a vector of JG publicly provided goods and services to each individual, Gi = {Gij }Jj=1  G
                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                               n oJX
provides monetary transfers to each individual, Ti , and imposes linear taxes14 on goods, τix = τijx
                                                                                                     j=1
                                  n oJL
and labor supply activities, τil = τijl   .
                                               j=1
    13
     For example, j can index time so that lij is the labor supply of individual i in time j. Or, li1 could be labor supplied
in wage work and li2 could be labor supplied in the informal (un-taxed) sector.
  14
     Because I focus on marginal policy changes, the model can consider nonlinear tax settings by interpreting Ti as
                       l
“virtual income” and τij as the marginal tax on labor earnings.




                                                             5
       Individuals value their goods, labor supply activities, and publicly provided goods and services
according to the utility function:
                                                      ui (xi , li , Gi )                                                 (1)

which is allowed to vary arbitrarily across people.15
       To simplify the exposition, I assume a stylized model of production in which one unit of any type
of labor supply produces 1 unit of any type of good under perfect competition. Thus, individuals face
a single linear budget constraint given by
                                                               
                                         (1 + τix ) xi ≤ 1 − τil li + Ti + yi                                            (2)

                                                                                                    PJX             
where all vector multiplication is the standard dot product (e.g. (1 + τix ) xi =                      j=1   1 + τijx xij ).
The individuals expenditure on goods, inclusive of the taxes τix , must be less than the earnings from
labor supply activities (plus taxes τil ), transfers, Ti , and non-labor income, yi .16 This simplified pro-
duction structure rules out many interesting features that can easily be added to a more general model,
including imperfect competition (i.e. producer surplus), production externalities (e.g. spillovers), and
pecuniary externalities (in which case real prices would not always be 1).17 I assume the marginal
cost to the government of producing publicly-provided goods is given by cG = {cj }j for j = 1, .., JG .18
       Each individual takes taxes, transfers, non-labor income, and the provision of publicly-provided
goods as given and chooses goods and labor supply activities to maximize utility. This yields the
standard indirect utility function of individual i,
                                                
                     Vi τil , τix , Ti , Gi , yi   = max ui (x, l, Gi )
                                                       x,l
                                                                                   
                                                      s.t.   (1 + τix ) xi ≤ 1 − τil li + Ti + yi

where Vi depends on taxes, transfers, income, and publicly provided goods. The Marshallian demand
functions generated by the agent’s problem are denoted xm   x l                        m   x l
                                                                                                               
                                                        ij τi , τi , Ti , Gi , yi and lij τi , τi , Ti , Gi , yi .
Because the utility function is allowed to vary arbitrarily across people, it will be helpful to normalize
by the individual’s marginal utility of income, λi ,

                                                                  ∂Vi
                                                        λi =
                                                                  ∂yi

which is the Lagrange multiplier from the type i maximization program. For measuring welfare, it
will also be helpful to define the expenditure function, Ei u; τil , τix , Ti , Gi , of individual i to be the
                                                                                  

amount of income yi required for individual i to obtain utility level u in a world with taxes, transfers,
  15
     Note that these publicly provided goods could be market or non-market goods. For example, one can capture a
setting where G is a market good by assuming the utility function has a form: ui (x1 , x2 , G) = ũi (x1 , x2 + G), so that G
and x2 would be perfectly substitutable.
  16
     I allow (but do not require) taxes and transfers to be individual-specific. This allows the model to nest the standard
MEB experiment.
  17
     See Appendix D for a discussion of GE effects and Appendix C for a discussion of externalities.
  18
     Note this nests the case of a pure public good by assuming cG       1
                                                                   j = N and Gij is constant across i.




                                                              6
and publicly provided good τil , τix , Ti , Gi .19
                                              

       The indirect utility function provides a measure of individual i’s utility; to move to social welfare,
I assume there exists some vector of Pareto weights, {ψi }, for each individual i, so that social welfare
is given by                                                                  ˆ
                                    n                              o                                          
                                W        τil , τix , Ti , Gi , yi        =         ψi Vi τix , τil , Ti , Gi , yi di                          (3)
                                                                    i        i∈I

Note that this social welfare function in principle depends on a very rich set of policy choices by the
government: it’s an implicit function of the vector of taxes, transfers, and publicly provided goods to
every individual in the economy.
       These canonical measures of individual welfare, Vi , and social welfare, W , provide a mapping from
policy choices of the government to measures of well being. The remainder of the paper will seek to
characterize the welfare impact of small changes to government policy.

2.2        Policy Paths and Potential Outcomes
To evaluate the welfare impact of government policy changes, one needs to first mathematically describe
a policy change in the environment. To do so, I adopt an empirical framework that aligns closely with
the canonical definitions of causal effects as differences of “potential outcomes” (e.g. Angrist and
Pischke (2008)).20 To be specific, I define a “policy path”, P (θ). For any θ in a small region near 0,
θ ∈ (−, ), let P (θ) be a vector of taxes, transfers, and publicly provided goods to each individual,
                                                   n                                         o
                                            P (θ) = τ̂ xi (θ) , τ̂il (θ) , T̂i (θ) , Ĝi (θ)                                                  (4)
                                                                                                     i∈I

where the “^” indicates the policies are functions of θ. I make two assumptions about how the policy
varies with θ. First, I normalize the value of the policy at θ = 0 to be the status quo:
                                  n                                        o            n                    o
                                   τ̂ xi (0) , τ̂il (0) , T̂i (0) , Ĝi (0)            = τix , τil , Ti , Gi
                                                                                 i∈I                          i∈I

                                                                                                                       x
                                                                                                                    dτ̂ij    l
                                                                                                                          dτ̂ij dT̂i         dĜij
Second, I assume that the policy path is continuously differentiable in θ (i.e.                                      dθ , dθ , dθ ,    and    dθ
exist and are continuous in θ).21 Intuitively, P (θ) traces out a smooth path of government policies,
centered around the status quo. By using this path, one can easily consider policies that vary multiple
policy parameters at the same time. Given a path P (θ), I consider the welfare impact of following
  19
       Note that the standard duality result implies:
                                                                                         
                                        Ei Vi τil , τix , Ti , Gi , yi ; τil , τix , Ti , Gi = yi

  20
     This method for thinking of policy changes is also adopted by Kleven and Kreiner (2006) to derive the marginal cost
(/value) of public funds in settings with intensive and extensive labor supply responses.
  21
     This does not require that the behavioral response to the policy be continuously differentiable. For notational
convenience in the text, I will assume the behavioral responses are continuously differentiable. However, in the empirical
application to the study of the EITC expansion in Section 3, I allow for extensive margin labor supply responses (which is
a key feature of the behavioral response to EITC expansions, and is known to be an important factor in MEB estimation
(Eissa et al. (2008), Eissa and Hoynes (2011))).



                                                                             7
the path, parameterized by an increase in θ. This can be interpreted as following a policy path or
evaluating a policy direction.22
         Before asking the normative question of whether the government should follow the policy path, I
first consider the positive question of what the policy change would do to behavior. Given a policy
                                                                                                 n path,  o
I assume individuals choose goods and labor supply activities, x̂i (θ) = {x̂ij (θ)} and l̂i (θ) = ˆlij (θ) ,
                                                                                               i                        i
that maximize their utility under policy P (θ).23 In the now-standard language of Angrist and Pischke
(2008), x̂ (θ) and ˆl (θ) are the “potential outcomes” of individual’s choices of goods and labor supply
activities if policy world θ is undertaken. As θ moves away from 0, x̂ (θ) and l̂ (θ) trace out the causal
effect of the policy change on the individual’s behavior..
         In addition to the individual’s behavior, the policy will also impact the government budget. To
keep track of these effects, let t̂i (θ) denote the net government resources directed towards type i,
                                                                                                  
                   t̂i (θ)  =       cG Ĝi (θ)    + T̂i (θ) − τ̂ xi (θ) x̂i (θ) + τ̂ li (θ) l̂i (θ)                    (5)
                   | {z }           | {z }           | {z }  |                 {z                   }
               Net Resources Public-Provided Goods Transfers           Tax Revenue

where cG Ĝi (θ) is the government expenditure on publicly provided goods to individual i, T̂i (θ) is
the government transfers to type i, and τ̂ xi (θ) x̂i (θ) + τ̂ li (θ) l̂i (θ) is the tax revenue collected from
individual i on goods and labor supply activities.
         With this definition of t̂i , the total impact of a policy on the government’s budget is given by
´    dt̂i
 i∈I dθ di.     The analysis does not require policies to be budget-neutral24 , but budget-neutrality of a
policy path could be imposed by assuming
                                                 ˆ
                                                         dt̂i
                                                              di = 0 ∀θ
                                                   i∈I   dθ

where
                              dt̂i      dĜi dT̂i   d h x                                  i
                                   = cG     +     −    τ̂ i (θ) x̂i (θ) + τ̂ li (θ) l̂i (θ)
                              dθ         dθ   dθ    dθ
The term cG ddθ
             Ĝi
                 is how much the policy changes spending on publicly provided goods;                         dT̂i
                                                                                                             dθ     is how
much the policy increases direct transfers; and the last term is the impact of the policy on the net tax
revenue from goods and labor supply activities.
    As is well-known, the impact of the policy on individual behavior and on the government budget
are related through the mechanical and behavioral impact of the policy on net tax revenue from goods
    22
     I have not specified a scale/speed for the policy path. In practice, one can normalize the speed of the policy to one
unit of a tax or one dollar of revenue raised, as illustrated in the application in Section 3.
  23
     These can be calculated in theory by evaluating the Marshallian demands at the policy vector for each θ:
                                                                                          
                                x̂ij (θ) = xm          x          l
                                              ij τ̂ i (θ) , τ̂i (θ) , T̂i (θ) , Ĝi (θ)      ∀j = 1..JX
                                                                                          
                                 ˆ
                                 lij (θ) = lijm
                                                  τ̂ xi (θ) , τ̂il (θ) , T̂i (θ) , Ĝi (θ)   ∀j = 1..JL

    24
    I do not model explicitly the source of non-budget neutrality, but one can extend the model to a world in which the
government issues debt, B, and even allow B to affect behavior, u (x, l, G, B). I discuss this further in relation to the
definition of the MCPF in footnote 75.


                                                             8
and labor supply activities:
                                                                                                                               !
                                                                             dτ̂ xi       dτ̂ l
                                                                                               
                      d h x                                   i                                             dx̂i          dl̂i
                         τ̂ i (θ) x̂i (θ) + τ̂ li (θ) l̂i (θ)      =                x̂i + i l̂i   +   τ̂ xi       + τ̂ li            (6)
                      dθ                                                      dθ          dθ                dθ            dθ
                                                                           |           {z       }   |            {z            }
                                                                           Mechanical Impact        Behavioral Impact
                                                                           on Govt Revenue          on Govt Revenue

The mechanical effect is the change in revenue holding behavior constant. This would be the marginal
budget impact of the policy if one did not account for any behavioral responses. The behavioral impact
is the effect of the behavioral response to the policy on the government’s budget.

2.3       Definitions of Welfare
Moving from positive to normative analysis requires a definition of welfare. A primary aim of the
paper is to clarify the relationship between such welfare definitions, such as marginal willingness to
pay and marginal excess burden, and the types of behavioral responses that are required to construct
such welfare measures. In Section 2.6, I discuss MEB; however I begin by defining the individual’s
willingness to pay out of their own income to follow the policy path, as this will be the definition of
welfare that corresponds to the use of causal, not compensated, behavioral responses.25
       To be specific, let V̂i (θ) denote the utility obtained by type i under the policy P (θ). The marginal
                                                                                                dV̂i
impact of the policy on the utility of individual i is given by                                 dθ |θ=0 .    Normalizing by the marginal
utility of income, the individual’s own willingness to pay (out of their own income) for a marginal
                                           dV̂i
                                                |
policy change is given by                  dθ θ=0
                                               λi   .26
       With this definition of individual welfare, aggregation to social welfare is straightforward: one can
take a weighted sum of individual willingness to pay, with the weights given by the social marginal
                               ´       dV̂i
                                            |
utilities of income, ddθ
                      Ŵ
                         |θ=0 = i∈I ηi dθλiθ=0 di.27 Social marginal utilities ηi can be interpreted in terms
  25
       Alternatively, one could evaluate the marginal excess burden of the policy change – this is discussed below in Section
2.6.
                                dV̂i
  26                                   |
    It is well-known that dθλiθ=0 is equivalent to two other canonical measures of welfare for marginal policy changes.
First, the equivalent variation, EVi (θ), of policy P (θ) for type i is the amount that the consumer would be indifferent
to accepting in lieu of the policy change. EVi (θ) solves
                                                                              
                                          Vi τil , τix , Ti , Gi , yi + EVi (θ) = V̂i (θ)

Second, the compensating variation, CVi (θ), of policy P (θ) for type i is the amount of money that must be compensated
to the agent after the policy change to bring her back to her initial utility level. CVi (θ) solves
                                                                                      
                                  Vi τil (θ) , τix (θ) , Ti (θ) , Gi (θ) , yi − CVi (θ) = V̂i (0)

It is straightforward to verify (e.g. Schlee (2013)) that:
                                                          dV̂i
                                                               |
                                                          dθ θ=0       d [EVi ]        d [CVi ]
                                                                   =            |θ=0 =          |θ=0
                                                            λi            dθ              dθ

  27
    Note this remains true even if the welfare weights are not fixed and
                                                                       ´ are functions of utility levels, since marginal
policy changes do not change the welfare weights. For example, if W = i∈I G (Vi ) di for a concave function G, then the



                                                                              9
                                                                                                                    η1
of Okun’s classic bucket experiment (Okun (1975)): Society is indifferent to transferring                           η2   resources
to individual 2 as opposed to $1 to individual 1. If η1 < η2 , society is willing to lose resources in order
to make a transfer from individual 1 to individual 2.
       In principle, values of the social marginal utility of income are a subjective matter. However,
Hendren (2014) provides one potential alternative that replaces these social marginal utilities of income
with the “inequality deflator”, which measures the marginal price of transferring resources between
individuals using modifications to the tax schedule. Under certain conditions, the use of such weights
corresponds to searching for potential Pareto improvements in the spirit of Kaldor (1939) and Hicks
(1939), and does not require a subjective specification of a social welfare function. For now, we imagine
the researcher has chosen a given set of social marginal utilities of income, either subjectively or using
the inequality deflator of Hendren (2014).

2.4      Defining Behavioral Responses: The Policy Elasticity
In principle, the behavioral responses to the policy can be driven by any number of underlying reasons
such as the impact of changing prices, changing disposable incomes, or complementary effects from
changes in the provision of public goods and services. A Marshallian elasticity holds disposable income
constant. A Hicksian elasticity holds utility constant. A key benefit of these well-agreed upon elasticity
definitions is that they allow the economist to state clearly what is being held constant in the conceptual
experiment in question.
       However, in practice policy changes hold neither income nor utility constant. All aspects of the
policy are varying simultaneously which could be interacting to produce behavioral responses through
a potentially complicated underlying process.28 To provide a vocabulary that allows one to make
clear what is being held constant in the conceptual experiment in which the policy occurs, I define
the policy response of xij and lij to be the local causal effect of the policy on xij and lij . Similarly,
because empirical estimation often occurs in logs, I define the policy elasticity of xij and lij to be the
local causal effect of the policy on log (xij ) and log (lij ).
                                                                                                                     dx̂ij
Definition 1. The policy response of xij (or lij ) with respect to policy P (θ) is given by                           dθ |θ=0   (or
                                                                  
social marginal utility of income would be ηi = G0          V̂i (0) λi .
  28
   Of course, one can write these causal        effects using an individual’s Marshallian or Hicksian demand functions. For
example, suppose xm   x    l
                                           
                  ij τi , τi , Ti , Gi , yi is the Marshallian demand of individual i for good j. Then,

                                             JX                 JX                          JG
                                  dx̂ij      X     ∂xm     x
                                                      ij dτij
                                                                X   ∂xm     x
                                                                       ij dτij   ∂xm
                                                                                   ij dTi
                                                                                            X   ∂xm
                                                                                                  ij dĜij
                                           =          x
                                                              +        x
                                                                               +          +
                                    dθ       j=1
                                                   ∂τ ij  dθ    j=1
                                                                    ∂τ ij  dθ     ∂T  dθ    j=1
                                                                                                ∂G ij dθ
                                             |                               {z                          }
                                                                 Marshallian Expansion

Similarly, suppose xhij    τix , τil , Ti , Gi , u is the Hicksian demand of individual i for good j (evaluated at utility level u).
                                                  

Then,
                                  JX               JX                          JG
                          dx̂ij   X   ∂xhij dτij
                                              x    X   ∂xhij dτij
                                                               x
                                                                    ∂xhij dTi X    ∂xhij dĜij   ∂xhij dV̂i
                                =        x
                                                 +        x
                                                                  +          +                 +
                           dθ     j=1
                                      ∂τij dθ      j=1
                                                       ∂τij dθ       ∂T dθ     j=1
                                                                                   ∂Gij dθ        ∂u dθ
                                  |                                   {z                                  }
                                                             Hicksian Expansion
In principle, the response to a given policy could be driven by a multitude of underlying factors.


                                                                   10
dl̂ij                                                                                                  dlog(x̂ij )                         dlog (l̂ij )
 dθ |θ=0 ).   The policy elasticity of xij (or lij ) is given by ˆxij =                                  dθ       |θ=0   (or ˆlij =         dθ        |θ=0 )

    The policy elasticity is simply the causal effect of the policy in question. Given these definitions,
the total impact of the policy change on government revenue in equation (6) has three representations:
                                                                                                                                JX                   JL
                                                                   !                                                !                                                !
    d h x                    l
                                          i
                                                x dx̂i      l dl̂i                         dx̂i              dl̂i               X                    X
       τ̂ i (θ) x̂i (θ) + τ̂ i (θ) l̂i (θ) − τ̂ i      + τ̂ i        =               τ̂ xi        +    τ̂ li            =             x x
                                                                                                                                     rij ˆij   +          l x
                                                                                                                                                          rij ˆij       (7)
   dθ                                             dθ          dθ                          dθ                dθ                  j                    j
   |                               {z                              }             |                {z                }       |                   {z                   }
      Total - Mechanical Impact on Govt Revenue                                Behavioral Impact                              Behavioral Impact
                                                                            on Govt Revenue (levels)                        on Govt Revenue (logs)

                                           x = τ̂ x x̂ (or r̂ x = τ̂ l ˆ
where the weights for the log responses, r̂ij                           x
                                                 ij ij       ij     ij lij ), equal the government revenue on
each good (or labor supply). Note again that all vector multiplication is the standard dot-product.29

The compensated response                             In contrast to the policy response, one can also define the compen-
                                           dx̂cij
sated response to the policy,               dθ .      To do so, one needs to subtract the income effects associated with
the policy change.
                                      dx̂cij   dx̂ij            ∂xhij dV̂i               dx̂ij               ∂xm  dV̂i
                                                                                                               ij dθ
                                             =       −                               =         −                                                                         (8)
                                       dθ       dθ              |∂u{z dθ}                 dθ                  ∂y λ
                                                                                                             | {z i}
                                                             Income Effect                                Income Effect
The compensated response to the policy P is equal to the policy response minus the portion of the
behavioral response that is due to changes in income or utility. This income effect can be represented
                                                              ∂xh
                                                                ij dV̂i
using the Hicksian response to utility,                        ∂u dθ ,    which adjusts behavior for the change in the utility
induced by the policy, dVi
                       dθ . Alternatively, the income effect can                                            be represented using the Marshallian
                     ∂xm dV̂i
response to income, ∂yij λdθi , which adjusts the policy response                                           for the change in the income-value of
                           dV̂i
                           dθ
the policy change,         λi     .
       As illustrated in Equation (8), the construction of the compensated response to a policy change
is potentially much more difficult than the policy response. Not only does one need to know the
                                                   ∂xm
                                                     ij                   ∂xh
                                                                            ij
behavioral response to income (                     ∂y )   or utility (    ∂u ),     but to scale properly one also needs to know the
                                                                                                                                                             dV̂i
utility impact of the policy ( ddθ
                                 V̂i
                                     ) or the marginal willingness to pay for the policy change,                                                             dθ
                                                                                                                                                             λi      . As is
well-known, the compensated response to a given policy is the policy response to an alternative policy,
P̂ c , that holds individuals’ utilities constant via individual-specific lump-sum transfers (Auerbach and
Hines (2002)).
       The next section illustrates that one can construct a comprehensive welfare framework for local
evaluation of government policy changes that relies solely on the policy elasticities of the policy in
question, and does not require knowledge of either the compensated effect, or any of the underlying
marshallian or hicksian demand functions (conditional on knowledge of the policy response).
  29
       In other words,
                                                                       JX                 JL
                                                   dx̂i         dl̂i   X   x dx̂ij
                                                                                          X      ˆ
                                                                                              l dlij
                                           τ̂ xi        + τ̂ li      =    τij      |θ=0 +    τij     |θ=0
                                                   dθ           dθ      j
                                                                              dθ           j
                                                                                                 dθ




                                                                            11
2.5   The Marginal Willingness to Pay for the Policy Change
Proposition 1 characterizes individual i’s marginal willingness to pay to pursue the policy:

Proposition 1. The marginal welfare impact to individual i of pursuing policy path P (θ) is given by:

              dV̂i              dui
              dθ |θ=0          dĜi dTi dτ̂ix
                                dGi                    dτ̂ l
                         =            +    +      xi + i l i
                 λi         λi dθ       dθ    dθ       dθ
                                              dui
                                                        !                                              !
                              dt̂i            dGi            dĜ i                dx̂ i          dl̂ i
                         =         |θ=0   +        − cG            |θ=0 +   τ̂ xi        + τ̂ li
                              dθ
                              | {z }           λi             dθ                  dθ             dθ
                           Net Resources
                                            |         {z              }   |             {z             }
                                              Public Spending/            Behavioral Impact
                                                         Mkt Failure              on Govt Revenue

Proof. The first line follows from the envelope theorem and the second line follows from substituting
the derivative of equation (5). The calculation is provided in Appendix A.

   By the envelope theorem, the extent to which individuals respond to the policy change does not
affect their utility directly. Hence, the first line of Proposition 1 does not contain behavioral responses.
However, behavioral responses are crucial when one attempts to account for the cost of the policy, as
shown in the second line of Proposition 1.
                      dt̂i
   The first term,    dθ ,   is straightforward: it is the change in net government resources provided to
individual i from the government, which is the difference between the change in spending on publicly
provided goods and transfers and the collection of taxes on goods and labor supply activities. For
                                    ´
budget neutral policies, recall that i ddθt̂i di = 0; in this sense, ddθt̂i captures the redistributive impact
of the policy. These transfers increase social welfare to the extent to which those receiving the net
transfer have higher values of the social marginal utility of income than those who pay for the net
transfer.
                                                                                                     dĜij
   The second term captures the value of any changes to publicly provided goods,                      dθ |θ=0 .   This is
given by the difference between the willingness to pay for
                                                        ! the publicly provided goods and their costs of
              dui                            ∂ui
                       G dĜi |
                                     PJG      ∂Gij    G    dĜij
production, dG  λi − c
                  i
                           dθ θ=0 =     j=1    λi − cj      dθ |θ=0 . This component is well-known and

popularized in Samuelson (1954). One can interpret this number as the size of the market inefficiency
being addressed by the publicly provided goods. If the private market can efficiently supply and
allocate all goods, then agents would be able to pay cg to obtain a unit of a good that is equivalent to
                                           ∂ui
                                          ∂Gij
the publicly provided good, so that        λi    = cG
                                                    j . If the private market does not provide such goods as
efficiently as the government (or vice-versa), then one needs to know the difference between the costs
and benefits of its provision.
   The final term in Proposition 1 summarizes the importance of behavioral responses. It is the
impact of the behavioral response to the policy on the government’s budget. It is a weighted sum of
                                        dx̂ij            dl̂ij
the policy responses on behavior,        dθ |θ=0   and    dθ |θ=0 ,   with the weights given by the marginal tax



                                                          12
rates.30
       The causal effect matters because of a fiscal externality. The envelope theorem guarantees that
behavioral responses do not affect utility directly; however, when prices do not reflect their resource
costs (as is the case with taxation), behavioral responses impose a cost on those bearing the difference
between the prices faced by the individual and their resource costs.31 Conditional on calculating this
fiscal externality, behavioral responses are not required for measuring individual’s willingness to pay
for the policy change.32

Relation to Feldstein (1999)                If there is only one tax rate on aggregate taxable income and social
marginal utilities of income are the same for all types, then the aggregate taxable income elasticity
is sufficient for capturing the behavioral responses required for welfare analysis.33 This insight was
recently popularized in Feldstein (1999). I provide two clarifications to this result.34 First, it is in
general neither the Hicksian (compensated) nor the Marshallian (uncompensated) elasticity of taxable
income that is desired for analyzing the welfare impact of government policy. Rather, it is the taxable
income elasticity associated with the policy in question, which depends on how the revenue is spent.
       Second, as is well known, the taxable income elasticity is not sufficient to the extent to which
individuals face multiple tax rates. For example, if capital income is taxed at a different rate than labor
income, the elasticity of the sum of these two incomes would not be sufficient (Saez et al. (2012)). If
behavioral responses occur on both the participation and intensive margin, then the aggregate earnings
elasticity is not sufficient (Kleven and Kreiner (2006)). Moreover, one also needs to know the extent
to which policies affect consumption of subsidized goods or services (e.g. enrollment in government
programs such as SSDI or unemployment insurance). While subsequent literature tends to suggest a
need for adding additional elasticities to the analysis35 , the present analysis shows that if one switches
  30
     Although this causal effect is the impact of a marginal change in the policy, in practice causal effects are often
measured using discrete changes in policies. Appendix B provides intuitive conditions under which the non-marginal
                                                    dx̂
causal effects (i.e. x̂ij (1) − x̂ij (0) instead of dθij |θ=0 ) can be used to measure the individual’s willingness to pay for the
policy change.
  31
     As discussed in Appendix C, if there are other externalities one also requires an estimate of the impact of the policy
on those externalities as well. However, the causal effects remain the desired behavioral responses.
  32
     For completeness, it is also important to note that a decomposition of causal effects into income and substitution
                                                                            ∂ui
                                                                           ∂Gij
effects do not generally help measure the size of market inefficiency,      λi
                                                                                  − cG
                                                                                     j . Income and price effects depend on the
                                                                                                 ∂ui
                                                                                                ∂G
Hessian (2nd derivative) of the utility function, whereas the size of the market failure, λiij − cG j , depends on the first
derivatives of the utility function (Mas-Colell et al. (1995)).
  One exception is the model of Chetty (2008) who models unemployment durations with a separable effort function and
a binary state. He shows that the size of the market failure (wedge between marginal utilities) is a function of the causal
impact of assets on search (liquidity effect) and the causal impact of unemployment benefits on search (moral hazard).
Of course, it is not a general feature of economic models that marginal utilities can be written as functions of elasticities.
Generally, marginal utilities are equated to prices, and elasticities correspond to the impact of price changes.
  33
     To see this, note that if τ1 = τ2 , then
                                                                                          
                                           dx1           dx2             d (x1 + x2 )
                                        τ1     |θ=0 + τ2     |θ=0 = τ1                |θ=0
                                            dθ            dθ                  dθ

  34
     These clarifications are distinct from the insight of Chetty (2009a) who shows that the aggregate taxable income
elasticity is not sufficient if the private marginal cost of tax avoidance is not equal to its social marginal cost.
  35
     For example, if there are both intensive and extensive labor supply responses, one can compute both a participation


                                                               13
the dependent variables in these analyses from the components of taxable income to aggregate tax
revenue, such a decomposition of the mechanics of the behavioral response is not required.36 Of course,
there are many reasons to be interested in the mechanisms driving such a response; but calculating
the marginal welfare impact of the policy change in question is not one of them.

2.6    Relation to MEB
Since Harberger (1964), the MEB framework is arguably the most common welfare framework for
the evaluation of the welfare impact of changes to tax and transfer policies.37 As discussed in the
introduction, calculating welfare changes with this approach requires the compensated (Hicksian)
elasticity. However, the compensated (Hicksian) elasticity is the causal effect of a policy that holds
utility constant; under the present framework, it is therefore not sufficient for calculating the welfare
impact of policies that actually change utilities.
    This section clarifies the difference between the marginal willingness to pay measure of welfare
– which relies on the policy responses – and the marginal excess burden – that is known to rely on
compensated effects. I begin by defining the MEB in this environment.
    Let P (θ) be a policy path. To compute the marginal excess burden to individual i from the policy
P (θ), let v = (vi ) be a vector of pre-specified utilities. Most commonly, v is chosen to be the set of
status quo utilities. This corresponds to the “equivalent                                             38
                                                          n variation” measure of MEB. Now,                  o define
                                  v                  v       x      l
the compensated policy path, P (θ), such that P = τ̂ i (θ) , τ̂i (θ) , T̂i (θ) + Ĉi (θ; v) , Ĝi (θ) where
                                                                                                               i            
Ĉi (θ; u) is a compensation provided to individual i such that Vi τ̂ xi (θ) , τ̂il (θ) , T̂i (θ) + Ĉi (θ; v) , Ĝi (θ) , yi =
vi . Intuitively, P v (θ) is the same as the proposed policy path, P (θ), with the addition of individual
specific lump-sum transfers, Ĉi (θ; v), that hold agent i’s utility constant at vi .
    Now, let t̂vi denote the net government resources allocated to individual i under the compensated
policy P v (θ). Following the textbook definitions of Auerbach and Hines (2002), the class of marginal
excess burden measures are defined as

                                                                 dt̂vi
                                                  M EBivi =            |θ=0                                             (9)
                                                                 dθ

This measures the amount of additional resources the government must give to individual i in order to
maintain individual her utility constant at vi while the policy change is implemented.39 If the policy
elasticity that is weighted by the average tax rates and an intensive elasticity weighted by marginal tax rates (Kleven
and Kreiner (2006)). If there are switches between capital and labor income, one can compute the causal impacts on
each of these and weight by their respective tax rates.
  36
     Indeed, this is the approach taken in Chetty et al. (2013) who show the behavioral responses to the marginal incentives
induced by the EITC lead to a 5% increase in government expenditures.
  37
     For example, Eissa et al. (2008) and Eissa and Hoynes (2011) apply the MEB framework to study the welfare impact
of recent expansions of the earned income tax credit in the US.
  38
      See Auerbach and Hines (2002). Choosing v to be the utilities obtained in the hypothetical first-best world with no
economic distortions yields the “compensating variation” measure of MEB. Of course, the distinction between CV and
EV measures of MEB depend on whether one is starting from the perspective of the first best or from the status quo.
Hence, some papers switch these two definitions around.
  39
     An alternative definition of marginal excess burden is given in the handbook chapter of Auerbach (1985) that preceded
Auerbach and Hines (2002). In this chapter, the equivalent variation MEB is defined as the marginal willingness to pay


                                                            14
change is not desirable to individual i, she must be compensated to hold her utility constant (so MEB
is positive); conversely if the policy change is good for individual i, the government must take away
resources to hold her utility constant (so MEB is negative).
                                                                                                                                                  dV̂i
                                                                                                                                                       |
                                                                                                                                                  dθ θ=0
       If v is the status quo vector of utilities (i.e. the EV measure), then MEB is related to                                                       λi
 through the income effects that were removed to construct the MEB policy experiment. Let x̂cij and
ˆlc denote the compensated choices of goods and labor supply activities under policy path P v (θ).
ij
Then, the income effect component of the response to the policy on xij is the difference between the
                                                                                                                                    dV̂i
                                                   dx̂ij              dx̂cij    40                                                       |
                                                                                                                                    dθ θ=0
causal and compensated response:                    dθ |θ=0    −       dθ |θ=0 .          Then, MEB is related to                       λi   through the
impact of the behavioral response to the compensation on the government budget:

                                                                          dV̂i
                                                                          dθ |θ=0
                                                     M EBivi          =                 − IN Ci                                                      (10)
                                                                              λi
where                                                                                                                 !!
                                                              dx̂c                                          dl̂c
                                                                                
                                                   dx̂i                                          dl̂i
                        IN Ci =          τix            |θ=0 − i |θ=0                  + τil          |θ=0 − i |θ=0
                                                   dθ         dθ                                 dθ         dθ
                                     |                               {z                                                         }
                                                   Income Effects on Government Budget
            dV̂i
                 |
            dθ θ=0                                                                                                                            dx̂ij
Also, if        λi   = 0, then no marginal compensation is provided to individual i, so that                                                   dθ |θ=0     −
dx̂cij
 dθ |θ=0    = 0 and   M EBivi   = 0 (and           vice-versa).41
       Equation (10) illustrates that MEB and the marginal willingness to pay are related to each other
through the income effects induced by the lump-sum taxation that hold individuals’ utility constant
in the MEB experiment. In the special case for which there are no income effects, IN Ci = 0 so that
MEB and marginal willingness to pay coincide.42 More generally, the MEB requires removing the
portion of the causal effects that are due to the income effects associated with the policy change.
       One reason MEB is a mainstay in the welfare analysis toolkit is perhaps because it is a funda-
for a hypothetical policy that is the same as the original policy but for which the budget constraint is closed using
individual-specific lump-sum taxation. To express this definition of MEB in the present framework, define an augmented
policy path                             n                                                   
                                                   o 
                                 P 85 =      l
                                           τ̂ij         x
                                                (θ) , τ̂ij (θ) j , T̂i (θ) − t̂ (θ) , Ĝi (θ)
                                                              j                                                i

where individual is forced to pay for net resources, t̂i (θ), provided to her by the policy path. Given this, the equivalent
variation MEB from Auerbach (1985) is
                                                                                   1985
                                                                              dV̂iP
                                                                      |θ=0
                                                         M EBi85          =       dθ
                                                                   λi
which depends on compensated elasticities (since the individual must pay for the resource cost), but it is straightforward
to verify that these are not “fully compensated” Hicksian elasticities since the transfers are not guaranteed to hold utility
constant.
  40                                                 dx̂ij            dx̂c              dxmij dĈi                                                 dxm
       The Slutsky equation guarantees that                |
                                                      dθ θ=0
                                                                  −      ij
                                                                            |
                                                                       dθ θ=0
                                                                                   =     dyi dθ
                                                                                                     where xm
                                                                                                            ij is the marshallian demand,
                                                                                                                                                      ij
                                                                                                                                                    dyi
                                                                                                                                                           is
                              dĈi
the response to income, and    dθ
                                     is the amount of compensation required to hold utility constant.
                                                                                                                     dV̂i
  41                                                                                                                        |                         ∂ui
     If v is not the status quo utilities, no such relationship is guaranteed between MEB and dθλiθ=0 because λi and                                 ∂Gij
need to be computed in the alternative world for which Vi is the utility level specified in the MEB experiment.
  42
     Indeed, this is a common empirical assumption (e.g. see Immervoll et al. (2007)).




                                                                          15
mental input into the optimal commodity taxation analysis initiated by Ramsey (1927) and studied
in detail in Diamond and Mirrlees (1971). Their results show that, in a model with a representative
agent, the marginal excess burdens across commodities are equated. This yields the classic “inverse
elasticity” rule for commodity taxation: at the optimum, tax-weighted compensated price derivatives
for each commodity are equated. However, as shown in Appendix E, this optimality formula involves
compensated responses because a necessary condition for taxes to be at an optimum is that small
budget-neutral changes to taxes do not affect utility. Hence, around the optimum, the policy re-
                                                  dx̂ij                 dx̂cij
sponses are compensated responses (i.e.            dθ |θ=0          =    dθ |θ=0    because utility is not changing at the
optimum).43

2.7      Aggregating to Social Welfare
Heretofore, I have defined measures of the welfare impact of a policy change on an individual, as
measured by willingness to pay (Proposition 1) and MEB (Equation (9)). Here, I illustrate how these
measures aggregate across individuals to measures of social welfare. As noted in Section 2.3, the
marginal willingness to pay for a policy change can be aggregated to social welfare using the social
marginal utilities of income, ηi .
                                                         ˆ          dV̂iP
                                               dW                    dθ |θ=0
                                                   =           ηi              di                                       (11)
                                                dθ         i            λi
                                                                                    dV̂iP
                                                                                          |
                                                                                     dθ θ=0
As shown in Proposition 1, the construction of each term,                               λi    , does not require decomposing
behavioral responses into underlying components such as income and substitution effects. Of course,
one must specify social marginal utilities of income, ηi , in order to provide such aggregation. As
                                                                                ηj
is well-known, ratios of social marginal utilities of income,                   ηi ,   measure one’s willingness to pay to
transfer resources from individual i to individual j and nest many forms of social preferences (Saez
and Stantcheva (2013)).
       As mentioned above, a potentially more objective method of aggregation of welfare impacts across
the income distribution is to weight welfare by the marginal price of transferring resources across the
income distribution using modifications to the income tax schedule, as suggested by Hendren (2014).
                                                                                                                       dV̂iP
                                                                                                                        dθ
Regardless of how one does the aggregation, the marginal willingness to pay measure of welfare,                         λi     ,
has the useful feature that it aggregates to social welfare using these social marginal utilities of income,
ηi .
       In contrast, aggregation of MEB across individuals is often more difficult. Using equation (10),
one can express the aggregate impact ed by Diamond and Mirrlees (1971), the aggregate impact on
social welfare is given by
                                                   ˆ
                                       dW
                                              =         (ηi M EBi + ηi IN Ci ) di
                                        dθ          i
  43
    Moreover, away from an optimum, the causal effects from policies that change commodity taxes continue to provide
information on the desirability of changing commodity tax rates. In contrast, compensated elasticities defined not around
the optimum will not necessarily provide information about the optimal commodity tax rate, as this would require an
assumption that the compensated elasticities are constant.


                                                               16
In other words, if one wishes to use the social marginal utilities to aggregate to social welfare, one
needs to add back in the income effects that were removed from the policy response in order to form
the compensated response.
       The difficulty of aggregating MEB across individuals was arguably well-documented by Diamond
and Mirrlees (1971). In the case of a representative agent, the optimality condition for policy to be
                    dV
set optimally is    dθ   = 0, so that the income effects associated with the policy change are zero at an
optimum (see Appendix E for further details). But, with heterogeneous individuals, the marginal
welfare formulae no longer depend on compensated responses.44 This is because small budget-neutral
policy changes does not hold the agents’ utilities constant at the optimum when there are heteroge-
neous agents. Some agents are better off; others are worse off. And, the aggregation of MEB across
individuals requires knowledge of the income effects associated with the policy change (Diamond and
Mirrlees (1971)).45 In this sense, aggregation of MEB across individuals is arguably more difficult than
                                                     dV̂iP
                                                           |
                                                      dθ θ=0
aggregation of marginal willingness to pay,              λi      , since the latter does not require knowledge of the
income effects associated with the policy change.

2.8      Estimating welfare in practice: A MVPF for non-budget neutral policies
If a policy is budget neutral, then the aggregate impact of the policy on social welfare (Equation (11)
and the components in Proposition 1) provides a natural measure for the total welfare impact of the
policy change. Such a measure depends on the policy responses or policy elasticities, and does not
require decomposition of behavioral responses into income and substitution effects, for example.
                                                                                         ´ dt̂P
   In reality many policy changes are not budget neutral, at least in the short run (i.e. i∈I dθi di 6= 0).
For such policies, one needs to adjust the welfare framework to account for the total cost of the policy.
Individuals will generally be willing to pay to obtain a transfer.
       In this section, I show that the framework provides a natural justification for computing a simple
marginal value of public funds (MVPF) as the welfare cost per dollar of government budget expended.
I use the term “MVPF” to be distinct from the traditional definition of the MCPF which generally
does not rely on the causal effect of the policy in question, as discussed in Section 2.9.
       Normalizing social welfare into units of individual î’s income, the MVPF is given by:

                                                     ´  ηi
                                                              dV̂iP
                                                               dθ θ=0
                                                                     |
                                                      i ηî        λi      di       "Benefit"
                                      M V P FPî =       ´                      =                                        (12)
                                                                  dt̂P               "Cost"
                                                             i∈I dθ
                                                                     i
                                                                      di

                                                                                ∂ V̂ P
                                                                                    î |
                                                                                  ∂θ θ=0
which is the sum of the welfare impact on each individual,                           λî   , weighted by their social marginal
utilities of income, ηi , and normalized in units of dollars to individual î.46 There is an extraordinary
  44
       See Section VII, page 268 of Diamond and Mirrlees (1971).
  45
       See Auerbach and Hines (2002) for a simple derivation of this on page 1370, equation 3.24).
    46
       Note that the î notation makes clear the units of income used in the definition; it is not the welfare impact on type
î. It is the welfare impact on all types measured in units of î’s income.



                                                                17
number of ways of constructing welfare measures for non-budget neutral policies (Fullerton (1991);
Auerbach and Hines (2002); Dahlby (2008)). This particular definition of the welfare impact of non-
budget neutral policies in equation (12) was initially proposed by Mayshar (1990) and also by Slemrod
and Yitzhaki (1996, 2001) and Kleven and Kreiner (2006).
   The MVPF has two key advantages. First, the needed behavioral responses depend solely on the
causal, not compensated, effects of the non-budget neutral policies in question. This contrasts with
both the MEB and also the traditional definition of the marginal cost of public funds, as discussed
below in Section 2.9.
   Second, comparisons of MVPFs across policies correspond to comparisons of the social welfare
impacts of policies. Given any two non-budget neutral policies, PT ax and PExp , let P (θ) denote a
policy that increases spending by $θ on PExp financed by a decrease in spending by $θ on PT ax . Then,
the welfare impact of this combined policy is given by:

                                 dŴ P                                        
                                       = η î M V P FPî Exp − M V P FPî T ax                            (13)
                                  dθ

so that policy PExp provides a benefit of M V P FPî Exp per dollar of government revenue and a cost
of M V P FPî T ax per dollar of government revenue. If M V P FPî Exp is greater (less) than M V P FPî T ax ,
then taking resources from the tax (expenditure) policy and using it to finance the expenditure (tax)
policy will improve social welfare. Identifying heterogeneity in the MVPF across different policies is
equivalent to identifying welfare-improving budget neutral policies.

2.9    Relation to the MCPF
As mentioned, the definition of the MVPF is based on welfare measures of Mayshar (1990) and Slemrod
and Yitzhaki (1996, 2001); Kleven and Kreiner (2006). However, it differs from the canonical definition
of the marginal cost of public funds. Following the papers of Stiglitz and Dasgupta (1971) and Atkinson
and Stern (1974), this literature seeks a number that can be used to adjust the standard Samuelson
(1954) condition for the welfare cost of raising the resources to finance the public expenditure (Ballard
and Fullerton (1992)). This definition is the impact of the behavioral response to the policy on the
government’s budget of both increasing taxes and spending resources on the public good (i.e. the final
term in Proposition 1 for a policy that raises taxes and increases spending on G).
   Suppose PExp is non-budget neutral a policy that increases spending on a public good G. The
MCPF is intended to provide an adjustment to the welfare measurement of the value of the public
spending to account for the distortionary cost of raising tax revenue.
   For simplicity, consider a stylized environment with one individual and a linear tax labor supply,
l. Now, let P be a budget-neutral policy that simultaneously increases spending on G but that is




                                                       18
financed by an increase in taxation on labor supply. The aggregate welfare impact is given by
                                                              !
                                                  ∂u
                                   dV̂ P                  dĜ        dˆlP
                                         =        ∂G
                                                       − cG      + τ
                                    dθ           λ        dθ         dθ}
                                                                   | {z
                                                                  "MCPF"
                                               |     {z     }
                                             Samuelson Condition

The first term is the canonical Samuelson condition for the provision of public goods, which measures
the difference between the willingness to pay and the per-person cost for providing the public good.
The second term is generally referred to as the marginal cost of public funds (Fullerton (1991),Dahlby
(2008)).47 It adjusts the Samuelson condition to account for the distortionary cost of raising tax
revenue.
       By construction, the MCPF does not depend on the policy response to the non-budget neutral
policy in question, PExp . Rather, it depends on the policy response to the augmented policy, P ,
which also includes a modification to the tax schedule to account for the cost of raising tax revenue.
Indeed, this definition of the MCPF in principle varies with how the revenue is spent. In practice,
many papers assume that the expenditure has a separable impact on utility and hence does not have
a causal impact on labor supply or the distortionary cost of taxation (Ballard and Fullerton (1992)).
This is violated in many realistic policy settings, such as job training programs and education more
generally, where perhaps a primary motivation for the government expenditures is to generate positive
tax impacts from labor supply responses.
       A more fundamental difficulty with this method for defining “the” MCPF is that there is an
implicit assumption that a single measure of the cost of raising revenue can be applied across different
expenditure settings. In practice, revenue can be obtained not only from the tax schedule but also
from a reduction in expenditure on alternative public goods and services.
       In contrast, the MVPF is not a component of a broader welfare calculation but rather it is the total
welfare impact of the policy per unit of government expenditure. By computing the MVPF for a range
of policies, the government can improve social welfare by moving resources from policies with low to
high MVPF policies, regardless of whether they are “tax” or “expenditure” policies, or combinations of
both. More importantly, in contrast to the MCPF or the MEB, the only behavioral responses required
for constructing the MVPF are the policy responses to the non-budget neutral policy in question.

2.10       Simplifications to the MVPF
At first glance, the MVPF in equation (22) may seem complicated to estimate in practice. However, a
couple of reasonable simplifications allow for a straightforward implementation. First, one may wish
to assume that the social marginal utility of income varies across beneficiaries of different policies (e.g.
the EITC versus the top marginal income tax rate), but may be willing to assume that the beneficiaries
of a given policy change have the same social marginal utility of income (e.g. EITC beneficiaries have
  47
    An alternative tradition – the so-called Pigou-Harberger-Browning tradition (Pigou (1947); Harberger (1964); Brown-
ing (1976, 1987)) – uses the MEB as the measure of the MCPF. Such an approach suffers from the drawbacks discussed
in Section XX.



                                                          19
similar social marginal utilities of income and those subject to the top marginal income tax rate have
similar social marginal utilities of income).
       With this assumption, one can define the MVPF in units of the income of the beneficiaries and
make comparisons using the MVPF and the social marginal utilities of income. For example, suppose
P1 and P2 are two policies that affect two different populations with different social marginal utilities
of income, η1 and η2 . For example, P1 could be an EITC expansion and η1 is the social marginal
utility of income of EITC beneficiaries; P2 could be a decrease in the top marginal income tax rate
and η2 is the social marginal utility of income of those subject to the top marginal income tax rate.
Then, increasing spending on P1 financed by a decrease in P2 increases social welfare if and only if

                                                       η1   M V P FP22
                                                          ≥                                                                            (14)
                                                       η2   M V P FP11

                         η1
Intuitively, the value   η2   measures society’s willingness to pay to transfer resources from beneficiaries of
                                           M V P FP2
P2 to beneficiaries of P1 ; the ratio              2
                                           M V P FP1
                                                       measures the marginal cost of transferring such resources
                                                   1
through a reduction of P2 and increase of P1 .48
       Second, in practice many policies only affect either market goods (e.g. taxes and transfers) or
publicly provided goods. In the case that the policy changes only market goods, the envelope theorem
(shown in the first line in Proposition (1)) shows that individuals value these policy changes dollar-
for-dollar. So, letting θ parameterize the increase in mechanical spending, the MVPF in units of the
beneficiaries own income is given by

                                                                    1                    1
                                          MV PF =             ´                   =
                                                         1            dt̂P            1 − FE
                                                        |I|       i∈I dθ
                                                                         i
                                                                             di

                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                              ´   dt̂P
where the numerator, 1, is the average marginal benefit of the policy and                               |I|   i∈I dθ
                                                                                                                     i
                                                                                                                         di = 1 − F E is the
average marginal cost of the policy, which incorporates the causal impact of the behavioral response
to the policy on the government budget – i.e. the fiscal externality F E.
       More generally, if a policy increases spending on a publicly provided good, G, the MVPF is given
by
                                                 ∂u
                                                 ∂G                                                 1
                  MV PF =                                                     ∗                 ´                                      (15)
                                            λ                                              1        dt̂P
                                          |{z}                                            |I|       di
                                                                                                i∈I dθ
                                                                                                       i

                                WTP for Grelative to income                               |    {z     }
                                                                                  Fiscal cost per dollar raised
Intuitively, the MVPF is the same as for market goods, but now one needs to adjust for the individual’s
willingness to pay for $1 in the publicly provided good, G, in units of her income. This is given by the
                                     ∂u
                                     ∂G
marginal rate of substitution,       λ    . The second term remains the same as the case with market goods:
it captures the total cost of providing $1 of public goods. The key is that this total cost incorporates
  48
    Equation (14) does not hold if one were to instead use MEB instead of the MVPF. As can be seen in the analysis
of Diamond and Mirrlees (1971), such comparisons require using modified social welfare weights that re-incorporate the
income effects that were removed for the MEB calculation.



                                                                   20
the causal impact of the behavioral response to the policy on the government budget.


3        Applications
This section draws on the large literature estimating the causal effects of policy changes and places
the in this normative framework by calculating their MVPF in equation (15). In particular, I study
changes involving the top marginal income tax rate, the generosity of the earned income tax credit
(EITC), food stamps (SNAP), job training programs (JTPA), and housing vouchers (Section 8).49
The calculations are presented in Table 1.50




3.1      Top Tax Rate Increase
There is a large literature estimating the causal effect of changes to the top marginal income tax rate
and the impact of such behavioral responses on the government’s budget (see Saez et al. (2012) for
a recent review). Such estimates generally come from variation induced by two policy reforms: the
    49
     Throughout, I assume that the social marginal utilities of income are constant within the set of beneficiaries for each
policy change. For example, in considering the expansion of the EITC, I assume a dollar of welfare provided to someone
earning $20K per year is valued equally to a dollar to someone earning $30K per year. This simplifies the calculation of
the MVPF for each policy change, but could be relaxed with explicit assumptions on the distribution of social marginal
utilities of income. Importantly, I do not require constant social marginal utilities of income across the entire population.
Section 3.6 illustrates how one can make welfare comparisons across policies by considering the relative social marginal
utilities of income between the beneficiaries.
  50
     The literature studying the causal effects of these policies focuses on a wide range of outcomes including many aspects
of taxable behavior. However, in most cases, these studies do not construct a comprehensive measure of the revenue
impact of the behavioral responses. Therefore, I construct such a measure using the causal effects on various components
of taxable behavior. These details are discussed in Appendix F.


                                                             21
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 (a.k.a. OBRA-93 or the Clinton tax increases) and the
Tax Reform Act of 1986 (a.k.a. TRA-86 or the Reagan tax cuts).
      Translating the causal estimates from the literature into impacts on the government’s budget
requires a couple of assumptions. First, I assume that the policy has no spillover effects, so that the
response to the top marginal income tax rate is zero amongst those whose earnings are below ¯l. This
is commonly assumed in existing literature (e.g. Feldstein (1999)), as lower income groups are used as
controls for macroeconomic effects argued to be unrelated to the tax policy. Of course, this assumption
could be relaxed if one had an estimate of the causal effect of the policy on taxable behavior of those
earning below the top income tax threshold.
      Second, I assume that the rich have no income shifting across tax bases with different nonzero
tax rates. This rules out the program having an impact on capital gains, for example. Again, this
assumption could be relaxed with additional empirical work estimating the causal effect of raising the
top income tax rate on tax revenue from capital gains.
      With these assumptions, the MVPF of raising revenue from the rich through an increase in the
top marginal tax rate is given by
                                                                                                  1
                                                               M V P FPRich
                                                                        T ax =
                                                                                                 1+r
where r is the fraction of mechanical ordinary income tax revenue lost from behavioral responses to
the tax increase,
                                                                     ´        l dl̂i
                                                                                          T ax

                                                                   i∈Rich τi dθ |θ=0 di
                                                    r=      ´           T ax
                                                                                                                                                         (16)
                                                                     dτ̂Rich          ˆlT ax − ¯l di
                                                              i∈Rich dθ      |θ=0       i

                                                                                                     dl̂iT ax
Here, ˆli is the taxable ordinary income of the rich and                                               dθ |θ=0         is the response of taxable ordinary
income to a policy that raises the top marginal tax rate and uses the finances to raise government
revenue.51 Note r < 0 if behavioral responses lower tax revenue.
      Fortunately, there is a large literature focused on estimating r in equation (16). Generally, this
parameter is referred to as the “marginal excess burden” of the change in the top tax rate (Mirrlees
et al. (2011); Saez et al. (2012)). However, as noted in earlier handbook chapters (Auerbach (1985);
Auerbach and Hines (2002)), such an interpretation is technically incorrect in the presence of income
effects. Such a point was raised by Feldstein (2012) in his critique of the ambitious and widely-
celebrated Mirrlees Review (Mirrlees et al. (2011)) analyzing British tax policy:

        Despite the centrality of the concept of excess burden, the Mirrlees Review fails to provide
        a clear explanation that the excess burden is the difference between the loss to taxpayers
 51
      To see this, note that
                     ∂ V̂ Rich
                         P T ax |                                            ´               dτ Rich
                                                                                                                        
                          ∂θ     θ=0                                                                 |θ=0         ˆli − ¯
                                                                                                                        l di
                          λRich                                                  i∈Rich         dθ
                    ´                       =   −
                                T ax                ´                                    ´
                                                                                                                                                    
                            dt̂P                                   dl̂T ax                                      dx̂T ax                dl̂T ax
                        i       dθ
                                       di                     τl      i
                                                                           |θ=0 di   +
                                                                                                     P     x
                                                                                                          τij      ij             l
                                                                                                                          |θ=0 + τij      ij
                                                                                                                                                 |θ=0 di
                                                        i∈Rich i      dθ                     i        j           dθ                     dθ

                                                 1
                                            =
                                                1+r



                                                                                  22
       caused by the tax (e.g., the amount that taxpayers would have to receive as a lump sum
       to be as well off as they were before the imposition of the tax) and the revenue collected
       by the government. There are instead several alternative definitions at different points in
       the text, some of which are vague and some of which are simply wrong. For example,
       the Mirrlees Review states “it is the size of this revenue loss that determines the ‘excess
       burden’ of taxation” (61). That is not correct since the excess burden depends only on the
       substitution effects while revenue depends also on the income effects. ( Feldstein (2012))
Because this literature generally does not remove income effects, Feldstein (2012) is technically correct
that it is not estimating the marginal excess burden. However, taking r to be the causal impact of
the policy (without removing income effects), one obtains precisely the desired parameter for welfare
analysis in the present framework.52
    While there is a wide range of existing causal estimates, Saez et al. (2012) and Giertz (2009) suggest
mid-points ranging from 25-50% – i.e., roughly 25-50% of the mechanical revenue that is raised from
the tax is lost due to behavioral distortions. This implies M V P FPRich
                                                                     T ax is between 1.33 and 2, as

reported in the first row of Table 1.53

3.2    EITC Expansion
There is also a large literature estimating the causal effects of EITC expansions, especially impacts on
single mothers. Unfortunately, there is no study that estimates the impact of the behavioral response
to EITC expansions on government expenditures directly. So, I construct such a causal estimate by
taking the causal impacts on earnings and labor supply estimated in previous literature.
    To do so, I make several assumptions commonly made in the empirical literature. First, I assume
the policy has no effect on groups ineligible for the expansion. This assumes no response amongst
(1) individuals above the income eligibility threshold and (2) low-income women choosing to become
single mothers to become EITC eligible. Support for (1) is found in Chetty et al. (2013) who find
minimal effects of behavioral responses in the so-called “phase-out” region of earnings above the refund-
maximizing earnings level. Support for (2) is found in Hotz and Scholz (2003) who summarize the
empirical literature as finding little or no effects on marriage and family formation.54 Both of these
assumptions could easily be relaxed with precise estimates of the impact of the behavioral responses
of these groups to EITC expansions on its budgetary cost.
  52
     Saez et al. (2012) show also how r can be incorporated into the calculation of the optimal top income tax rate.
However, the optimal top tax rate depends on r defined locally around the optimum; hence one must assume that r is
constant as the tax rate changes towards the optimum. In contrast, estimating M V P FPRich  T ax relies on local estimates of
r for variation in taxes around the status quo.
  53
     There are many caveats to this figure. For example, it assumes all of the reduction in taxable income is a social
cost; in practice some avoidance behavior that reduces taxable income might be socially beneficial (e.g. if people increase
charitable giving in response to higher tax rates) or even privately beneficial if individuals are not optimally choosing
their degree of avoidance as in Chetty (2009a). If higher tax rates increase charitable giving or causes other positive
spillovers, then the MVPF will be lower to the extent to which society values these induced transfers. Conversely, if
tax rate increases cause negative spillovers or “trickle-down” general equilibrium effects as in the model of Scheuer and
Rothschild (2013), the MVPF will be higher.
  54
     A further defense of this assumption is found in the EITC papers using single women without children as a control
group (e.g. Eissa and Liebman (1996); Chetty et al. (2013)).


                                                             23
       For EITC eligibles, I assume that the only behavioral impact of the program that affects tax
revenue is through ordinary taxable (labor) income. Although capital income is less of an issue for
EITC recipients, this assumption also rules out fiscal externalities of the EITC expansion on other
social program take-up, such as SSDI or food stamps. Such impacts are likely to be present, as
significant earnings generally disqualifies eligibility for such programs. To the extent to which an
EITC expansion crowds out take-up other government services, the analysis will underestimate the
social desirability of increasing funding of the EITC.
       With these assumptions, one obtains an expression analogous to the change in the top income tax
policy:
                                                                             1
                                                 M V P FPPEIT
                                                          oor
                                                              C =
                                                                            1+p
where p is the fraction of the mechanical revenue distributed that is increased due to behavioral
distortions,
                                                       ´            l   dl̂iEIT C
                                                           i∈P oor τi       dθ |θ=0 di
                                p =
                                         ´
                                                                                  EIT C
                                                                                                   
                                                           dT̂iEIT C            dτ̂ij
                                             i∈P oor           dθ    |θ=0   +       dθ   |θ=0 li       di

       There is a large literature focused on estimating the causal effects of EITC expansions on taxable
behavior, such as labor supply. For my purposes, these studies would have ideally looked at the impact
on tax revenue/expenditure in order to form an aggregate estimate of p. Short of this, I take estimates
of the extensive and intensive margin labor supply response to the EITC to construct an estimate of
the associated fiscal externality.
       In appendix A, I generalize the model to allow for extensive margin (i.e. discontinuous) responses
in labor supply. Estimates of causal effects summarized in Hotz and Scholz (2003) suggest that the
cost of EITC expansions are ~9% larger than their mechanical cost due to extensive margin behavioral
responses.
       In addition to extensive margin responses, recent literature has also found evidence that the EITC
induces distortions on the intensive margin as well but that these effects may take a while to fully
be realized. Using variation in knowledge about the marginal tax rates induced by the EITC, Chetty
et al. (2013) estimate that the cost of the EITC program is 5% higher due to behavioral responses. If
responses to the marginal incentives primarily govern intensive margin responses and extensive margins
are primarily about the average EITC rebate, this suggests these two estimates can be summed so
that the total cost of EITC expansions are 14% higher due to behavioral responses. The estimate of
p = 14% suggests that raising $1 in general government revenue through a reduction in EITC spending
would only require a reduction in benefits of 1/1.14=$0.88. Hence, the marginal value of public funds
of the EITC policy is roughly M V P FPPEIT
                                       oor = 0.88.55
                                           C

  55
     The calculation of M V P FPPEIT
                                 oor
                                     C ignored the potential of general equilibrium effects of the policy expansion. This
is easily incorporated if one has estimates of the causal impact of the policy on prices. For example, recent research
suggests beneficiaries may only capture $0.73 for every dollar of EITC spending (Rothstein (2010)). This suggests the
marginal value of the program should be a weighted average of 0.73 for the beneficiaries and .27 for those who benefit



                                                                  24
3.3    Food Stamps (SNAP)
The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (a.k.a. SNAP or “food stamps”) provides financial
assistance to low-income households for the purchase of food and is one of the largest transfer programs
in the United States. Indeed, 1 in 4 children received benefits in July 2011 (Ganong and Liebman
(2013)). Despite the program’s size, there have been relatively few quasi-experimental studies an-
alyzing its impact on behavior, perhaps due to the fact that it is a national program (Hoynes and
Schanzenbach (2012)). A notable exception is the recent work of Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2012)
who exploit county-level variation in the introduction of food stamps in the 1960s and 70s to estimate
its impacts on labor supply. They find significant but noisy reductions in intensive labor supply and
large but noisily estimated reductions in labor earnings (with a 95% confidence interval that includes
zero impact). Appendix F.2 translates their point estimates into an estimate of the implied fiscal
externality. The results suggest that although the program cost was roughly $1,153.25 per household,
the reductions in labor supply led to a reduced state and federal income tax receipt of $588, which
implies that the behavioral response is equal to 0.34 of the net resource cost of the program. However,
one should be cautious in interpreting the magnitude of this coefficient since it is not statistically
significantly different from zero.
    Because the program benefits must be used to purchase food, these benefits may not be valued
dollar-for-dollar by beneficiaries. However, many studies have shown that in general food stamp receipt
does not significantly alter purchase decisions in the U.S. (Smeeding (1982)) and Puerto Rico (Moffitt
(1989)). However, Whitmore (2002) uses a slightly different modeling approach and experimental data
to arrive at an estimate of roughly. The former studies suggest the transfer of $1,153.25 in food stamps
is valued dollar-for-dollar by beneficiaries, whereas the latter suggests they are valued at only $922.60
                                                                                        ∂u
                                                                                        ∂G −c
                                                                                              g
by beneficiaries. Appendix F.2 shows that this corresponds to a value of                 λ
                                                                                           dt     = −.132; 13% of the
                                                                                           dθ
total cost of the program is lost due to the fact that the in-kind benefits were not valued as equivalent
to cash. Combining the estimates together, the MVPF for food stamps is estimated at 0.53 to 0.64,
depending on whether one takes the Smeeding (1982) estimate versus the Whitmore (2002) estimate
for the cash-value of the food stamps to beneficiaries. Moreover, it is important to note that because
the behavioral response is imprecisely estimated, one cannot rule out no behavioral response, which
would imply a MVPF of 0.8 to 1.
    There are a couple of important caveats to keep in mind in interpreting these results. First,
the estimated behavioral responses correspond to a 1970s world with very different tax rates and
extrapolation to present day may be problematic. Indeed, the presence of the EITC changes the
government’s stake in labor force participation and labor earnings. Second, food stamps may have
significant benefits on children that are not perfectly incorporated into the utility function of the
parents. For example, Almond et al. (2012) estimate that food stamps led to improvements in birth
from the reduced wages. To the extent to which the reduction in wages increases firm profits, one would then wish to
add this fiscal externality into the benefit of the EITC expansion. But, to the extent to which those benefiting from the
wage reduction have lower social marginal utilities of income, this will reduce the MVPF for the MVPF for the EITC
expansion. For example, in the extreme case where society had zero value for the beneficiaries of the wage reduction and
the wage change did not induce any additional fiscal externality, the MVPF would be 0.88 - 0.27 = 0.51.


                                                           25
outcomes, such as increased birth weight. These potential externalities on newborn children are of
course not captured in the current MVPF calculation. If one wished to add such effects, one could
take the causal effects from Almond et al. (2012) and multiply by the valuation of the externality
along the lines discussed in Appendix C.56

3.4    Job Training
While some transfer programs cause reductions in labor supply, others programs are known to increase
labor supply and taxable earnings. For example, the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) of 1982
provided job training to economically disadvantaged youth and adults with the attempt of promoting
entry into the labor force. Bloom et al. (1997) reports results from a randomized controlled trial of the
program. Fortunately for the present purposes, their analyses focuses not only on earnings impacts
but also on budget-relevant variables such as welfare and tax receipt.
    The program reports results on adult women, adult men, children; for brevity and comparison to
the EITC policy, I focus on their results for adult women presented at the top of Table 8 on p573 of
Bloom et al. (1997).
    The program increased earnings on adult women by $1,683, which led to an increased tax collection
of $236 per enrollee and also a $235 reduction in welfare expenditures (AFDC). Assuming these capture
the behavioral response impact on the budget, the total impact is $471. The marginal cost of providing
the program to an adult female enrollee is $1,381.57 Subtracting this from the $471 positive impact
on the budget from behavioral responses, the net resource transfer is $910.58
    One needs to calculate the extent to which the individual would be willing to pay for the job
training program in excess of its marginal cost. In their cost-benefit analysis, Bloom et al. (1997)
implicitly assume that the earnings increase of the beneficiaries is a welfare benefit. For this to be the
case, one needs to assume that this earnings increase was the result of a positive externality imposed
on the beneficiaries (e.g. an increase in their productivity that was incurred with no cost to the
beneficiary) and not the result of their increased labor effort. Under this assumption, the individuals
willingness to pay for the program in excess of its cost is $1,683-$1,381 = $302 per enrollee. This
implies a MVPF of $1,683/$910 = 1.85 on the job training beneficiaries.
    However, the envelope theorem suggests caution in this calculation. In the canonical model with
no distortions besides government intervention, people who are induced into the labor force were, to
first order, indifferent to working. Hence, the increase in earnings provides no direct evidence on the
willingness to pay for the program. One potential assumption one can make is that the government
has no comparative advantage or disadvantage in the provision of job training (e.g. there’s an equally
good private training program that can also provide similar job training for $1,381). In this case, the
market failure term would be zero so that the MVPF would be MVPF of $1,381/$910=1.52. Note this
  56
     For example, one could translate the increase in birth weight to an implied increase in quality-adjusted life years
(QALY) and multiply by an assumed value of a QALY.
  57
     $1,227 of this is the administrative cost; $154 is the cost of a wage subsidy associated with the program.
  58
     The report also indicates women reduced their spending on private training programs by $56 and considers this a
benefit of the program. But by the envelope theorem, such crowd-out estimates are not welfare relevant to first order.



                                                          26
is still well above 1 because of the positive fiscal externalities associated with the program.59 However,
deriving a more precise MVPF requires future work that quantifies the extent to which government
job training programs are valued above or below their cost by beneficiaries.

3.5      Housing Vouchers (Section 8)
With roughly 2 million beneficiaries, Section 8 housing vouchers constitute the largest low-income
housing program in the US (Rice and Sard (2006)). Such vouchers provide rent assistance to low-
income households; however, vouchers are mean-tested, and therefore induce potentially significant
labor earnings distortions. Often, voucher applications exceed supply, which leads to rationing. Jacob
and Ludwig (2012) exploit the randomness in the allocation of vouchers to excess applications in
Chicago. They analyze not only the impact of voucher receipt on labor supply, but also on other
governmental program participation such as TANF (cash welfare), Medicaid, and SNAP. They find
housing vouchers lead to a significant reductions in labor supply – on both the intensive and extensive
margin – and an increase in participation in other welfare programs.
       Appendix F.3 translates these calculations into the impact of the behavioral response to the policy
on the government’s budget. Although the paper estimates significant behavioral responses, they are
arguably modest relative to the cost of the voucher and correspond to $432 per $8,400 voucher, so
that the fiscal externality comprises roughly 5% of the total cost of the program.
       There is little work studying the willingness to pay for the housing voucher. To my knowledge, the
only known study is Reeder (1985) who estimates $1 in Section 8 vouchers are valued at $0.83 by the
beneficiaries (see also the discussion in Jacob and Ludwig (2012)).60 Taking this estimate, one arrives
at (0.83-1)/1.05 = -0.17, which suggests beneficiaries value the section 8 vouchers less than their costs
by an amount equal to 17% of the total resource costs (voucher cost + fiscal externality). Combining,
this suggests a MVPF of 0.78 for the housing vouchers.61
  59
    It may also be reasonable to argue that the government provides an inferior job training product relative to the
private market; or, equivalently from a welfare perspective, the type of people who select into a government job training
program versus a private market job training program may be those who did not have a sufficient welfare gain for the job
training program to begin with. Indeed, revealed preference of the participants in the JTPA program only guarantees
that the willingness to pay was nonnegative for beneficiaries: uλG ≥ 0. As a result, one technically cannot rule out
the possibility that individuals received no value whatsoever from the program, and the MVPF is zero. This highlights
the importance of attempting to estimate individuals’ willingness to pay for government programs when conducting a
cost-benefit analysis of such programs.
                                       ∂u
  In addition to issues with valuing ∂G  λ
                                            − cG , one may also be concerned about general equilibrium effects of such
policies. For example, Crepon et al. (2012) find evidence that a job placement program in France had an increase in
employment among beneficiaries but was offset by a decrease in employment by non-beneficiaries. In this case, even if
the beneficiaries had a willingness to pay for the program, it might be perfectly offset by negative impacts on those not
enrolled in the program. Incorporating such general equilibrium effects would reduce the estimate of the MVPF. For
example, if the program was simply causing sorting within a fixed labor market and non-beneficiaries have equal social
marginal utilities of income to beneficiaries of the program, one would find a MVPF of zero.
  60
     Carlson et al. (2011) argue that individuals value the housing voucher greater than its face value, but they don’t
seem to address the issue that the housing market imposes a natural upper bound on the valuation.
  61
     There are a couple of potential caveats to this estimate that are perhaps worth mentioning. First, Jacob and Ludwig
(2012) provides novel identification of the impact of voucher receipt on labor supply and public program take-up; but,
they do not estimate the impact of increased voucher generosity on ex-ante labor supply decisions. Indeed, people may
decrease their labor supply to become eligible in the first place. Second, there is some recent evidence that suggests a



                                                           27
3.6     Combining Policies Using Okun’s Bucket Experiment
While the previous sections constructed estimates of the MVPF for each of these policies, the benefi-
ciaries for each policy are different. Hence, the MVPF are not directly comparable across policies. To
make such comparisons, one needs to aggregate using the social marginal utilities of income.
     To illustrate this, consider a budget neutral policy of increasing EITC generosity financed by an
increase in the top marginal income tax rate.62 Following equation (14), let η Rich and η P oor denote
the social marginal utilities of income on the rich with incomes above $400K who are subject to the
top tax rate under the status quo and the poor single mothers earning less than $40K who are eligible
for the EITC, which I assume to be constant within each group for simplicity.
     If one takes the upper range estimate of M V P FPRich
                                                       T ax
                                                            = 2, additional redistribution is desirable iff

                                                            η Rich
                                                 0.88 − 2             ≥ 0
                                                            η P oor

or
                                                   η Rich ≤ 0.44η P oor

Additional redistribution is desirable if and only if one prefers $0.44 in the pocket of an EITC recipient
relative to $1 in the pocket of an individual subject to the top marginal tax rate (i.e. with income above
~$400K). Similarly, if one takes the lower estimate of M V P FPRich
                                                                T ax = 1.33, additional redistribution is

desirable if and only if one prefers $0.66 in the pocket of an EITC recipient relative to $1 to someone
subject to the top marginal tax rate. In this sense, comparisons of welfare impacts across policies
involve an Okun (1975) bucket experiment between the beneficiaries of each policy in question.
     Ratios of the other MVPF reveal other implicit ratios of social marginal utilities of income. For
example, the EITC MVPF of 0.88 and the housing voucher estimate of 0.78 suggest society values
money in the hands of Section 8 voucher-holders more than EITC beneficiaries. From a more normative
perspective, if housing voucher beneficiaries have equal social marginal utilities of income as EITC
beneficiaries, then the estimates suggest social welfare would be improved by increasing EITC funding
financed by a decrease in Section 8 housing vouchers.
portion of housing vouchers (~0.13) may be captured by landlords instead of tenants (Collinson and Ganong (2013)). If
the social marginal utilities of landlords and tenants were the same, this would not affect the MVPF; but if landlords
have lower social marginal utilities of income, one would need to adjust for the fact that 13% of the mechanical subsidy
falls in the hands of landlords and weight the MVPF accordingly.
   62
      This exercise is similar to Browning and Johnson (1984) who simulate the marginal reduction in resources from an
increased demogrant at the bottom of the income distribution. For their baseline simulation, additional redistribution is
desirable if one prefers $0.29 to the poor relative to $1 to the rich. Because Browning and Johnson (1984) simulate the
causal impacts of the redistributive policy, the desirability of pursuing the policy depends on the social marginal utilities
of income, and hence have an interpretation in terms of Okun’s bucket (Okun (1975)). In contrast, if one were to take
the MEB estimates for increasing tax rates from Browning (1987), one would need to add back in the income effects
before interpreting the results using the social marginal utilities of income.
   In more recent work, Immervoll et al. (2007, 2011) also consider a “critical values” approach to additional redistribution
that solves for what the social welfare weights must be in order to prefer a policy change.




                                                             28
4     Conclusion
This paper illustrates how one can conduct welfare analysis of policy changes using precisely the causal
effects of those policy changes – no decomposition into income and substitution effects is required.
Moreover, in the broad class of models in which the government is the only distortion, the causal
impact of the behavioral response to the policy on the government budget is sufficient for all behavioral
responses. For non-budget neutral policies, the framework motivates the use of a simple benefit/cost
ratio, adopted previously by Mayshar (1990), Slemrod and Yitzhaki (1996, 2001), and Kleven and
Kreiner (2006), as a measure of the marginal value of public funds (MVPF) that can be used to assess
the social welfare impacts of government expenditure on the policy. Translating causal estimates
into their implicit MVPF would seem particularly promising with the potential to create a volume
of estimates for different policies and a more comprehensive analysis of the desirability of potential
government policy changes.


References
Almond, D., H. Hoynes, and D. W. Schanzenbach (2012). Inside the war on poverty: The impact of
    food stamps on birth outcomes. The Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (2), 387–403. 3.3

Angrist, J. and J.-S. Pischke (2008). Mostly Harmless Econometrics. Princeton University Press. 2.2,
    2.2

Athreya, K., D. Reilly, and N. Simpson (2010). Earned income tax credit recipients: Income, marginal
    tax rates, wealth, and credit constraints. Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 96,
    229–258. F.1

Atkinson, A. B. and N. H. Stern (1974, January). Pigou, taxation and public goods. The Review of
    Economic Studies 41 (1), 119–128. 1, 2.9

Auerbach, A. (1985). The theory of excess burden and optimal taxation. Handbook of public eco-
    nomics, Elsevier. 12, 39, 3.1

Auerbach, A. J. and J. R. Hines (2002). Chapter 21 taxation and economic efficiency. In Handbook of
    Public Economics, Volume Volume 3, pp. 1347–1421. Elsevier. 11, 2.4, 2.6, 38, 39, 45, 2.8, 3.1, H

Ballard, C. L. and D. Fullerton (1992). Distortionary taxes and the provision of public goods. Journal
    of Economic Perspectives 6 (3), 117–131. 1, 1, 2.9

Bloom, H., L. L. Orr, S. H. Bell, G. Cave, F. Doolittle, W. Lin, and J. M. Boss (1997). The benefits
    and costs of jtpa title ii-a programs: Key findings from the national job training partnership act
    study. The Journal of Human Resources 32 (3), 549–576. 3.4

Bovenberg, A. L. and R. A. de Mooji (1994). Environmental levies and distortionary taxation. Amer-
    ican Economic Review 84 (4), 1085–1089. C

                                                   29
Browning, E. (1976). The marginal cost of public funds. Journal of Political Economy 84, 283–98. 47

Browning, E. (1987). On the marginal welfare cost of taxation. American Economic Review 77, 11–23.
  47, 62

Browning, E. and W. R. Johnson (1984). The trade-off between equality and efficiency. The Journal
  of Political Economy 92 (2), 175–203. 62

Carlson, D., R. Haveman, T. Kaplan, and B. Wolfe (2011). The benefits and costs of the section 8
  housing subsidy program: A framework and estimates of first-year effects. Journal of Policy Analysis
  and Management 30 (2), 233–255. 60

Chetty, R. (2008). Moral hazard versus liquidity and optimal unemployment insurance. Journal of
  Political Economy 116 (2), 173–234. 32

Chetty, R. (2009a). Is the taxable income elasticity sufficient to calculate deadweight loss? the
  implications of evasion and avoidance. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1 (2), 31–52.
  1, 34, 53, C

Chetty, R. (2009b). Sufficient statistics for welfare analysis: A bridge between structural and Reduced-
  Form methods. Annual Review of Economics 1 (1), 451–488. 1, 1

Chetty, R., J. Friedman, and E. Saez (2013). Using differences in knowledge across neighborhoods to
  uncover the impacts of eitc on earnings. American Economic Review (Forthcoming). 36, 3.2, 54,
  F.1, F.1, 71, 73

Collinson, R. and P. Ganong (2013). Incidence and price discrimination. Working Paper . 61

Crepon, B., M. Gurgand, R. Rathelot, and P. Zamora (2012). Do labor market policies have displace-
  ment effects? evidence from a clustered randomized experiment. Working Paper . 59

Dahlby, B. (2008). The Marginal Cost of Public Funds. The MIT Press. 2.8, 2.9, H

Diamond, P. A. and J. A. Mirrlees (1971, June). Optimal taxation and public production II: tax rules.
  The American Economic Review 61 (3), 261–278. 1, 11, 2.6, 2.7, 44, 48, E, E, E

Eissa, N. and H. Hoynes (2011). Redistribution and tax expenditures: The earned income tax credit.
  National Tax Journal 64, 689–730. 5, 10, 1, 21, 37, F.1

Eissa, N., H. J. Kleven, and C. T. Kreiner (2008). Evaluation of four tax reforms in the united states:
  Labor supply and welfare effects for single mothers. Journal of Public Economics 92 (3-4), 795–816.
  5, 10, 1, 21, 37, 67

Eissa, N. and J. Liebman (1996). Labor supply responses to the earned income tax credit. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (2), 605–637. 54, F.1



                                                  30
Feldstein, M. (1999). Tax avoidance and the deadweight loss of the income tax. Review of Economics
  and Statistics 81 (4), 674–680. 1, 1, 1, 2.5, 3.1

Feldstein, M. (2012, September). The mirrlees review. Journal of Economic Literature 50 (3), 781–790.
  1, 3.1

Fullerton, D. (1991). Reconciling recent estimates of the marginal welfare cost of taxation. American
  Economic Review 81, 302–08. 2.8, 2.9, H

Ganong, P. and J. Liebman (2013). The decline, rebound, and further rise in snap enrollment: Disen-
  tangling business cycle fluctuations and policy changes. NBER Working Paper No. 19363 . 3.3

Giertz, S. H. (2009). The elasticity of taxable income: Influences on economic efficiency and tax
  revenues, and implications for tax policy. In A. Viard (Ed.), Tax Policy Lessons from the 2000s,
  pp. 101–136. AEI Press. 1, 9, 3.1

Goolsbee, A. (1999, January). Evidence on the High-Income laffer curve from six decades of tax
  reform. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1999 (2), 1–64. 1

Goulder, L. H. (1995). Environmental taxation and the double dividend: A reader’s guide. Interna-
  tional Tax and Public Finance 2 (2), 157–183. C

Harberger, A. (1964). The measurement of waste. American Economic Review 54, 58–76. 1, 1, 2.6,
  47

Hendren, N. (2014). The inequality deflator: Interpersonal comparisions without a social welfare
  function. Working Paper . 2.3, 2.7

Hicks, J. R. (1939). The foundations of welfare economics. Economic Journal 49, 696–712. 2.3

Holahan, J. and S. McMorrow (2012). Medicare, medicaid, and the deficit debate. Technical report,
  Urban Institute. F.3

Hotz, J. and K. Scholz (2003). The earned income tax credit. In R. A. Moffit (Ed.), Tax Policy and
  the Economy. University of Chicago Press. 1, 3.2, F.1, 70

Hoynes, H. W. and D. W. Schanzenbach (2009). Consumption responses to in-kind transfers: Evi-
  dence from the introduction of the food stamp program. American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy 1 (4), 109–139. F.2

Hoynes, H. W. and D. W. Schanzenbach (2012). Work incentives and the food stamp program. Journal
  of Public Economics 96 (1-2), 151–162. 3.3, F.2

Immervoll, H., H. J. Kleven, C. T. Kreiner, and E. Saez (2007). Welfare reform in european countries:
  A microsimulation analysis. The Economic Journal 117, 1–44. 42, 62



                                                      31
Immervoll, H., H. J. Kleven, C. T. Kreiner, and N. Verdelin (2011). Optimal tax and transfer programs
  for couples with extensive labor supply responses. Journal of Public Economics 95, 1485–1500. 62

Jacob, B. A. and J. Ludwig (2012). The effects of housing assistance on labor supply: Evidence from
  a voucher lottery. American Economic Review 102 (1), 272–304. 3.5, 61, F.3

Kaldor, N. (1939). Welfare propositions of economics and interpersonal comparisons of utility. The
  Economic Journal 49 (195), 549–552. 2.3

Kaplow, L. (1996). The optimal supply of public goods and the distortionary cost of taxation. National
  Tax Journal 49, 513–534. 74

Kaplow, L. (2004). On the (ir)relevance of the distribution and labor supply distortion to government
  policy. Journal of Economic Perspectives 18, 159–175. 74

Kaplow, L. (2008). The Theory of Taxation and Public Economics. Princeton University Press. 74

Kleven, H. J. and C. T. Kreiner (2005). Labor supply behavior and the design of tax and transfer
  policy. Danish Journal of Economics 143, 321–358. 5, 1

Kleven, H. J. and C. T. Kreiner (2006). The marginal cost of public funds: Hours of work versus labor
  force participation. Journal of Public Economics, 1955–1973. 1, 20, 2.5, 35, 2.8, 2.9, 4

Liebman, J. (2002). Making Work Pay: The Earned Income Tax Credit and Its Impact on American
  Families, Chapter The Optimal Design of the Earned Income Tax Credit. Russell Sage Foundation.
  77

Mas-Colell, A., M. D. Whinston, and J. R. Green (1995, June). Microeconomic Theory. Oxford
  University Press, USA. 1, 32

Mayshar, J. (1990). On measures of excess burden and their applications. Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics 43 (3), 263–89. 1, 7, 1, 2.8, 2.9, 4, H

Meyer, B. D. and D. T. Rosenbaum (2001). Welfare, the earned income tax credit, and the labor
  supply of single mothers. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (3), 1063–1114. 71

Mirrlees, J. A., S. Adam, T. Besley, R. Blundell, S. Bond, R. Chote, M. Gammie, P. Johnson, G. Myles,
  and J. Poterba (Eds.) (2011). Tax by Design: the Mirrlees Review, Chapter Chapter 3: The Taxation
  of Labour Earnings. Oxford University Press. 1, 3.1

Moffitt, R. (1989). Estimating the value of an in-kind transfer: The case of food stamps. Economet-
  rica 57 (2), 385–409. 3.3

of Representatives. Committee on Ways, U. H. and Means (2004). 2004 green book: Background ma-
  terial and data on programs within the jurisdiction of the committee on ways and means. Technical
  report, 111th Congress. F.3

                                                   32
Okun, A. (1975). Equality and Efficiency. Brookings Institution Press. 1, 2.3, 3.6, 62

Parry, I. W. H. (1995). Pollution taxes and revenue recycling. Journal of Environmental Economics
  and Management 29 (3), S64–S77. C

Pigou, A. (1947). A Study in Public Finance. Macmillian. 47

Piketty, T. and E. Saez (2013). A theory of optimal inheritance taxation. Econometrica 81 (5),
  1851–1886. 1

Ramsey, F. P. (1927, March). A contribution to the theory of taxation. The Economic Journal 37 (145),
  47–61. 2.6, E

Reeder, W. J. (1985). The benefits and costs of the section 8 existing housing program. Journal of
  Public Economics 26 (3), 349–377. 3.5

Rice, D. and B. Sard (2006). President’s 2007 budget renews same number of housing vouchers funded
  in 2006. Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. 3.5

Rothstein, J. (2010). Is the eitc as good as an nit? conditional cash transfers and tax incidence.
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2 (1), 177–208. 55

Saez, E. (2001). Using elasticities to derive optimal income tax rates. Review of Economic Studies 68,
  205–229. 1

Saez, E., J. Slemrod, and S. H. Giertz (2012). The elasticity of taxable income with respect to marginal
  tax rates: A critical review. Journal of Economic Literature 50 (1), 3–50. 1, 1, 9, 1, 2.5, 3.1, 3.1, 52

Saez, E. and S. Stantcheva (2013). Generalized social marginal welfare weights for optimal tax theory.
  NBER Working Paper No. 18835 . 2.7

Salanie, B. (2003). The Economics of Taxation. MIT Press. 64

Samuelson, P. (1954). The pure theory of public expenditure. The Review of Economics and Statis-
  tics 36, 387–389. 1, 2.5, 2.9

Scheuer, F. and C. Rothschild (2013). Redistributive taxation in the roy model. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 128, 623–668. 53

Schlee, E. E. (2013). Radner’s cost-benefit analysis in the small: An equivalence result. Working
  Paper . 26

Slemrod, J. and S. Yitzhaki (1996). The social cost of taxation and the marginal cost of funds.
  International Monetary Fund Staff Papers 43 (1), 172–98. 7, 1, 2.8, 2.9, 4, H

Slemrod, J. and S. Yitzhaki (2001). Integrating expenditure and tax decisions: The marginal cost of
  funds and the marginal benefit of projects. National Tax Journal . 7, 1, 2.8, 2.9, 4, 74

                                                   33
Smeeding, T. M. (1982). Alternative methods for valuing selected in-kind transfer benefits and mea-
  suring their effect on poverty. Technical Paper No. 50 . 3.3, F.2

Stiglitz, J. E. and P. Dasgupta (1971, April). Differential taxation, public goods, and economic
  efficiency. The Review of Economic Studies 38 (2), 151–174. 1, 2.9

Whitmore, D. (2002). What are food stamps worth? Princeton University Industrial Relations Section
  Working Paper #468 . 3.3, F.2




                                                  34
            Online Appendix: Not for Publication
A       Appendix: Proof of Proposition 1
                          dV̂i
                               |
                          dθ θ=0
I first characterize          λi    . Taking the total derivative of Vi with respect to θ, I have
                                                    
           dV̂i     dVi τ̂il , τ̂ix , T̂i , yi , Ĝi         ∂Vi dT̂i X
                                                                       JG
                                                                          ∂Vi dĜi X
                                                                                    JX
                                                                                       ∂Vi dτ̂ijx X
                                                                                                   JL
                                                                                                      ∂Vi dτ̂ijl
                =                                        =           +            +              +
           dθ                      dθ                        ∂Ti dθ       ∂Gi dθ       ∂τijx dθ       ∂τijl dθ
                                                                              j=1                 j=1               j=1


Applying the envelope theorem from the agent’s maximization problem and evaluating at θ = 0 implies

                                                               ∂Vi
                                                                          = −xij λi
                                                               ∂τijx
                                                               ∂Vi
                                                                          = −lij λi
                                                               ∂τijl
                                                               ∂Vi
                                                                          = −λi
                                                               ∂Ti
                                                               ∂Vi              ∂ui
                                                                          =
                                                               ∂Gi              ∂Gi

Replacing terms, I have
                                                                                                                     
                                                             JG     ∂ui               JX                JL
                         dV̂i             dT̂i               X     ∂Gij   dĜij       X         dτ̂ijx X       dτ̂ijl
                              |θ=0 = λi       +                                −           xij       −    lij        
                         dθ               dθ                        λi     dθ                    dθ             dθ
                                                             j=1                      j=1               j=1


                                                                               dT̂i
Now, I use equation 5 to replace the total transfers,                          dθ ,   with the net government budgetary position,
dt̂i
dθ ,   which yields
                                                                                                                               
                       JG        ∂ui            !                                                   JX         x   JL         l
    dV̂i              X         ∂Gij                dĜij   dt̂i   d  h                         i X      dτ̂ij
                                                                                                                   X      dτ̂ij 
         |θ=0   = λi                   − cG
                                           j              +      +      R τ̂ix , x̂i , τ̂il , l̂i −    xij       −    lij
    dθ                            λi                 dθ     dθ     dθ                                       dθ             dθ
                       j=1                                                                                 j=1            j=1


Finally,
  h  note that i        equation 6 shows I can replace the difference between the total revenue impact,
                                                                         dτ̂ x           dτ̂ l
d        x        l         , and the mechanical revenue effect, Jj=1 xij dθij + Jj=1 lij dθij , with the behav-
                                                                P X             P L
dθ R τ̂i , x̂i , τi , l̂i
ioral impact of the policy on the government budget constraint, yielding
                                                                                                                
                                 JG              ∂ui            !                   JX               JL
                 dVi            X               ∂Gij                dĜij   dt̂i X         dx̂ ij
                                                                                                     X       dˆ
                                                                                                              lij 
                     |θ=0 = λi                          − cG
                                                            j             +     +      τijx        +    τijl
                 dθ                               λi                 dθ     dθ               dθ              dθ
                                        j=1                                                   j                j




                                                                          35
B     Non-Marginal Welfare Analysis
In reality, policy changes are not always small. In such cases, one might be worried that the use of
                                                                                                    dx
the difference in potential outcomes may not reflect a local derivative,                            dθ .    Here, I provide conditions
under which one can use the difference in causal effects to construct a measure of the (non-marginal)
equivalent variation of the policy change. Heuristically, one can use the framework to estimate equiv-
alent variation as long as the policy does not induce a significant effect on the marginal utility of
income.
    Equivalent variation, EV (θ), of the policy at point θ from the initial point θ = 0 is given by the
implicit equation:
                                                           V (P, y + EV (θ)) = V̂ (θ)

where V (P, y) is the utility obtained under policy P with non-labor income y +EV (θ). Differentiating
yields:                                                                                      
                                                 dV̂ (θ)                         λ P̂ (θ) , y                   dV̂
                         EV 0 (θ) =                dθ
                                                                 =                                            dθ
                                        λ (P, y + EV (θ))               λ (P, y + EV (θ))    λ P̂ (θ) , y
                                                                        |       {z      }
                                                                     MU of Income Adjustment |    {z      }
                                                                                             Std Measure
              dV̂
where         dθ
                         relies on the local causal effects of the policy at P (θ). Expanding yields:
          λ(P̂ (θ),y )


                              ˆ
                                                                                                                           
                                   1     λ P̂ (θ) , y                     ∂ û
                                                                                 dĜ   dt̂                      X           dx̂j 
                                                                          ∂G
                                                                         − cG 
              EV (1) =                                                            +     +                          τ̂j          dθ
                               0       λ (P, y + EV (θ))   λ P̂ (θ) , y          dθ    dθ                                   dθ
                                                                                                                j


Conditions for Global = Local                              If two conditions are satisfied, global and local conditions are
equivalent. Suppose that:
  (a) themarginal utility of income does not vary for the policy relative to the income effects:
λ P̂ (θ) , y = λ (P, y + EV (θ))
                                                                  dx̂j                             dl̂j
    (b) the causal effects are linear in θ (i.e.                   dθ    = x̂j (1) − x̂j (0) and   dθ     = ˆlj (1) − ˆlj (0) for all θ.
    Note that (a) is implied by quasilinear utility, but is far less restrictive. Also, (b) is commonly
imposed in empirical applications. To derive the total equivalent variation for the policy, let Dj =
´1
    ∂ û             
       ∂Gj          G dθ denote the average willingness to pay above cost for the publicly provided
 0               − cj
    λ(P̂ (θ),y )
goods. Then, if (a) and (b) hold, one can show that:
                                            X                                   X                X
                            EV (1) =             ∆Ĝj ∗ Dj +           ∆ t̂
                                                                      |{z}    +    τ̄j
                                                                                      x
                                                                                        ∆x̂ j  +   τ̄jl ∆ˆlj
                                             j                    Net Transfer | j               j
                                           |    {z    }                                       {z           }
                                           Public Goods                          Behavioral Reponse

where ∆Ĝj = Ĝj (1)−Ĝj (0) is the change in publicly provided good j, ∆t̂is the change in net resources,
and ∆x̂j = x̂j (1) − x̂j (0) is the difference in potential outcomes in policy world θ = 1 relative to θ = 0


                                                                         36
(i.e. ∆x̂j is the non-marginal causal effect of the policy on x̂j ).


C     Appendix: Externalities (and Internalities)
The fact that the causal effect does not need to be decomposed into income and substitution effects
extends to a more complex environment with internalities and externalities.
    To see this, now suppose that the agents’ utility function is given by

                                                   ui (xi , li , Gi , Ei )

where the externality imposed on agent i, Ei , is produced in response to the consumption choices of
all agents in the economy,
                                                        Ei = fiE (x)

where x = {xi }i is the vector of all consumption decisions made by the agent (one could generalize
this easily to incorporate l). I assume that there is no market for Ei and that agents do not take Ei
into account when conducting their optimization. Note that I allow Ei to interact arbitrarily with
the utility function, but I assume it is taken as given in the agents’ maximization problem. Thus,
Ei could represent a classical externality (e.g. pollution) or a behavioral “internality”. An internality
could be welfare costs of smoking that are not incorporated into their maximization program, or could
incorporate “optimization frictions” of the form used by Chetty (2009a) where taxpayers over-estimate
the costs of tax sheltering so that the marginal utility of tax sheltered income is not equal to the
marginal utility of taxable income.
    The value function is now given by
                                             
             Vi τil , τix , Ti , yi , Gi , Ei   = max ui (x, l, Gi , Ei )
                                                  x,l
                                                         JX
                                                         X                     JL 
                                                                               X            
                                                                1 + τijx xij ≤      1 − τijl lij + Ti + yi
                                                                        
                                                 s.t.
                                                          j=1                  j=1


Given each agent’s solution to this program, xi , I construct Ei = fiE (x) and x is the vector of solutions
to each agents optimization program.
    All other definitions from Section 2 are maintained. In particular, policy paths are defined as in
equation 4.63 Proposition 2 presents the characterization of the marginal welfare impact of a policy
evaluated at θ = 0.
  63
     Note that I do not allow the government to directly affect the level of E. This would be duplicating the role of
publicly provided goods, as I could specify G to be provision of goods which mitigate the externality (either directly or
through their effect on agents’ choices of x).




                                                            37
Proposition 2. The welfare impact of the marginal policy change to type i is given by
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
                                                                                             
           J             !                       J            J                  ∂u
                                                                                                
dVi           G  ∂ui                              X dx̂ij X dˆlij
                                                   X            L                    i
dθ |θ=0                     dĜ         dt̂                                            dÊ
           X                                                                                   
                 ∂G     G       ij         i          x            l              ∂E i    i
          =         − cj          +          +      τij    +     τij      +
                                                                                             
  λi             λi          dθ         dθ               dθ           dθ          λ     dθ
                                                                                                
                                                                                 | i {z }
                                                                                               
            j=1                       |{z}        j            j                               
           |        {z          }                                       } Impact on Externality
                                     Transfer
                                                |           {z
                                                     Impact on Govt
                                                                                               
            Public Spending /                                                                  
                                                                                               
                      Market Failure

where                                                                      
                                                               JX   E
                                                      dÊi  X X  ∂fi dx̂ij 
                                                          =
                                                       dθ         ∂xij dθ
                                                                    i       j

is the net marginal impact of the policy on the externality experienced by type i.

Proof. Taking the total derivative of Vi with respect to θ, I have
                                         
   dVi τ̂il , τ̂ix , T̂i , yi , Ĝi , Êi         ∂Vi dT̂i X
                                                            JG
                                                               ∂Vi dĜij X
                                                                          JX
                                                                             ∂Vi dτ̂ijx X
                                                                                         JL
                                                                                            ∂Vi dτ̂ijl   ∂Vi dÊi
                                              =           +             +              +               +
                     dθ                           ∂Ti dθ       ∂Gij dθ       ∂τijx dθ       ∂τijl dθ     ∂Ei dθ
                                                           j=1                           j=1            j=1


Applying the envelope theorem from the agent’s maximization problem and evaluating at θ = 0 implies

                                                            ∂Vi
                                                                        = −xij λi
                                                            ∂τijx
                                                            ∂Vi
                                                                        = −lij λi
                                                            ∂τijl
                                                            ∂Vi
                                                                        = −λi
                                                            ∂Ti
                                                           ∂Vi                  ∂ui
                                                                        =
                                                           ∂Gij                 ∂Gij
                                                            ∂Vi                 ∂ui
                                                                        =
                                                            ∂Ei                 ∂Ei

Replacing terms, I have
                                                                                               
                                         JG ∂ui           JX         x   JL         l
                  dVi             dT̂i
                                         X  ∂Gij dĜ ij
                                                          X      dτ̂ij
                                                                         X      dτ̂ij   ∂ui dÊi
                      |θ=0 = λi       +                −    xij       −    lij       +
                  dθ              dθ         λi dθ                dθ             dθ     ∂Ei dθ
                                                    j=1                     j=1                j=1


                                                                                dT̂i
Now, I use equation 5 to replace the total transfers,                           dθ ,   with the net government budgetary position,




                                                                        38
dt̂i
dθ ,   which yields
                                                                                                                                  
                  JG      ∂ui           !                                                   JX         x   JL         l
dVi              X       ∂Gij               dĜij   dt̂i   d  h                         i X      dτ̂ij
                                                                                                           X      dτ̂ij   ∂ui dÊi 
    |θ=0   = λi                 − cG
                                    j             +      +      R τ̂ix , x̂i , τ̂il , l̂i −    xij       −    lij       +
dθ                        λi                 dθ     dθ     dθ                                       dθ             dθ     ∂Ei dθ
                  j=1                                                                   j=1             j=1


Finally,
  h  note that i        equation 6 shows I can replace the difference between the total revenue impact,
                                                                         dτ̂ x           dτ̂ l
d        x        l         , and the mechanical revenue effect, Jj=1 xij dθij + Jj=1 lij dθij , with the behav-
                                                                P X             P L
dθ R τ̂i , x̂i , τi , l̂i
ioral impact of the policy on the government budget constraint, yielding
                                                                                                             
                          JG       ∂ui             !                   JX              JL
          dVi            X        ∂Gij                 dĜij   dt̂i X         dx̂ij
                                                                                       X       dˆ
                                                                                                lij    ∂ui dÊi
              |θ=0 = λi                    − cG
                                               j             +     +      τijx       +    τijl        +
          dθ                       λi                   dθ     dθ               dθ             dθ       ∂Ei dθ
                           j=1                                          j               j


                                        dÊi
And, note that I can expand              dθ    by taking a total derivative of Ei = fiE (x) across all goods and
types, yielding
                                                                  J
                                                          X
                                                   dÊi X X ∂fiE dx̂ij
                                                       =
                                                    dθ      ∂xij dθ
                                                              i   j=1

which concludes the proof.

   With externalities,
                  P I must     know the net causal effect of behavioral response to the policy on the
             dEi      JX ∂fiE dx̂ij
externality, dθ =     j ∂xij dθ , along with the the marginal willingness to pay for the externality,
∂ui
∂Ei
 λi    . Therefore, the welfare loss from a behavioral response that reduces government revenue may be
counteracted by the welfare gain from any reduction on the externality imposed on other individuals.
Thus, financing government revenue using so-called “green taxes” that also reduce externalities may
deliver higher government welfare than policies whose financing schemes do not reduce externalities.64
This is the so-called “double-dividend” highlighted in previous literature (Bovenberg and de Mooji
(1994); Goulder (1995); Parry (1995)). But even in this world, the causal effect of the policy on
behavior, i.e. the policy elasticity, continue to be the behavioral elasticities that are relevant for
estimating welfare impact of the policy.


D        General Equilibrium Effects
By assuming one unit of goods are produced with one unit of labor supply, the model ruled out
general equilibrium effects (i.e. that the policy change affects prices). However, such effects are easily
                                                                                                              dt̂i 65
incorporated into the model by adding the implied transfers to the net resources term,                        dθ .
  64
      As is well-known (e.g. Salanie (2003)), if taxes are initially near their optimal levels, then at the margin it is not
clear that an additional green tax will be any more desirable than a tax on any other good.
   65
      Note that the aggregate impact of the policy on the value of production (i.e. GDP) does not enter the welfare
calculation. This is not because of the stylized model of production per se. At the optimum, individuals trade off
their private benefit from production (their after-tax wage) with their private cost of production (their disutility of
labor supply activities). If production increases because of the policy, this envelope condition suggests individuals were
privately indifferent to the change. Hence, such changes to production matters for welfare only through the impact on


                                                                  39
    For example, if the policy increases the price of i’s labor supply activity j, then she will obtain a
                          dwij                 dwij
resource benefit of lij    dθ |θ=0 ,   where    dθ |θ=0   is the causal impact of the policy on the after-tax wage
faced by individual i on her jth labor supply activity. These additional impacts are valued dollar-for-
                                                                              dt̂i
dollar and can simply be added to the resource transfer term,                 dθ |θ=0 ,   in Proposition 1. Hence, when
policies have general equilibrium effects, one also needs to track the causal impact of the policy on
prices, and adjust the size of the resource transfers in Proposition 1 accordingly. The causal effects are
still the desired responses, but one needs to also know the general equilibrium effects of government
policies.


E     Optimal Commodity Taxation and the “Inverse Elasticity” Rule
Ramsey (1927) proposes the question of how commodities should be taxed in order to raise a fixed
government expenditure, R > 0. Diamond and Mirrlees (1971) provide a formal modeling of this
environment and show that, at the optimum, the tax-weighted Hicksian price derivatives for each
good are equated. Here, I illustrate this result and relate it to the framework provided in this paper.
    Assume there is a representative agent and drop i subscripts. A necessary conditions for tax policy
to be at an optimum is given by
                                                          dV̂P
                                                               =0
                                                           dθ
for all feasible policy paths, P . With a representative agent, the optimal tax would be lump-sum of size
R. However, the optimal commodity tax program proposed by Ramsey (1927) makes the assumption
that the government cannot conduct lump-sum taxation. Hence, the only feasible policies are those
that raise and lower tax rates in a manner that preserves the budget constraint.
    Consider a policy, P (θ), that lowers the tax on good 1 and raises the tax on good 2. The optimality
condition is given by
                                                     X           dx̂k
                                                           τ̂k        =0                                              (17)
                                                                  dθ
                                                      k

Equation (17) suggests more responsive goods should be taxed at lower rates, thereby nesting the
                                                           dx̂k
standard “inverse elasticity” argument (higher              dθ    should be associated with lower τ̂k ). The optimal
tax attempts to replicate lump-sum taxes by taxing relatively inelastic goods.
                                                                           dV̂P
    Diamond and Mirrlees (1971) further note that, because                  dθ    = 0 at the optimum, one can expand
the behavioral change using the Hicksian demands, xhk ,

                                               dxk   ∂xhk dτ1 ∂xhk dτ2
                                                   =         +
                                                dθ   ∂τ1 dθ    ∂τ2 dθ

                                                                        ∂xh
                                                                          k dVp
where, in general, there would be the additional term,                  ∂u dθ ,    but this vanishes at the optimum.
the government budget. However, if there are spillovers or externalities in the production process, one would need to
account for the impact of the policies on these externalities in a manner analogous to the impact on the fiscal externality
(see Appendix C).




                                                                 40
Hence, that the optimality condition is given by

                                               ∂xh dτ1 X ∂xhk
                                                                                 
                                       X                                      dτ2
                                             τk k     = τk                  −                                         (18)
                                               ∂τ1 dθ      ∂τ2                dθ
                                         k                        k

so that the tax-weighted Hicksian responses are equated across the tax rates – precisely the classic
result in Diamond and Mirrlees (1971) (see equation 38).66
    However, note that one never relied on compensated elasticities to test the optimality condition
in equation (17). Compensated elasticities arise only because of the assumption that policy is at the
optimum. One could consider any budget-neutral policy that simultaneously adjusts two commodity
taxes and test equation (17) directly. Conditional on knowing the causal effects of such a policy,
one would not need to know whether income or substitution effects drive the behavioral response to
commodity taxes. The policy elasticities would be sufficient.


F     Application Details
F.1     EITC
This section outlines the welfare analysis of an EITC expansion. To correspond with the causal
effects analyzed in much previous literature, the marginal expansion of the EITC program can best
be thought of as increasing the maximum benefit level in a manner that maintains current income
eligibility thresholds and tax schedule kink points (but raises the phase-in and phase-out rates in
order to reach the new maximum benefit). However, the results from Chetty et al. (2013) suggest the
phase-out slope of the EITC has only a minor impact on labor supply (most of the response is from
individuals below the EITC maximum benefit level choosing to increase their labor supply). This
suggests the impact on the behavioral response on the government budget would not be too sensitive
to the precise design of the phase-out of the program.
    The effects documented in previous literature consist of both intensive and extensive labor supply
                                                      dl̂iEIT C
responses. With extensive margin responses,               dθ      may not exist for all i, as individuals make discrete
jumps in their choice of labor supply. However, this is easily accommodated into the model. To see
this, normalize the index of the Poor to be the unit interval, i ∈ P oor = [0, 1]. Then, order the index
of the poor population such that ˆli (θ) > 0 implies ˆlj (θ) > 0 for j < i and all θ ∈ (−, ). With this
ordering, there exists a threshold, iLF P (θ), such that i < iLF P (θ) indicates that i is in the labor force
and i > iLF P (θ) indicates that i is not in the labor force. Hence, iLF P (θ) is the fraction of the poor
single mothers that are in the labor force. With this notation, the impact of the behavioral response
  66
     Under the additional assumption that compensated cross-price elasticities are zero, one arrives at the classic inverse
elasticity rule:
                                                              ∂xh
                                                                1 dτ1
                                                      τ2      ∂τ1 dθ
                                                         =
                                                      τ1      ∂xh
                                                                2 dτ2
                                                              ∂τ2 dθ

so that optimal tax rates are inversely proportional to their compensated (Hicksian) demands.




                                                             41
to the policy by the poor on the government’s budget is given by:
                 ˆ                                                                                            ˆ
                                       dˆlEIT C                                                  diLF P    dˆlEIT C
             −                      τil i       |θ=0 di      =          τilLF P (0) liLF P (0)|θ=0 −      τil i       |θ=0 di              (19)
                 i∈P oor                   dθ                       |               {z    dθ     } | i<î       dθ
                                                                                                                {z          }
                                                                             Extensive Margin        Intensive Margin

where τilLF P (0) liLF P (0) is the average taxable income (or loss) generated by the marginal type entering
                                    diLF P
the labor force and                   dθ     is the marginal rate at which the policy induces labor force entry.67 The cost
resulting from extensive margin responses is given by the impact of the program on the labor force
participation rate, multiplied by the size of the average subsidy to those entering the labor force.                                        68

    There is a large literature analyzing the impact of the EITC expansion on labor force participation
of single mothers, beginning with Eissa and Liebman (1996). These approaches generally estimate
the causal effect of EITC receipt on behavior using various expansions in the generosity of the EITC
program. Hotz and Scholz (2003) summarize this literature and find consistency across methodologies
in estimates of the elasticity of the         i participation rate of single mothers, î, rate with respect
                                    hlabor force
to the average after-tax wage, E                           1 − τîl ll̂ , with estimates ranging from 0.69-1.16.
    I translate this elasticity into equation (19) by normalizing θ to parameterize an additional unit of
the mechanical subsidy69 and writing:
                                                                                                          
                                                         diLF P                   τilLF P (0) liLF P (0)
                                τilLF P (0) liLF P (0)              |θ=0     =                             LFhP l  i
                                                             dθ                   1 − τiLF P (0) liLF P (0) E 1−τî lî
                                                                                        l



where LFhP       i            is the elasticity of the labor force participation rate with respect to the after tax
         E   1−τ l lî
                     î         h     i
                            E τ l lî
                               î
wage rate and              h          i       is the size of the subsidy as a fraction of after tax income for the marginal
                          E 1−τ l lî
                                      î
labor force entrant. For the elasticity of labor force participation, I choose
                                                                           h   ian estimate of 0.9, equal
                                                                                                              E τ l lî
to the midpoint of existing estimates (Hotz and Scholz (2003)). For                                          h î  i ,   one desires the after
                                                                                                            E 1−τ l lî
                                                                                                                  î
tax wages and subsidies for marginal entrants into the labor force. While such parameters could be
identified using the same identification strategies previous papers have used to estimate the labor
supply impact of the EITC, to my knowledge no such estimates of the marginal wages and subsidies
exist. Using the 2004 SOI, Eissa and Hoynes (2011) report that the average subsidy is $1,806 per
beneficiary, which corresponds to 9.2% of a $20,000 gross income for EITC beneficiaries. Athreya
et al. (2010) report the average recipient obtains a subsidy equal to 11.7% of gross income in the 2008
  67
     This formula is conceptually similar to that of Eissa et al. (2008) who simulate the MEB of recent EITC expansions
using estimates of compensated labor supply elasticities on both the extensive and intensive margin.
  68
     Because my model assumed individuals face linear tax rates, the distinction between the average and marginal tax
rate is not readily provided, but it is straightforward to verify that the fiscal externality imposed by those entering the
labor force is given by the size of the subsidy they receive by entering the labor force, not by the marginal tax or subsidy
they face if they were to provide
                               an additional EIT   unit of labor
                                                                supply.
  69
                      ´         dT̂iEIT C       dτ̂ij C
     This normalizes i∈P oor        dθ
                                          |θ=0 + dθ |θ=0 li di = 1




                                                                                  42
CPS. I therefore take the approximate midpoint of 11%.
       These calculations suggest the extensive margin impact on the government budget is given by:
                                         h i dî         0.11
                                       E τîl lî    =          ∗ 0.9 = 0.09
                                       | {z dθ}        1 + 0.11
                                    Extensive Margin

so that the EITC is 9% more costly to the government because of extensive margin labor supply
responses.70

Intensive margin responses Until recently, there was little evidence that the EITC had intensive
margin impacts on labor supply. However, the recent paper by Chetty et al. (2013) exploits the
geographic variation in knowledge about the marginal incentives induced by the EITC, as proxied by
the local fraction of self-employed that bunch at the subsidy-maximizing kink rate. Using the universe
of tax return data from EITC recipients, their estimates suggest that the behavioral responses induced
by knowledge about the marginal incentives provided by the EITC increase refunds by approximately
5% relative to what they would be in the absence of behavioral responses, with most of these responses
due to intensive margin adjustments. What is particularly useful about this study is that it uses tax
expenditures as an outcome variable, and hence can compute the associated fiscal externality directly.
       The downside of Chetty et al. (2013) is that the policy path in question is the degree of “knowledge
about the shape of the EITC schedule”. While this policy path provides guidance on the size of
the distortions induced by these marginal incentives, one could imagine that even in places with no
knowledge of the EITC schedules the existence of the EITC generates extensive margin responses.
       To account for this, I make the baseline assumption that the knowledge of the average EITC subsidy
generates extensive margin responses and knowledge of the shape of the EITC schedule generates
intensive margin responses. With this assumption, the results of Chetty et al. (2013) should be added
together with the extensive margin responses found in previous literature to arrive at the total impact
of an EITC expansion. This yields an estimate of p = 0.09 + 0.05 = 14% with a range of 0.12-0.16
taking the range of extensive margin labor supply responses.71

F.2       Food Stamps
Using variation induced in the introduction of food stamps in the 1960s and 70s Hoynes and Schanzen-
bach (2012) estimate that food stamps led to a significant reduction in labor supply, especially among
  70
     Taking elasticity estimates in the 0.69-1.12 range reported by Hotz and Scholz (2003), yields estimates of the extensive
margin impact ranging from 0.07 to 0.11. Hence, if one assumed only extensive margin responses were operating, the
policy elasticity would be p = 0.09, ranging between 0.07 and 0.11.
  71
     This is potentially an overestimate of the net effect of behavioral responses because some of the responses found in
Chetty et al. (2013) is along the extensive margin and is more amenable to the potential critique that the earlier literature
could not effectively separate the impact of EITC expansions from the impact of the decrease in welfare generosity (see
Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001) for this debate). Therefore, I also consider the case that the 0.05 figure in Chetty et al.
(2013) captures all of the EITC response (so that p = 0.05). This arguably provides a lower bound of the impact of
the policy. For an upper bound, I consider the upper range of extensive margin response can be added to Chetty et al.
(2013), so that p = 0.11 + 0.05 = 16%.


                                                             43
female headed households. They estimate a fairly imprecise and large reduction in labor hours (-658
hours per year, with a 95% CI of [-1186 , 130]; see Column (2) of Table 2 on page 157). They also
estimate a large and imprecise change in annual earnings of -$2,943 (95% CI of [-10,169 , 4,284]).
Corresponding to the tax rates operating around 1970, I assume a linear marginal tax rate of 20% on
earnings, consistent with the absence of an EITC program during this time period. I arrive at 20% us-
ing the 14% bottom tax bracket for federal taxes and a 6% state tax assumption. With this assumption,
the net change tax revenue collected due to behavioral responses to food stamps is $2,943*.2=$588.60.
It is important to note that this estimate is not statistically significantly different from zero.
      In contrast, the food stamp program provided an average monthly benefit of $26.77 per per-
son in 197872 , which corresponds to $321.24 per person per year. Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2009)
estimate a mean household size of 3.59 in their sample, which implies a household-level transfer
size of $1,153.25. Hence, the total cost to the government of providing the food stamps policy is
$1,153.25+$588.60=$1,741.85.
      For the net valuation of food stamps, Smeeding (1982) estimates that food stamps are valued
dollar-for-dollar. In contrast, Whitmore (2002) estimates that every dollar of food stamps is valued
at ~$0.80 by the beneficiaries. In the absence of behavioral responses this estimate suggests the
MVPF would be 0.8. Placing this into the context of the size of the transfers, the estimate suggests
that the mechanical transfer of $1,153.25 is valued by beneficiaries at only $922.60. In other words,
∂u
∂G
 λ    − cG = −$230.65; expressed as a fraction of the net resource transfer, this is -922.60/1,741.85 = -
0.132. In turn, the impact of the behavioral response on the government budget is -$588.60; expressed
as a fraction of the net resource transfer, this is -588.6/1,153.25 = -0.338. Putting these together,
we have a MVPF of 1-.132-.338=0.53 for the Whitmore (2002) estimate of the cash-value of the food
stamps. Assuming instead that food stamps are valued dollar-for-dollar, the MVPF is 1-0.338 = 0.642.
Of course, because one cannot reject the null hypothesis that the revenue impact of the policy is zero,
one cannot reject the null hypothesis of a MVPF of 0.80 to 1 (no behavioral responses) or even higher.

F.3      Section 8 Housing Vouchers
Jacob and Ludwig (2012) study the impact of obtaining a housing voucher on labor supply (intensive
+ extensive), Medicaid receipt, TANF receipt, and SNAP receipt. For the extensive margin labor
supply response, I use the 11% tax rate assumption from the EITC section. For the intensive margin
response, Jacob and Ludwig (2012) report a marginal tax rate of 24% for the treatment group that
includes phase-out of government benefits in addition to marginal income tax rates. For the change
in TANF and SNAP use, I use the Green Book (2004) and compute average costs per household in
2002, normalized to 2007 dollars using the CPI-U to be consistent with Jacob and Ludwig (2012). For
the change in Medicare enrollment, I use costs compiled by Holahan and McMorrow (2012). Table A1
reports the calculations.


 72
      www.fns.usda.gov/pd/SNAPsummary.htm+&cd=3&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=us&client=safari



                                                    44
G     OLD MATERIAL: Alternative Welfare Frameworks
The representations in equation (7) suggest there are multiple potential empirical strategies one can
use to estimate the impact of the behavioral response to the policy on the government’s budget.
First, one could attempt to estimate the fiscal externality directly. If one had a counterfactual budget
forecast of what the government budget would be in the absence of any behavioral responses (the
“mechanical impact on government revenue” in equation (6)), one could compare the difference in the
realized budget and the mechanical revenue that would have been observed in the absence of behavioral

                                                  45
responses.73 Second, one could estimate the micro-level behavioral changes xi and li resulting from
the policy and multiply by the government’s stake in the behavior. In this micro approach, one can
either use policy responses and marginal tax rates (levels), or using policy elasticities and government
revenues on each activity (logs).


H        Additivity and the Marginal Value of Public Funds
Many government policies are not budget neutral, at least in the short run. Naturally, one desires a
coherent way of analyzing these non-budget neutral policies. This section provides a condition that
allows the welfare impacts of policies to be added together. In doing so, it provides formal justification
for the calculation of a simple benefit-cost ratio – namely, the social welfare impact of the policy per
dollar of government revenue expended – as the marginal value of public funds.74
       To begin, suppose one is interested in characterizing the marginal welfare impact of a policy path,
P (θ). Suppose that two policy paths, PT ax (θ) and PExp (θ), sum to the policy path of interest, P (θ):

                            (P (θ) − P (0)) = (PT ax (θ) − P (0)) + (PExp (θ) − P (0))                                     (20)

Condition (20) requires that the movement from the initial policy position, P (0) towards P (θ) can
be written as the sum of two movements: first in the direction of PT ax (θ) and second in the direction
of PExp (θ) (or vice-versa). This equality must hold for all components of the policy (taxes, transfers,
and public provision of goods). For example, PExp (θ) could be a policy path that spends money from
the government budget on a public good; PT ax (θ) could be a policy that raises government revenue
through increasing the labor tax rate. In this case, P (θ) would be a policy that simultaneously
increases the labor tax rate and spends the resources on the public good.75
  73
      As discussed further in Section (3), this approach is taken by Chetty et al. (2013) who estimate the marginal incentives
from the EITC schedule increase EITC expenditures by 5%.
   74
      Although the model provides a formal justification for a benefit-cost ratio, B  C
                                                                                        , it should be clear that the difference
in levels, B − C, of benefits and costs are not comparable across policies and does not lead to a coherent welfare ranking
of policies. Intuitively, calculating whether benefits exceed cost assume that the social cost of raising the revenue to
fund the program is 1, which will not be true in general (see Slemrod and Yitzhaki (2001); also see Kaplow (1996, 2004,
2008)).
   75
      The non-budget neutral policies, PT ax and PExp , implicitly change government debt obligations. Intuitively, when
the government implements non-budget neutral policies, it is either borrowing resources from its own citizens or from
abroad (in an open economy). I do not explicitly model such borrowing, but it is important to note that one can augment
the model to allow the level of government debt or obligations, B, to affect the agents’ behavior, ui (xi , li , Gi , B). In this
case, non-budget neutral policies can increase B; but when considering the sum of two non-budget neutral policies that
sum to a budget neutral policy, one can ignore the impact of each individual policy on B, since on aggregate B remains
unchanged in any budget neutral policy experiment.




                                                               46
       If equation (20) is satisfied, it is straightforward to show76 that the marginal welfare impact of the
                                                                  ∂ V̂iP
                                                                         |
                                                                    ∂θ θ=0
comprehensive policy on type i, denoted                                λi      , is given by the sum of the two welfare impacts:

                                                                           P                      P
                                                     ∂ V̂iP             ∂ V̂i T ax            ∂ V̂i Exp
                                                      ∂θ |θ=0               ∂θ     |θ=0           ∂θ    |θ=0
                                                                 =                        +                                                                  (21)
                                                       λi                      λi                      λi
                P                       PExp
           ∂ V̂ T ax               ∂ V̂
               i      |θ=0             i      |θ=0
where           ∂θ
                   λi        and        ∂θ
                                           λi         denote the marginal welfare impact of the component policies, PT ax
and PExp .
       Despite being straightforward in the present framework, equation (20) is not innocuous from the
perspective of the MEB framework. For example, suppose one were to take a MEB calculation for
a tax increase from existing literature as PT ax .77 This hypothetical policy involves the government
collecting or providing individual-specific lump-sum transfers in a manner that holds utility constant.
Hence, for the additivity condition to hold there are two options depending on whether one seeks a
                                                       dV̂i
                                                            |
                                                       dθ θ=0
comprehensive MEB estimate or a                            λi      estimate. First, to calculate the MEB of the comprehensive
policy, the expenditure policy must also hold utility constant while raising taxes via individual-specific
                                                                                                                                                     ∂ V̂iP
                                                                                                                                                            |
                                                                                                                                                       ∂θ θ=0
lump-sum to finance the expenditure. For a calculation of individuals’ willingness to pay,                                                                λi     ,
one must consider an expenditure policy that not only provided the expenditure but also removed
the lump-sum transfers that were provided in the tax policy. In both cases, the causal effects of the
expenditure policy are not sufficient for the behavioral responses required to compute the welfare
impact of the comprehensive policy, even conditional on knowing the MEB of the tax policy. In
                                                                                                                        PT ax                   PExp
                                                                                                                ∂ V̂                       ∂ V̂
                                                                                                                       i      |θ=0             i      |θ=0
                                                                                                                        ∂θ                      ∂θ
contrast, if one uses the measures of welfare in the present framework,                                                    λi        and           λi        , the
causal effects of the tax and expenditure policies are                               sufficient.78
  76                                                           ∂ V̂iP
       Let ∇Vi denote the gradient of Vi , so that              ∂θ
                                                                        = ∇ViP dP
                                                                               dθ
                                                                                  , where         dP
                                                                                                  dθ
                                                                                                       is the vector of policy changes. Note that

                                                        ∂ViP                 dP
                                                                  =      ∇Vi
                                                         ∂θ                  dθ
                                                                                              
                                                                               dPT ax   dPExp
                                                                  =      ∇Vi          +
                                                                                 dθ       dθ
                                                                             dPT ax       dPExp
                                                                  =      ∇Vi        + ∇Vi
                                                                               dθ           dθ
                                                                                              P
                                                                          ∂ViPT ax   ∂Vi Exp
                                                                  =                +
                                                                            ∂θ         ∂θ
where all derivatives are evaluated at θ = 0.
   77
      Equation (20) is often violated in practice. For example, Liebman (2002) studies the welfare impact of EITC reforms.
In equation 2 of Liebman (2002), the budgetary cost of the EITC program is weighted by the MEB to adjust for the
cost of raising revenue. For the additivity condition to hold, the EITC policy experiment must fund the EITC expansion
using lump-sum taxation on the general population (or the affluent, depending on the policy). As a result, the income
effects that were subtracted in constructing the MEB need to be added back in to construct a measure of the social
welfare impact of expanding EITC financed by taxation on the rest of the economy.
   78
      In the context of tax policies, it is interesting to note that causal effect of tax increases may be either a pure Hicksian
response, an uncompensated response, or neither. If agents expect the increased revenue to be returned through future
transfers or publicly provided goods and then borrow against these in capital markets (i.e. Ricardian equivalence holds),
then the behavioral response may be similar to a compensated response. In contrast, the uncompensated approach may
describe behavior if people do not expect future tax revenue or do not borrow against these future benefits. Indeed,


                                                                                47
    The additivity condition in equation (21) suggests a natural method for dealing with non-budget
neutral policies. One can simply compute the welfare cost per dollar of government budget expended,
which captures a measure of the marginal value of public funds (MVPF). Normalizing social welfare
into units of individual î’s income, the MVPF is given by:

                                                     ´  ηi
                                                              dV̂iP
                                                               dθ θ=0
                                                                     |
                                                      i ηî        λi      di       "Benefit"
                                      M V P FPî =       ´                      =                                        (22)
                                                                  dt̂P               "Cost"
                                                             i∈I dθ
                                                                     i
                                                                      di

                                                                                ∂ V̂ P
                                                                                    î |
                                                                                  ∂θ θ=0
which is the sum of the welfare impact on each individual,                           λî   , weighted by their social marginal
utilities of income, ηi , and normalized in units of dollars to individual î.79 There is an extraordinary
number of different definitions for the MCPF in previous literature (Fullerton (1991); Auerbach and
Hines (2002); Dahlby (2008)). The particular definition in equation (22) was initially proposed by
Mayshar (1990) and also by Slemrod and Yitzhaki (1996). The key advantage of this definition of the
MVPF is that the behavioral responses depend solely on the causal, not compensated, effects of the
non-budget neutral policies in question.
    Given any two policies, PT ax and PExp , satisfying equation (20), the additivity condition implies

                                      dŴ P                                        
                                            = η î M V P FPî Exp − M V P FPî T ax                                      (23)
                                       dθ

so that policy PExp provides a benefit of M V P FPî Exp per dollar of government revenue and a cost
of M V P FPî T ax per dollar of government revenue. If M V P FPî Exp is greater (less) than M V P FPî T ax ,
then taking resources from the tax (expenditure) policy and using it to finance the expenditure (tax)
policy will improve social welfare. Identifying heterogeneity in the MVPF across different policies is
equivalent to identifying welfare-improving budget neutral policies.




whether or not the policy response is compensated or uncompensated arguably depends the degree to which Ricardian
equivalence holds and how people respond to government debt. Of course, I do not explicitly model government debt.
But, as eluded to in Footnote 75, comparisons of the values of MVPF are implicitly constructing budget neutral policies
(e.g. M CP FPî 1 − M CP FPî 2 is the welfare impact of taking $1 along policy path P2 and using it to increase spending
along policy path P1 ). Hence, the combined policy is budget neutral so that one need not isolate the particular impact
of government debt on behavior and utility.
    79
       Note that the î notation makes clear the units of income used in the definition; it is not the welfare impact on type
î. It is the welfare impact on all types measured in units of î’s income.


                                                                48
