NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HETEROGENEITY IN COST-SHARING AND COST-SENSITIVITY, AND THE
ROLE OF THE PRESCRIBING PHYSICIAN
Mariana Carrera
Dana Goldman
Geoffrey Joyce
Working Paper 19186
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19186

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2013

We are grateful to David Card, Stefano DellaVigna, William Dow, Enrico Moretti, Neeraj Sood, and
to seminar participants at RAND, ASHEcon, U.C. Berkeley, U.S.C., Cornell, University of Pittsburgh,
Case Western Reserve, and Indiana University- Purdue University. All errors are our own. Research
reported in this working paper was supported by the National Institutes of Health under award number
R01AG029514. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent
the official views of the National Institutes of Health or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Mariana Carrera, Dana Goldman, and Geoffrey Joyce. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Heterogeneity in Cost-Sharing and Cost-Sensitivity, and the Role of the Prescribing Physician
Mariana Carrera, Dana Goldman, and Geoffrey Joyce
NBER Working Paper No. 19186
June 2013
JEL No. I1
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we use individual level data on purchases of one of the most prescribed categories of
drugs (cholesterol-lowering statins) to study the responses of physicians and patients to variation in
the cost of drugs. In a sample of first-time statin prescriptions to employees from a group of Fortune
500 firms, we find that copay variation across plans has a relatively small effect on the choice of drug,
and this effect does not vary with patient income. After the highly-publicized expiration of the patent
for Zocor (simvastatin), however, prescriptions for this drug increased substantially, especially for
lower-income patients. Our analysis suggests that physicians can perceive the adherence elasticity
of their patients and adjust their initial prescriptions accordingly, but only in response to a large and
universal price change. Using prescriber identifiers, we present suggestive evidence that physicians
learn about a patient's price sensitivity through their own experience of prescribing to that patient.
Geoffrey Joyce
Schaeffer Center for Health Policy and Economics
University of Southern California
3335 S. Figueroa St., Unit A
Los Angeles, CA 90089-7273
and NBER
Dana Goldman
gjoyce@usc.edu
Schaeffer Center for Health Policy and Economics
University of Southern California
3335 S. Figueroa St, Unit A
Los Angeles, CA 90089-7273
and NBER
dana.goldman@usc.edu
Mariana Carrera
Case Western Reserve University
2452 Kenilworth Rd.
Cleveland Heights, OH 44106
mpc67@case.edu

1

Introduction

Over the past two decades, insurers have sought to rein in rising drug costs by increasing patient
cost-sharing and adopting incentive-based benefit structures. Tiered formularies, which use multiple copay levels (“tiers”) to encourage choice of generic or certain brand drugs, have become nearly
ubiquitous in both employer-sponsored and Medicare Part D plans.1 Relative to simpler benefit structures with a fixed copay (out-of-pocket cost) for all covered drugs, tiered formularies have
been found to reduce overall drug expenditures while shifting costs heavily towards patients.2 Studies have cautioned, however, that higher cost-sharing hurts utilization rates of important chronic
medications, causing savings on pharmaceuticals to be partially offset by increased medical costs
[Chandra et al., 2010, Gaynor et al., 2007].
Little attention has been paid to the role of physicians, who can, in theory, mitigate the
harmful effects of cost-sharing through cost-sensitive prescribing. Tiered formularies operate on the
assumption that cost-sensitive patients can choose low-tier drugs, but prescription drugs cannot,
by definition, be purchased at will. Instead, patients rely on physicians to write a prescription,
wherein three interacting problems emerge: First, the physician may not know the price-sensitivity
of a given patient, which will determine her adherence decision.3 Second, physicians may put too
little weight on a patient’s costs, relative to her level of price-sensitivity. Third, with a variety of
multi-tiered formularies operating in any given geographic market, most physicians don’t observe
a patient’s array of copayments [Shrank et al., 2005, Khan et al., 2008]. In the prescribing of
chronic, preventative drugs, these asymmetric information problems can have both health and
welfare consequences.4 Prescribing a more expensive drug than necessary raises the risk of poor
adherence, which is estimated to cause $100 billion in excess hospitalizations and more than 125,000
extra deaths each year [NEHI, 2009].
In this paper, we study how initial prescriptions respond to copay changes in plan formularies,
and how these responses vary with patient income. We focus on the most prescribed class of drugs
1

In 2010, benefit designs with 3 or more tiers applied to 78 percent of privately insured workers and over 85 percent
of Medicare Part D beneficiaries. In 2000, only 29 percent of privately insured workers faced these benefit designs
[Kaiser Family Foundation, 2010, Hargrave et al., 2010].
2
See Goldman et al. [2007] for a review of this literature.
3
For clarity, we use “he” for the physician and “she” for the patient throughout the paper.
4
This results from the fact that physicians can only prescribe one drug out of a given choice set, and switching
costs are large (see evidence in Appendix.)

1

in the U.S., HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins). Statins reduce blood levels of low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL), and are proven to reduce the risk of coronary heart disease and
heart attacks.5 Beyond its economic importance as the largest class in U.S. sales until 2007 and
the third largest class today,6 the statin drug class is arguably the one where we are most likely to
find sizeable copay effects on prescribing. It contains five drugs that are highly substitutable for
the majority of users, in terms of both their effects on cholesterol and side effects.7 Furthermore,
statins are expensive and meant to be used indefinitely, so a reasonable agent for a patient ought
to consider her costs. In our sample, the average yearly out-of-pocket cost for an adherent statin
user is $216, but only 49% of starting patients are adherent over the first year.
The first goal of this paper is to estimate how copay variation across plans affects drug choice
for non-elderly patients receiving a first statin prescription between 2005 and mid-2006. In this
period, the five drugs in the choice set were all patented brand drugs that varied in their tier levels
across plans, and we find that the effect of this type of copay variation is modest: When the most
prescribed statin, Lipitor, costs $10 less per month than the second-most prescribed statin, Zocor,
Lipitor’s prescribing share is only 4 percentage points greater than when their copays are equal.
Our second goal is to determine whether the price responsiveness of prescribing is constrained
by the difficulty of observing patients’ plan formularies. To do so, we study an event that caused
a copay shock that was highly publicized and highly correlated across plans: the patent expiration
of Zocor, the first among these five similar drugs, in June 2006. Since generic drugs are always
assigned the lowest copay tier in incentive-based formularies, Zocor’s patent expiration brought
about a $12.50 drop in its average monthly copay among employer-insured patients [Kaiser Family
Foundation, 2010]. The resulting shift in initial prescriptions was approximately twice as large as
would be predicted based on the cross-sectional estimates of copay effects on prescribing. We argue
that this indicates physicians respond more strongly to expected copays than to actual copays.
The critical assumption underlying our approach is that patient preferences– or any unobserved characteristics that make certain statins a better choice– are uncorrelated with the copayments set by patients’ insurers. We investigate this assumption with an analysis of how patient
5

Grundy et al. [2004] review recent long-term trials and their implications for recommended treatment guidelines.
Source: IMS Health press release: “Top Therapeutic Classes by U.S. Spending”
7
84% of new statin patients receive a drug that is expected to reduce their LDL cholesterol by 34% to 52%, and
therapeutic differences between the five drugs in this choice set are minimal [Rosenson, 2012].
6

2

adherence responds to cross-sectional variation in copays: if plans have private information on patient preferences and set their copays accordingly, then cross-sectional estimates of copay elasticity
would differ from estimates based on plan-specific copay changes over time. The results support our
identifying assumption, and also demonstrate the large difference in price-sensitivity of low-salary
and high-salary patients.
Other recent studies, which we review in a later section, have examined how doctors take into
account the costs faced by their patients.8 Our work departs from this literature in two ways. First,
we differentiate between two types of cost variation, one of which is much easier for physicians to
observe. While others have suggested that the difficulty of observing prices limits doctors’ ability
to act as agents for their patients [Shrank et al., 2005, Iizuka, 2012], we are the first to estimate
the magnitude and consequences of this information problem.
Second, our ability to observe patient income allows us to make several novel contributions.
Most previous studies of cost-sharing focus either on employer-sponsored plans without income
data (e.g. Goldman et al. [2004] and Gaynor et al. [2007]), or on low-income populations with
government-subsidized insurance (e.g. Chandra et al. [2012] and Tamblyn et al. [2001]). Our
setting allows us to hold plan costs and policies constant in estimating how patient price elasticities
vary with income, and we find a striking difference.
Given that income is an important determinant of the cost sensitivity of adherence, it is important to understand how prescribers respond. The extent to which they are able to identify lowerincome patients, and choose a low-cost drug for them, reduces the scope of adverse consequences
of high cost-sharing for other drugs. Since patient costs are typically unobserved by physicians,
however, their ability to prescribe cost-effectively depends partly on how well a patient knows her
formulary and communicates with her physician. Since income correlates positively with education
as well as measures of patient engagement [Hibbard and Cunningham, 2008], lower-income patients
may actually be less likely to obtain prescriptions for low-tier brand drugs.
Thus, the third goal of this paper is to test for different price responses by patient income.
We find that lower-income patients do not receive more cost-sensitive prescriptions when the choice
set contains only patented brand drugs. They do, however, experience a greater increase in the
prescribing of a drug when it “goes generic.” This suggests that despite being generally unaware
8

Iizuka [2012], Lundin [2000], Dickstein [2012], and Limbrock [2011] are some of the most relevant works.

3

of their patients’ copays, physicians know that generic drugs are cheaper, and use this knowledge
to provide lower-income patients with more affordable drugs. Thus, beyond simply reducing the
cost of one drug, the existence of a known off-patent drug improves the efficiency with which
physicians match patients to drugs. This finding is particularly timely, as the Supreme Court
investigates the legality of “pay-to-delay” agreements between patent-holding brand owners and
generic manufacturers of the same drug.9 Our results suggest that the first patent expiration in a
class of chronic drugs has the potential to reduce disparity in health outcomes across socio-economic
groups by improving the health and welfare of lower income populations.
To test whether our results are driven by low-salary patients or their pharmacists specifically
requesting generic Zocor, in lieu of physicians responding to patient income, we look for evidence
of prescriber learning through past interactions with a specific patient. We find that low-salary
patients are significantly more likely to receive a prescription for generic Zocor if they have received
other prescriptions in the past from the current prescriber, holding constant their past prescriptions
from any prescriber.
Combining the results from our prescribing and adherence analyses, we are able to estimate
the health costs of physicians’ imperfect information and agency. We find that the average adherence rate of low-salary patients would increase by around 4 percentage points, reducing the
gap in adherence of low and high salary patients by approximately one-third (from 11.4 to 7.7
percentage points), if all patients were prescribed the lowest-cost drug in their choice set. While
the adherence of high salary patients would not be significantly affected, both low and high salary
patients would pay, on average, $8-$9 less per monthly prescription. Via a simulation, we find that
providing physicians with perfect information on patient copays would only achieve about 15% of
these gains. Thus, we conclude that while the difficulty of observing copays is indeed an obstacle to
cost-sensitive prescribing, it is not primarily responsible for the fact that prescriptions to low-salary
patients are insufficiently responsive to their costs.
This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the institutional setting and relevant
literatures. Section 3 describes the data, Section 4 presents our conceptual framework, and Section
5 contains our empirical framework and results. Section 6 discusses robustness, and Section 7
concludes.
9

Federal Trade Commission v. Actavis, No. 12-416.

4

2

Institutional Background

In this section, we summarize the roles and incentives of each player in the prescribing and dispensing of prescription drugs, and relevant research on their behavior. We then describe the statin
drug class and the patent expiration of Zocor (simvastatin) and Pravachol (pravastatin) in 2006.
Since our data consist of filled (purchased) rather than written prescriptions, what we call the
“physician prescribing decision” is the net output of a series of action that begin and end with the
physician. Since the physician must approve any prescription switch suggested by any other party,
pharmacist and patient requests can be understood as a mechanism through which the physician
learns about the copays, copay sensitivity, and drug preferences of a given patient.

2.1

The Health Plan and Formulary

In setting levels of patient cost-sharing and procedures for obtaining prescription drugs, health
plans can influence their beneficiaries’ utilization rates. While facing double-digit annual growth
of drug expenditures from 1995 to 2004, many insurers implemented aggressive cost-cutting strategies including tiered or “incentive-based” formularies either on their own or through a pharmacy
benefit manager (PBM). This rapid shift has drawn substantial research attention to the effects of
patient cost-sharing, with most studies finding that cost-sharing in general, and tiered formularies
in particular, reduce drug utilization and expenditures.10 .
Apart from drug formularies, insurers and PBMs have other ways of influencing prescribing:
they can make contracts with physicians that disincentivize repeat visits from patients, effectively
encouraging the prescription of drugs that patients are less likely to request changing [Dickstein,
2012], or they can implement various restrictive policies termed “utilization management strategies.” For example, step therapy requires a patient to have tried a low-cost (Tier 1 or Tier 2) drug
prior to purchasing other more costly drugs. Prior authorization requires the prescribing physician
to document a patient’s need for a specific medication prior to its approval for coverage. Limbrock
[2011] estimates the average effect of these unobserved insurer strategies through the additional
increase in prescribing probability of each plan’s “preferred” (lowest tier) drugs beyond the effect
10

A 10% increase in the price faced by the patient reduces drug spending by 2% to 6%, depending on drug class
and patient health conditions, and the utilization change is largely driven by adherence rather than starting and
stopping rates. [Goldman et al., 2007]

5

explained by the copay difference. He finds that these effects are stronger in HMO plans (equivalent
to a $8.57 copay discount) than in other plans ($4.85 copay discount). These strategies can be used
to encourage prescribing of either Tier 1 (generic) or Tier 2 (preferred brand) drugs.
Are insurers reducing their current drug expenditures at the expense of future medical costs?
Since chronic prescription drugs are an expensive investment in long-term patient health, insurers
may not pursue efficient levels of their use if another insurer– or Medicare– is likely to reap the gains
of the health improvements. Cebul et al. [2011] and Fang and Gavazza [2011] provide theoretical
reasons for dynamic inefficiency in preventive care investments; Herring [2010] presents empirical
evidence that firms’ expectations of employee turnover have a negative effect on their beneficiaries’
utilization of preventive services.11 In the short-term, Chandra et al. [2010] find that 20% of the
savings due to increased copayments for office visits and prescription drugs is offset by an increase
in hospital charges in an elderly population, and Gaynor et al. [2007] find a 35% offset rate for drug
copayments in a non-elderly population.

2.2

The Physician

A prescription must indicate a specific drug molecule, either by brand name or molecular (generic)
name. For this reason, physicians have the “first move” in the process determining an individual’s first fill. However, they may respond to patient requests for a certain drug prior to writing
the prescription. While physicians who work exclusively for one managed care organization (for
example, Kaiser in California) may face pressure or incentives from their employer to prescribe
cost-effectively, no such incentives are present in the typical physician practice. Nonetheless, the
vast majority of physicians agree, in surveys, that “When choosing between equally effective and
safe medications, it is important to prescribe the drug that minimizes patients’ out-of-pocket costs”
[Shrank et al., 2005, Khan et al., 2008]. To our knowledge, no studies have asked physicians whether
they would prescribe a slightly inferior medication if it would greatly reduce a patient’s costs.
There is a large literature on physician agency in the choice of prescription drugs (Iizuka
[2012], Lundin [2000], Lu (2011), Ching (2010), Liu et al. (2009)), primarily focused on non-US
11

Very large firms, however, are typically self-insured, and often continue to cover their employees as retirees
(Kaiser Family Foundation [2007]). The firms in our study fall into this category. Their stronger incentives to
promote adherence to chronic drugs may explain why many plans in our sample offer more generous pharmaceutical
benefits than commercially insured plans on average.

6

countries where there is greater variation in physicians’ financial incentives to prescribe drugs, but
less variation in cost-sharing across patients. These studies find that physicians respond to financial
motives to prescribe more expensive drugs, but moreso when treating insured versus uninsured
patients [Lu (2011) and Lundin [2000]], or elderly patients in a setting where there they face no
marginal cost for prescriptions Iizuka [2007]. In settings where they face no direct financial motives
(like the U.S.), physicians are also found to prescribe more expensive drugs when patients face lower
levels of cost-sharing, indicating possible tension between their consideration of patient costs and
their loyalty to certain drug manufacturers [Lundin, 2000]. There is evidence that pharmaceutical
marketing to physicians affects prescribing [Gönül et al., 2005, Venkataraman and Stremersch, 2007,
09] and significant debate about whether such marketing is harmful to patients.12 Gonzalez et al.
[2008] find evidence in the U.K. that physicians are sensitive to pharmaceutical detailing, shifting
their prescribing towards other on-patent drugs when a major antidepressant (Prozac) loses its
patent. In the U.K., however, an off-patent molecule offers no cost savings to patients, who pay a
flat out-of-pocket cost for all drugs.
There is also evidence of habit formation in prescribing, which could lead to inefficient outcomes even in the absence of monetary incentives (Frank and Zeckhauser [2007], Taub et al. [2011]).
Studies have found that physicians adopt practice styles suited to their typical patient; for example, Hellerstein [1998] finds that physicians with a larger share of patients in HMOs prescribe more
generic drugs to all of their patients, including those not in HMOs. Virabhak and Shinogle [2005]
find evidence of spillovers of Medicaid Preferred Drug Lists (PDLs) on non-Medicaid patients.13
Joyce et al. [2011] however, find that individual physicians do not rely on the same drug for all
patients: in drug classes with a large number of “me-too” drugs, most physicians use at least half
of these drugs as initial prescriptions.
Iizuka [2012] examines the choice to prescribe a brand vs. generic version of a drug in Japan,
where some physicians work in “vertically integrated” (VI) clinics, providing a financial incentive
to prescribe drugs with higher markups. As expected, the prescriptions of physicians in VI clinics
respond positively to the brand/generic markup differential. Interestingly, however, Iizuka also
12

It may be beneficial in keeping busy physicians informed of new advances in pharmaceutical treatments and
details regarding their use. It may be harmful for the obvious reason that marketers may present biased information
on the costs and benefits of risky and expensive drugs.
13
It is important to note that Medicaid PDLs are the strictest kind of formulary, in which non-preferred drugs are
not merely offered at higher copays, but not covered at all.

7

finds that physicians in VI clinics are more responsive to the brand/generic price difference faced
by patients, suggesting that because they sell the drugs themselves, these physicians “may be better
informed about the price difference between generic and brand-name drugs,” and “the information
advantage of VI doctors may make the doctor a better agent for the patient.” Similarly, U.S.-based
surveys find that despite a widespread reported desire to take patient costs into account, 60-70%
of physicians “never or rarely” know a patient’s pharmacy benefit structure or copayments for
different drugs [Shrank et al., 2005, Khan et al., 2008].

2.3

The Pharmacist

Most individuals in our sample (77%) fill their first statin prescription at a retail pharmacy, while
the others purchase by mail. Surveys reveal that it is usually at the pharmacy that a patient first
learns her copay for the drug prescribed [Shrank et al., 2006]. Physicians and pharmacists alike
believe it is a pharmacist’s duty to review a patient’s plan formulary for cost-saving alternatives,
before filling a prescription for a non-formulary or high-tier drug.14 The pharmacist must contact
the physician’s office to request approval for any switch, however.15 This is referred to as therapeutic
interchange: interchanging prescriptions for similar, but not molecularly identical, drugs.
In contrast, generic substitution (supplying a generic version of a prescribed drug molecule)
does not require contacting the prescribing physician. In all 50 states, pharmacists are either
mandated or allowed to dispense generic versions of a multi-source drug molecule, as long as
the prescriber has not explicitly prohibited it.16 While low rates of generic substitution were a
policy concern a few decades ago, rates have increased dramatically with the state-level mandates,
combined with the fact that pharmacies may earn more from dispensing generic prescriptions than
from multi-source brands. Also, most plan formularies now require patients to pay the highest
levels of cost-sharing for brand versions of multi-source molecules, and sometimes the full retail
price difference between the brand and generic versions. Thus, in this study we do not focus on
14

Only 25 percent of physicians believe that it is their responsibility to prescribe preferred drugs, while 68 percent
believe it is the pharmacists’ responsibility to check a drug’s formulary status. The same physicians report that about
20 percent of their prescriptions result in a pharmacist’s call about nonformulary status, and that in 53 percent of
these cases, they approve prescription changes (Shrank et al. [2006]).
15
The very few exceptions include prescriptions written by hospital doctors and filled in hospital pharmacies, and
other cases in which doctors belonging to a closed network may be contractually obligated to give ex ante approval
for pharmacists to interchange prescriptions within certain drug classes.
16
Multi-source refers to multiple manufacturers producing and selling the same drug molecule; this can only occur
when a drug is no longer protected by a patent.

8

whether prescriptions for a multi-source drug (i.e. one that is available as a brand or a generic)
result in a generic fill, but rather, on the prescriber’s choice between a multi-source drug and a
single-source drug, which is not available as a generic. Importantly, while the higher price spreads of
generics could lead pharmacists to suggest therapeutic interchange to patients, contacting physicians
for approval is still required.

2.4

Patent Expiration

New drugs approved by the Food and Drug Administration are eligible for patent protection, which
typically lasts 11-12 years after the drug’s launch. The Hatch-Waxman Act (1984) instituted a
reward of 180-day generic exclusivity to the manufacturer of the first-approved generic version of
any drug, as an incentive for rapid entry following a patent’s expiration. As a result, the market
price of an off-patent drug molecule usually drops gradually at first, and more precipitously after
the first 180 days. Copays, however, are affected immediately, since they are predicated on generic
status rather than the actual price of a drug.
As mentioned above, generic substitution is extremely common once a generic version of a
drug is available, regardless of whether the physician has written the brand or generic name of a
molecule.17 As Figure 1 shows, for the two drugs whose patents expire during our sample period,
generic versions rapidly overtook the full share of initial prescriptions for their respective molecules.
There is typically some media attention surrounding the patent expiration of a major drug,
especially when it is the first to expire in a high-profile drug class. In 2006, Zocor was Merck’s
highest-grossing drug, and its primary competitor, Lipitor, was the highest selling drug in the
United States. Consequently, this patent expiration was anticipated to reshape statin prescribing
and the profit structure of these two firms, and “Zocor” was mentioned in 289 headlines in 2006.18
Patent expiration may also shape prescribing through the cessation of drug company advertising for the patent-losing drug. Due to their large market, statin manufacturers do a significant
amount of promotion, both direct to physicians (detailing, free samples) and direct to consumers
(e.g. television advertisements). Promotion has been found to significantly affect both physician
and patient preferences for drugs (Gönül et al. [2005], Venkataraman and Stremersch [2007, 09]).
17

With the exception of when a physician writes “Do not substitute.”
Author’s Lexis-Nexis search for articles with “Zocor” or “simvastatin” in the headline, and “generic” in the body,
from six months prior to the patent expiration to six months after.
18

9

Huckfeldt and Knittel [2011] find that total prescriptions actually decrease, by around 20% on
average, after patent expiration. They argue that this is explained by the reduction in a drug’s
advertising. However, as noted by Aitken et al. [January/February 2009] and Scott Morton and
Kyle [2011], the case of Zocor typifies a “special class of exceptions” in which the potential price
savings dominate: “the entry of a first generic in a large therapeutic class with close substitutes.”
[Scott Morton and Kyle, 2011].19

2.5

The Statin Drug Class

Statins are the first-line recommended drug treatment for high blood cholesterol. A series of longterm studies has demonstrated their efficacy in preventing cardiac events (e.g. heart attacks)
among patients with coronary heart disease, and in preventing the emergence of heart disease itself
[Grundy et al., 2004]. Today, they are the class of drugs most frequently dispensed in the United
States, with 210.5 million prescription purchases in 2009.20 Statins are generally well tolerated.
Muscle symptoms including soreness, stiffness, tenderness, and weakness, are estimated to affect 5
to 10% of statin users, while more serious adverse effects (liver damage and rhabdomyolysis) are
exceedingly rare. [Rosenson, 2012, Baker and Rosenson, 2012, Joy and Hegele, 2009].
All statins are available in several strength (dosage) levels. Higher strength levels (measured
in milligrams) achieve greater cholesterol reductions, but also pose a higher risk of side effects. For
this reason, high doses of less potent statins are prescribed much less often than low doses of more
potent statins.
During our sample period, two statins faced patent expiration. Zocor (simvastatin) was the
second most prescribed statin at the time of its patent expiration (15.8% of initial fills in our
sample), and it was roughly in the middle of the existing statins in its potency ranking. Pravachol
(pravastatin), which also underwent patent expiration in 2006, was much less commonly prescribed
(4.5%), most likely due to its lower potency. At the start of our study period, there was one older
statin available as a generic (lovastatin), which was also infrequently prescribed (6.7% of initial fills
in our sample). The two newest statins, Lipitor and Crestor, are both more potent than Zocor.
19

Of course, factors other than physician agency, including “utilization management” strategies employed by insurers, contribute to the response of prescriptions to this type of event. To deal with this concern, we present
several supplemental analyses that strengthen our conclusion that the efforts of physicians to reduce the copays of
price-sensitive patients form a large part of the story.
20
Including Zetia (ezetimbe) which is not a statin. Source: IMS National Prescription Audit PLUS

10

Vytorin is a combination of simvastatin with ezetimbe, another cholesterol-lowering agent. Thus,
it is also more potent than simvastatin alone.21
The table below shows the smallest dose of each statin that can achieve a cholesterol reduction
in the 30-40% range, and its patent status in 2006.
Table 1: Doses of Available Statins Required to Attain an Approximate 30% to 40% Reduction of
LDL-C Levels and Patent Status in 2005
Drug
Lescol (fluvastatin)
Mevacor (lovastatin)
Pravachol (pravastatin)
Zocor (simvastatin)
Lipitor (atorvastatin)
Crestor (rosuvastatin)

Dose, mg

LDL Reduction

Patent Status (2006)

80
40
40
20
10
5

35%
31%
34%
35%
39%
39%

On-patent
Off-patent since 2001
Expired on April 20, 2006
Expired on June 23, 2006
On-patent
On-patent

Source: Grudy et al. and NCEP (2004)

Recommended guidelines for statin treatment provide detailed instructions for determining
a patient’s heart attack risk based on several risk factors such as diabetes, high blood pressure,
and smoking, and they provide tables with “goal” cholesterol levels for patients in different risk
categories. Physicians are directed to first determine the percentage by which a patient’s LDL level
ought to be reduced, based on the difference between their current LDL level and their goal level,
and then to prescribe a drug at a strength level sufficient to achieve this reduction.22 A succinct
version of this table, as published in the pocket manual most commonly used as a prescribing
reference by physicians, is shown in the Appendix.

3

Data

The data used in this paper come from the full medical and pharmaceutical claims for over 150
distinct employee and retiree plans offered by 29 Fortune 500 firms from 2005-2007, with full-year
coverage of 1,440,020 primary beneficiaries and 3.0 million lives in 2006.
Medicare Part D, which offers pharmaceutical benefit plans to Medicare beneficiaries, came
21

We refer to Vytorin as a different molecule since it is impossible to unbundle the two active ingredients, simvastatin
and ezetimbe.
22
The guidelines also report a lower LDL cutoff at which physicians should recommend “lifestyle changes” such as
better eating and exercise.

11

into effect in 2006, during the period we study. While this reform did not directly affect retirees who
already received pharmacy benefits from their employer, it is difficult to rule out indirect effects on
retiree plan copays or on prescribing toward the elderly. To avoid these complications, we exclude
retirees and elderly employees from our sample, focusing on actively employed workers (and their
dependents) between the ages of 30-64. These individuals represent 96% of all non-retired statin
starters in the dataset. Further, we limit our study to the sixteen firms that report beneficiary
salaries. These are reported in $10,000 bins ranging from Under $50,000 to Above 250,000. These
employers range in size from 3,639 to 111,145 primary beneficiaries with full-year coverage in 2006.23
The drug claims include detailed information on each drug fill, including NDC number (National Drug Code), days supplied, place of fill (mail or retail pharmacy, in/out of network), date, and
all amounts paid (copay or coinsurance, amount paid by plan, deductibles and other non-covered
amounts paid by patient). Drug fills were matched by NDC numbers to Thompson Redbook data,
to obtain additional characteristics such as drug strength, generic status, and therapeutic class.
Through the corresponding medical claims, rich patient medical information is available for
the length of each patient’s tenure within a plan. We use diagnosed chronic conditions, number of
doctor visits and drugs purchased, as well as age, sex, and 3-digit zip code of residence.
Individual prescribers can be tracked through masked identifiers. However, a large number
of prescribers appear in the data (496,882) with few prescriptions across all drug classes (median
= 6, 99th percentile = 317). In our sample of initial prescriptions, 49% have unique prescribers,
and only 17.5% come from one of 620 prescribers with 5+ initial fills.24
Lacking information on physician areas of specialty, we calculate each prescriber’s share of
prescriptions for cardiovascular drugs (the therapeutic group containing statins, antihypertensives,
and other drugs frequently prescribed by cardiologists). The distribution is bimodal (see Appendix Figure 12), suggesting 0.6 as a natural breakpoint. We use this cutoff to impute a “cardiac
specialist” dummy equal to one if more than 60% of a physician’s observed prescriptions are for
cardiovascular drugs.
In our analysis of prescribing, the key independent variable is plan copay. In the analysis of
23
The identities of the firms are not known, and it is possible that some of them offer other plans to their employees
that are not included in these data.
24
In our copay-verified sample (defined in the Section 3.3) only 11% come from 173 prescribers who have 5 or more
observed initial prescriptions.

12

how copays affect patient adherence, the outcome variable is six-month adherence to any statin.
This is defined as having purchased at least 80% of the necessary quantity of statin to take one
pill per day for the first six months, i.e. at least 144 days’ worth of pills. We allow patients to
switch to a different statin and still be classified as adherent because we aim to measure the costs of
suboptimal prescribing on adherence to statin therapy; if switching costs were low, then the initial
prescribing decision would matter less.
Previous experiences with prescribed drugs can allow patients to learn about their benefit
coverage, and physicians to learn about their patients’ adherence tendencies and preferences over
drugs. We define two variables to capture the extent of patient drug history and patient-physician
drug history. DrugsP astY eari represents the number of unique prescription drugs filled by patient
i in the 365 days prior to her initial statin fill. SameDocDrugsid , which must be less than or equal
to DrugsP astY eari , counts the unique prescriptions drugs that were prescribed to patient i by
doctor d, the prescriber of the initial statin fill.

3.1

Defining our sample of initial statin prescriptions

We define an initial prescription as a patient’s first fill in the statin class after at least one year.
Of those who are observed for two years prior to an initial prescription, 17% had at least one
statin fill between 730 and 365 days before the “initial” fill used in the analyis. We control for this
occurrence, and for the specific drug previously purchased, in the analysis.25

3.2

Defining the choice set

The table below shows how the different available dosages of the top six statins in 2005 can be
grouped into narrow ranges of expected LDL reduction. As discussed in section 2.5, physicians
use a standard calculation of risk factors to determine the level of LDL reduction needed by each
patient. Thus, to accurately analyze prescribing, we must consider how the level of desired efficacy
eliminates some statins from a prescriber’s choice set.
We study the choice of drug among observed prescriptions in the middle three strength categories, which comprise 83% of initial prescriptions, and assume that these prescribers had the
25
Because many employers were not included in the sample prior to 2005, our sample size would drop by 41% if
we strengthened the requirement to “first fill after at least two years.”

13

Table 2: Statin dosages available at each range of expected LDL reduction
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

<26%

28-32%

34-39%

40-47%

50-52%

57-59%

60-70%

lovastatin
Pravachol
Zocor
Lipitor
Vytorin
Crestor

20mg
10mg
5mg

40mg
20mg
10mg

80mg*
40mg
20mg
10mg

80mg
40mg
20mg
10mg
5mg

80mg
40mg
20mg
10mg

80mg
40mg
20mg

80mg
40mg

Share of
Initial Rx

.04

.26

.22

.06

.005

Average LDL reduction

.06

.36

Table constructed using mean percent LDL cholesterol lowering from manufacturers’ prescribing information as reported in Smith et al. [2009]
* While 80 mg is the maximum recommended daily dose of lovastatin, it requires taking two
40 mg pills. All other doses shown are commercially available as one pill.

five drugs that appear in these three categories in their choice set. We drop from our sample any
observed prescriptions for drug doses expected to reduce LDL by 32% or less, since it is unlikely
the prescribers considered Vytorin and Crestor as alternatives. Similarly, we drop observed prescriptions expected to reduce LDL by 57% or more, since it is unlikely the prescribers considered
Zocor or Pravachol. Notice that the only statin available as a generic in 2005, lovastatin, was not
available in a single dose high enough to be considered in the middle three strength categories. This
may explain why it was rarely prescribed (4.7% of initial prescriptions in 2005) despite costing substantially less than any other statin. Similarly, another weak statin shown in Table 1 (fluvastatin)
is excluded from our study entirely, because received less than 1% of prescriptions. The patent
expiration of Pravachol in April 2006 was the first one that directly affected the choice set in the
more common strength ranges, and that of Zocor in June 2006 was the first one to offer generic
options spanning the three most common strength ranges.
Our definition of the choice set is bolstered by two findings (shown in the Appendix). First,
in our conditional logit regressions, we use a slew of patient characteristics including diabetes,
hypertension, past heart attacks, and age group, as controls, yet only one of them (a diagnosis of
high cholesterol) has jointly significant effects on the five drugs’ choice probabilities. Second, the
distribution of drugs prescribed by physicians imputed to be cardiac specialists is very similar to the
distribution of drugs prescribed by other physicians. Neither of these findings remains true when
14

we consider the entire set of seven statins as one choice set. Given that our use of a multinomial
logit model requires the independence of irrelevant alternatives, the choice set we have defined is
preferable to using the full set of initial statin prescriptions across the seven columns above.

3.3

Verified Copay Sample

While the claims data report exact out-of-pocket payments for each drug fill, these vary by type
of fill (e.g. by mail or retail pharmacy, and number of days supplied). For the conditional logit
analysis done below, we must know the prices faced by each patient for options that were not
chosen, and we must use a standard copay definition that does not depend on the place of fill or
size of fill. We define as “standard” the most common type of fill: a 30-day prescription filled at
an in-network retail pharmacy.26
Using plan identifiers, we empirically identify each plan’s standard copay for each statin in
each quarter within 2005-2007. We leave the standard copay undefined in plans (or plan-quarters)
in which there does not appear to be one dollar value that applied to the standard fill at least
90% of the time. While these observations are excluded from the Verified Copay Sample used in
the conditional logit analysis, we include them in the analysis of copay effects on adherence, to
maximize power, and in the graphical representations of prescribing trends, to ensure that our
results generalize to the full sample.

3.4

Prescribing and Copay Trends

Figure 2 illustrates the variation in copays across plans, as well as the change in the distribution
of Zocor copays upon its patent expiration.
Figures 3 and 4 plot the average drug copays and initial prescribing shares of each statin in
our full sample from 2005-2007. It appears that the upward trend in Zocor molecule prescribing
may have begun in the quarter prior to its generic entry; this is in fact the national trend. Many
insurers began reducing their copays for Zocor in an effort to steer prescribing there, in anticipation
of its patent expiration. For the same reason, copays for Lipitor, the most commonly prescribed
26

This specification overestimates the long-term copay differences between drugs, in dollars, since some patients
will begin filling prescriptions in large quantities, by mail, once they are settled on a long-term drug. Copays can be
30-40% lower when filled by mail in 90-day quantities. However, in percentage terms, differences between different
drugs’ copays remain fairly constant within a plan.

15

statin, began increasing prior to Zocor’s patent expiration.27 A small, but significant, increase in
prescribing followed the patent expiration of Pravachol (pravastatin) in April 2006.

4

Conceptual Framework

Since we observe only filled prescriptions, the choice of a drug is a joint decision between patient,
pharmacist, and physician. We think of this choice as some function of patient copay, patient
price-sensitivity and preferences for certain drugs, doctor preferences based on patient’s condition,
and any private incentives faced by the doctor to prescribe certain drugs.
One can imagine various types of physicians who prescribe with different goals in mind.
For example, “health maximizing” physicians may not view it as their role to make cost-benefit
calculations, but simply aim to select the treatment with the best expected impact on a patient’s
health.28 They may or may not consider that the expected health benefit of a drug depends on
the likelihood that a patient is adherent, and thus, depends indirectly on its cost. By contrast,
physicians who are perfect agents for a patient would consider not just the patient’s health but
also how the costs of treatment would impact her budget for non-health goods.29 Adherencemaximizing physicians might consider costs only when they suspect a patient be cost-sensitive in
her adherence decision. Yet other physicians might aim to prescribe cost-effective drugs even to
cost-insensitive patients, because they act as agents for insurers, or as good stewards of national
health care spending.30 In fact, all of these reasons to consider costs have been recently discussed
in the medical literature in relation to statin treatment.31
We do not attempt to distinguish between these physician types, but simply to measure
27

A response to an upcoming cost reduction is also consistent with sophisticated prescribing: if doctors understand
that switching costs are high and copay gains will begin in the next period, they will maximize patients’ utility and
adherence by shifting prescribing towards Zocor in anticipation of its patent expiration.
28
One survey found that “Although 88% of physicians agreed that it is important that patients’ out-of-pocket
costs for prescription drugs are managed, only 25% strongly or somewhat agreed that it is their ‘responsibility’ to
help. Instead, 69% of physicians believed that it is the responsibility of the pharmacist to be familiar with patients’
out-of-pocket costs.” [Shrank et al., 2005]
29
In medical ethics, the idea of trading off health benefits against costs is somewhat controversial. What is much
more acceptable is the idea of taking cost into consideration when choosing between two or more “equally safe and
efficacious treatments” [Shrank et al., 2005].
30
In our analysis, we do not consider insurer costs for 2 reasons: First, we do not observe rebates paid by pharmaceutical firms to insurers, which are an important driver of net costs, and second, other studies find that physicians
place more importance on patient costs than on plan costs [Lundin, 2000, Shrank et al., 2005]
31
In 2011, the National Physicians Alliance included the recommendation to “Use only generic statins when initiating lipid-lowering drug therapy” in its “Top 5” list of internal medicine guidelines for primary care physicians
[Good Stewardship Working Group, 2011])

16

the net effects of patients’ copays and their copay-sensitivity on the choice of drug prescribed.
While the “good stewardship” motive would encourage physicians to prescribe cost-sensitively
to all patients, the two patient-centered motivations (maximizing adherence and perfect agency)
should be stronger when a doctor is prescribing to a patient who is more cost-sensitive. Thus,
we hypothesize an empirical relationship between patient salary (which is a strong predictor of
price-sensitivity of adherence), and the cost-responsiveness of the initial prescription decision.

4.1

Baseline case and necessary assumptions

Our first objective is to estimate how the prescribing decision responds to cross-plan variation
in copays, and to test if this response is stronger for patients with lower salaries. Suppose the
physician’s utility from prescribing drug j to patient i is Uls (j, Xi , pij ) if patient i has a low salary,
and Uhs (j, Xi , pij ) if patient i has a high salary.
We will test the null hypotheses that dUls /dp = 0 and that dUhs /dp = dUls /dp, assuming
that drug j is prescribed to drug i if Uij ≥ Uik ∀k ∈ J. Even though patients with low salaries
are substantially more price sensitive in their adherence decisions, it is possible that |dUls /dp| <
|dUhs /dp| if it is harder for the physician to observe the copayments of low salary patients, for
example, if low salary patients themselves are less familiar with their plan formularies.
In other words, what we will empirically observe as dUls /dp could be expressed as αls λls
where αls is the response to the physician’s expectation of the copay of a low salary patient and
0 ≤ λls ≤ 1 is a dampener reflecting the imperfect observation of pij for these patients. Similarly,
dUhs /dp = αhs λhs . We hypothesize that αls < αhs < 0 and that 0 ≤ λls ≤ λhs ≤ 1 (the copays
of low salary patients may be less well observed at the time of an initial prescription). We cannot
test these hypotheses without a way to separate α from λ for each salary group.
To estimate αhs and αls , we use a large and highly publicized shock in copays associated with
the entry of a generic substitute for Zocor. We decompose each patient’s copayment into p̄jt and
pijt − p̄jt , where p̄jt represents the national average copay of brand or generic drugs (depending
on the patent status of drug j at time t) among employer-insured plans (see Appendix Table 13).
Thus, dUhs /dp̄jt and dUls /dp̄jt are primarily identified by the shift in prescribing of Zocor and
Pravachol to high and low salary patients, respectively, after these drugs’ patent status changed in
mid-2006.

17

Under the following assumptions, we can estimate αls = dUls /dp̄jt and αhs = dUhs /dp̄jt , as
well as αls λls = dUls /dpijt − p̄jt and αhs λhs = dUhs /dpijt − p̄jt .
Assumption 1. For both high and low salary patients, the expected therapeutic benefit of a drug
does not differ between its brand and generic versions, and thus, does not change upon patent
expiration.
Assumption 2. Physicians are fully aware of when Zocor’s patent expiration occurred and the
corresponding drop in its average copayment among patients in employer-insured health plans.
Assumption 3. No other factors in the prescribing decision change upon a drug’s patent expiration.
These three assumptions are necessary to assert that the responses dUls /dp̄jt and dUhs /dp̄jt
identify the parameters of interest, αls and αhs , respectively. In words, under these assumptions,
any increase in prescribing of Zocor, after its patent expiration, is purely driven by a desire to
reduce copayments for patients. If these assumptions hold, then we can also identify λls and λhs
as the ratios between the two price responses:
dUls
d(pijt − p̄jt )

= λls αls
dUls
dp̄jt
dUls /d(pijt − p̄jt )
dUls /dp̄j t

= λls
λls =

The same approach applies to estimate λhs , and the predictions below follow.
1. If there is more emphasis placed on expected copays in prescriptions to lower income patients
(|αls | > |αhs |), then Zocor prescriptions will increase more for low salary patients upon its
dUhs
ls
patent expiration: | dU
dp̄jt | > | dp̄jt |

2. If idiosyncratic plan copay variation is imperfectly observed in prescribing to patients of either
dUhs
dUs
salary group s ∈ ls, hs, that is, λs < 1, then | d(pijt
−p̄jt ) | < | dp̄jt |

3. If |αls | > |αhs | and 0 ≤ λls ≤ λhs ≤ 1, then the difference in the response to Zocor’s patent
expiration, across patients of different salaries, will be larger than the difference in their
18

prescribing response to idiosyncratic plan copay variation: |αls | − |αhs | > |λls αls | − |λhs αhs |,
dUhs
dUhs
dUls
ls
which we will test empirically as | dU
dp̄jt | − | dpijt | > | d(pijt −p̄jt ) | − | d(pijt −p̄jt ) |

4.2

Other incentives faced by prescribers

Suppose a prescriber’s utility for prescribing drug j to patient i is increasing in Tdjpt , the unobserved external incentives (or disincentives) to prescribe drug j to a patient of plan p in time t. This
may include the time costs imposed on physicians by plans’ “utilization management” strategies
to encourage prescribing of certain drugs, or any incentives from pharmaceutical company representatives to prescribe their drugs. Since we estimate

dU
dp¯jt

from changes in prescribing upon patent

expiration, we must consider two possible sources of bias due to the unobservability of Tdpjt . First,
the fact that drug advertising ceases shortly before the expiration of a drug’s patent implies that,
if physicians are responsive to drug advertising, our estimate of

dU
dp¯jt

will be biased towards zero, as

argued in Huckfeldt and Knittel [2011]. On the other hand, if some plans imposed policies, after
Zocor’s patent expiration, to require a generic Zocor prescription prior to covering another statin,
then our estimate of

dU
dp¯jt

will be biased away from zero.

Due to these possible violations of Assumption (3), we are wary of relying solely on the
difference between

dU
dp¯jt

and

dU
(pijt −p̄jt )

to identify λ. However, if we replace Assumption (3) with

the following assumption, stating that prescriptions for patients of varying salaries are no differently targeted by utilization management strategies and drug advertising, then we can still rely on
predictions 1 and 3 to reject the null hypothesis that λls = 1.
Assumption 4. Outside of the copay-induced effect, the effect of Zocor’s patent expiration on Uls
is the same as its effect on Uhs , that is, the quantity

dUs
dT ∆Tdjp

does not vary with s ∈ ls, hs.

Furthermore, if we assume that λhs ≤ 1, and that the net effect of Tdjp on U is non-negative,
we can derive bounds for both λhs and λls :
dUhs /d(pijt − p̄jt )
≤ λhs ≤ 1
dUhs /dp̄j t
dUls /d(pijt − p̄jt )
dUls /d(pijt − p̄jt )
≤ λls ≤
dUls /dp̄j t
(dUls /dp̄j t − dUhs /dp̄j t)

19

4.2.1

Imperfectly observed patient price sensitivity

The baseline case described above does not require that physicians are a priori aware of whether
a given patient has a low or high salary; it may be simply be the case that patients exert sufficient
influence on the prescribing decision to obtain outcomes that reflect their levels of price sensitivity.
On the other hand, the prescribing decision might depend on the physician’s awareness of the
patient’s level of price sensitivity: αid might be a function of ãid , physician d’s current estimate of
ai , patient i’s private level of price sensitivity.
To shed light into the black box of the initial prescription decision, we can consider situations
in which we expect physicians to have a greater a priori awareness of a patient’s level of pricesensitivity. Suppose a physician starts with a uniform prior for a for all his patients. There are
two types of signals he might receive in the course of treating a new patient. First, he will find out
which medications the patient is currently taking. Second, he may learn through the course of his
own prescribing to a new patient, observing the patient’s adherence response in subsequent office
visits. If so, then holding constant the number of different drugs patient i has used in the previous
year, the number of those drugs that were prescribed by physician k should be positively correlated
with the precision of physician k’s estimate of αi . In particular, we would expect past prescribing
by the same physician to be valuable when patient i has not taken many drugs in the past year,
because the information physician k can glean from current medication use is limited.
This approach is inspired by Altonji and Pierret’s model of employer learning about employee
productivity.32 Patient salaries are predictive of price sensitivity, like AFQT scores are predictive
of employee productivity. Physicians do not actually observe patients’ salaries, like employers do
not observe AFQT scores. If past prescribing experiences facilitate physician learning about patient price-sensitivity, then salary should be more strongly negatively correlated with cost-sensitive
prescribing among patients who have had previous prescriptions from the same physician. On
the other hand, if the salary gradient of prescribing is mostly due to patient requests for certain
types of drugs, or to pharmacist intervention, then we would not expect past experience within a
patient-physician pair to be important.
32

Altonji and Pierret [2001] use AFQT score as a predictor of employee productivity that is unobserved by employers, and thus, uncorrelated with employees’ wages when entering the labor force. Over time, workers’ wages begin to
demonstrate a stronger correlation with AFQT score, supporting the hypothesis that employers are gradually picking
up signals of each employee’s true productivity.

20

We formalize this approach with the assumptions below. SameDocDrugsid represents the
number of different drugs prescribed in the past year by physician d to patient i, DrugsP astY ri
represents the total number of different drugs prescribed to patient i in the past year, and ãid is
the prescriber’s estimate of patient i’s price sensitivity.
2
Assumption 5. E[ãid ] = ai and V ar[a˜id ] = σid

Assumption 6.

2
dσid
dSameDocDrugsid

Assumption 7.

2
dσid
dDrugsP astY eari

Assumption 8.

2
d2 σid
dSameDocDrugs2id

<0
<0
> 0,

2
d2 σid
dDrugsP astY eari2

> 0 and

2
d2 σid
dDrugsP astY eari dSameDocDrugsid

>0

Assumption 9. E[ai |SameDocDrugsid , DrugsP astY eari ] = E[ai |DrugsP astY eari ]
Assumption 6 states that a physician who has prescribed a greater number of drugs to a
specific patient will have a more precise estimate of that patient’s ai than a physician who has
prescribed fewer drugs to that patient. We also assume that estimates of ai are more accurate for
patients who have taken more drugs in the past year (Assumption 7). We assume that the value
of SameDocDrugsid and DrugsP astY earid in improving the physician’s estimate of ai diminishes
as SameDocDrugsid and DrugsP astY earid increase (Assumption 8).
While DrugsP astY eari is certainly not randomly assigned, and is likely correlated with ai
2 , we make the assumption that conditional on DrugsP astY ear , the value
itself in addition to σid
i

of SameDocDrugsid is exogenous to ai (Assumption 9). Consider a patient who has only used
two different drugs in the past year, prior to her first statin prescription. We assume that whether
zero, one, or both of those drugs were prescribed by the physician currently writing her statin
prescription is independent of αi , but that in latter case (SameDocDrugsid = 2), the prescriber
has the most accurate estimate of ai .
If it is the case that physicians are always aware of patients’ levels of price sensitivity, or if
it is solely through patient input in the prescribing process that copays affect the choice of drug,
then the length of the prescribing history between a given physician and a given patient should
not impact the magnitude of

dUls
dp̄jt

or

dUhs
dp̄jt .

On the other hand, if physicians drive the choice of

drug and only gradually acquire signals of a patient’s price sensitivity, then the difference between
dUls
dp̄jt

and

dUhs
dp̄jt

should increase as these signals accumulate. We will explore this question with
21

an empirical analysis of how these quantities vary with SameDocDrugsid while holding constant
DrugsP astY eari .

5

Empirical Specification and Results

This section presents our main empirical results. We start with our analysis of the initial statin
prescribing decision. We use a conditional logit framework to estimate how variation in the five
drugs’ copays affect their probabilities of being chosen. The basic set-up of our equations is:

Uij

= Tj + βpij + controls + ij

where i indexes patients and j indexes drugs. The key identifying assumption in our analysis is:
Assumption 10. For all pairs of drugs j and k in a class, the distribution of ij − ik across
individuals is independent of pij − pik .
This assumption would be violated if plans have private information on which drug is a better
match for their beneficiaries, and set their copays accordingly. To gauge the validity of this assumption, in Section 5.4 we test whether estimates of patients’ price-sensitivity of adherence depend on
the type of plan fixed effects included. If prices are indeed correlated with the unobservable benefits
of certain drugs to the patients in certain plans, this should translate into a correlation with patient
adherence. Finally, in Section 5.5, we combine results from the prescribing and adherence analyses
to estimate outcomes under simulated counterfactuals.

5.1

Prescribing response to plan-specific copays

First, we examine prescribing in the period prior to Zocor’s patent expiration. Table 4 reports
results of a conditional logit model in which the choice set includes five drugs: Crestor, Lipitor,
Pravachol, Vytorin, and Zocor.33
We estimate:
33

As described in Section 3.2, this is the choice set we have defined for the initial prescriptions in our sample. These
five drugs were only available as patented brands in this period prior to Zocor’s patent expiration.

22

Uidj

= Tj + β1 pij + β2 pij HighSali + Xi Bj + γLastDocRxjd
+γLastP atRxij + monthly time trendj + ijd

(1)

where i indexes patients, d indexes prescribers, and j indexes drugs. The conditional logit model
assumes that ijd is distributed EV-1, and that the initial drug chosen from the choice set is the
one with the largest value of Uidj . Tj is a fixed effect for each drug molecule, representing a baseline
perceived value of drug j. The patient characteristics included in Xi (diagnosed conditions, age
group, and gender) can affect the perceived value of each drug separately, through Bj . LastDocRxjd
is an indicator for the drug most recently prescribed by doctor d to another patient starting statin
therapy, meant to capture habit persistence. LastP atRxjd indicates whether statin j was the last
statin taken by a patient, among those patients who have taken statins in the past despite having
a one-year “clean” window.34
The results of interest are the coefficients on pij (plan-specific copay for drug j) and its
interaction with High Salary. They show that in the period prior to Zocor’s patent expiration,
there was a generally small response to copay variation across plans. The largest estimate, -.14,
corresponds to an average marginal effect as follows: a $10 decrease in Zocor’s copay, holding those
of other drugs constant, should move Zocor’s prescribing share from 18% to 20%.
Notably, there are no statistically significant differences in the copay response by salary. This
runs counter to what we would expect, if physicians could easily observe copays.
The point estimate of LastDocRxjd indicates that habit persistence is as strong as the predicted effect of a $42-$51 copay reduction in this period, and LastP atRxjd has an effect more than
twice as large as LastDocRxjd . These findings underscore how minor an influence copay has on
prescribing, when it is difficult for physicians to observe.
Columns (3) and (6) demonstrate that high salary has no statistically significant effect on any
particular drug’s intercept, and a Wald test confirms that the added terms are jointly insignificant.35
34

We observe that about 13% of the patients in the sample have received a statin previously, and 58% of them
are re-started on the last statin they took (for which LastP atRx = 1. For all other patients, LastP atRx = 0 for all
drugs in the choice set.
35
For Model 3, Prob > chi-squared = 0.4422 . For Model 6, Prob > chi-squared = 0.5634

23

Thus, there is no evidence that physicians are more likely to prescribe certain statins to patients
with higher incomes, holding other patient characteristics constant. On this basis, we will omit
salary-specific intercepts from the specifications in the next sections, but our results do not change
substantially if they are included.

5.2

Prescribing response to Zocor’s patent expiration

To test whether imperfect copay knowledge is to blame for the small effect of pij , we exploit
the patent expiration of Zocor, an event causing a large and observable copay change for the
Zocor molecule. We decompose copay into its expectation, p̄jt , and each patient’s copay deviation
(pij − p̄jt ), to compare physicians’ responses to idiosyncratic plan variation in copays versus the
large-scale copay change induced by patent expiration. We define p̄jt based on whether drug j was
available as a generic in period t: If so, p̄jt equals the national average copay of generic drugs for
employer-insured patients, and otherwise, it equals the national average copay of brand drugs for
employer-insured patients, according to Kaiser Family Foundation’s annual surveys of employersponsored health insurance [Kaiser Family Foundation, 2007].36
We estimate:

Uidjt = Tj + β1 p̄jt + β2 p̄jt HighSali + β3 (pijt − p̄jt ) + β4 (pijt − p̄jt )HighSali
+Xi Bj + γ1 LastDocRxjd + γ2 LastP atRxij + ij

(2)

Results are shown in Table 5. The significance of p̄jt HighSali in all models demonstrates that
prescriptions are substantially more responsive to expected copays when the patient has a salary
below $50,000 (the omitted category). In the previous table, by contrast, we saw that low salary
patients were no more likely than high salary patients to receive lower cost drugs when only patented
drugs were in the choice set. Figure 5 shows that this result extends to the full sample: the increase
in prescribing of pravastatin and simvastatin was much larger for low-salary patients.
If pijt were perfectly observed, and if patent expiration did not change factors of the prescribing decision aside from drug copays, then we would expect β1 = β3 and β2 = β4 . Instead, βˆ1 is
36
Another way to define this variable would be using the average copay within a given quarter for a given drug,
among the plans in our sample. Our results remain consistent across these two approaches.

24

significantly larger than βˆ3 , implying λLS =

βˆ3
βˆ1

(reported at the bottom of the table) is significantly

less than one. Based on the model in Section 4, λLS can be interpreted as a measure of how accurately plan-specific copays are observed by physicians at the time of the initial prescription. The
corresponding estimator for λHS is

βˆ3 +βˆ4
,
βˆ1 +βˆ2

and its estimated values are larger than λLS in every

specification, suggesting a smaller discrepancy between the responsiveness of high salary patients’
prescriptions to expected copays and actual copays.
A comparison of columns (1) and (2) reveals that including a separate linear time trend for
each drug diminishes the magnitude of βˆ1 . The specifications with these trends provide extremely
conservative estimates of βˆ1 , because the gradual increase in Zocor prescribing after its patent
expiration is seen as partly a time trend, rather than a gradual response to its abrupt drop in
expected copay in mid-2006 (see Figure 4). In columns (3) and (4), we add plan fixed effects (planspecific intercepts for each drug), in order to ensure that large-scale differences between the plans
of low and high salary patients are not driving our results. Comparing columns (1) and (3), and
(2) and (4), we see that holding plan constant decreases the magnitude of the differences between
low and high salary patients, in terms of both βˆp̄ and λ, but the differences remain statistically
and economically significant.

5.3

Past prescribing experience within physician-patient pair

A physician’s differential prescribing of generic Zocor to low and high income patients could be
driven by his own private estimate of a patient’s price sensitivity, or it could result from the
explicit requests of low-salary (high-salary) patients for low-cost (highly advertised brand) drugs.37
Since our data include only purchased prescriptions, we cannot separately observe these parts
of the prescription process. However, we can examine how prescribing patterns vary with the
length of a physician’s patient-specific prescribing history. A simple learning model, described in
Section 4.2.1, predicts that as physicians acquire patient-specific experience, their estimate of that
patient’s price sensitivity will become more precise. Thus, if the results of the previous section are
at least partially driven by physicians’ perceptions of their patients’ price sensitivity, the difference
in prescribing to low and high salary patients should increase with SameDocDrugsid , the number
37

A third possibility is that pharmacists are more likely to suggest low-cost alternatives after patients express
unwillingness to pay a high copay. However, pharmacists must obtain the prescribing physician’s permission to
change the prescription before the patient can purchase the drug suggested as an alternative.

25

of drugs prescribed in the past year by prescriber d to patient i, holding constant DrugsP astY ri ,
the number of drugs prescribed to patient i by any prescriber.
In Table 6, we estimate the following equation, to determine how same-doctor past prescriptions impact the effects of p̄jt and pijt − p̄jt (which we will abbreviate pdiff ) on the initial statin
choice for low and high salary patients.

Uijdt = Tj + β1 p̄jt + β1hs HighSali ∗ p̄jt + β1SD SameDocid ∗ p̄jt + β1SDhs SameDocid HighSal ∗ p̄jt
+β2 pdiff + β2hs HighSali ∗ pdiff + β2SD SameDocid ∗ pdiff + β2SDhs SameDocid HighSal ∗ pdiff
+Xi Bj + γ1 LastDocRxjd + γ2 LastP atRxji + ij

where SameDocid is a dummy variable indicating an above-median number of prescribed
drugs in the past year between patient i and doctor d. We run the analysis separately for patients
above and below the median value of DrugsP astY ear.38 We can think of patients with 5 or more
previous drugs in the past year as more “experienced” with their plan formulary (and possibly in
worse health) than patients with 4 or fewer drugs.
In the models estimated, shown in Table 6, we do not include drug-specific time trends, but
the results are robust to their inclusion. Before we focus on the SameDoc interaction terms, we
note some interesting differences between patients with more and less recent experience with drug
prescriptions. By comparing columns 1 and 3, we see that prescriptions to low-salary patients only
respond to pdiff (plan-specific copayments) for patients who have had five or more prescriptions in
the past year. Prescriptions to high-salary patients, however, respond similarly to pdiff for patients
with fewer and more than five past prescriptions. This is consistent with our suspicions that lowsalary patients have a harder time navigating their plan formularies, and that patient familiarity
with copays is one driver of the prescribing response to pdiff .
We now turn our attention to the effect of physician-specific prescribing experience. Column
2 reveals that among patients with fewer than 5 recently-prescribed drugs, the salary-difference in
the response to p̄jt doubles in size with same-doctor prescribing experience. A low-salary patient
starting a statin after Zocor’s patent expiration becomes significantly more likely to be prescribed
38

We exclude patients with DrugsP astY ear = 0, since they cannot possible have any doctor-specific experience.
However, the results do not change if we include these observations.

26

(3)

a generic if the physician has some prescribing history with her, while a high-salary patient does
not. By contrast, column 4 shows that among patients with five or more recently prescribed
drugs, doctor-specific experience is irrelevant. Two explanations are possible: experienced patients
are more likely to verbally express their preferences (for brand or generic drugs) to the current
prescriber, or new physicians can infer a patient’s preferences through the list of the drugs she
reports having used recently.
We also tested a specification that included similar interaction terms for DrugsP astY ri with
the copay and salary variables, to ensure that the results are not driven by the correlation between
SameDocDrugsid and DrugsP astY ri . The coefficients of interest remained statistically significant
and similar in magnitude, while the DrugsP astY r interaction terms were insignificant (results not
shown). These results extend to the full sample and are graphically displayed in Figures 6 and 7.
We now turn to an analysis of the copay sensitivity of patient adherence outcomes, which will
serve three purposes: First, we can compare estimates of copay elasticities with different levels of
controls, to test whether plans set their copays endogenously. This is one way of testing Assumption
10. Second, after estimating copay sensitivity during the period prior to Zocor’s patent expiration,
we can compare trends in adherence of new patients to the model’s predictions, to verify that
patients value the drug similarly in its brand and generic versions (Assumption 1). Third, we can
make out-of-sample predictions of each patient’s adherence to each statin in the choice set, which
will allow us to estimate how adherence rates could improve in simulated scenarios, in Section 5.5.

5.4

Analysis of Patient Adherence Decision

We use a common medical definition of class-based full adherence over six months (henceforth
simply adherence) – filling enough statin prescriptions to maintain a supply of medication during
at least 80% of the days in the six months following the initial fill. While we attribute the choice
of drug initially prescribed to the physician (possibly influenced by the patient or pharmacist), we
attribute the decision to adhere to statin treatment to the patient. This is because statins are
always prescribed as long-term drugs.39
39

A patient guide to statins by the Mayo Clinic says “Keep in mind that when you begin to take a statin, you’ll
most likely be on it for the rest of your life. Side effects are often minor, but if you experience them, you may want
to talk to your doctor about decreasing your dose or trying a different statin. Don’t stop taking a statin without
talking to your doctor first.”

27

We estimate a logit equation for patient adherence using only observations in the period prior
to Zocor’s patent expiration:

40

Yij = dj + a1 pijt + a2 pijt ∗ HighSal + Xi B + γs + ij

(4)

where Yij = 1 if patient i is adherent after starting on drug j, and ij is a Type 1 EEV
error. pijt , patient i’s monthly copay, is measured in $10 units. Thus a1 , expected to be negative,
represents the average effect of a $10 copay increase on a patient’s utility of statin treatment.41
dj represent fixed effects for the drug molecule prescribed, γs represents fixed effects for the
strength category (range of LDL reduction) of the drug prescribed, and Xi is a vector of individual
characteristics including age decile, gender, salary category, having 0, 1, or 2+ different diagnoses
that call for cholesterol reduction, and DrugsP astY ear. If we observe that the patient used a
statin in the previous two years (despite a “clean” previous year), we include a dummy for this, as
well as a dummy for the case when the same drug is prescribed as before. Finally, we include a
dummy for specialist prescribers (imputed), and if the patient’s initial fill is for more than 30 days.
Table 7 reports the results of the equation above, estimated in the period prior to Zocor’s
patent expiration. Marginal effects for the probability of adherence are shown, for a copay change
of $10. There is a large change in the point estimates between columns (2) and (3), when we add
plan fixed effects. The fact that the coefficient on copay moves towards zero indicates that, on
average, plans with higher average copays have patients who are less likely to adhere in general. It
could also be the case that patients in plans with higher average copays are more price-sensitive
than patients in plans with lower average copays.42
The most relevant comparison for our purposes is between Models 3 and 4. In Model 3, the
identification of the copay effect comes from the fact that multi-tier plans have different copays
for different brand drugs: for example, two plans may have the same copay structure, with their
Tier 2 drugs costing $15 and their Tier 3 drugs costing $25 per month, but one plan may place
40

We restrict the sample to this period because our results in Section 5.2 show that low-salary patients are more
likely to be prescribed Zocor once it is available as a generic. Given this selection on observables, we are concerned
that selection on unobservables that are correlated with adherence might occur in the post-entry period.
41
Recall that we use a class-based measure of adherence. As some patients switch to cheaper drugs, our effect of
copay on adherence will be smaller than the effect of copay on utility. Nevertheless, this is the margin that is most
relevant for assessing health consequences.
42
One possible reason, which is beyond the scope of this paper, is that plans with higher overall levels of cost-sharing
cause income effects, increasing price-sensitivity to the marginal drug prescribed.

28

Lipitor on Tier 2 and Crestor on Tier 3, while another plan might do the reverse. In Column (4),
instead of fixed effects at the plan level, we include fixed effects by planXmolecule. This absorbs
permanent differences in tier placements, and identifies the effect of copay from changes in a plan’s
copay structure or tier placements over time, during the period prior to Zocor’s patent expiration.
If plan managers had private information indicating that their own patients would do better
on a certain drug, and chose to offer that drug at a lower (or higher) copay level, then Model 3
would overestimate (underestimate) the effect of copays on adherence relative to Model 4. Similarly,
if patients had selected into plans based on their generous coverage of a certain statin, then Model
3 would overestimate the effect of copays on adherence. What we find is that the estimates are
quite close in Models 3 and 4, suggesting that tier placements within a plan are uncorrelated with
unobserved patient preferences for certain drugs. This is reassuring, given that our approach to
estimating the effects of copays on prescribing relies on this assumption.
Based on Model 4, a $10 copay increase is estimated to reduce a low salary patient’s adherence
probability by 4 percentage points (corresponding to a 8.5% reduction). The adherence of high
salary patients, however, appears very inelastic, with a $10 copay increase reducing adherence
probability by only four-tenths of a percentage point. Since the average copay in this period is
$22.21, these estimates together imply an average elasticity of -.08.43
In Panel B, we conduct exclusion tests for additional control variables that are included in
the prescribing analysis. For example, in the prescribing analysis we allow physicians to have different baseline probabilities for prescribing each drug to patients with different salary and different
diagnoses (either 0, 1, or 2+ diagnoses related to statin therapy). Thus, in models 5 and 6, we
test whether patients with different salaries and diagnoses have different adherence probabilities to
different drugs. The results of a Wald test show that these interactions are not jointly significant.
In Models 7 and 8, we test the inclusion of variables introduced in section 5.3, relating to prior
patient-prescriber experience. These variables are not significant; this reassures us that the results
43
While this is quite a bit smaller than other elasticity estimates in the literature (from -.2 to -.6), there are several
reasons why we expect this to be a lower bound. First, using a class-based measure of adherence means we are
allowing patients to switch to other drugs. Second, since we do not observe prescriptions that were never filled, we
may be missing the prescriptions to the most price-sensitive patients, who chose not to purchase even one month of
the drug they were prescribed. (Interestingly, this same data limitation causes us to overestimate the relationship
between copays and prescribing.) By contrast, many of the existing estimates in the literature come from comparing
aggregate utilization rates across plans, or when a plan changes its copay structure; these estimates include the
potential effect of copays on first fills.

29

of section 5.3 are not driven by underlying differences between patients who have received more or
fewer prescriptions from their current prescriber.
We evaluate Model 4 by matching out-of-sample predictions of monthly mean adherence rates
to observed mean adherence rates for the Zocor molecule after patent expiration. Since the model
is estimated only using the pre-expiry period, the post-period predicted values are based purely on
the pre-period association between patient characteristics, copays, and adherence. Figure 8 shows
that the model-based probabilities do a reasonable job predicting the adherence trends of all four
groups: low vs. high salary patients starting on Zocor vs. other statins. Figure 8 also tells us
that the brand or generic status of a drug’s manufacturer does not have any meaningful impact
on patient adherence rates. If consumers were less likely to adhere to generic Zocor (simvastatin)
than to brand Zocor, then the solid line should overestimate the average adherence rates to Zocor
in the post-patent period. By visual inspection, it does not.
To summarize, in this analysis of patient adherence decision we have found:
1. Evidence that salary is negatively correlated with price sensitivity.
2. Support for the assumption that plan copays are not endogenous to unobserved patient preferences.
3. Support for the assumption that patients perceive the therapeutic value of brand and generic
Zocor similarly.
We will now present simulations of alternate types of prescribing; to evaluate each simulation’s
effect on adherence, we will predict patient i’s adherence to drug k, using out-of-sample predictions
from the regression described above (Model 3).

5.5

Simulation of Prescribing and Adherence under Counterfactual Scenarios

Using the estimates from our adherence and prescribing analyses,44 we simulate prescribing and adherence under three counterfactual scenarios. We report predicted changes in aggregate adherence
and copays, relative to status-quo prescribing, for four groups: Low salary patients who had fewer
than 5 prescriptions in the previous year, and thus, are less familiar with their plan’s pharmacy
44

Model 3 in Table 7, combined with Models 2 and 4 from Table 6

30

benefits (“unexperienced”), low salary patients with 5 or more prescriptions in the previous year
(“experienced”), and high salary patients, divided in the same way.
In Table 8, we compare adherence rates for the status-quo set of prescriptions to the minimum
and maximum possible levels of adherence conditional on the drug copays faced by each patient.
These bounds are calculated after generating predicted values of qij , patient i’s probability of
adhering to drug j; these depend on patients’ specific copays for each drug, as well as their pricesensitivity and baseline preferences for drugs, based on their observable characteristics.
Status-quo adherence rates are roughly halfway between the minimum and maximum values
of predicted adherence given the choice set. However, if each patient was prescribed the drug that
maximized qij , adherence would increase further, particularly for the group of low salary patients
inexperienced with their formularies: their adherence rate would increase from 48% to 53%.45
Table 9 reports average copays for the status-quo set of prescriptions, the set of prescriptions
that would maximize adherence, and the set of copay-minimizing prescriptions. Comparing the last
two columns reveals that for low salary patients, the adherence-maximizing drugs are almost always
the ones with lowest copays. For high salary patients, in contrast, the adherence-maximizing drugs
are significantly more expensive than the lowest copay drugs.46
The first scenario we consider is one in which physicians have perfect knowledge of pij .
Following the assumptions described in Section 4, we take the weight placed on p̄jt to indicate how
prescribers would weight plan-specific copays if they observed them, and simulate the choice of a
statin for each patient if the weight placed on pij − p̄jt were equal to the weight placed on p̄jt .47 In
other words, we simulate prescribing when λ = 1 for both low and high salary patients. Details of
the simulation are in the Appendix.
The top panel of Table 10 reports our results. 7-9% of low salary patients receive a different
prescription under this simulation, but only 12-15% of the possible increase in adherence is achieved.
For high salary patients, there is essentially no change in prescribing, and thus, no improvement
45
In the experienced group of high salary patients, adherence would increase from 44% to 48%. For high salary
patients, the potential gain in adherence is much smaller (.01) because copays play almost no role in determining
their adherence.
46
Recall that our adherence model allows for patients with different diagnoses and demographics to have different
preferences for drug molecules; thus the cheapest drug is not always the one that maximizes the chance of adherence.
47
We allow these weights to differ between inexperienced and experienced groups of low and high salary patients,
as well as between patients who have longer or shorter histories receiving prescriptions from the current physician,
as we found in section 5.3 that this experience leads to greater differentiation between low and high salary patients.

31

in adherence. This is primarily because for high salary patients, we found a smaller discrepancy in
the prescribing response to p̄jt and pij (λHS = .65 while λHS = .27).
In Scenario 2, we combine perfect knowledge of pij with better precision in the prescriber’s
estimate of ai , by applying the weights placed on copay by physicians with prior patient-specific
experience, to all prescriptions. This is a meaningful change for low salary inexperienced patients,
who are otherwise more likely to receive similar prescriptions as high salary (less cost-sensitive)
patients. For this group, there is an added adherence improvement relative to Scenario 1, resulting
in 14 percent of patients receiving different prescriptions, a 1.1 percentage point increase in adherence, and a $2.66 reduction in mean monthly copay (see middle panel of Table 10). However, this
is still less than one-quarter of the maximum possible adherence gain for this group. For the other
three groups, results are no better than in Scenario 1.
As Scenario 3, we assign all patients the drug with the lowest copay on their formulary.48 In
practice, this could be achieved if plans imposed strict policies requiring that patients try a lowesttier statin prior to receiving coverage for any other statin. As shown in the bottom panel of Table
10, the predicted changes in adherence for low salary patients are 94% of the possible increase.
A back-of-the-envelope calculation predicts that this adherence increase would prevent 5-6 cardiac
events per 10,000 low salary statin prescribees, in the year following their first prescriptions.49 For
high salary patients, the simulation yields small but positive changes in adherence. Furthermore,
high salary as well as low salary patients save an average of $8-$9 per monthly prescription.

6

Robustness

In this section, we show that our main findings are robust to the inclusion of plan and prescriber
fixed effects. We also argue, based on the distribution of generic prescribing shares across the
plans in our sample, that it is unlikely these plans imposed restrictive policies to maximize generic
prescribing. Lastly, we examine the potential bias in our estimates due to the unobservability of
48

In the period prior to Zocor’s patent expiration, there were often several drugs available at the same copay. If
the status-quo prescription was one of these, we assumed that it did not change. Otherwise, we chose one of the
lowest-copay drugs at random.
49
We used observed rates of cardiac-related ER visits within the sample, in the calendar year following statin
initiation, as baseline (3.13% among unexperienced low-salary patients and 5.6% for experienced low-salary). We
used .62 as the odds ratio effect of statin treatment, as reported for the below-age-65 subgroup in a meta-analysis of
RCTs focused on populations with no prior history of cardiac events [Brugts et al., 2009].

32

unfilled first prescriptions.

6.1

Plan and prescriber fixed effects

The copay-verified subsample that we use in Sections 5.1-5.3 does not contain enough observations
per prescriber to support prescriber-specific drug intercepts. Here, we use a simple empirical
specification that allows us to include both plan fixed effects and prescriber fixed effects. We focus
on the period after Zocor’s patent expiration and estimate a linear probability model with the
binary outcome being a prescription for an off-patent drug:
OffPatentid = β0 + β1 HighSali + Xi B + plan f.e. + prescriber f.e. + id

(5)

Our goal is to test whether a high salary makes patients less likely to be prescribed an offpatent drug (Zocor or Pravachol) holding constant the plan and the prescriber. Indeed, we find that
high salary patients are 8.1 percentage points less likely to be prescribed off-patent drugs (Table 11,
models (1) and (2)). In contrast, we show in models (3) and (4) that no salary differential existed
for the probability of being prescribed a Tier 2 (“preferred brand”) drug , in the period preceding
Zocor’s patent expiration.50
We also use this specification to examine the robustness of the past prescribing effects from
Table 6. We estimate the following model in the period following Zocor’s patent expiration:
OffPatentid = β0 HighSali + β1 SameDocDrugsid + β2 HighSali · SameDocDrugsid

(6)

+β3 DrugsP astY eari + β4 Specialistd + Xi B + plan f.e. + id
where the binary variable of interest, SameDocDrugsid represents the number of prescriptions (for
any type of drug) written by physician d and filled by patient i in the past 365 days. The hypothesis
drawn from the simple learning model described in Section 4.2.1 is that the difference in prescribing
to low and high salary patients grows larger as the physician gains experience prescribing to his
patients (β1 > 0 and β2 < 0). To mitigate bias by unobserved characteristics that make patients
more likely to have received prior prescriptions from their doctor, we control for Specialist, number
of different drugs taken by patient in the previous year (DrugsPastYear ) and number of days
50

To increase the comparability between these two time periods, we restrict the sample to plans with 3 or more
tier levels in all four regressions.

33

patient made outpatient visits in the previous calendar year (DocVisits).51 To avoid endogeneity
due to unobserved characteristics of physicians, we control for SameDocd , the percent of doctor
d’s observed patients with at least one prior prescription from physician d.
In Table 12, we report results from variations of Equation 6. As before, we estimate it separately for patients below and above the median value (5) of DrugsP astY eari . Regardless of the
controls added to the model, the hypothesis that β1 = 0 is rejected for the case of inexperienced
patients: low salary patients become far more likely to get a generic prescription as their physicians accumulate experience prescribing to them. The estimate of β2 is always relatively close in
magnitude (and opposite in sign) to β1 , suggesting that the generic prescribing rate towards high
salary patients does not change much as doctors gain more experience prescribing to them. In fact,
there is no evidence that low salary inexperienced patients are any more likely than high salary
inexperienced patients to be prescribed a generic drug by a doctor who has not prescribed to them
in the past. In the group of patients more experienced with their drug plan, however, a difference
of 5.8 percentage points is statistically significant. While we lose significant power when doing this
estimation as a conditional logit with physician fixed effects, the overall picture is similar (results
not shown). These results support the findings of Table 6. At least part of the salary-differential
in generic prescribing appears to be driven by gradual physician learning of patient type.

6.2

Potential bias from insurers’ efforts to promote generic drugs

We have expressed our estimates of λLS and λHS , the ratio of responses to idiosyncratic vs. observed
price differences, as lower bounds, because part of the response of prescribing to p¯jt might be due
to complementary actions taken by plans to increase prescribing rates of newly off-patent Zocor.
Here, we explore the distribution of generic prescribing by plan in the post-expiration period. If
plans implemented prior authorization or step therapy policies, we would expect them to yield
high generic prescribing shares for initial prescriptions. In Figure 9, we show the distribution of
generic prescribing shares across plans for those used in our full sample as well as our copay-verified
sample.52 It is worth noting that all of the plans with generic shares smaller than 20 percent belong
51

Unfortunately, the outpatient visit claims data cannot be matched with physician identifiers, so we cannot identify
office interactions between a specific patient and physician.
52
Since plans might have taken some time to enact these policies, we calculate the shares using prescriptions from
the year 2007 only, and we exclude plans with fewer than ten initial prescriptions in this time period.

34

to the same employer, one with an unusual formulary that violates the norm of offering generic
drugs at lower copays than other drugs.
The distributions are centered around 35%. We might suspect that plans with generic shares
greater than 50% are the most likely to have imposed strong incentives on physicians to prescribe a
generic; however, our copay-verified sample does not include any plans with a generic share above
50%. Thus, we are confident that our λ estimates are not significantly biased by restrictive plan
policies that made it difficult for physicians to prescribe brand drugs after Zocor’s patent expiration.

6.3

Potential bias due to purchase non-adherence

A limitation of our dataset is that we do not observe written prescriptions that were never filled.
Our main analysis implicitly assumes that all patients prescribed a statin by their doctor purchased
a first supply of some statin medication. Rates of primary non-adherence, or the failure to fill a
first prescription, have been estimated as 34.1% for initial prescriptions of lipid-lowering drugs
[Liberman et al., 2010]. To the extent that purchase non-adherence is correlated with copays
and cost-sensitivity, its unobservability will bias our estimates. Specifically, it will lead us to
overestimate the responsiveness of initial prescriptions to copays (by disproportionately missing
prescriptions for drugs with high copays), and to underestimate the effect of copays on adherence
(by missing the worst possible adherence outcome).
A few studies have used electronic prescribing information to identify prescriptions that were
sent to pharmacies, but never purchased. To calibrate the likely bias in our estimates, we use
the results from the only study of this type, to our knowledge, focused on initial prescriptions for
cholesterol-lowering drugs [Liberman et al., 2010]. As expected, this study finds that higher copays
are associated with higher rates of purchase non-adherence: rates range from 26.4% when the copay
is less than $10 to 44.2% when the copay is greater than $25. However, the study does not find
significant variation with income level.
In this section, we assume that patients in our sample purchase their first prescriptions at
the rates found by Liberman et al. [2010], according to the copay of the drug prescribed. We
expand the sample of patients observed from each plan in each quarter in accordance with the
chance that each plan’s patients do not fill their first prescriptions, based on plan copayments.
First, we generate simulated prescriptions for each patient, drawn in a way that does not depend
35

on copay (i.e. αLS = αHS = 0).53 Next, we use the aforementioned probabilities of purchasing
the first prescription to draw a hypothetical sample of “observed” patients. Finally, we use a basic
conditional logit model (as in Section 5.1) to estimate the “phantom effect” of copay on prescriptions
among those that are “observed” (the estimate that is biased by purchase non-adherence). Our
goal is to measure how this estimate differs from zero, which was the true effect of copay in the
data generation process of the simulated dataset.
In 5000 simulations, we obtain the distribution of copay coefficients shown in Figure 10. It
has a mean value of -.115, which is 55% of our estimated copay effect using the same approach with
our actual data from the full period 2005-2007, and 86% of the estimate we obtain in period prior
to Zocor’s patent expiry. These results suggest that a large share of the estimated effect of copays
on prescribing could be explained by the endogeneity of first fills. In fact, it is possible that the
copay effects reported in Table 4 are entirely explained by endogenous first fills. By contrast, the
overall copay response estimated in the full period (Estimate #2 in Fig. 10), which includes the
increase in the Zocor molecule’s use following its patent expiration, is too large to be explained by
endogenous first fills.

7

Conclusion

Drugs that prevent and manage chronic illnesses are hugely cost-effective when used regularly as
prescribed, but only 30-50% of starting patients achieve adequate levels of adherence.54 Many
previous studies have shown that copays affect adherence rates, and others have expressed concern
for the fact that physicians in the U.S. rarely observe the prices faced by their patients. Our study
is the first to attempt to estimate the effect of this information problem on drug prescribing and
adherence rates, in the context of statin drugs.
We exploit a highly publicized patent expiration as a price shock that most physicians were
aware of. We find that the prescribing response to this patent expiration was two to three times
as large as the average response to similar-sized idiosyncratic variation in plan copays. This paper
makes three additional contributions to our understanding of agency and information problems in
53

The simulated prescription is chosen on the basis of monthly trends in the prescribing of each statin, and randomly
generated EEV-1 errors.
54
Simpson [2006]

36

drug prescribing. We shed light on how the difficulty of observing copays, and the weight placed
by prescribers on copays, both vary with patient income, an important correlate of patient pricesensitivity. Second, we provide suggestive evidence that physicians learn about patient income (or
cost-sensitivity) through their own past experiences prescribing to a given patient.
Third, simulations allow us to predict how prescribing would change if physicians could
observe cross-plan variations in copays as easily as they can guess the average difference between
brand and generic drugs’ copays. Unfortunately, the results do not make us optimistic: less than
10% of low salary patients would receive different prescriptions, reducing the average patient’s
copay by approximately $1.50 and adherence by less than one percentage point. By contrast, if
all patients were prescribed the lowest cost drug in their choice set, average copays would fall by
approximately $9, or 40%, and the adherence rate of low salary patients would increase from 46%
to 50%, shrinking the gap in adherence of low and high salary patients by more than one-third.
If physicians were perfect agents for low income patients, they would place much more weight on
their copays; the difficulty of observing copays plays only a small role in the larger agency problem.
There are several policy implications of these findings. We cannot conclude that mechanisms
making copays easier to observe, such as providing physicians with mobile devices linked to plan
formularies, would significantly improve prescribing from the standpoint of maximizing adherence
or reducing expenses. We find that the more heavy-handed policy of requiring patients to start
with low-tier drugs would benefit low salary patients without harming high salary patients, but we
caution that this conclusion is limited to statins, a relatively homogenous drug class.
In future work, we will more broadly examine the welfare effects of patent expirations, given
that the presence of a generic allows physicians to sort patients by their price sensitivity. We will
also seek to better understand how physicians learn about the preferences of their patients, and
what policies could expedite this process to facilitate the matching of patients to drugs.

37

References
Murray Aitken, Ernst R. Berndt, and David M. Cutler. Prescription drug spending trends in
the united states: Looking beyond the turning point. Health Affairs, 28(1):w151–w160, January/February 2009. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.28.1.w151. URL http://content.healthaffairs.
org/content/28/1/w151.abstract.
Joseph G. Altonji and Charles R. Pierret. Employer learning and statistical discrimination. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(1):pp. 313–350, 2001. ISSN 00335533. URL http://www.
jstor.org/stable/2696451.
Steven K. Baker and Robert S. Rosenson. Muscle injury associated with lipid lowering drugs. In
D.S. Basow, editor, UpToDate. 2012.
J J Brugts, T Yetgin, S E Hoeks, A M Gotto, J Shepherd, R G J Westendorp, A J M de Craen,
R H Knopp, H Nakamura, P Ridker, R van Domburg, and J W Deckers. The benefits of statins
in people without established cardiovascular disease but with cardiovascular risk factors: metaanalysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ, 338, 6 2009. doi: 10.1136/bmj.b2376.
Randall D. Cebul, James Rebitzer, Lowell J. Taylor, and Mark Votruba. Unhealthy insurance
markets: Search frictions and the cost and quality of health insurance. American Economic
Review, 101(5):1842–1871, 2011.
Amitabh Chandra, Jonathan Gruber, and Robin McKnight. Patient cost-sharing and hospitalization offsets in the elderly. American Economic Review, 100(1), 2010.
Amitabh Chandra, Jonathan Gruber, and Robin McKnight. The impact of patient cost-sharing on
the poor: Evidence from massachusetts. Working Paper 18023, National Bureau of Economic
Research, April 2012. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w18023.
Michael Dickstein. Physician vs. patient incentives in prescription drug choice. Manuscript, 2012.
Hanming Fang and Alessandro Gavazza. Dynamic inefficiencies in an employment-based healthinsurance system: Theory and evidence. American Economic Review, 101(1):30473077, 2011.
Richard G. Frank and Richard J. Zeckhauser. Custom-made versus ready-to-wear treatments:
Behavioral propensities in physicians choices. Journal of Health Economics, 26, 2007.
Martin Gaynor, Jian Li, and William B. Vogt. Substitution, spending offsets, and prescription
drug benefit design. Forum for Health Economics & Policy, 10(2):4, 2007. URL http://ideas.
repec.org/a/bpj/fhecpo/v10y2007i2n4.html.
Dana P. Goldman, Geoffrey F. Joyce, Jose J. Escarce, Jennifer E. Pace, Matthew D. Solomon,
Marianne Laouri, Pamela B. Landsman, and Steven M. Teutsch. Pharmacy Benefits and the Use
of Drugs by the Chronically Ill. JAMA, 291(19):2344–2350, 2004.
Dana P. Goldman, Geoffrey F. Joyce, and Yuhui Zheng. Prescription Drug Cost Sharing: Associations With Medication and Medical Utilization and Spending and Health. JAMA, 298(1):61–69,
2007. doi: 10.1001/jama.298.1.61.
Füsun F. Gönül, Franklin Carter, Elina Petrova, and Kannan Srinivasa. Physicians’ prescribing
responses to a restricted formulary: the impact of medicaid preferred drug lists in illinois and
louisiana. American Journal of Managed Care, 2005.
38

Jorge Gonzalez, Catarina Sismeiro, Shantanu Dutta, and Philip Stern. Can branded drugs benefit
from generic entry? the role of detailing and price in switching to non-bioequivalent molecules.
International Journal of Research in Marketing, 25(4):247 – 260, 2008.
Good Stewardship Working Group. The top 5 lists in primary care: Meeting the responsibility of professionalism. Archives of Internal Medicine, 171(15):1385–1390, 2011. doi: 10.1001/
archinternmed.2011.231. URL +http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archinternmed.2011.231.
Scott Grundy, James Cleeman, C. Noel Bairey Merz, H. Bryan Jr. Brewer, Luther Clark, Donald Hunninghake, Richard C. Pasternak, Sidney C. Jr Smith, and Neil Stone. Implications of
recent clinical trials for the national cholesterol education program adult treatment panel iii
guidelines. Circulation, 2004. For the Coordinating Committee of the National Cholesterol Education Program, Endorsed by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, American College
of Cardiology Foundation, and American Heart Association.
Elizabeth Hargrave, Jack Hoadley, Laura Summer, and Katie Merrell. Medicare part d formularies,
2006-2010: A chartbook. Technical report, MedPac, October 2010. URL http://www.medpac.
gov/documents/Oct10_PartDFormulariesChartBook_CONTRACTOR_RS.pdf.
Judith K. Hellerstein. The importance of the physician in the generic versus trade-name prescription
decision. RAND Journal of Economics, 29(1):108–136, Spring 1998. URL http://ideas.repec.
org/a/rje/randje/v29y1998ispringp108-136.html.
Bradley Herring. Supoptimal provision of preventive healthcare due to expected enrollee turnover
among private insurers. Health Economics, 19:438–448, 2010.
JH Hibbard and PJ Cunningham. How engaged are consumers in their health and health care, and
why does it matter. Technical Report 8, Center for Studying Health System Change, 2008. URL
http://www.hschange.com/CONTENT/1019/.
Peter J. Huckfeldt and Christopher R. Knittel. Pharmaceutical use following generic entry: Paying
less and buying less. Working Paper 17046, National Bureau of Economic Research, May 2011.
URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w17046.
Toshiaki Iizuka. Experts’ agency problems: evidence from the prescription drug market in Japan.
The RAND Journal of Economics, 38(3), 2007.
Toshiaki Iizuka. Physician agency and adoption of generic pharmaceuticals. American Economic
Review, 102(6):2826–2858, 2012.
Tisha R. Joy and Robert A. Hegele. Narrative review: Statin-related myopathy. Annals of Internal
Medicine, 150(12):858–868, 2009. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-150-12-200906160-00009. URL +http:
//dx.doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-150-12-200906160-00009.
Geoffrey F. Joyce, Mariana P. Carrera, Dana P. Goldman, and Neeraj Sood.
Physician prescribing behavior and its impact on patient-level outcomes.
American Journal of Managed Care, 17:e462–e471, 2011.
URL http://www.ajmc.com/articles/
Physician-Prescribing-Behavior-and-Its-Impact-on-Patient-Level-Outcomes.
Kaiser Family Foundation. Employer health benefits: 2007 summary of findings. Technical report,
The Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research & Educational Trust, October 2007.
39

Kaiser Family Foundation. Employer health benefits: 2010 summary of findings. Technical report,
The Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research & Educational Trust, October 2010.
S Khan, R Sylvester, D Scott, and B. Pitts. Physicians’ opinions about responsibility for patient
out-of-pocket costs and formulary prescribing in two midwestern states. Journal of Managed
Care Pharmacy, 14(8):780–789, 2008.
Joshua N. Liberman, David S. Hutchins, Richard G. Popiel, Mihir H. Patel, Saira A. Jan, and
Jan E. Berger. Determinants of primary nonadherence in asthma-controller and dyslipidemia
pharmacotherapy. The American Journal of Pharmacy Benefits, 2(2), 2010.
Frank Limbrock. Pecuniary and non-pecuniary incentives in prescription pharmaceuticals: The
case of statins. The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 11(2), 2011.
Douglas Lundin. Moral hazard in physician prescription behavior. Journal of Health Economics,
19(5), 2000.
NEHI. Thinking outside the pillbox: A system-wide approach to improving patient medication
adherence for chronic disease. Technical report, New England Healthcare Institute, 2009. URL
http://www.nehi.net/publications/44/thinking_outside_the_pillbox_a_systemwide_
approach_to_improving_patient_medication_adherence_for_chronic_disease.
Robert S. Rosenson. Statins: Actions, side effects, and administration. In D.S. Basow, editor,
UpToDate. 2012.
Fiona Scott Morton and Margaret Kyle. Markets for pharmaceutical products. In M.V. Pauly, T.G.
McGuire, and P.P. Barros, editors, Handbook of Health Economics, number v. 2 in Handbook of
Health Economics. Elsevier Science, 2011. ISBN 9780444535931. URL http://books.google.
com/books?id=Pia95cLN84cC.
William Shrank, Henry Young, Susan Ettner, Peter Glassman, Stephen Asch, and Richard Kravitz.
Do the incentives in 3-tier pharmaceutical benefit plans operate as intended? results from a
physician leadership survey. American Journal of Managed Care, 11:16–22, 2005.
William Shrank, Sarah Fox, Adele Kirk, Susan Ettner, Clairessa Cantrell, Peter Glassman, and
Stephen Asch. The effect of pharmacy benefit design on patient-physician communication about
costs. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 21(4):334–339, 2006.
Ross J. Jr Simpson. Challenges for Improving Medication Adherence. JAMA, 2006.
ME Beth Smith, Nancy J Lee, Elizabeth Haney, and Susan Carson. Drug class review: Hmg-coa
reductase inhibitors (statins) and fixed-dose combination products containing a statin: Final
report update 5. Technical report, Oregon Health & Science University, 2009. URL http:
//www.ohsu.edu/drugeffectiveness/reports/final.cfm.
Robyn Tamblyn, Rejean Laprise, James A. Hanley, Michael Abrahamowicz, Susan Scott, Nancy
Mayo, Jerry Hurley, Roland Grad, Eric Latimer, Robert Perreault, Peter McLeod, Allen Huang,
Pierre Larochelle, and Louise Mallet. Adverse Events Associated With Prescription Drug CostSharing Among Poor and Elderly Persons. JAMA, 285(4):421–429, 2001. doi: 10.1001/jama.285.
4.421.
40

Anna A. Levine Taub, Anton Kolotilin, Robert S. Gibbons, and Ernst R. Berndt. The diversity
of concentrated prescribing behavior: An application to antipsychotics. Working Paper 16823,
National Bureau of Economic Research, February 2011. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/
w16823.
Sriram Venkataraman and Stefan Stremersch. The debate on influencing doctors’ decisions: Are
drug characteristics the missing link? ERIM Report Series Reference No. ERS-2007-056-MKT.,
2007, 09.
S Virabhak and JA Shinogle. Physicians’ prescribing responses to a restricted formulary: the
impact of medicaid preferred drug lists in illinois and louisiana. American Journal of Managed
Care, 2005.

41

Figure 1: Generic substitution rates, initial prescriptions. The dark gray represents all fills of initial
prescriptions for each molecule. The light gray shows the share of fills for generic versions in each
period.

Figure 2: Copay Distribution of Plans in Sample.
42

Figure 3: Average copays by molecule, 2005-2007.

Figure 4: Initial prescriptions. Full sample, 2005-2007.

43

Figure 5: Responses to patent expiration by salary, in full sample.

44

Figure 6: Off-patent prescribing by salary and SDD (SameDocDrugs) SameDocDrugsik is the
number of different drugs that patient i was prescribed by physician k in the one-year period
prior to the initial statin fill, which is also prescribed by physician k. “High SDD” is defined as
SameDocDrugs > 1 and applies to 40% of the low salary group and 35% of the high salary group.
“High salary” is defined as greater than $50,000.

Figure 7: Off-patent prescribing by salary and SDD (SameDocDrugs) This figure corresponds to
the one above, but represents a set of patients who use many more prescription drugs overall. Here,
“High SDD” is defined as SameDocDrugs > 4 and applies to 43% of the low salary group and
37% of the high salary group.
45

Figure 8: Predicted and Actual Zocor Continuation Rates, by salary groups. These figures compare
the predicted values of the model estimated in Table 7 to the actual observed continuation rates of
patients initiating statin treatment with a Zocor prescription.

46

Figure 9: Distribution of Generic Prescribing Shares by Plan, 2007. Plans with at least ten initial
statin prescriptions in 2007 are shown.

Figure 10: Potential bias in copay coefficient. The distribution of the estimated copay coefficient in
5,000 simulations in which prescriptions are assigned at random but copays influence the probability
that a written prescription is filled, and therefore, observed. Copay effect #1 is estimated using
observed prescriptions prior to the expiration of Zocor’s patent. Copay effect #2 is estimated in
our entire copay-verified sample, 2005-2007.
47

Table 3: Descriptive Statistics (Verified Copay Sample)
Variable
Age
Male
Salary
< $50,000
$50,000-$60,000
$60,000- $80,000
> $80,000
Tiers in plan formulary
1 (same copay for all drugs)
2 (same copay for all brand drugs)
3+ (brand drugs sorted into 2+ tiers)
Diagnosed health conditions
Hypertension
Diabetes
Cardiac Disease
Recent heart attack (30 days)
Other patient characteristics
DocV isits (any provider, last year)
DrugsP astY ear (# different drugs purchased)
Initial statin prescription
First statin after at least one year
First statin after at least two years
Copay (for 30 days, in dollars)
Prescribed by Specialist (imputed)
6 month adherence, class based (MPR≥ .80)
6 month adherence to initial drug (MPR≥ .80)
SameDocDrugs (# different drugs prescribed by

Mean

SD

N

49.4
0.59

7.63
0.49

9,855
9,855

0.29
0.23
0.12
0.36

0.45
0.42
0.33
0.48

9,855
9,855
9,855
9,855

0.05
0.12
0.82

0.22
0.33
0.38

9,855
9,855
9,855

0.23
0.12
0.07
0.01

0.42
0.33
0.25
0.12

9,855
9,855
9,855
9,855

5.55
5.67

4.61
5.26

9,855
9,855

1.00
0.84
20.89
0.07
0.55
0.46
2.49

0
0.37
11.80
0.25
0.50
0.50
3.03

9,855
6,783*
9,855
9,855
8,218**
8,218**
7,847***

same physician to current patient, in past year)
* This variable is missing for individuals who are not observed in the claims data for the past two calendar years.
** This variable is missing for individuals whose initial fill occurs after June 30, 2007, because we do not observe a
full 180 days following it.
*** This variable is missing for individuals whose initial fill occured in 2005, because prescription data from 2004 do
not contain prescriber identifiers.

48

Table 4: Copay effects on initial prescription, prior to Zocor’s patent expiration
Copay-verified sample

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.12∗∗
(0.05)

-0.13∗∗
(0.05)

-0.14∗∗∗
(0.05)

-0.11∗∗
(0.05)

-0.12∗∗
(0.05)

-0.13∗∗
(0.05)

-0.059
(0.06)

-0.034
(0.07)

-0.017
(0.07)

-0.053
(0.06)

-0.024
(0.07)

-0.00053
(0.07)

Doctor’s last prescription

0.60∗∗∗
(0.06)

0.59∗∗∗
(0.06)

0.61∗∗∗
(0.06)

0.61∗∗∗
(0.06)

Patient’s last prescription

1.27∗∗∗
(0.1)

1.27∗∗∗
(0.1)

1.29∗∗∗
(0.1)

1.29∗∗∗
(0.1)

pjt (Copay, in $10)
x High Salary

Choice of Lipitor
High salary

-0.074
(0.1)

-0.0089
(0.1)
-0.064∗∗∗
(0.010)

Monthly time trend

-0.067∗∗∗
(0.010)

-0.067∗∗∗
(0.010)

Choice of Pravachol
High salary

-0.29
(0.2)

-0.21
(0.2)
-0.090∗∗∗
(0.02)

Monthly time trend

-0.081∗∗∗
(0.02)

-0.080∗∗∗
(0.02)

Choice of Zocor
High salary

-0.087
(0.1)

-0.070
(0.1)
-0.024∗∗
(0.01)

Monthly time trend

-0.017
(0.01)

-0.017
(0.01)

Choice of Vytorin
High salary

0.068
(0.1)

Monthly time trend
N
Log. Lik.
Patient characteristics
Drug-specific time trend
Salary-specific drug intercepts

4061
-5262.84

4061
-5095.27
Yes

4061
-5093.40
Yes

0.11
(0.1)
-0.038∗∗∗
(0.01)

-0.036∗∗∗
(0.01)

-0.036∗∗∗
(0.01)

4061
-5231.25

4061
-5059.72
Yes
Yes

4061
-5058.24
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Average percent change in Zocor prescribing share expected from a $10 (∼35%) copay increase
Low salary patients
High salary patients

-0.10
(0.00)
-0.15
(0.00)

-0.11
(0.01)
-0.14
(0.01)

-0.12
(0.01)
-0.13
(0.01)

-0.09
(0.00)
-0.14
(0.00)

-0.10
(0.01)
-0.12
(0.01)

-0.11
(0.01)
-0.11
(0.01)

Conditional logit coefficients. Standard errors in parentheses.
These models estimate how the characteristics of drugs in the physician’s choice set affect their probability
of being individual i’s first statin prescription fill in the period from January 2005 to June 2006. The choice
set contains the five statin drugs that can achieve a level of LDL cholesterol reduction between 34% and
52%. pijt is the monthly copayment that applies to patient i for drug j at the time of prescribing, in units
of ten dollars. Other patient characteristics included as controls are diagnosed health conditions, age decile,
gender, and whether the drug was prescribed by a cardiac specialist, all of which are allowed to affect each
drug’s intercept separately.

49

Table 5: Copay effects on initial prescription
Copay-verified sample

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.72∗∗∗
(0.05)

-0.54∗∗∗
(0.08)

-0.64∗∗∗
(0.06)

-0.42∗∗∗
(0.08)

x High Salary

0.31∗∗∗
(0.05)

0.31∗∗∗
(0.05)

0.21∗∗∗
(0.05)

0.20∗∗∗
(0.05)

pijt − p̄jt (Difference)

-0.19∗∗∗
(0.04)

-0.17∗∗∗
(0.04)

-0.20∗∗∗
(0.05)

-0.13∗∗∗
(0.05)

x High Salary

-0.075∗
(0.04)

-0.076∗
(0.04)

0.0080
(0.05)

0.016
(0.05)

Doctor’s last prescription

0.60∗∗∗
(0.03)

0.60∗∗∗
(0.03)

0.57∗∗∗
(0.03)

0.57∗∗∗
(0.03)

Patient’s last prescription

1.27∗∗∗
(0.05)

1.29∗∗∗
(0.06)

1.25∗∗∗
(0.06)

1.29∗∗∗
(0.06)

9855
-12726.68
Yes

9855
-12681.81
Yes
Yes

9855
-12350.18
Yes

9855
-12270.10
Yes
Yes
Yes

p̄jt (National average copay)

N
Log. Lik.
Patient characteristics
Drug-specific time trend
Plan-specific drug intercepts

Yes

Average percent change in Zocor prescribing share expected from a $10 (∼35%) copay increase
Low salary patients
-0.60
-0.46
-0.53
-0.35
(0.05)
(0.04)
(0.05)
(0.03)
High salary patients
-0.35
-0.19
-0.37
-0.19
(0.03)
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.02)
Estimates of λ = βpijt −p̄jt /βp̄jt
λLS (Low salary patients)
λHS (High salary patients)

0.27
(0.00)
0.65
(0.01)

0.31
(0.01)
1.07
(0.12)

0.31
(0.01)
0.44
(0.01)

0.30
(0.02)
0.49
(0.05)

Conditional logit coefficients. Standard errors in parentheses.
These models estimate how the characteristics of drugs in the physician’s choice set affect their probability of
being individual i’s first statin prescription fill. The choice set contains the five statin drugs that can achieve
a level of LDL cholesterol reduction between 34% and 52%. pijt is the monthly copayment that applies to
patient i for drug j at the time of prescribing, in units of ten dollars. p̄jt is the national average copay
in year t among employer-insured plans for either brand or generic drugs, from Kaiser Family Foundation
[2007], depending on drug j’s patent or off-patent status at time t. λ is described in Section 4 as a measure
of how well plan-specific copays are observed at the time of prescribing.

50

Table 6: Copay effects on initial prescription, by previous prescribing in patient/physician pair
(1)
Copay-verified sample
p̄jt (National average copay)
x High salary

(2)

(3)

(4)

Below-median DrugsP astY ri

Above-median DrugsP astY ri

-0.69∗∗∗
(0.09)

-0.40∗∗∗
(0.1)

-0.68∗∗∗
(0.08)

-0.74∗∗∗
(0.1)

0.29∗∗∗
(0.08)

-0.020
(0.1)

0.37∗∗∗
(0.07)

0.48∗∗∗
(0.1)

x Above-median SameDocDrugsid
x High salary

-0.41∗∗∗
(0.1)

0.099
(0.1)

0.45∗∗∗
(0.2)

-0.21
(0.1)

pijt − p̄jt (Difference)

-0.10
(0.06)

0.068
(0.1)

-0.21∗∗∗
(0.06)

-0.23∗∗∗
(0.08)

x High salary

-0.16∗∗
(0.08)

-0.29∗∗
(0.1)

-0.026
(0.07)

0.0050
(0.1)

x Above-median SameDocDrugsid
x High salary

-0.25∗
(0.1)

0.031
(0.1)

0.19
(0.2)

-0.053
(0.1)

Doctor’s last prescription

0.67∗∗∗
(0.05)

0.67∗∗∗
(0.05)

0.58∗∗∗
(0.05)

0.58∗∗∗
(0.05)

Patient’s last prescription

1.40∗∗∗
(0.10)

1.41∗∗∗
(0.10)

1.12∗∗∗
(0.08)

1.12∗∗∗
(0.08)

N
Log. Lik.
Patient characteristics

3284
-4205.7
Yes

3284
-4198.2
Yes

3768
-5025.3
Yes

3768
-5023.8
Yes

Conditional logit coefficients. Standard errors in parentheses.
These models build on the specification in column (1) of Table 5. The copay variables are interacted
with a dummy indicating an above-median value of SameDocDrugsid , which is the number of different
drugs prescribed by physician d to patient i in the previous 365 days. We also divide the sample along
DrugsP astY ri , the number of different drugs taken by a patient in the previous 365 days, which has a
median value of 5. In the group with below-median (above-median) values of DrugsP astY ri , the median
value of SameDocDrugsid is 1 (4). The sample includes 2006 and 2007 observations from the Copay Verified
Sample, since physician identifiers are not included in 2004 data. We also exclude patients who took no drugs
in the past year, since their value of SameDocDrugsij would be zero by necessity.

51

Table 7: Copay effect on 6-month Adherence, prior to Zocor’s patent expiration
Panel A

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.050∗∗∗
(0.02)

-0.050∗∗∗
(0.02)

-0.038∗∗∗
(0.01)

-0.040∗∗∗
(0.01)

x High Salary

0.028∗
(0.01)

0.027∗
(0.01)

0.035∗∗∗
(0.01)

0.036∗∗∗
(0.01)

Observations
Patient characteristics
Molecule f.e.
Plan f.e.
Plan x Mol. f.e.
Panel B

11431
Yes

11431
Yes
Yes

11431
Yes
Yes
Yes

(5)

(6)

(7)

11338
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(8)

-0.038∗∗∗

-0.037∗∗∗

(0.01)

(0.01)

-0.036∗∗∗
(0.01)

-0.041∗∗∗
(0.01)

0.036∗∗∗
(0.01)

0.034∗∗∗
(0.01)

0.031∗∗∗
(0.01)

0.035∗∗∗
(0.01)

SameDoc (Above-median SameDocDrugsid )

-0.0090
(0.01)

-0.021
(0.02)

Above-median DrugsP astY ri

-0.015
(0.02)

-0.015
(0.02)

0.016
(0.02)

0.015
(0.02)

Copay (in $10)

Copay (in $10)
x High salary

x SameDoc
Copay x SameDoc

0.011
(0.008)

x High salary

-0.0080
(0.007)

Observations
Patient characteristics
Molecule f.e.
Plan f.e.
Plan x Mol. f.e.
Added variables
Wald Test: Prob > chi-squared

11431
Yes
Yes
Yes

11431
Yes
Yes
Yes

10218
Yes
Yes
Yes

10218
Yes
Yes
Yes

High sal. x Mol.
0.98

Diag. x Mol.
0.17

–
0.74

–
0.57

Marginal effects; Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by plan.

∗

p < 0.10,

∗∗

p < 0.05,

∗∗∗

p < 0.01

Note: Average marginal effect of a $10 copay increase on the probability of Six month adherence (80%
or greater days supplied) is shown. High salary is above $50,000, and 59.2% of this group is adherent.
The omitted category is salary below $50,000, of whom 46.6% are adherent. Patient characteristics include
dummies for chronic conditions diagnosed, Prescription from a specialist, a 90-day first fill, previous statin
usage (more than 365 days ago), age decile, sex, and salary group. In Panel B, we test the inclusion
of additional variables: allowing high salary patients and patients with diagnosed conditions to respond
differently to the drug prescribed (in (5) and (6)) and testing for differences in adherence based on patients’
recent experience with their plan formularies and with the current prescriber (in (7) and (8)).

52

Table 8: Predicted Adherence Probabilities (average)

Low salary patients
Inexperienced
Experienced
High salary patients
Inexperienced
Experienced

minj∈J qij

qij , j = drug prescribed
(status quo)

maxj∈J qij

Max. potential improvement
relative to status quo

0.44
0.41

0.48
0.44

0.53
0.48

0.05
0.03

0.56
0.57

0.57
0.57

0.58
0.58

0.01
0.01

Table 9: Monthly Copays (average)
Low salary patients
Inexperienced
Experienced
High salary patients
Inexperienced
Experienced

pij , j = drug prescribed

pij , j = argmax(qij )

minj∈J (pij ),

$23.30
$21.62

$13.73
$13.12

$13.54
$12.94

$18.99
$19.08

$25.09
$10.59

$10.77
$10.45

Table 10: Changes under simulated counterfactuals
1. Prescriber observes copays
Rx that change
(j 0 6= j)
Low salary patients
Inexperienced
Experienced
High salary patients
Inexperienced
Experienced

Change in adherence rate
(∆qij )
(Share of max.)

Copay change
(∆pij )

9%
7%

0.007
0.004

0.15
0.12

-$1.63
-$1.10

2%
2%

0.000
0.000

0.00
0.02

-$0.28
-$0.26

2. Prescriber observes copays and has patient-specific experience
Rx that change
(j 0 6= j)
Low salary patients
Inexperienced
Experienced
High salary patients
Inexperienced
Experienced

Change in adherence rate
(∆qij )
(Share of max.)

Copay change
(∆pij )

14%
6%

0.011
0.003

0.24
0.09

-$2.66
-$0.88

2%
3%

0.000
0.000

0.00
0.03

-$0.23
-$0.52

3. The drug with the lowest copay is always prescribed.
Rx that change
(j 0 6= j)
Low salary patients
Inexperienced
Experienced
High salary patients
Inexperienced
Experienced

Change in adherence rate
(∆qij )
(Share of max.)

Copay change
(∆pij )

55%
54%

0.044
0.032

0.94
0.94

-$9.76
-$8.68

49%
53%

0.004
0.007

0.36
0.75

-$8.21
-$8.63

Simulations described in Section 5.5.

53

Table 11: Does patient salary affect the probability of receiving a low-cost prescription?
(1)

(2)

Post-expiry of Zocor patent
Y = Off-patent drug prescribed

(3)

(4)

Pre-expiry of Zocor patent
Y = Tier 2 drug prescribed

-0.048∗∗∗
(0.01)

-0.081∗∗∗
(0.02)

-0.0054
(0.01)

-0.024
(0.04)

Overall share of Y = 1

0.41

0.41

0.55

0.55

Observations
Patient characteristics
Plan f.e.
Prescriber f.e.

10665

10665

Yes

Yes
Yes

6842
Yes
Yes

6842
Yes
Yes
Yes

High salary

The linear probability model allows us to include both plan and prescriber fixed effects. The sample is limited
to plans with three or more tiers for consistency between columns (1)-(2) and (3)-(4). The Zocor patent
expired in June 2006, the midpoint of our sample time period. The sample size is larger in the post-expiry
period, however, because of a large increase in the number of firms reported in the data. Clustered standard
errors in parentheses.

54

Table 12: Generic prescribing, by previous prescribing in patient/physician pair
(1)

(2)

(3)

Below-median DrugsP astY ri

(4)

(5)

(6)

Above-median DrugsP astY ri

High salary

-0.025
(0.02)

0.020
(0.03)

0.061
(0.04)

-0.058∗∗∗
(0.01)

-0.054∗∗∗
(0.02)

-0.063∗∗
(0.03)

Above-median SameDocDrugsid

0.0020
(0.01)

0.049∗
(0.03)

0.046∗
(0.03)

-0.0032
(0.01)

0.0023
(0.02)

0.0034
(0.03)

-0.067∗∗
(0.03)

-0.061∗
(0.03)

-0.0083
(0.03)

-0.0098
(0.03)

-0.0048
(0.006)

0.0077
(0.01)

-0.0013
(0.001)

-0.0019
(0.002)

x High salary
DrugsP astY ri

-0.0049
(0.006)

x High salary
Prescribed by specialist

-0.017
(0.01)
-0.096∗∗∗
(0.03)

-0.097∗∗∗
(0.03)

x High salary
Observations
Patient characteristics
Plan f.e.

-0.0013
(0.001)

-0.091∗
(0.05)

0.00097
(0.002)
-0.072∗∗∗
(0.02)

-0.072∗∗∗
(0.02)

-0.0075
(0.05)
6567
Yes
Yes

6567
Yes
Yes

6567
Yes
Yes

-0.073∗∗
(0.03)
0.0014
(0.04)

8008
Yes
Yes

8008
Yes
Yes

8008
Yes
Yes

Linear probability model. Clustered standard errors in parentheses.
DrugsP astY ri , the number of different drugs taken by a patient in the previous 365 days, has a median
value of 5. The High salary dummy is interacted with a dummy indicating an above-median value of
SameDocDrugsid , which is the number of different drugs prescribed by physician d to patient i in the
previous 365 days. In the group with below-median (above-median) values of DrugsP astY ri , the median
value of SameDocDrugsid is 1 (4). The sample includes 2006 and 2007 observations from the entire sample
(physician identifiers are not included in 2004 data). We also exclude patients who took no drugs in the past
year, since their value of SameDocDrugsij would be zero by necessity. Other controls include the number of
days in which the patient had at least one outpatient office visit in the past year, the share of a physician’s
observed prescriptions with above-median SameDocDrugsid , and they usual set of patient characteristics.

55

Appendix
1. Switching costs appear to be high.
It is a stylized fact that switching to a different statin is highly correlated with a long delay
(or discontinuation) of statin treatment. Among patients who refilled the same drug they
were initially prescribed, the median number of days between the first fill and the second fill
was 34 (mean=54, sd=70), whereas for patients whose second fill was for a different drug,
the median number of days in between was 105 (mean=202, sd=220).55 . Sixty-five percent
of patients who do not switch drugs between their first and second fills are adherent over the
first six months, while only 9.6% of those who switch are adherent over the first six months.
By the end of the six months following the initial fill, 15% of adherent patients are on a
different statin than the one they initially started. This suggests that it might be easier to
switch statins upon subsequent visits to the prescriber than between visits.
2. Description of Simulation Procedure used in Section 5.5.
We use an Accept-Reject approach to generate a set of Type I extreme value errors that
rationalize each observed prescription, given their estimated values of indirect utility Vj .
Draws of errors for each patient i’s choice set are repeated until ij ...iJ are such that Uij =
Xij B + ij > Uik = Xik B + ik for all unchosen drugs k. We then hold the set of generated
errors {ij ...iJ , ∀i} constant in evaluating which drug would be chosen for each patient under
the new values of B implied by each counterfactual scenario.
3. The table below reports the “national average copays” of brand and generic drugs, for
employer-insured patients, used in the analysis of Section 5.2, and how they compare to
the average statin copays across the plans in each of our samples.

Table 13: Average Copay Comparison
Panel A: Single-Source Brand Drugs
KFF Survey*

Full sample

Copay-Verified sample

2005

$22.5

$21.08

$24.95

2006

$24

$23.77

$24.38

2006

$24

$23.63

$23.79

Panel B: Generic Drugs
KFF Survey*

Full sample

Copay-Verified sample

2005

$10

$9.81

$9.15

2006

$11

$11.02

$11.44

2006

$10.5

$8.45

$9.97

*These values were taken from Kaiser Family Foundation [2007],
based on annual surveys of a random sample of U.S. employers.
These are the values we take to be a prescriber’s expectation
of brand and generic drug copays for an employer-insured patient,
in Section 5.2

55
To simplify interpretation, the numbers presented here correspond to patients whose first fill was a 30-day
prescription. Similar patterns exist for patients with 90-day first prescriptions

56

Figure 11: This chart of goal LDL levels (from Grundy et al. [2004]) has been widely disseminated
by the NIH’s National Cholesterol Education Program and appears in the most commonly used
physician pocket manual on prescription drugs, Tarascon Pocket Pharmacopoeia.

Figure 12: This figure shows the distribution of the share of prescriptions for cardiovascular drugs,
by unique prescriber. We denote prescribers with shares above 0.60 as specialists.

57

Table 14: Logit coefficients and exclusion tests, using Model 3 in Table 4.

Prescribed by specialist

(1)
Lipitor
-0.040
(0.2)

(2)
Pravachol
-0.20
(0.4)

(3)
Vytorin
-0.47*
(0.3)

(4)
Zocor
-0.54**
(0.3)

Age group dummies

(5)
Wald test p-value
0.05

0.12

Age 40-49

0.030
(0.2)

0.39
(0.4)

0.23
(0.2)

0.031
(0.2)

Age 50-59

0.20
(0.2)

0.93**
(0.4)

0.38**
(0.2)

0.31*
(0.2)

Age 60-65

0.13
(0.2)

1.29***
(0.5)

0.27
(0.3)

0.093
(0.3)

Male

-0.12
(0.1)

-0.45**
(0.2)

-0.15
(0.1)

-0.21*
(0.1)

0.19

High cholesterol

-0.35***
(0.1)

-0.28
(0.3)

0.16
(0.1)

-0.35**
(0.1)

0.00

Cardiac disease

0.050
(0.2)

-0.32
(0.5)

0.13
(0.3)

0.065
(0.3)

0.93

Diabetes

-0.062
(0.1)

0.20
(0.3)

-0.092
(0.2)

0.077
(0.2)

0.71

Hypertension

-0.15
(0.1)

-0.15
(0.2)

-0.035
(0.1)

-0.048
(0.1)

0.65

AMI ever observed

0.82
(1.1)

1.87
(1.5)

1.11
(1.2)

0.14
(1.4)

0.69

Recent AMI (past month)

-0.050
(1.2)

-0.079
(1.6)

-1.29
(1.3)

1.13
(1.5)

0.43

Salary above $50,000

-0.074
(0.1)
1.27
(0.17)

-0.29
(0.2)
-1.66
(0.42)

0.068
(0.1)
-.16
(0.22)

-0.087
(0.1)
0.21
(0.21)

0.44

Alternative-specific
constant

N/A

N=4061. Excluded choice is Crestor. Columns (1)-(4) show the estimated coefficient of each dummy
variable on the choice of each drug in the conditional logit regression from Table 6, Column (3).
Column (5) shows the p-value of the Wald test statistic when testing for the exclusion of each
variable or set of variables from the model.

58

