                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              DIFFERENTIAL PRICING IN UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION:
                    EFFECTS ON DEGREE PRODUCTION BY FIELD

                                           Kevin M. Stange

                                        Working Paper 19183
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19183


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2013




I am incredibly grateful to Glen Nelson for sharing his data on differential tuition and for several very
helpful discussions. Alfredo Sosa provided exceptional research assistance. Helpful comments were
provided by numerous seminar participants at the University of Michigan, Columbia University Teachers
College, and the Association for Education Finance and Policy Annual Meetings. Author can be contacted
at kstange@umich.edu. All errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Kevin M. Stange. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Differential Pricing in Undergraduate Education: Effects on Degree Production by Field
Kevin M. Stange
NBER Working Paper No. 19183
June 2013
JEL No. I20,I22,I28,J24

                                               ABSTRACT

In the face of declining state support, many universities have introduced differential pricing by undergraduate
program as an alternative to across-the-board tuition increases. This practice aligns price more closely
with instructional costs and students’ ability to pay post-graduation. Exploiting the staggered adoption
of these policies across universities, this paper finds that differential pricing does alter the allocation
of students to majors, though heterogeneity across fields may suggest a greater supply response in
particularly oversubscribed fields such as nursing. There is some evidence that student groups already
underrepresented in certain fields are particularly affected by the new pricing policies. Price does appear
to be a policy lever through which state governments can alter the field composition of the workforce
they are training with the public higher education system.


Kevin M. Stange
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
5236 Weill Hall
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
kstange@umich.edu
I.     Introduction

The provision of higher education is one of the most important functions of state governments in

the United States, accounting for $170 billion of direct state spending in 2011 (NASBO, 2012).

Historically states have attempted to provide their residents with access to high-quality

postsecondary education by providing large subsidies directly to public institutions with few

directives for how the money was used. Public institutions, in turn, charged all students a price

well below cost, with very little price variation between in-state undergraduate students within

institutions. 1

         However, escalating tuition and tight state budgets have placed higher education

institutions under recent scrutiny, as lawmakers debate what type of education government

should be promoting and who should pay for it. One of the more high-profile proposals

stemming from these debates is the recent effort by Florida Governor Rick Scott to nudge more

students into majors in “strategic areas” like engineering and biotechnology by freezing tuition

rates in these fields, while increasing rates for students in liberal arts (Alvarez, 2012). An

alternative approach was taken at public universities in Texas following deregulation in 2004.

Many institutions increased overall tuition rates and began charging higher rates for specific

programs, at least partially in an attempt to improve the quality of these specific programs by

generating additional resources (Kim and Stange, 2013). Michigan and Ohio recently followed

the trend of many other states by making appropriations conditional on various measures of

institutional performance, including the production of degrees in high-need fields (Jesse, 2012;

Plant, 2012). At the national level, calls to increase the number of bachelor’s degrees awarded in

engineering and nursing (Executive Office of the President, 2012; Institute of Medicine, 2010)


1
 Public institutions do charge different prices to in-state and out-of-state students and lower prices to students that
attend part-time, but other forms of price differentiation within institutions are less pronounced historically.



                                                            2
motivated the SMART Grant program and various workforce provisions of the Affordable Care

Act. 2 In short, policy-makers at many levels are attempting to alter the mix of undergraduate

degrees to achieve the greatest return on the public’s substantial investment in higher education.

        The efficacy of many of these efforts depends on the responses of students and

institutions to changes in major-specific prices, a topic about which little is known. This question

is the focus of this paper. The situations in Texas and Florida are not atypical, as institutions

across the country are increasingly charging students higher prices for upper division coursework

and for certain high-cost majors such as engineering, business, and nursing. This reverses the

historical convention of universities charging all undergraduates the same price regardless of

field. A recent survey found that forty-two percent of public doctoral institutions now charge

differentially either by field or level, with field-based differentials much more common

(Ehrenberg, 2012). Given the heightened scrutiny and financial pressure faced by institutions,

differential pricing may very well become the new standard practice in undergraduate education,

as it is in graduate education. Since differential pricing could induce both demand and supply

responses, the combined effect on the sorting of students into majors is theoretically ambiguous

and thus an important and unanswered empirical question.

      In this paper, the effect of differential pricing is estimated using data on the mix of degrees

awarded by 142 large public research universities from 1990 to 2010. Fifty of these universities

adopted differential pricing for engineering, business, or nursing during this time period. These

three fields are the most common targets for differential pricing and also account for a sizable

share of all undergraduate students. Employing a difference-in-differences and event-study

strategy, I compare changes in the share of degrees awarded in certain fields at these universities


2
 See Evans (2012) for a discussion of the recently discontinued SMART Grant program and Morgan (2010) for
discussion of the nursing and other health workforce provisions in the Affordable Care Act.



                                                      3
to changes at schools that did not alter their tuition policy during the same time period. Several

different plausible control groups – colleges that adopt differential pricing at different times,

colleges that considered adopting (but didn’t), non-adopters in the same region and selectivity

category – are used to estimate the counterfactual time trend that adopters would have

experienced had they not enacted price differentials. The event-study model finds no evidence

that schools adopting differential pricing policies were trending differently than control schools

prior to adoption.

      The results indicate that differential pricing for engineering is associated with a statistically

significant 1.1 percentage point decrease in the share of degrees awarded in engineering after

three years (on a base of 14.7 percent). The analogous figure for business is an (imprecise) 0.8

percentage point decrease in the business share within three years (on a base of 19.5 percent).

Differential pricing for nursing is actually associated with a 0.8 percentage point increase in the

nursing share (on a base of 4.4 percent), though this is imprecise and not significantly different

from zero. These patterns are robust across a number of specifications, covariate adjustments,

different control groups, and samples. I also find that women and minorities have larger

proportionate effects than male and white students. Using individual-level data, I find no

evidence that additional institutional grant aid offsets the increased tuition for impacted majors.

Since the effects I uncover combine both a demand and supply response, different responses

across fields may reflect differences in demand parameters, that the supply response differs

across fields, or that fields are in different initial equilibrium states. It is possible that additional

revenue enables an expansion in the supply of over-subscribed nursing positions while the

quality and capacity enhancement of engineering programs is not sufficient to overcome the

price impact on demand.




                                                     4
      This paper provides the first evidence on the consequence of a new model for pricing in

higher education, which has grown significantly and is likely to become the norm in the near

future. Graduate training has long differentiated price based on instructional cost and students’

willingness (or ability) to pay, but this has become widespread in undergraduate education only

recently. Price does appear to be a policy lever through which state governments can alter the

field composition of the workforce they are training with the public higher education system.

      This paper proceeds as follows. The next section provides a brief background on

differential pricing. A framework for interpreting the empirical results is presented in Section III.

Previous literature is discussed in Section IV. Section V describes the data used in the analysis

and the empirical strategy. Results and robustness are discussed in Section VI. Section VII

concludes.

II.    Background on Differential Pricing

      Differential pricing by major has been advocated by economists and educational scholars

periodically for quite some time. Proponents of differential pricing cite two primary rationales

(Hoenack and Weiler, 1975, Siegfried and Round, 1997, Nelson 2008). First, differentials make

the price students experience align more closely actual instructional costs, eliminating the

implicit cross-subsidy across major fields that results from the conventional practice of charging

similar prices. The cost of instruction differs tremendously between upper and lower division

coursework and across programs even within institutions. For instance, recent analysis of cost

data from four large state postsecondary systems (Florida, Illinois, New York‐SUNY, and Ohio)

indicated that upper division instruction costs approximately 40% more per credit hour than

lower division instruction, and that upper-division engineering, physical science, and

visual/performing art was approximately 40% more costly than the least costly majors (SHEEO,




                                                  5
2010). In fact, an earlier but more extensive cost study found that more than three-fourths of the

variance in instructional cost across institutions is explained by the disciplinary mix within an

institution (U.S. Department of Education 2003). The consequence is that lower division students

subsidize upper-division students and students in costly majors are subsidized by those in less

expensive ones. Of course, institutions also benefit from the reputation and donations of

graduating alumni, which may offset these cost differences at many of these schools.

       Second, tuition differentials better align prices with students’ ability to pay post-

graduation. Lower division includes many students who eventually drop out, while students that

have advanced to upper division are more likely to graduate and earn more. Engineering,

science, and business majors tend to earn more and have higher returns than education and

humanities majors, even after controlling for differential selection of major by ability

(Arcidiacono 2004). Higher earnings upon graduation mean that graduates with these degrees are

thus in a better position to finance higher tuition fees with loans. Again, non-differentiated

pricing implicitly creates cross-subsidization that runs counter to differences in post-schooling

earnings and ability to pay. In addition to being regressive, this pattern of cross-subsidization is

highly unusual; profit-maximizing firms in other markets are predicted to charge based on

marginal cost and willingness to pay.

       Some opponents of the changes worry that tuition differentials will adversely affect

student choice, particularly for low-income students (Nelson 2008). A related concern is that

differential tuition practices will make it even more difficult to increase participation in STEM

fields and in health professions such as nursing, as some of these fields are often the target of

tuition differentials. Others worry that differential tuition will discourage student exploration




                                                  6
(Redden, 2007), undermining the liberal arts goals of institutions and resulting in worse matches

between students and majors or occupations.

        A few large public universities, such as the University of Illinois and the University of

Michigan, have charged more for upper division coursework and for high-cost majors for quite

some time (Yanikoski and Wilson, 1984). However, many more universities have recently

implemented explicit differential prices by level and program as an alternative to across-the-

board tuition and fee increases. In a broad survey of 165 public research universities, Nelson

(2008) found that 45% of schools have at least one undergraduate program with differential

tuition or fees in 2008, with most implementing them in the past decade. This share was up to

57% by 2011 (Reed 2011). Many more, such as the University of California System, have

recently considered and rejected such a scheme (Gordon 2009, University of California Office of

the President 2009) or have commissioned studies of pricing practices at other institutions as a

possible first step to considering such schemes (University of Washington Office of Planning

and Budgeting 2011). Differential pricing by level, independent of major program, is rarer, but

still present at some institutions (Simone 2010, Ehrenberg, 2012). A recent survey found a

continuation of this trend: 42% of all public doctoral institutions had some form of tuition

differential in 2010-2011, as did many public masters and bachelors-level public institutions

(18% and 30%, respectively) (Ehrenberg, 2012). The enactment of these practices has grown

steadily since the mid-1990s with no sign of slowing down (Cornell Higher Education Research

Institute, 2012).

III.   Possible Demand and Supply Channels

The introduction of differential pricing by program could induce both a demand and supply

response, so the combined effect on the sorting of students into majors is theoretically




                                                  7
ambiguous. This section discusses the possible demand and supply channels to help interpret the

reduced form effects uncovered in the empirical analysis. Throughout I assume that program-

specific price at each institution, P, is set externally (e.g., by a Board of Trusties or legislature),

so that individual departments and students act as price-takers and P does not necessarily equate

supply and demand.

         On the demand side, individuals weigh the long-term expected benefits of studying a

particular program against the short-term costs of doing so, as is typical in the human capital

framework (Becker 1964). First suppose that supply is perfectly elastic. Individuals are thus free

to choose the major for which the difference between expected benefit and cost is the greatest.

Denote the net value that individual i receives from receiving a degree in major k at university j

to be Vijk = β1Pjk + β 2 Earningsi (Q jk ) + β3 Effort ijk + δ jk + ε ijk . The most salient benefit is the

financial return, Earningsi(Qjk), which is a function of the quality of major k at university j,

where quality includes such things as class size, faculty prestige, and classroom technology.

Benefits also include the non-financial aspects of careers associated with each major (δjk) or the

consumption value during college. In most previous analysis of major choice, costs consist of the

individual-specific non-financial effort costs (Effortijk) stemming from the difficulty of

completing each major. For instance, large differences in effort cost and study requirements exist

between majors (Babcock and Marks 2011, Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner 2008). 3 A

differential tuition policy creates financial cost differences by program, Pjk, which may also




3
 Differences in required study time between majors could also be thought of as differences in the opportunity cost
of time not available for work, given that many students combine work and schooling.




                                                         8
influence demand. Under typical assumptions 4, the marginal effect of an increase in price on the

share of students choosing major k at school j is:

.

                 dShare jk                 dEarning jk dQ jk     
                                  β1 + β 2
                                 =                                 ( Share jk )(1 − Share jk )
                       dPjk                  dQ jk    dPrice jk 
                                 

β1 reflects the pure price effect, which is likely negative since higher prices should discourage

students from entering impacted fields, holding all else constant.

         However, price changes can also induce at least two supply responses which would alter

students’ major decisions. First, programs could use some of the additional revenue to improve

              dQ jk
quality (                 > 0 ). If students value earnings (β2 > 0) and there are positive returns to
            dPrice jk

                      dEarning jk
major quality (                     > 0 ), then demand for major k will reflect both a price and quality
                         dQ jk

response, which are likely to be opposite signed. If the quality improvement is substantial,

demand for a given program could actually increase when its price is raised. The key mediator is

how much colleges reinvest additional revenue to improve the quality of impacted majors. 5

         Expanded capacity is a second supply response. Now suppose that department-level

capacity is not perfectly elastic, but rather upward-sloping with price. Higher prices may enable

units to teach more students without altering program quality (e.g. class size) by offering more

course sections and hiring more faculty. If the initial price (set externally) is too low, demand

will exceed supply creating capacity constraints and individual programs will ration slots with

4
  If unobserved determinants of demand for major k (𝜀𝑖𝑗𝑘 ) are assumed to be i.i.d. with a type 1 extreme value
distribution and individual heterogeneity of returns and effort cost is ignored, then major choice probabilities take
the conditional logit form with the marginal effect given above.
5
 This discussion simplifies things by assuming that the effort costs and non-financial benefits of a given major are
not altered when its price increases.




                                                           9
non-price mechanisms (e.g. waiting lists, GPA cut-offs, separate application processes). In this

case, an increase in price will enable a department to expand capacity, which could increase

equilibrium quantity. If a department initially has excess supply (more slots available than

students demand at the externally-set initial price), then demand effects will dominate and

equilibrium quantity will decline as price increases (assuming no quality response).

    To summarize, demand theory is unambiguous in predicting that differential pricing should

discourage students from entering the impacted fields, holding all else constant. However, if

impacted programs use the additional revenue to improve quality, the net effect on demand will

be ambiguous since quality improvements will increase demand. Furthermore, if the equilibrium

at initial prices is one of over-demand (a shortage of available seats), then higher prices may

permit oversubscribed departments to expand supply and increase the total number of students.

Thus, we may expect to see a range of effects across majors and institutions, depending on the

major-specific elasticity of demand, the extent to which additional revenue is used to improve

instructional quality, the elasticity of supply, and the nature of the equilibrium point at initial

prices. The average combined effect of all these mechanisms across all institutions is thus an

empirical question. While the data do not permit the separate identification of these various

channels, it is important to keep in mind that the reduced form effects I estimate are a

combination of responses by students (demand) and institutions (supply). This may be, however,

the effect most relevant to policy-makers who have the ability to set prices, but do not directly

control what individual departments do with any additional revenue.

IV. Previous Literature

There is a large body of evidence showing that students’ enrollment, persistence, and college

choices are influenced by net college price. A consensus estimate is that a $1,000 change in




                                                   10
college price (1990 dollars) is associated with an approximately 3-5 percentage point difference

in enrollment rates (Kane 2006). Evidence on the effect of college price on persistence and

degree completion is rarer, but most studies suggest that persistence and completion are modestly

responsive to prices for at least some groups (Bettinger 2004, Turner 2004, Dynarski 2008,

DesJardins and McCall 2010, Goldrick-Rab et al 2011). Price also appears to be a strong

predictor of the specific college students choose to attend (Long, 2004, Jacob McCall and

Stange, 2013). All of this work exploits variation that affects prices of all majors simultaneously,

so it sheds little light on the independent price effects across majors.

          Previous research on the determinants of major choice has focused on expected earnings,

student tastes or preferences, and student ability. Berger (1988) finds that students respond to

predicted lifetime earnings across majors, rather than starting salaries, consistent with a standard

economic life-cycle model. Montmarquet, Cannings, Mahseredjian (2002) extend this approach

by including uncertainty about successful completion for each major. Arcidiacono (2004)

estimates a dynamic structural model to control for selection into major and finds that student

ability, preferences, and earnings all impact student choice of major. Exploiting differences in

major-specific returns over the business cycle to eliminate selection bias, Beffy, Fougere, and

Maurel (2011) find that the elasticity of major choice to expected earnings is significant, but low.

They conclude that nonpecuniary factors are a primary determinant of major choices. 6 Griffith

(2010) finds that academic background, grade performance, and the educational focus of the

institution explain a great deal of the higher exit rate of women and minorities from STEM

fields.

6
  Very recently, researchers have begun to collect subjective expectations of earnings in each major in an attempt to
isolate the effect of earnings expectations while relying on fewer assumptions about expectations (Arcidiacono,
Hotz, and Kang 2011; Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner 2011; Wiswall and Zafar (2011). These papers all conclude
that future earnings are an important consideration in students’ major choice, though preferences and
ability/background may be even more important.




                                                          11
         There has been almost no research on how major-specific prices affect students’ major

choice. One exception is a recent working paper by Evans (2012), who finds that eligibility for

the National SMART Grant had little impact on students’ likelihood of pursing a STEM major at

public institutions in Ohio. Given the stringent eligibility requirements, low program

participation, and specific setting of the study, these findings may not generalize to other forms

of major-specific pricing. Furthermore, students’ responses to earnings differences by major (for

which there is evidence) may provide a poor guide to the likely effects of differential tuition.

Students may weigh short-term and long-term financial considerations differently (Rothstein and

Rouse, 2011), so price and earnings responses may be very different. I add to this literature by

explicitly estimating the price response of major choice for a broad set of institutions using

variation in their normal pricing practices, rather than through a specialized program. 7

         Evidence on the response of institutions to price (or resources more generally) is also

limited, though the research that does exist has found that institutions reallocate resources when

faced with changes in their budgets and that these reallocations have real impacts on students.

For instance, Brown et al (2010) find that negative endowment shocks lead universities to reduce

hiring (or accelerate the firing) of both faculty and support personnel (but not university

administrators), but positive endowment shocks have no effect on these measures of real

resources. Using changes in per-student funding arising from exogenous variation in cohort size

across states over time, Bound and Turner (2007) conclude that funding for public universities

has a large impact on both the quantity and the quality of college graduates because supply is far

from perfectly elastic. A reduction in per-student state appropriations thus reduces collegiate

7
 Hoenack and Weiler (1975) and Berg and Hoenack (1987) discuss the implementation of cost-related tuition (an
earlier name for “differential tuition”) at the University of Minnesota and also present simulation results of the likely
consequences. Neither of these papers directly assesses the impact of the policy, however. Hoenack and Weiler
(1975) simulate major-specific price responses using the enrollment response to distance to approximate the
enrollment response to differential tuition.




                                                           12
attainment and the production of college-educated workers, though which mediating factors

(reduced quality of instruction, fewer support services, less generous institutional aid) explain

this relationship is not assessed. In one of the few studies that examined resource allocation

within institutions, Johnson and Turner (2009) find that faculty salary differences across fields

do correlate with student-faculty ratios, suggesting that economic factors (such as price) could

cause institutions to reallocate instructional resources such as faculty. I am not aware of any

evidence on the reallocation of resources across departments within institutions in response to

greater revenue generated by specific departments. Though if institution-level evidence is any

guide, we’d expect departments to increase both program quality and quantity (number of

students) in response to differential pricing.

V. Empirical Implementation

A. Data and sample

Information on differential tuition prices by undergraduate major or program is not readily

available from any standard data source. The most common source for tuition information, the

Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), only publishes differentials by in-

state status. 8 I have obtained data on tuition differentials by program compiled by Nelson (2008).

This data contains the incremental tuition or fees charged to different majors above base tuition

(in percentage terms) for the 2007-2008 academic year at 161 public research universities. 9

Seventy-four of these institutions had differential tuition for at least one program in 2007-2008.

The data also contains information on the year of differential enactment and which schools


8
  IPEDS does currently collect program-specific tuition prices for some institutions, but these are vocational-
oriented institutions and programs, not bachelors-granting undergraduate institutions. IPEDS did collect differential
information for a few select years in the 1980s, but the reliability and completeness of this information is not clear.
9
 These were the 165 public research intensive and extensive institutions defined by 2000 Carnegie Classification
categories 15 and 16. I exclude UCSF, CUNY-Graduate, U Maryland-Baltimore, and U Puerto Rico which had
specialized undergraduate programs.




                                                           13
considered (but did not implement) differential pricing. Of the 161 institutions, the precise

timing of differential adoption was unavailable for 19 institutions, so my analysis focuses on the

142 remaining institutions (55 that adopted differential pricing for at least one program). My

analysis focuses on the 50 institutions that had implemented differentials for engineering,

business, and nursing majors as of the 2007/2008 academic year. These three fields are the most

common fields in which differentials were enacted that also affect a sizable number of students.

Though differentials for architecture and fine arts are also common, these impact a very small

number of students and are ignored in my analysis. Table A1 in the appendix list the schools that

adopted differential tuition policies for these three majors, along with the magnitude and timing

of adoption. One limitation of the data is that the timing of field-specific differentials was not

obtained, so I have assumed that differentials for all majors at a school were adopted at the same

time. If schools enacted differentials for different fields during different years, then the timing

may be misclassified, creating attenuation bias in my estimates.

        The primary outcome I examine is the share of undergraduate degrees awarded by field,

which is assessed using the IPEDS Degrees and Certificates Conferred (Completions) module. 10

The raw data includes the number of students who complete a postsecondary program by

Classification of Instructional Programs (CIP) code and level by sex and race. From this data I

calculate the fraction of bachelor’s degrees awarded in engineering, business, and nursing for

each institution in each year from 1990 to 2008 overall and by sex and race. The full dataset thus

contains 2698 observations (142 institutions X 19 years), though several specifications restrict

this sample in different ways. Most importantly, many specifications restrict the sample to

include only four years before and after the implementation of differential pricing for those


10
  I also estimate models with the logarithm of the number of degrees awarded in each field as the outcome variable
and the results are qualitatively and qualitatively similar.



                                                        14
institutions that adopt such policies so that baseline major shares for these institutions are

estimated with observations close to the time of adoption. The resulting sample size is smaller

(2,304 for Engineering, 2,234 for Business, and 2,489 for Nursing). This outcome data was

supplemented with year-specific freshmen enrollment, tuition (in-state and out-of-state

differential), resources (full-time faculty, state appropriations, and spending per FTE), and

student attributes (% full-time, % in-state, Pell grant amount per FTE). Institutions are grouped

into three selectivity categories, using the Barron’s taxonomy (most or highly competitive, very

competitive, competitive or less competitive).

         Table 1 presents summary statistics of my analysis sample. Institutions that adopt

differential pricing tend to be slightly larger and better resourced and are more likely to be in the

“very competitive” category. Across all schools and years, business majors represent 18% of the

sample, engineering 8%, and nursing 3%. Though the fraction of students choosing nursing is

comparable across the three groups, institutions with differentials tend to have more engineering

and business majors than colleges without differentials. Given these apparent differences

between institutions with and without differentials, it will be important to control for observed

(and unobserved) differences between colleges that may correlate with both major choice and the

adoption of differential pricing.

     To analyze how differential pricing affects the composition and financial aid of students in

impacted fields, I also analyze individual-level data from the 1996, 2000, 2004, and 2008 waves

of the National Postsecondary Student Aid Study (NPSAS). 11 My NPSAS analysis sample

consists of undergraduate students who attended one of these 142 universities, excluding


11
   An earlier version of this paper also used the NPSAS to assess major choice, but estimates from this analysis
(which found no statistically significant effects of differential pricing) were extremely imprecise and thus abandoned
in favor of using the IPEDS completions data. Using IPEDS completions data generates confidence intervals that are
three to five times narrower and also permits the testing for pre-treatment balance using an event-study approach.




                                                         15
students attending multiple institutions during the survey year, a few whose undergraduate level

is missing, and any students whose major field is either missing or undecided/undeclared. I also

restrict attention to full-time, full-year students so that financial aid differences do not reflect

enrollment intensity. Across all four years, the NPSAS student sample contains approximately

18,000 students attending one of 141 universities. 12

B. Identification strategy

Institutions adopted differential pricing for these programs at different times throughout the past

two decades. Using this staggered adoption, my basic empirical strategy is to compare changes in

major shares at universities that have recently adopted differential tuition pricing to changes at

universities that did not alter their tuition policy during the same time period. To implement this

difference-in-differences strategy, I estimate regressions of the form:

                             =
                          EngShare jt β EngDiff jt + α X it + δ t + λ j + ε jt
                                                                                                 (1)

In this specification, EngShare is the fraction of degrees awarded in engineering at university j

during year t. EngDiff is an indicator for whether j charges differential tuition for engineering

during year t, X is a vector of time-varying institutional controls, δ is a set of year fixed effects, λ

is a full set of school fixed effects, and ε is an error term. Aggregate time trends in major choice

across all institutions (e.g. changes in the popularity of the business major) are accounted for by

year fixed effects. School fixed effects control for average differences in field prevalence across

institutions that may be related to the adoption of differential tuition policies. Time-varying

school characteristics control for any changes in student population or school resources at the

institution-level that may correlate with adoption of differential tuition. This specification is

12
 One of my 142 analysis institutions do not appear in the NPSAS. I have rounded the number of students to the
nearest five hundred. Missing information on SAT score reduces this sample to 12,000 for analysis that relies on
non-missing SAT scores. Using a balanced sample of institutions that appear in all waves of the NPSAS generates
qualitatively similar estimates.




                                                        16
conceptually equivalent to estimating a separate difference-in-differences model for each school

that implemented differential tuition, then pooling these school-specific estimates. The

coefficient of interest (β) is the change in the change in share of degrees granted in engineering

following the adoption of differential pricing for engineering. I estimate (1) separately for the

three majors that have differential tuition most frequently – engineering, business, and nursing –

and that also represent a sizeable share of all college students. Standard errors are clustered by

institution, to address the possibility that errors within schools are not independent.

       The simple difference-in-differences specification assumes that outcomes for treatment

and control schools would trend similarly in the absence of treatment. While inherently not

testable, the panel data does allow one to test whether treatment and control schools were

trending similarly in the years leading up to the adoption of differential pricing by the former. To

do so, I estimate an event-study specification:

                                        k = 4+
               =
               EngShare jt              ∑
                                        k = −3
                                                 β k StartEngDiff jt + k + α X it + δ t + λ j + ε jt
                                                                                                       (2)

In the event study specification, StartEngDiffjk indicates that institution j adopted differential

pricing for engineering k years before year t. The parameter βk is the change in share of degrees

granted in engineering k years after the adoption of differential pricing relative to the omitted

category (k = -4 or earlier). For instance, β-3 is the change in share 3 years before adoption, β0 is

the share change in the year of adoption and β4+ is the share change 4 or more years after

adoption (all relative to four or more years before adoption). A suggestive test of the common

trends assumption is that all the pre-treatment coefficeints are equal to zero. Another limitation

of the simple difference-in-differences specification is that a new pricing policy may take a few

years before affecting degree production, but it is not obvious how quickly this will happen. The




                                                       17
event study specification has the additional benefit of quantifying how quickly policy effects

develop.

       Since major-specific price differentials are not experimentally assigned, there are several

threats to identification that confound estimates of β. First, lifetime earnings differences across

majors and unobserved student preferences for majors (or the jobs that certain majors lead to)

cannot be directly entered as time-varying controls. If differential tuition is implemented for

specific majors precisely when they become more desirable or lucrative at specific schools, β

will suffer from omitted variable bias. It thus may appear that students actually prefer to pay

higher prices. To address this, some specifications compare schools within the same region or

state and only include schools that considered (but did not implement) differential tuition as

controls. Presumably demand for impacted majors was sufficiently high at these latter

institutions to warrant a formal consideration of differential tuition. Region- and state-specific

time trends control for any time-varying determinants of major share that are common to all

institutions in the same geographic area, such as labor market conditions or K-12 preparation.

For instance, the relative desirability of majoring in engineering at University of Oregon (no

differential tuition for engineering) will serve as a counterfactual for the relative desirability of

majoring in engineering at Oregon State and Portland State Universities (both enacted

differential tuition for engineering in 1994) in each year. Since the models also control for

institution fixed effects, any time-invariant differences across institutions will not confound

estimates. Another strategy for addressing this concern is to test for pre-treatment trend

differences between schools that do and do not adopt differential pricing. A lack of trend

differences between adopting and non-adopting universities immediately before treatment occurs

would also suggest policy adoption is not correlated with unobserved factors. Given the many




                                                  18
political and legislative hurdles to adopting differential pricing, it is unlikely that institutions are

able to control policy adoption with yearly precision.

        Another possible confounder is financial aid. The vast majority of financial aid is based

on need or general merit and is independent of program of study, so will not bias estimates of β.

The only Federal financial aid program that specifically considers major is the SMART Grant,

which provided large grants to Pell upperclassmen majoring in STEM fields or a critical foreign

language from 2006 to 2010. Since this program was available to students at all institutions,

regardless of differential pricing, its existence should not bias my estimates. However, it is

possible that institutions may re-direct some of the additional revenue collected from differential

tuition to financial aid for students in affected majors. I explicitly examine whether schools with

differential tuition provide more institutional aid to students in affected majors conditional on

merit and income.

    Finally, I cannot rule out the possibility that institutions happen to implement other policies

coincident with differential tuition. For instance, if differential tuition accompanied changes in

the entry requirements for different majors or outreach by impacted departments, then my

estimates will confound the pricing effect with these other policies as well. It should be reiterated

that my estimates may combine a demand price response, a quality response, and changes in

supply resulting from major-specific price differentials. Separately distinguishing demand and

supply would require a different setting in which price was altered for only one side of the

market in isolation.

VI. Results

A. “Case-study” Evidence




                                                   19
I first document how the major share changes following each school’s adoption of differential

tuition. For each university that implemented differential pricing for engineering, business, or

nursing between 1990 and 2008, I calculate the change in the fraction in each major following

the policy change. The left panel of Figure 1 plots the distribution of these school-specific

changes for the three majors. While there is substantial heterogeneity in schools’ experience

following the introduction of differential pricing, the majority of schools experienced a decrease

in the fraction of students majoring in engineering and business. In contrast, a majority of

schools experienced an increase in the fraction of students majoring in nursing when differential

pricing for nursing was introduced. Since many things could be determining time trends in major

choice at individual colleges and also be correlated with differential pricing, one should not

necessarily interpret these raw estimates as causal effects. For instance, changes in the demand

for certain fields within states that happen to correlate with changes in pricing policy may cause

the simple change over time to not equal the causal effect of differential pricing on major share.

The right column of Figure 1 plots the distribution of these school-specific changes after

controlling for major-specific time trends using colleges in the same region and Barron’s

selectivity group as controls. 13 This method controls for any time trends in the popularity of

certain majors within regions and selectivity category. Though the distribution of estimates

changes somewhat, the original pattern remains. This general pattern –negative effects of

differential pricing on the fraction of degrees awarded in engineering or business and positive or




13
  The histograms plot the distribution of treatment effects estimated by school-specific difference-in-differences
models. For each college that enacted differential tuition, I estimate a separate regression of MAJORSHAREtj on
DIFFtj (=1 if the college had differential tuition during year t), SWITCHERj (a dummy for the college under study)
and year dummies on a sample that includes the SWITCHER college and any other control colleges in the same
census division and Barron’s category (most/highly competitive, very competitive,
competitive/less/noncompetitive). The histograms plot the distribution of estimated coefficients on DIFFtj.




                                                        20
minimal effects on the fraction awarded in nursing – persists throughout a number of different

identification strategies and robustness checks.

B. Main Results

Figure 2 presents estimates of the event study model separately by field using the restricted (+/- 4

year window) sample. 14 The figure plots the point estimates and 95% confidence interval for the

β k coefficients in equation (2). Consistent with the assumption that differential pricing was not

implemented when these three majors were trending differently at treatment and control schools,

the point estimates on the pre-treatment years are close to zero and insignificant. This finding

gives some credibility to the key difference-in-differences assumption that treatment and control

schools would have trended similarly if not for the adoption of differential pricing. However, the

share of degrees awarded in engineering or businesses eventually drops following the enactment

of differential pricing, while the nursing share increases. These event-study estimates also

suggest that any treatment effects may take 3 to 4 years to emerge, as the point estimates

experience their most notable change three years after differential pricing was enacted. To gain

precision and to facilitate the comparison of many specifications, my preferred specification is a

difference-in-differences model that permits separate effects for the immediate (0, 1, and 2 years

after the policy was enacted) and medium-run (3 and 4 years after) time periods. Table 2 presents

these difference-in-differences results.

     Columns (1), (5), and (9) present the raw correlation between differential tuition policies and

major share. University-year observations in which differentials are in place for engineering and

nursing are coincident with greater number of degrees awarded in these majors. The raw

correlation for business majors is small, negative and insignificant. This raw correlation may

14
  Event-study estimates using the full balanced panel (not restricted to 8 year window around policy adoption) are
qualitatively very similar, though larger in magnitude.




                                                         21
overstate the positive effect of tuition differentials (or, rather, understate the negative effect) if

differentials are implemented by universities whose students are predisposed to choose impacted

majors, as a simple revenue-maximization goal would suggest universities should do. For

instance, students with high SAT math scores are more likely to major in engineering and

business and thus colleges with high SAT students may be more likely to implement tuition

differentials. To address some of these concerns, columns (2), (6), and (10) control for year and

university fixed effects. In these models, the effect of differential pricing on major share is

identified by changes in major share within universities following the introduction of price

differentials, relative to the time path of major share predicted by other (non-treatment) colleges.

In all three cases, the point estimate becomes more negative and, in the case of engineering,

becomes statistically significant. Specifications (3), (7), and (11) separate the post-treatment

observations into two periods (0 to 2 years after adoption vs. 3+ years). Consistent with the

event-study estimates, the effect of differential pricing on the major shares are larger three years

after enactment than immediately following. The final specifications restrict the analysis sample

to include observations for treatment schools only within an eight-year window around the year

differential pricing was enacted. Thus observations far from the time of the policy change are not

used to identify the pre- or post-period school averages used to calculate the treatment effects.

This restriction has the effect of diminishing the estimated effect for engineering and business

share. This final (preferred) specification indicates that differential pricing for engineering is

associated with a statistically significant 1.1 percentage point decrease in the share of degrees

awarded in engineering within three years (on a base of 14.7 percent). The analogous figure for

business is an (imprecise) 0.8 percentage point decrease in the business share within three years

(on a base of 19.5 percent). Differential pricing for nursing is actually associated with a 0.8




                                                   22
percentage point increase in the nursing share (on a base of 4.4 percent), though this is imprecise

and not significantly different from zero. The 95% confidence interval permits me to rule out

negative effects larger than 0.37 percentage points. 15

     Given the magnitude of the price increase associated with these policies (increase in price of

engineering by 14.5%, business by 13.7% and nursing by 18.9%.), these represent fairly large

elasticities. For engineering and business, the implied elasticities are positive 0.51 and 0.30,

respectively. For nursing, the elasticity is positive and almost unity (elasticity = 1.0). 16

C. Robustness of Main Results

The key untestable assumption of the difference-in-differences approach is that the time path for

the outcome experienced by control schools provides a valid counterfactual for the time path of

treatment schools in absence of the treatment. That is, the time trend in fraction of students

graduating with a degree in engineering at schools that did not adopt differential tuition is what

adopters would have experienced had they not implemented differential pricing. Given the

centrality of this counterfactual time path to the validity of difference-in-differences estimates,

the choice of control group is critical. My base model uses all non-adopters to form the control

group, both schools that had differential tuition policies in place throughout the time period and

those that never implemented one. Table 3 examines the robustness of the main findings to the

choice of control group used to estimate the counterfactual time trends. The first column reports

the base model, taken from columns (4), (8), and (12) from Table 2.

15
   Table A2 in the Appendix repeats this analysis using the logarithm of number of degrees granted as the outcome
(rather than the share), both with and without controlling for the log of total number of degrees (in any field). The
implied proportionate change in the share of degrees awarded in each field is similar with this specification. The log
specifications (not controlling for total degrees awarded) also suggest that differential pricing is associated with an
absolute decline in number of degrees awarded in engineering, not just as a share of the total.
16
   I find no correlation between institution-specific treatment effect size and the differential amount in 2008, as
depicted in Appendix Figure A1. This suggests that size of the differential is less important than whether one is
present. This result should be interpreted with caution, however, since differential amount is only available in a
single year, which may not reflect the amount at the time it was introduced.




                                                          23
         Column (2) controls for observable time-varying differences in prices, resources, and

student characteristics between treatment and controls that may happen to correlate with both

degree mix and the adoption of differential pricing (time-invariant differences are absorbed by

the school fixed effects). These controls leave the baseline estimates virtually identical. Column

(3) includes controls for the simultaneous adoption of differential pricing in related fields. 17 The

presence of differentials for other (related) fields is relatively uncommon and has no impact on

the point estimates. Column (4) controls for the simultaneous adoption of price differentials for

the other two fields. Though magnitudes change modestly, the qualitative relationship is

unchanged.

         Columns (5) to (7) alter the control group by restricting the sample to students only

attending schools that either adopted differential tuition during the analysis period or that are

arguably more similar to adopters than a typical non-adopter school. These control groups

include schools that have adopted some form of differential by 2007/8 in any field (column (5)),

only universities that adopted a differential in the given major (6), and the 16 schools that

considered (but did not adopt) tuition differentials in any field (7). The main qualitative results

are generally robust to these various control groups, though the magnitudes of the point estimates

does change somewhat. In (5) and (7), engineering differentials are associated with a 1.1

percentage point drop in the engineering share after three years. Specification (6) is the only

anomaly, with a much smaller, but negative, and insignificant coefficient for engineering. It

should be noted that this specification has a substantially smaller sample size than the others so I




17
   I include controls for differential pricing for architecture, computer science, or physical science when examining
engineering share, liberal arts when examining business share, and other health professions and physical therapy
when studying nursing share.




                                                          24
cannot reject that coefficients are different. 18 The coefficients for business and nursing change

only slightly, remaining negative for business and positive for nursing, but insignificant for both.

     Columns (8) through (10) alter the control group used to generate counterfactual time trends

by estimating time trends that are specific to various college characteristics. These models permit

distinct time trends by census division (8), institution state (9), and the interaction between

division and Barron’s category (10). For instance, if there was an increased demand for engineers

from selective colleges on the west coast which happened to coincide with the adoption of

differential tuition policies at some west coast schools, then specification (10) would control for

this source of omitted variable bias. Identification comes from comparisons between the trends in

degree share of adopters and non-adopters among similarly-selective schools in the same region.

Specification (9) permits time trends to vary by institution state, exploiting within-state variation

in the adoption of differential tuition. The base results are robust to all these alternative control

groups. The point estimates for engineering share are remarkably stable and those for business

and nursing only become larger in magnitude, though are still insignificant.

D. Heterogeneity and Student Sorting

A primary concern voiced by opponents of differential pricing is that certain groups would be

particularly affected. For instance, if minority or low-income students are particularly price-

sensitive, then they may be dissuaded from entering more high-priced fields. Differential

responses would be worrisome given that these fields are particularly lucrative and that there is

already concern about underrepresented minority and female representation in many fields. To

test for response heterogeneity, I re-estimate the base model separately by gender and race. The

outcome variables are the share of all degrees awarded to individuals in each group at time t that


18
  Furthermore, the results for specification (6) using the full sample (not just the +/- 4 year window) are very similar
to the base specification. These results are available from the author.



                                                          25
were in engineering, business, and nursing. Table 4 presents these results. The point estimate for

the 3-year impact on engineering share is similar for most gender and racial groups, but given the

large differences in initial major share across groups, the percent reduction is much larger for

women than men and underrepresented minorities than white students. Interestingly, the absolute

and proportional response is greatest for Asian students, despite their high initial share in

engineering. For business, there is less variation across gender and race in the baseline degree

share, so similar absolute effects across groups results in similar proportionate effects for men

and women and for black and white students. As for engineering, the effect for Asian students is

large both absolutely and proportionately. Contrary to the pattern for these other racial/ethnic

groups is the experience of Hispanic students, for which the point estimate is positive (but

statistically insignificant). Lastly, Panel C presents the results for nursing. Differences across

groups are more difficult to interpret as the estimates are much less precise relative to the initial

major share than for engineering and business. But the point estimates are positive (though not

statistically significant) for all gender and racial groups. For men, the point estimate is significant

and implies an extremely large proportionate increase in the share of men majoring in nursing

following the introduction of differential pricing for nursing.

   Table 5 presents additional evidence on whether differential pricing altered the

characteristics of students who enter impacted fields using individual-level data from the

NPSAS. A benefit of the individual data is that I can test for changes in characteristics not

available in the aggregate IPEDS data, such as test scores and socioeconomic status. I regress

each student characteristic on dummies for being in each impacted major, indicators for whether

the institution charged differentially for the majors during the survey year, and interactions




                                                  26
between major and differential pricing. 19 In this difference-in-differences specification,

coefficients on the interactions test whether the characteristic changed more for the impacted

fields than other fields following the introduction of differential pricing. For instance, if women

were driven from studying engineering when differential pricing was introduced, the coefficient

on the engineering interaction should be negative in column (1). Though the coefficients on the

main field dummies indicate substantial differences in student characteristics across fields (men

and high SAT math students more likely to enter engineering, high income students more likely

to enter business), there are few significant changes in student characteristics following the

introduction of differential pricing. There is some evidence that differential pricing for

engineering students is associated with fewer Pell recipients entering engineering and shift

towards students with higher SAT scores (relative to other students at their institution), but no

other changes are significant.

     Table 5 also provides suggestive evidence on the extent that students sort across institutions

in response to differential pricing. The coefficients on the indicators for differential pricing

during the survey year quantify the change in enrolled student characteristics across all other

(non-impacted) fields following differential pricing. The overall student body enters with lower

SAT scores when differential pricing for engineering is introduced, but there are no other

observed changes in student characteristics. Taken at face value, this could suggest that one

mechanism through which differential pricing for engineering reduces the number of engineering




19
  The models also include a full set of year and institution fixed effects. Qualitative results do not change if I
include the major indicator, differential pricing indicator, and interaction for each field one at a time.




                                                           27
graduates is by shifting the enrollment of high SAT freshmen (who are disproportionately more

likely to enter engineering) to other universities. 20

     It should be noted that due to the relatively few students in each major and at each institution,

these estimates are imprecise and I cannot rule out modest changes in student characteristics at

institutions and in impacted majors following the introduction of differential pricing.



E. Financial Aid, Resources, and Major Substitutability

     One way that institutions can use revenue generated by differential pricing is to provide

additional financial aid to students in impacted majors, partially offsetting the tuition increase.

George-Jackson, Rincon, and Garcia (2011) found that minorities studying engineering at two

universities received financial aid packages that offset differential tuition. Table 6 presents

estimates of the effect of differential pricing on the share of list price covered by institutional

grant aid using the same difference-in-differences model used to examine student characteristics.

Institutional grant aid covers 15% of the tuition list price across our entire sample. Coefficients

on the interactions test whether institutional grant aid changed more for the impacted fields than

other fields following the introduction of differential pricing. For instance, if business schools

redirected the revenue generated from differential pricing to more grant aid for undergraduate

business students, the coefficient on the business interaction should be positive. I find no

evidence that differential pricing leads to a reallocation of institutional grant aid across majors.

Whether controlling for an extensive set of individual controls (SAT score, female, minority,

undergraduate level, EFC) or looking at specific student subgroups, the interaction coefficients

are never significant.

20
  In results available from the author, I also find that the share of students that is full-time, the share of students that
are in-state, and the Pell amount per full-time-equivalent student (a proxy for socioeconomic disadvantage) also do
not change following the introduction of differential pricing.



                                                             28
       A full accounting of changes in resource levels and allocation following the introduction of

differential pricing is not feasible due to the absence of within-institution, department-specific

resource measures over time for a large sample of universities. However, using university-level

measures, I do find that the introduction of differential pricing is associated with higher overall

sticker price and lower state appropriations, but no noticeable change in spending on instruction

or academic support at the university-level. It should be noted that these aggregate university-

level measures may provide a poor approximation for the price and resource changes occurring

in specific departments or schools within universities. 21

       To further uncover the channels through which my main results operate, I also examined the

effect of differential pricing on the degree share of all other fields. These results are presented in

Appendix Table A3. There are no clear and robust patterns of substitution between fields

following the adoption of differential pricing. For instance, I find no evidence that differential

pricing for engineering shifts students towards computer science, math, or other obviously

closely related fields; many estimates are imprecise and depend on the specification. Overall, I

do find that differential pricing does shift degree production towards fields that earn less on

average, though the magnitude is small (a reduction in average earnings of 0.7% following

differential pricing for business) and the estimate is imprecise and not robust.

VII.       Implications and Conclusions

This paper provides the first evidence on the consequences of differential pricing by

undergraduate program in postsecondary education. Given the differences in instructional costs

and earnings premiums across majors, some view this practice as an equitable and politically

feasible alternative to across-the-board tuition and fees increases. I find that differential pricing is

associated with a sizable reduction in the fraction of degrees granted in engineering: the elasticity
21
     These results are available from the author.



                                                    29
of engineering share with respect to price is -0.51. Business share is slightly less responsive

(elasticity = -0.30), though this is not significant at conventional levels. Differential pricing for

nursing is actually associated with a large increase in the nursing share (elasticity = +0.97),

though this is imprecise and not significantly different from zero. Consistent with the concern of

some critics of this development, I also find that women and minorities have larger proportionate

effects than male and white students. It does not appear that additional institutional grant aid

offsets the increased tuition for impacted majors.

       This study has relevance for a number of different policies. Most directly, the results

inform the likely consequences of colleges’ use of differential pricing. Previous research on the

effect of price on college enrollment or choice and the effect of expected earnings on major

choice are unlikely to provide much guidance to the likely effects of differential pricing by

program. My results suggest that implementing these differentials may indeed impact the fields

that students pursue. Furthermore, since differentials may reduce demand, these policies may not

raise as much revenue as expected. It is important for colleges to understand how the revenue

and student impact of differential pricing compares to alternative pricing schemes such as across-

the-board tuition increases or tuition increases for wealthier or out-of-state students. This paper

informs one side of this calculation.

       The experience with differential pricing may also be informative about the likely impact

of financial incentives designed to alter students’ field of study. That fact that potential

engineering students appear to respond to differential pricing suggests that students’ major

choice may also respond to other financial incentives. This study also contributes to our

understanding of how students respond to financial incentives at different stages of the college

process. Choices may respond to financial incentives differently before college entry, while




                                                  30
enrolled in lower division coursework, or closer to graduation, though the timing of incentives

has received little attention. Though it is difficult to pin-point precisely when college major

choices are made, these results suggest that even decisions made during college can be

responsive to price. Understanding where financial incentives are strongest (or weakest) informs

how they should best be targeted.

        This study has a number of limitations that should be addressed in subsequent work.

First, I study the experience of many large public research universities, fifty of which adopted

differential tuition during the analysis period for engineering, business, or nursing. While these

schools represent an important segment of the U.S. postsecondary landscape, their experience

may not be typical of other segments, such as smaller public and private colleges, for-profits, and

sub-baccalaureate institutions. Future data collection on differentials should target these

institutions and examine the consequences.

      Second, my data does not permit me to separate demand from supply factors, which

combine to determine the sorting of students into majors. Different observed responses across

fields may reflect differences in demand parameters, a supply or quality response that differs

across fields, or that fields are in different initial equilibrium states since the effects I uncover

combine both a demand and supply response. It is possible that additional revenue enables an

expansion in the supply of nursing positions while engineering revenue is used to improve

quality and attract better (though fewer) students. Uncovering just how and whether programs

reallocate resources or increase capacity in response to this new revenue stream would help to

interpret my findings and would be a welcome complement to the present study.




                                                   31
                                      REFERENCE LIST

Alvarez, Lizette, 2012. “Florida May Reduce Tuition for Select Majors.” New York Times,
       December 9, 2012.

Arcidiacono, Peter. 2004. Ability Sorting and the Returns to College Major. Journal of
       Econometrics, 121(1-2): 343-375.

George-Jackson, Casey E., Blanca Rincon, and Mariana Garcia, 2011. “Effects of Differential
       Tuition on Low-Income Undergraduate Students in Engineering” forthcoming in Journal
       of Student Aid.

Arcidiacono, Peter, Joseph Hotz, and Songman Kang. 2011. Modeling College Major Choices
       using Elicited Measures of Expectations and Counterfactuals. Journal of Econometrics,
       forthcoming.

Babcock, Philip and Mindy Marks. 2011. The falling time cost of college: Evidence from half a
       century of time use data. Review of Economics and Statistics. 93(2): 468-478.

Becker, Gary S., 1964. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis with Special
       Reference to Education. New York: Columbia University Press.

Beffy, Magali, Denis Fougere, and Arnaud Maurel. 2011. Choosing the Field of Study in Post-
       Secondary Education: Do Expected Earnings Matter? The Review of Economics and
       Statistics, Forthcoming.

Berg, David and Stephen Hoenack, 1988. “The Concept of Cost-Related Tuition and Its
       Implementation at the University of Minnesota.” The Journal of Higher Education.
       58(3): 276-305.

Berger, Mark. 1988. Predicted Future Earnings and Choice of College Major. Industrial and
       Labor Relations Review, 41(3): 418-29.

Bettinger, Eric. 2004. How Financial Aid Affects Persistence.” In College Choices: The
       Economics of Where to Go, When to Go, and How to Pay for It, ed. Caroline Hoxby.
       University of Chicago Press.




                                                32
Bound, John and Sarah Turner, 2007. “Cohort crowding: How resources affect collegiate
       attainment,” Journal of Public Economics, Volume 91, Issues 5–6, June 2007, Pages 877-
       899.

Cornell Higher Education Research Institute, 2011. 2011 Survey of Differential Tuition at Public
       Higher Education Institutions.
       http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/cheri/upload/2011CHERISurveyFinal0212.pdf

DesJardins, Stephen and Brian McCall. 2010. Simulating the Effects of Financial Aid Packages
       on College Student Stopout, Reenrollment Spells, and Graduation Chances. The Review
       of Higher Education. 33(4): 513-541.

Dynarski, Susan, 2008. Building the Stock of College-Educated Labor." Journal of Human
       Resources 43:3, pp. 576-610.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G. 2012. “American Higher Education in Transition. Journal of Economic
       Perspectives. 26(1): 193-216.

Evans, Brent J., 2012. “SMART Money: Do Financial Incentives Encourage College Students to
       Study Science?” Unpublished working paper. Stanford University.

Goldrick‐Rab, Sara, Douglas N. Harris, James Benson and Robert Kelchen. 2011. Conditional
       Cash Transfers and College Persistence: Evidence from a Randomized Need‐Based Grant
       Program. Institute for Research on Poverty Discussion Paper no. 1393‐11

Gordon, Larry. 2009. “UC may hike tuition for some undergraduate majors.” Los Angeles Times.
       October 12, 2009.

Griffith, Amanda. 2010. Persistence of women and minorities in STEM field majors: Is it the
       school that matters? Economics of Education Review. 29 (2010): 911-922.

Hoenack, Stephen and William Weiler, 1975. “Cost-Related Tuition Policies and University
       Enrollments.” Journal of Human Resources. 10(3): 332-360.

Institute of Medicine. The future of nursing: leading change, advancing health. Washington, DC:
       National Academies Press, 2011.

Jesse, David, 2012, “3% Proposed Funding Hike for Public Universities Tied to Performance.”
       Detroit Free Press, February 9, 2012.



                                               33
Jacob, Brian, Brian P. McCall, and Kevin Stange, 2013. “College as Country Club: Do Colleges
       Cater to Students’ Preferences for Consumption.” NBER Working Paper 18745.

Johnson, William R. and Sarah Turner, 2009. “Faculty without Students: Resource Allocation in
       Higher Education.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 23(2): 169-189.

Kane, Thomas J., 2006. “Public Intervention in Postsecondary Education” in Eric Hanushek and
       Finis Welch (eds.) Handbook on the Economics of Education (Amsterdam:
       Elsevier/NorthHolland, 2006)

Kim, Jeongeun, and Kevin Stange, 2013. “Differential Pricing in the Wake of Tuition
       Deregulation in Texas Public Universities.” Unpublished working paper, University of
       Michigan.

Long, Bridget Terry. How Have College Decisions Changed Over Time? An Application of the
       Conditional Logistic Choice Model. Journal of Econometrics, 121: 271-298

Montmarquette, Claude, Kathy Cannings, and Sophie Mahseredjian. 2002. How Do Young
       People Choose College Majors? Economics of Education Review, 21(6): 543-556.

Morgan, Rachel, 2010. Summary of the Health Workforce Provisions in the Patient Protection
       and Affordable Care Act: HR3590. National Conference of State Legislators. Accessed at
       http://www.ncsl.org/documents/health/HlthWrkfrceProvHR3590.pdf.

National Association of State Budget Officers (NASBO), 2012. State Expenditure Report:
       Examining Fiscal 2010-2012 State Spending. National Association of State Budget
       Officers: Washington, D.C.

Nelson, Glen. 2008. Differential tuition by undergraduate major: Its use, amount, and impact on
       public research universities. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Nebraska-
       Lincoln. Lincoln, NE.

Plant, Meagan, 2012. “Ohio Unveils New Funding Plan for 4-year Colleges to Improve
       Graduation Rates.” Middletown Journal, November 30, 2012.

Redden, Elizabeth. 2007. “Paying by the Program” Inside Higher Ed. March 26, 2007.

Reed, Leslie. 2011. “UNL tuition may vary by majors” Omaha World-Herald. April 27, 2011.




                                               34
Rothstein, Jesse and Cecilia Rouse. 2011. Constrained after college: Student loans and early-
       career occupational choices. Journal of Public Economics. 95(2011):149-163.

SHEEO (State Higher Education Executive Officers). 2010. Four-State Cost Study.

Simone, Sean. 2010. Tuition and Fee Differentiation at Degree Granting Postsecondary
       Education Institutions. An AIR/NCES Data Policy Fellowship Report. May 2010.

Siegfried, John and David Round, 1997. “Differential Fees for Degree Courses in Australian
       Universities.” In Funding Higher Education: Performance and Diversity, edited by
       Jonathan Pincus and Paul Miller, 45-62. Canberra: Department of Employment,
       Education, Training, and Youth Affairs.

Stinebrickner, Ralph and Stinebrickner, Todd R. 2008 The Causal Effect of Studying on
       Academic Performance. The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy: Vol. 8 (1)
       (Frontiers), Article 14.

Stinebrickner, Todd, and Ralph Stinebrickner. 2011. "Math or Science? Using Longitudinal
       Expectations Data to Examine the Process of Choosing a College Major." NBER Working
       Paper 16869.

Turner, Sarah. 2004. Going to College and Finishing College: Explaining Different Educational
       Outcomes.”In College Choices: The Economics of Where to Go, When to Go, and How to
       Pay for It, ed. Caroline Hoxby. University of Chicago Press

University of California Office of the President. 2009. “Differential Fees for Undergraduates by
       Discipline.” 2010-11 Budget Development Briefing Paper. 10/5/2009.

University of Washington Office of Planning and Budgeting. 2011. “Use of Differential Tuition
       at Large Public Universities” Planning and Budgeting Brief.

U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. 2003. A Study of
       Higher Education Instructional Expenditures: The Delaware Study of Instructional Costs
       and Productivity. NCES 2003-161, by Michael F. Middaugh, Rosalinda Graham, and
       Abdus Shahid. Project Officer: C. Dennis Carroll. Washington, DC: 2003

Yanikoski, Richard and Richard Wilson. 1984. Differential Pricing of Undergraduate Education.
       Journal of Higher Education. 55(6): 735-750.




                                                 35
Wiswall, Matthew and Basit Zafar. 2011. Determinants of College Major Choice: Identification
       using an Information Experiment. Unpublished working paper.




                                             36
Table 1. Summary Statistics of Institutional Sample



                                                                                      Had at least one differential
                                                                     Never had         Timing           Timing
                                                      All schools    differential      known           unknown
Pricing differential
   Has differential in engineering during year           0.11            0.00            0.29              n/a
   Has differential in busines during year               0.12            0.00            0.30              n/a
   Has differential in nursing during year               0.04            0.00            0.11              n/a

College characteristics
   Total BA degrees granted (1,000)                     2.97            2.92             3.09             2.81
   Current freshmen enrollment (1,000)                  2.75            2.62             2.96             2.69
   In‐state tuition + fees (sticker price) ($1000)      4.76            4.72             4.90             4.54
   Out‐of‐state differential (% over in‐state)          1.89            1.95             1.84             1.76
   Full‐time faculty per 100 FTE                        6.34            6.10             6.55             6.88
   State appropriations per FTE ($1000)                 10.00           10.30            9.57             9.91
   Instructional spending per FTE ($1000)               9.10            9.06             9.17             9.12
   Academic support spending per FTE ($1000)            2.34            2.34             2.31             2.46
   Undergraduates % full‐time                           0.80            0.80             0.80             0.77
   Pell grant amount per FTE ($1000)                    0.62            0.66             0.56             0.63
   Freshmen enrollment % instate                        0.81            0.84             0.78             0.76
   Most/highly competitive                              0.17            0.20             0.16             0.11
   Very competitive                                     0.30            0.24             0.36             0.37
   Competitive/less/noncompetitive                      0.53            0.56             0.47             0.53

Share of bachelors degrees awarded in
   Engineering                                           0.08            0.07            0.10             0.07
   Business                                              0.18            0.17            0.19             0.18
   Nursing                                               0.03            0.03            0.03             0.06

Observations                                            3,059           1,653           1,045             361
Number of colleges                                       161              87              55               19



Notes: Full sample includes observations for 161 public research universities for 19 years (1990 to 2008). Analysis
sample includes the 87 non‐differential schools and the 55 differential schools for which precise information about
the timing of adoption of differential pricing was obtained. Data on differential pricing comes from Nelson (2008),
college characteristics come from IPEDS and the Delta Cost Project, and share of bachelors degrees awarded by
category comes from IPEDS.




                                                           37
Table 2. Effect of Differential Tuition on Composition of Degrees Awarded, Main Results

                                                     Dept Var: Share Engineering                            Dept Var: Share Business                             Dept Var: Share Nursing
                                            (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)            (9)         (10)         (11)           (12)

Have differential in year                0.059**       -0.011**                                  -0.001       -0.008                                  0.015**      -0.001
                                         (0.028)        (0.005)                                  (0.015)      (0.005)                                 (0.006)      (0.002)
Adopted differential 0-2 years earlier                               -0.004     -0.004**                                 -0.004        -0.004                                     -0.003       0.000
                                                                    (0.004)      (0.002)                                 (0.004)       (0.004)                                   (0.002)      (0.002)
Adopted differential 3+ years earlier                              -0.017**    -0.011***                                 -0.012        -0.008                                     0.004        0.008
                                                                    (0.007)      (0.004)                                 (0.009)       (0.007)                                   (0.003)      (0.006)

Constant                                 0.079***      0.097***    0.097***        0.088***     0.181***     0.213***    0.213***      0.210***      0.027***      0.023***      0.023***     0.021***
                                         (0.009)       (0.002)     (0.002)         (0.002)      (0.007)      (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.004)       (0.003)       (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)

Sample                                   All years    All years    All years   +/- 4 years      All years    All years   All years   +/- 4 years     All years     All years    All years   +/- 4 years

Additional controls                       None         Year FE     Year FE      Year FE           None       Year FE   Year FE        Year FE          None        Year FE      Year FE       Year FE
                                                      School FE   School FE    School FE                    School FE School FE      School FE                    School FE    School FE     School FE

Observations                              2,698         2,698       2,698           2,304         2,698       2,698       2,698         2,234          2,698        2,698         2,698        2,489
R-squared                                 0.027         0.979       0.979           0.978         0.000       0.906       0.906         0.913          0.008        0.903         0.903        0.918
Outcome mean                              0.147         0.147       0.147           0.147         0.195       0.195       0.195         0.195          0.044        0.044         0.044        0.044


Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by school in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All specifications include 142 schools, though the number of schools that adopted a differential
tuition policy varies between fields. Model is estimated using OLS. Outcome mean is for colleges that eventually adopted tuition differentials in the pre-differential period.




                                                                                                     38
Table 3. Robustness of Main Results to Choice of Control Group and Other Covariates


                                          (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)                (5)              (6)                  (7)                 (8)            (9)              (10)
                                                                                                                                                  Adopted
                                                                                                                                             differential in this
                                    Base model:                                                          Adopted any          Adopted              major +
                                                                                                         differential by   differential in    considered any
Sample                               All colleges      All colleges     All colleges    All colleges          2008          this major           differential         All colleges   All colleges     All colleges
                                                   Institutional                       Differential in                                                                                                Barrons X
                                                       control         Differential in   other two                                                                  Census division                 Census Division
Additional Controls                    None         variables          related field       fields            None              None                None               X Year FE     State X Year FE   X Year FE
                       Panel A: Engineering (mean = 0.147)
Adopted differential 0 to 2          -0.004**         -0.004**             -0.003           -0.004          -0.004*            0.000               -0.004*              -0.004*        -0.005**         -0.005*
     years earlier                    (0.002)          (0.002)            (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.002)           (0.003)              (0.002)              (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)
Adopted differential 3+             -0.011***        -0.011***            -0.010*         -0.012**         -0.011***          -0.003              -0.011**             -0.010***      -0.011***         -0.008*
      years earlier                   (0.004)          (0.004)            (0.005)          (0.005)          (0.004)           (0.004)              (0.004)              (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.004)

Observations                            2,304             2,271            2,304           2,304              651               252                 708                  2,304          2,304            2,304

                         Panel B: Business (mean = 0.195)
Adopted differential 0 to 2            -0.004         -0.004               -0.003         -0.010*            -0.004           -0.003              -0.003                -0.005         -0.007            -0.007
    years earlier                     (0.004)         (0.004)             (0.004)         (0.005)           (0.005)           (0.004)             (0.005)               (0.004)        (0.005)          (0.004)
Adopted differential 3+                -0.008         -0.007               -0.008         -0.019*            -0.010           -0.009              -0.006                -0.011         -0.016           -0.014*
     years earlier                    (0.007)         (0.007)             (0.007)         (0.011)           (0.008)           (0.009)             (0.008)               (0.007)        (0.010)          (0.007)

Observations                            2,234             2,201            2,234           2,235              600               277                 733                  2,234          2,234            2,234

                         Panel C: Nursing (mean = 0.044)
Adopted differential 0 to 2           0.000          -0.001                -0.000          0.001             0.000             0.002              -0.001                -0.000          0.001            -0.000
    years earlier                    (0.002)         (0.002)              (0.003)         (0.002)           (0.002)           (0.002)             (0.002)               (0.002)        (0.004)          (0.002)
Adopted differential 3+               0.008           0.007                0.007           0.009             0.008             0.012               0.007                 0.007          0.012            0.008
     years earlier                   (0.006)         (0.006)              (0.007)         (0.007)           (0.006)           (0.008)             (0.006)               (0.006)        (0.008)          (0.006)

Observations                            2,489             2,453            2,489           2,490              855               114                 570                  2,489          2,489            2,489

Notes: All specifications include year fixed effects, college fixed effects, and are restricted to 4 years before and after the adoption of a price differential for each school. Column (2) includes in-state
list tuition price, out-of-state tuition differential, full-time faculty to student ratio, state appropriations per student, instructional and academic support spending per student, fraction of students that are
full-time, fraction in-state, and the average Pell grant per student. Column (3) includes controls for differential pricing for architecture, computer science, or physical science (Panel A), liberal arts
(Panel B), or other health professions and physical therapy (Panel C). Robust standard errors clustered by school in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Outcome mean is for colleges that
eventually adopted tuition differentials in the pre-differential period.




                                                                                                           39
Table 4. Response Heterogeneity by Gender and Race

                                   Women         Men         Black      White     Hispanic        Asian     Other race
                                    (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)           (6)         (7)
                                                                  Panel A: Engineering
Outcome mean                        0.074        0.215       0.095      0.128       0.121         0.196        0.200
Adopted differential 0 to 2        -0.003**     -0.006*     -0.013*        -0.004     -0.009     -0.031**      -0.002
    years earlier                   (0.001)     (0.003)     (0.007)       (0.003)    (0.013)      (0.014)     (0.009)
Adopted differential 3+            -0.010**    -0.012**      -0.015      -0.012***    -0.014    -0.050**       -0.012
     years earlier                  (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.011)       (0.004)    (0.018)     (0.019)      (0.016)

3+ year coefficient/mean            -0.135      -0.056       -0.158       -0.094     -0.116      -0.255       -0.060

Observations                        2,304        2,304       1,709         1,712      1,695       1,707        1,705

                                                                      Panel B: Business
Outcome mean                        0.163        0.234       0.165         0.183      0.170       0.246        0.244

Adopted differential 0 to 2          -0.003      -0.005      -0.002        -0.004     0.001       -0.017       -0.018
    years earlier                   (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.011)       (0.004)    (0.013)     (0.017)      (0.012)
Adopted differential 3+              -0.008      -0.009      -0.006        -0.009     0.015       -0.026      -0.030*
     years earlier                  (0.006)     (0.008)     (0.013)       (0.006)    (0.016)     (0.022)      (0.016)

3+ year coefficient/mean            -0.049      -0.038       -0.036       -0.049      0.088      -0.106       -0.123

Observations                        2,234        2,234       1,665         1,668      1,651       1,663        1,661

                                                                      Panel C: Nursing
Outcome mean                        0.070        0.011       0.037        0.049       0.037       0.033        0.022

Adopted differential 0 to 2          -0.001     0.002**      0.010         0.000      0.005       0.004        0.003
    years earlier                   (0.003)     (0.001)     (0.011)       (0.002)    (0.006)     (0.004)      (0.004)

Adopted differential 3+              0.008      0.006**      0.009         0.001      0.004       0.008       0.019*
     years earlier                  (0.009)     (0.003)     (0.012)       (0.009)    (0.012)     (0.013)      (0.010)

3+ year coefficient/mean            0.114        0.545       0.243         0.020      0.108       0.242        0.864
Observations                        2,489        2,489       1,847         1,850      1,833       1,845        1,843




Notes: All specifications include year fixed effects, college fixed effects, and are restricted to 4 years before and
after the adoption of a price differential for each school. Regressions for race groups are limited to 1995-2008.
Robust standard errors clustered by school in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Outcome mean is for
the specified group at colleges that eventually adopted tuition differentials in the pre-differential period.




                                                           40
Table 5. Effect of Differential Pricing on Student Composition in Impacted Fields using NPSAS Microdata

                                                                                                            Outcomes (sample mean)
                                                                                                                                                  Income,           EFC ,
                                                                                   Minority          Pell        SAT math       SAT verbal      $thousands       $thousands
                                                               Female (0.518)      (0.175)        (0.228)         (0.098)         (0.056)          (81.71)         (14.42)
                                                                     (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)            (7)
                                           Engineering major ‐0.373***              ‐0.001         ‐0.007        0.520***          ‐0.031           7.116           0.308
                                                                  (0.016)          (0.013)        (0.017)         (0.037)         (0.037)          (6.038)         (0.728)
                                 Have engineering differential     ‐0.013           ‐0.003          0.020        ‐0.214**         ‐0.158*           0.620           0.495
                                                                  (0.029)          (0.019)        (0.017)         (0.093)         (0.094)          (4.661)         (0.896)
         (Engineering major) X (Have engineering differential)     0.013            ‐0.015        ‐0.043*         0.198**        0.243***           ‐2.959          1.363
                                                                  (0.028)          (0.028)        (0.023)         (0.081)         (0.071)          (7.722)         (1.339)

                                               Business major     ‐0.129***          0.011       ‐0.040***       0.103***        ‐0.208***       10.164***        2.738***
                                                                    (0.016)         (0.011)        (0.011)        (0.029)          (0.031)        (2.008)          (0.529)
                                    Have business differential       ‐0.008         ‐0.018         ‐0.029          0.052            0.168          5.543            0.463
                                                                    (0.034)         (0.023)        (0.025)        (0.072)          (0.112)        (5.260)          (1.193)
               (Business major) X (Have business differential)       0.025          ‐0.015         ‐0.005         ‐0.033            0.029          ‐4.886           ‐1.146
                                                                    (0.031)         (0.024)        (0.023)        (0.054)          (0.057)        (4.343)          (1.208)

                                                 Health major     0.194***           0.008         ‐0.008        ‐0.178***       ‐0.282***          ‐2.968           ‐0.686
                                                                   (0.018)          (0.012)       (0.013)          (0.045)         (0.042)         (1.870)          (0.464)
                                      Have health differential      ‐0.000          ‐0.027        0.060**           0.073           ‐0.120          ‐3.457           ‐0.490
                                                                   (0.042)          (0.029)       (0.030)          (0.127)         (0.156)         (6.241)          (1.666)
                   (Health major) X (Have health differential)     0.099*           ‐0.016          0.041          ‐0.023           ‐0.012          0.202            0.392
                                                                   (0.054)          (0.036)       (0.075)          (0.093)         (0.135)         (8.019)          (2.178)

                                                 Observations       18,105          18,105         18,105         12,202          12,202           18,105           18,105
                                                   R‐squared        0.096            0.125          0.054          0.232          0.177            0.051            0.054



Notes: All specifications include year fixed and institution fixed effects. Sample includes only full‐time, full‐year students attending one of 142 institutions with complete
differential pricing information. Family income and expected family contribution (EFC) are in 2009 dollars. Specifications (4) and (5) have fewer observations due to missing
SAT information for some students. Robust standard errors clustered by school in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                       41
Table 6. Effect of Differential Pricing on Institutional Aid to Students in Impacted Fields


                                                                                           Dependent variable:
                                                                                (Institutional grants) / (list tuition+fees)
                                                                                                         Lower         Upper     Fourth
                                                                      All students         In‐state     division      division    year
                                                                    (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)       (6)
                                             Engineering major 0.042** 0.033** 0.048***                   0.027       0.045**     0.037
                                                                  (0.016)     (0.016)       (0.018)     (0.025)       (0.021)    (0.024)
                                   Have engineering differential ‐0.020        ‐0.013       ‐0.028       ‐0.034        ‐0.004    ‐0.002
                                                                  (0.033)     (0.033)       (0.032)     (0.046)       (0.038)    (0.034)
            (Engineering major) X (Have engineering differential) ‐0.012       ‐0.016        0.001        0.014        ‐0.031    ‐0.009
                                                                  (0.019)     (0.019)       (0.022)     (0.035)       (0.026)    (0.038)

                                                 Business major ‐0.019**          ‐0.011      ‐0.019*     ‐0.023      ‐0.017     ‐0.018
                                                                   (0.009)        (0.009)     (0.011)     (0.014)     (0.013)    (0.020)
                                       Have business differential 0.018            0.006       0.022       0.059      ‐0.009      0.021
                                                                   (0.041)        (0.043)     (0.036)     (0.038)     (0.057)    (0.051)
                   (Business major) X (Have business differential) 0.014           0.015       0.021       0.034      ‐0.008      0.033
                                                                   (0.018)        (0.017)     (0.016)     (0.028)     (0.026)    (0.043)

                                                     Health major     ‐0.013      ‐0.009      ‐0.019      ‐0.014      ‐0.012     ‐0.011
                                                                      (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.018)     (0.014)    (0.018)
                                          Have health differential    ‐0.016      ‐0.009      ‐0.023      ‐0.000      ‐0.041     ‐0.081
                                                                      (0.044)     (0.046)     (0.043)     (0.065)     (0.059)    (0.053)
                       (Health major) X (Have health differential)     0.009       0.006      ‐0.003      ‐0.019       0.028      0.024
                                                                      (0.025)     (0.025)     (0.026)     (0.025)     (0.046)    (0.068)

                                               Additional controls        No        Yes         No          No          No         No

                                                     Observations     18,039      18,039      15,693      7,010       11,029      7,369
                                                       R‐squared      0.062       0.089       0.071       0.090       0.070       0.087
                                                   Outcome mean       0.150       0.150       0.151       0.165       0.138       0.144

Notes: All specifications include year fixed and institution fixed effects. Sample includes only full‐time, full‐year students attending
one of 142 institutions with complete differential pricing information. Additional controls in specification (2) include female,
minority, normalized SAT math and verbal score, dummy for missing SAT score, undergraduate level, instate, and expected famility
contribution. Robust standard errors clustered by school in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                     42
Table A1. Institutions with Differential Pricing for Engineering, Business, and Nursing in 2008

                                                                                         Amount of differential (% over base tuition)
Institution                                                    Year adopted            Engineering        Business            Nursing
University of South Alabama                                        2008                     8
University of Arkansas Main Campus                                 2000                    16                14
University of Arkansas at Little Rock                              2001                                       3
University of Arizona                                              1993                    12                16
Colorado State University                                          2006                     6                 9
University of Colorado Denver                                      1989                    14                 2                 147
University of Colorado at Boulder                                  1984                    38                59
University of Northern Colorado                                    2006                                      7                    5
University of Hawaii at Manoa                                      2007                                      12                  39
Iowa State University                                              2007                    19
University of Iowa                                                 2007                    19
University of Illinois at Chicago                                  1992                    25                 8                  26
University of Illinois at Urbana‐Champaign                         1994                    45                45
Indiana University‐Purdue University‐Indianapolis                  2008                                      10                  16
Purdue University‐Main Campus                                      1999                     8                13
Kansas State University                                            2003                    15                 8
University of Kansas                                               1994                    16                40
University of Kentucky                                             2005                                       6
University of Louisville                                           2004                     3
Louisiana Tech University                                          2006                                       3                   4
Michigan Technological University                                  2004                    11
Oakland University                                                 2005                                                           2
University of Michigan‐Ann Arbor                                   1989                     7
Missouri University of Science and Technology                      1996                    23                23
Montana State University                                           2003                     5                 8                   8
The University of Montana                                          2001                                      22
North Dakota State University‐Main Campus                          1998                    13                                    12
University of Nebraska‐Lincoln                                     2004                    24
University of New Hampshire‐Main Campus                            1991                     8                 8
Rutgers University‐New Brunswick                                   1992                    11                 2
Rutgers University‐Newark                                          1993                                       4
Miami University‐Oxford                                            2007                                       7
Oregon State University                                            1994                    30
Portland State University                                          1994                    24                 7
University of Oregon                                               1999                                      10
Pennsylvania State University‐Main Campus                          2008                     6                 6                  20
Temple University                                                  1989                                       2                  21
Clemson University                                                 2006                                      17
University of South Dakota                                         2005                                      30                  58
University of Memphis                                              2002                    10                12
The University of Texas at Arlington                               2004                     4                13                   8
The University of Texas at Austin                                  2003                    12                16                   8
The University of Texas at Dallas                                  2005                    15
The University of Texas at El Paso                                 2000                                                           2
University of Houston                                              2005                     6                6
University of Utah                                                 2007                                      35
Utah State University                                              2003                     2                31
Virginia Commonwealth University                                   2008                    31                 6
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University                2008                    12
University of Wisconsin‐Madison                                    2008                                      16
University of Wisconsin‐Milwaukee                                  2005                     9                 9                  13

Source: Glen Nelson. Blank indicates that no differential for this particular field.




                                                                        43
Table A2. Effect of Differential Tuition on Composition of Degrees Awarded, Log Results


                                            Log(Eng Degrees)              Log(Bus Degrees)            Log(Nurse Degrees)
                                             (1)        (2)                (3)       (4)               (5)        (6)

Adopted differential 0-2 years earlier     -0.056**       -0.033         -0.059**     -0.024         -0.037             -0.038
                                            (0.026)      (0.025)          (0.024)    (0.022)         (0.039)           (0.039)
Adopted differential 3+ years earlier     -0.100***      -0.071*          -0.058      -0.035          0.066             0.055
                                            (0.037)      (0.039)          (0.038)    (0.038)         (0.088)           (0.097)
Log(Total Degrees)                                       1.169***                    1.082***                          0.874***
                                                         (0.151)                     (0.077)                           (0.122)

Constant                                   5.062***     -3.949***       6.033***     -2.258***       4.282***         -2.507***
                                           (0.070)       (1.180)        (0.025)       (0.594)        (0.047)           (0.949)

Sample                                    +/- 4 years   +/- 4 years    +/- 4 years +/- 4 years     +/- 4 years        +/- 4 years

Additional controls                        Year FE       Year FE        Year FE   Year FE            Year FE           Year FE
                                          School FE     School FE      School FE School FE          School FE         School FE

Observations                                1,804         1,804           2,127        2,127          1,425             1,425
R-squared                                   0.940         0.950           0.948        0.963          0.803             0.820
Outcome mean                                5.709         5.709           6.280        6.280          4.784             4.784



Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by school in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All specifications initially
include 142 schools, though the number of schools that adopted a differential tuition policy varies between fields and
school-year observations with zero degrees awarded in the specified field are dropped. Model is estimated using OLS.
Outcome mean is for colleges that eventually adopted tuition differentials in the pre-differential period.




                                                                                                                 ``




                                                              44
Table A3. Effect of Differential Pricing on Detailed Composition of Degrees Awarded and Average Earnings

                                           Engineering diff                     Business diff                              Nursing diff
                             Outcome        3+ years ago           Outcome      3+ years ago               Outcome         3+ years ago
                              mean        Coeff         SE           mean    Coeff         SE               mean         Coeff        SE
 Panel A: No controls for simultaneous differential in other two fields
         Business             0.185       0.003      (0.006)         0.195  ‐0.008      (0.007)              0.194       ‐0.008     (0.010)
   Computer science           0.031      0.001       (0.004)         0.025   0.002      (0.002)              0.022      0.005**     (0.002)
        Education             0.054     0.010**      (0.005)         0.061  0.010*      (0.005)              0.068        0.006     (0.006)
       Engineering            0.147 ‐0.011*** (0.004)                0.096 ‐0.008**     (0.003)              0.085      ‐0.012**    (0.006)
          Health              0.041      0.001       (0.003)         0.048  ‐0.001      (0.003)              0.061       ‐0.001     (0.005)
       Humanities             0.112      ‐0.000      (0.004)         0.133  ‐0.003      (0.004)              0.130       ‐0.003     (0.005)
       Life science           0.079      0.002       (0.006)         0.079   0.002      (0.006)              0.085        0.012     (0.011)
           Math               0.010      0.000       (0.001)         0.010  ‐0.000      (0.001)              0.009       ‐0.002     (0.002)
         Nursing              0.027      ‐0.002      (0.002)         0.026  ‐0.001      (0.002)              0.044        0.008     (0.006)
   Other professional         0.134      ‐0.002      (0.005)         0.121   0.006      (0.006)              0.131       ‐0.003     (0.006)
    Physical science          0.016      0.000       (0.001)         0.017   0.001      (0.001)              0.016        0.000     (0.001)
     Social science           0.151      ‐0.004      (0.003)         0.175  ‐0.001      (0.003)              0.146       ‐0.004     (0.005)
  Vocational technical        0.014      0.001       (0.001)         0.014   0.001      (0.001)              0.011        0.000     (0.001)

     Average earnings         76,453     ‐484**       (187)            75,291   ‐569***     (216)           74,486       ‐417*       (243)

 Panel B: Controls for simultaneous differential in other two fields
         Business             0.185      0.029**      (0.013)          0.195    ‐0.019*    (0.011)           0.194       ‐0.005     (0.011)
   Computer science           0.031       ‐0.002      (0.006)          0.025      0.003    (0.003)           0.022        0.005     (0.004)
        Education             0.054        0.007      (0.009)          0.061      0.010    (0.009)           0.068        0.002     (0.007)
       Engineering            0.147     ‐0.012** (0.005)               0.096      0.000    (0.009)           0.085       ‐0.002     (0.008)
          Health              0.041        0.006      (0.006)          0.048     ‐0.005    (0.005)           0.061       ‐0.001     (0.005)
       Humanities             0.112        0.007      (0.006)          0.133     ‐0.002    (0.006)           0.130       ‐0.002     (0.006)
       Life science           0.079       ‐0.005      (0.008)          0.079     ‐0.009    (0.008)           0.085        0.011     (0.010)
           Math               0.010       0.000       (0.001)          0.010     ‐0.001    (0.001)           0.009       ‐0.003     (0.002)
         Nursing              0.027       ‐0.002      (0.002)          0.026     ‐0.002    (0.002)           0.044        0.009     (0.007)
   Other professional         0.134       ‐0.013      (0.008)          0.121     0.012     (0.008)           0.131       ‐0.008     (0.007)
    Physical science          0.016       ‐0.001      (0.001)          0.017     0.000     (0.001)           0.016       ‐0.001     (0.001)
     Social science           0.151     ‐0.012** (0.006)               0.175    0.010*     (0.005)           0.146       ‐0.002     (0.006)
  Vocational technical        0.014       ‐0.001      (0.001)          0.014     ‐0.002    (0.002)           0.011       ‐0.003     (0.002)

     Average earnings         76,453       ‐214       (311)            75,291    ‐480       (359)           74,486         70        (231)



Notes: All specifications also include year fixed effects, college fixed effects, a dummy for 0 to 2 years post adoption of differential (not
reported), and are restricted to 4 years before and after the adoption of a price differential for each school. Robust standard errors
clustered by school in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All specifications include 142 schools, though the number of schools
that adopted a differential tuition policy varies between fields. Model is estimated using OLS. Outcome mean is for colleges that eventually
adopted tuition differentials in the pre‐differential period. Average earnings is computed for each institution and year using the 2009 and
2010 ACS to compute mean annual earnings for each undergraduate major nationally and then averaging across all majors using an
institution's share of degrees granted in each major in each year as weights.




                                                                         45
Figure 1. Distribution of Treatment Effects at Individual Universities


                                  Engineering: no controls (n=31)                                    Engineering: matched controls (n=31)
                0 2 4 6 8




                                                                                        0 2 4 6 8
                            -.1        -.05        0            .05             .1                   -.1         -.05      0            .05             .1


                                   Business: no controls (n=35)                                        Business: matched controls (n=35)
  Frequency
                0 2 4 6 8




                                                                                         0 2 4 6 8
                            -.1        -.05        0            .05             .1                   -.1         -.05      0             .05            .1


                                    Nursing: no controls (n=14)                                            Nursing: matched controls (n=14)
                0 2 4 6 8




                                                                                         0 2 4 6 8




                            -.1        -.05        0            .05             .1                   -.1         -.05      0             .05            .1

                                  Change in share of All Degrees Following Differential Adoption
              Left column plots the distribution of changes in major share of degrees granted following the introduction of differential tuition at each school.
              Right column plots distribution of school-specific estimates from regression with one treatment school matched with control schools in
              same Barrons category and census region.




                                                                              46
Figure 2. Event-study Estimates of Effect of Differential Pricing on Major Share


                                 Engineering                                                               Business
    .02




                                                                            .02
    0




                                                                            0
    -.04 -.02




                                                                            -.04 -.02
                -4   -3     -2    -1     0      1      2      3    4                    -4   -3     -2    -1     0      1      2      3    4
                     Years Since Differential Pricing Introduced                             Years Since Differential Pricing Introduced

                           Point est                 95% CI                                        Point est                 95% CI



                                    Nursing
    .02
    0
    -.04 -.02




                -4   -3     -2    -1     0      1      2      3    4
                     Years Since Differential Pricing Introduced

                           Point est                 95% CI




Notes: Graphs plot the point estimates from the event study model in equation (2) using the restricted
(+/- 4 year window) sample. Institution sample includes 142 institutions with known adoption dates for
differential pricing. Dependent variable is the share of degrees awarded in the specified field.




                                                                       47
Figure A-1. School-Specific Estimates by Differential Pricing Amount

                                        A. Engineering                                                                    B. Business




                                                                                             .05
                   .05




                                                                                       Change in share
                                                                                                    0
 Change in share
                   0




                                                                                    -.05
                   -.05




                                                                                             -.1
                          0   10          20               30           40   50                          0   10            20            30           40   50
                                    Differential Amount (% over base)                                             Differential Amount (% over base)


                                               C. Nursing
                   .02
                 .01
 Change in share
       0           -.01
                   -.02




                          0            20                      40             60
                                   Differential Amount (% over base)




Notes: Each point corresponds to the treatment effect and amount of the price differential (in percent
terms over base tuition) for a specific institution that adopted differential pricing for the specified field.
Point estimates are from school-specific difference-in-difference estimates with one treatment school
matched to control schools in the same Barrons selectivity category and census division. Fitted line is
from a simple linear regression. Institution sample includes 142 institutions with known adoption dates
for differential pricing. Dependent variable is the share of degrees awarded in the specified field.




                                                                                   48
