                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        LIQUIDITY AND INEFFICIENT INVESTMENT

                                            Oliver D. Hart
                                            Luigi Zingales

                                        Working Paper 19184
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19184


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2013




We would like to thank Nicola Gennaioli, Bengt Holmstrom, Anil Kashyap, Guido Lorenzoni, and
Alp Simsek for helpful comments, and Kirill Borusyak for outstanding research assistance. Oliver
Hart gratefully acknowledges financial support from the U.S. National Science Foundation through
the National Bureau of Economic Research. Luigi Zingales gratefully acknowledges financial support
from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP), and the Initiative on Global Markets at the
University of Chicago The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Oliver D. Hart and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Liquidity and Inefficient Investment
Oliver D. Hart and Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 19184
June 2013
JEL No. E41,E51,G21

                                               ABSTRACT

We study the role of fiscal policy in a complete markets model where the only friction is the nonpledgeability
of human capital. We show that the competitive equilibrium is constrained inefficient, leading to too
little risky investment. We also show that fiscal policy following a large negative shock can increase
ex ante welfare. Finally, we show that if the government cannot commit to the promised level of fiscal
intervention, the ex post optimal fiscal policy will be too small from an ex ante perspective.


Oliver D. Hart
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 220
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ohart@harvard.edu

Luigi Zingales
Booth School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
luigi.zingales@ChicagoBooth.edu
The Great Recession and the ensuing policy debate on the fiscal stimulus have spurred a renewed interest
among economists in the role of government intervention during the business cycle. What is the
fundamental economic inefficiency that justifies intervention? Is intervention justifiable only ex post, in
the face of an unexpected shock, or are there some ex ante benefits if it is anticipated? If the intervention
is anticipated, will the government have an incentive to stick to the ex ante optimal fiscal policy or is
there a time inconsistency?
        We build a very simple general equilibrium model to answer these questions. We consider an
economy subject to an aggregate productivity shock. Suppose that this shock is verifiable and so can be
insured against—indeed contingent security markets exist. Assume that if the shock hits, firm profits are
low and so is consumer wealth. Then the shock can lead to a fall in demand for consumption goods, and a
fall in prices and employment. If there are no imperfections (e.g., sticky prices) there will be no
inefficiency: the negative shock lowers welfare but there is nothing that a benevolent government can do
to improve matters.
        We argue that this conclusion changes if we add just one reasonable friction: consumers cannot
pledge their future human capital. Under these conditions (non-human) assets play two roles: they serve
as liquidity (because they allow consumers to credibly transfer future income), and they represent part of
the consumer’s wealth. If the value of pledgeable wealth falls then consumers will cut back on purchases
not just because they want to consume less but also because they have to consume less.
        Anticipating this possibility even risk neutral consumers will want to insure against the aggregate
shock by holding an asset whose value is relatively stable, e.g., a riskless asset. We show that such an
asset will be held even if it is dominated in expected present value terms by riskier assets. However, we
also show that the economy does not get the balance between risky and riskless assets right. Because of
liquidity constraints there is an externality: liquidity-constrained consumers over-hoard the riskless asset,
driving up prices and hurting other liquidity-constrained consumers who are trying to buy the same
goods. We show that the market equilibrium is not even second-best efficient: the government can
intervene to obtain a Pareto improvement by restricting investment in riskless assets. In addition, our
analysis provides a foundation for certain kinds of fiscal policy that are observed in the real world. We
show that a government “gift” of bonds to consumers will increase output and welfare, even if all
consumers are ex ante identical and consumers fully anticipate that this gift will be paid for in the future
through higher taxes.
    Our model, which is a finite horizon one, contains two groups of agents, whom we call doctors and
builders. Doctors buy building services from builders and then builders buy doctors’ services from
doctors, or the other way round. There are large numbers in each group and so markets are competitive.


                                                                                                                2
Each builder requires a doctor at a different date and typically one with different skills from the doctor
she is building for, and vice versa for doctors. In other words there is no simultaneous double coincidence
of wants (see Jevons (1876) and, for a modern treatment, Kiyotaki and Wright (1989)). Since we assume
that future labor income is not pledgeable, this generates a need for means of payment.
    Agents are endowed with wheat. Wheat can be invested in various projects. We assume that all asset
returns can be pledged but that the returns from some activities are risky. Moreover, risky returns are
positively correlated, i.e., there are aggregate productivity shocks. We also suppose that uncertainty about
returns is resolved before trading in doctors’ and builders’ services takes place. Then, a high return
realization of risky assets provides a large amount of liquidity for the economy, while a low return
realization provides a low amount. Since there are diminishing returns to liquidity—the marginal value of
liquidity falls to zero when the gains from trade have been exhausted—this induces the equivalent of risk
aversion in agents: the yield on the high return assets is discounted in the good state, and safe assets are
favored for liquidity purposes.
    We study how competitive firms will invest and issue Arrow securities. In the first-best, the economy
operates at full capacity and all wheat is invested in risky projects. In the second-best, however, if the
total amount of pledgeable wealth in the bad state is low, the competitive economy will overinvest in the
riskless technology and overproduce “money”. Investing in liquidity, a doctor who buys building services
before he sells doctor services imposes a negative externality on other doctors since his actions increase
the price of building services. Moreover, this externality has first order welfare consequences given that
doctors are liquidity constrained. Because of this externality too much wheat is invested in the safe asset
to create liquidity instead of being invested in socially productive projects.
         As a result of this inefficiency, the government can improve on the competitive equilibrium by
restricting the amount of investment in the riskless asset.1 Alternatively, the government can increase the
efficiency of the economy by introducing a riskless asset. In our finite horizon economy fiat government
money can exist only if the government can tax individuals. We assume that the government can impose
sales taxes and that agents can pay these sales taxes with government notes. In our model government
notes or government money are equivalent, because both of them must be backed by future taxes.
Therefore, since the intervention we consider does not affect the aggregate wealth of consumers, but only
the temporal distribution of this wealth, we label it fiscal policy.



1 In Hart and Zingales (2011), we showed that a similar inefficiency and role for government intervention arise in an

economy with perfect certainty where there are two investments, one with a high return that is collateralizeable and
one with a low return that is not collateralizeable. (As in the current paper human capital cannot be pledged.) One
weakness of that formulation is that some assets are assumed to be collateralizeable and others not. In a way the
current paper can be seen as an attempt to endogenize collateralizeability; an asset with a riskless return serves as
better collateral/liquidity than an asset with an uncertain return.

                                                                                                                    3
        We find that government fiscal policy in bad states not only can increase output more than one-
to-one (fiscal multiplier), but also can -- absent any other use of the fiscal lever -- improve ex ante
welfare. In fact, our model suggests that it is optimal to undertax in normal times in order to retain the
flexibility to use the fiscal lever for this countercyclical policy. We also find that if the government cannot
commit to the optimal level of fiscal policy, it will do too little of it ex post, i.e. the ex post optimal fiscal
policy is different from the ex ante one. This is reminiscent of the famous Kydland and Prescott (1977)
result, with two differences: it applies to fiscal policy and it goes in the opposite direction (too little rather
than too much).
        It should be emphasized that our inefficiency is driven by a single imperfection: the inability of
consumers to pledge their future human capital. Markets are complete in other respects. Indeed our results
continue to hold even if agents can insure against whether they buy first or sell first. It turns out that an
agent who buys first has a lower utility than an agent who sells first but the same marginal utility of
wealth. Thus there will be no demand for insurance.
        Our work is closely related to Holmstrom and Tirole’s recent (2011) book (henceforth HT) and
Lorenzoni (2008). Unlike HT and Lorenzoni (2008), our model requires only one friction: the inability of
consumers to pledge their future human capital rather than two: the inability of firms to pledge future
returns and the inability of consumers to pledge future endowments. Yet, several of the same forces are at
play in all these works. As in HT the government’s ability to tax gives it a role in improving matters by
injecting liquidity, e.g., by creating a riskless asset and taxing consumers later to finance repayments. As
in Lorenzoni, the equilibrium without government money creation is second-best inefficient.
        Importantly, however, both HT and Lorenzoni focus on firms’ liquidity needs, whereas we focus
on consumers’ liquidity needs. Such a focus seems particularly germane given the growing evidence
(Kahle and Stulz (forthcoming) and Mian and Sufi (2012)) that during the Great Recession firms had
plenty of liquidity, while consumers were severely liquidity constrained.
        This difference in focus changes the sign of the pecuniary externality, leading to opposite results.
In Lorenzoni, firms borrow too much, ignoring the fact that in the bad state of the world they have to sell
capital to make debt payments, which drives down the price of capital and forces other agents to increase
their capital sales (a “fire-sale externality”). In our paper the externality goes the other way: agents
acquire too much liquidity (which is like borrowing too little), ignoring the fact that their liquidity drives
up the price of goods their fellow liquidity-constrained agents are trying to buy (an “inflation”
externality). HT do consider an externality similar to ours in Chapter 7. They analyze a situation where
ex post some distressed firms will be forced to liquidate and other healthy firms can purchase these firms
at discounted prices. They show that ex ante firms will overinvest in safe securities in order to take



                                                                                                                     4
advantage of the opportunity to buy distressed firms’ assets, thereby driving up the prices of these assets
and imposing an externality on other buyers.


           The different perspectives on the source of the externality lead to opposite policy implications:
any ex ante promise to push up prices during a crisis alleviates the inefficiency in case of fire-sale
externalities, while it worsens it in the case of our inflation externality. For example, in the context of the
last recession, the fire-sale externality perspective would push toward a more aggressive monetary policy,
while ours might suggest a renegotiation of underwater mortgages to help consumers who were liquidity
constrained. The full difference in policy implications can be seen in Jeanne and Korinek (2013). They
develop the ex ante and ex post policy implications of the fire-sale externalities’ perspective. As in our
case, they find a time inconsistency of fiscal policy. But in their case the fiscal authority would like to
commit to intervene less than what is ex post optimal to mitigate the overinvestment in risky assets; while
in our case it would like to commit to intervene more than what is ex post optimal to mitigate the
overinvestment in riskless assets.
           These differences in policy implications are a useful reminder of the importance of modeling
explicitly the nature of the incompleteness of markets, since the results are very sensitive to the way this
is done.
           Our model also bears a resemblance to Stein (2012) and Gennaioli et al. (2012). Stein (2012)
derives an inefficiency in the provision of money based on the assumption that agents have a
discontinuous demand for a riskless claim (money) and that there is a friction in financial markets (patient
investors cannot raise additional money). Gennaioli et al. (2012) develop a model in which infinitely risk-
averse investors have an appetite for riskless assets and, since these investors ignore unlikely risks,
financial intermediaries over-supply these assets. In contrast to these papers we endogenize the demand
for riskless assets and any financial frictions and we do not assume any investor irrationality.
           Our paper is also related to the huge literature on money. Much of this literature is concerned
with the role money plays in general equilibrium (e.g., Hahn (1965)). To create such a role, one needs to
dispense with the traditional Walrasian auctioneer and explicitly introduce an exchange process. Ostroy
and Starr (1990) provide an excellent survey of attempts in this direction. As far as we can tell, none of
these attempts analyze the externality we identify in our paper. The role money plays in our model (i.e., to
address the lack of double coincidence of wants) is similar to that in Kyotaki and Wright (1989). Their
focus, however, is on what goods can become money and how. Our focus is to what extent private traders
can provide the efficient quantity of medium of exchange.
           There are parallels between our work and the literature on incomplete markets. In that literature a
competitive equilibrium is typically inefficient and a planner operating under the same constraints as the


                                                                                                               5
market can do better (see, e.g., Hart (1975) and Geanakoplos and Polemarchakis (1986)). One feature of
this literature is that the market structure is taken as given. This raises the question: why can’t the private
sector create new securities to complete the market? Our work differs in that we endogenize the market
structure: markets are complete with respect to verifiable events such as aggregate shocks, but the
inability to borrow against human capital creates liquidity problems2. Related to this, we focus on whether
a market economy overinvests in safe assets, something that, as far as we know, the incomplete markets
literature has not considered.
        Finally, our paper is linked to a vast and growing literature on the welfare effects of pecuniary
externalities in the presence of financial constraints (see, e.g., Kehoe and Levine, (1993), Allen and Gale
(2004), Farhi, Golosov, and Tsyvinski (2009), and Korinek (2012)). This literature typically finds that
the competitive equilibrium delivers an inefficiently low investment in liquid assets. We find the
opposite: a competitive equilibrium delivers an inefficiently high level of liquidity.


2. The Model

Before getting into the details of the model let us provide some explanation of and motivation for its
structure. In order to create a role for pledgeability, we consider a situation where two groups trade under
competitive conditions but where there is not a double coincidence of wants. This requires two periods of
trade: call them periods 2 and 3. Since we are interested in how real investments can alleviate this
pledgeability problem, we study the role of firms’securities in providing liquidity. A simple way to
introduce firms is to suppose that they transform a numeraire good in period 1 into a numeraire in period
4. Firms’ securities as claims on future consumption then provide liquidity in periods 2 and 3.Hence the
need for a four-period model.


         1 ---------------------------------------------2------------------------3----------------------------------4
Agents learn whether         State of world           Trade of                Trade of                         Output
they will buy or sell first realized                   services                services                       from
Wheat invested                                                                                             production/
Securities traded                                                                                           wheat
                                                                                                           consumed


                                        Figure 1



2 In this respect our paper has parallels with Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), which also endogenizes the market
structure, although in a different context.

                                                                                                                         6
             The two types of agents, whom we call doctors and builders, are assumed to be in equal
numbers. As noted, doctors want to consume building services and builders want to consume doctor
services. Consumption of these services occurs in periods 2 and 3. Doctors and builders can also consume
wheat in period 4 and there is no discounting. Each doctor and builder has an endowment of wheat in
period 1 equal to e . We will assume that e  1. The timeline is as in Figure 1.
           We write agents’ utilities as:
                              1 2
Doctors: U d  wd  bd         ld
                              2
                              1 2
Builders: U b  wb  d b       lb
                              2
where wi is the quantity of wheat consumed by individual i  d , b ; bd is the quantity of building

services consumed by a doctor; l d is the labor supplied by a doctor; d b is the quantity of doctor services

consumed by a builder; and lb is the labor supplied by a builder. We assume constant returns to scale: one

unit of builder labor yields one unit of building services and one unit of doctor labor yields one unit of
doctor services.
          In words, doctors and builders have a constant marginal utility of wheat, a constant marginal utility
of the service provided by the other group of agents, and a quadratic disutility of labor.
          Note that the above utility functions have the feature that doctors’ and builders’ labor supplies will
be (somewhat) elastic with respect to price. This will be important when we analyze the role of fiscal
policy.
          In period 1 each agent learns whether he will first buy or sell. Ex ante both events are equally
likely. For convenience, we assume that in the east side of town doctors buy builders’ services in period
2, while builders buy doctors’ services in period 3. In the west side of town, the order is reversed. (We
assume that there is a measure one of doctors and a measure one of builders in each side of town.) In
periods 2 and 3 the markets for doctor and building services meet and the doctors and builders trade in the
order determined in period 1.
     We assume there are many doctors and many builders, and so the prices for both services are
determined competitively. It is crucial for our analysis that there is no simultaneous double coincidence of
wants: builders and doctors are in either the market for buying or the market for selling: they cannot do
both at the same time. Hence, even if the builder a doctor buys from wants the doctor services from her
customer, she cannot buy them at the same time as she is selling building services.




                                                                                                               7
     We have deliberately set up the model to be very symmetric; this helps with the welfare
comparisons later. Throughout the paper we will analyze the east part of town, where doctors buy in
period 2 and builders in period 3; the reverse case is completely symmetric.
      Let’s turn now to investment. In period 1 wheat can be invested in two technologies. There is a
riskless technology (storage) where one unit of wheat is transformed into one unit of wheat in period 4;
                                                                                 H
and there is a risky technology where one unit of wheat is transformed into R >1 units of wheat in

period 4 with probability    and R L  1 units with probability 1   , where 0<  <1 and
R   R H  (1   ) R L  1 . The returns of the various risky projects are perfectly correlated. Thus there
                                              H            L
are two aggregate states of the world, R= R        or R= R , which we refer to as high (H) or low (L). Agents
learn about the aggregate state of the world between periods 1 and 2. All agents are risk neutral.
     We suppose that there is free entry of firms possessing the two technologies described above and
that these firms face constant returns to scale.


2.1 A benchmark: the Arrow-Debreu equilibrium
         In an Arrow-Debreu economy, the state of the world H or L is verifiable. In addition the
penalties for default are infinite. Hence doctors can pledge to pay the builders out of income from
supplying doctor services that they will earn in period 3.
         It is easy to compute the Arrow-Debreu equilibrium (more precisely, a sequential version). As
we will see, the trading economy and the production economy are separable. Consider the trading
economy. Once we have reached period 2 all the uncertainty is resolved and so we are in a classic
competitive equilibrium model without uncertainty, where there are three goods: doctor services (in
period 2), builder services (in period 3), and wheat (in period 4). Imagine that (spot and futures) markets
                                                                                                      H   L
for these three goods open in period 2, and normalize the price of period 4 wheat to be one. Let pb , pb ,

pdH , and pdL be the prices of builder and doctor services in the high and low state, respectively, relative
to wheat. Focus on one of the states and for the moment leave off the state superscript. Markets cannot

clear if either pb >1 or pd     >1, since demand will be less than supply for building/doctor services,

respectively (consumers will prefer wheat). On the other hand, we cannot have both pb  1 and pd  1

because then the demand for wheat would be zero, while the supply is positive. Hence, either pb  1 and

pd  1 , or pb  1 , pd  1 , or pb  pd  1 . It is easy to show that pb  pd (we leave this to the

reader). We are left with pb  pd  1 . Utility maximization then implies bd  lb  d b  ld  1 . Each



                                                                                                               8
consumer receives a net surplus of ½ from buying one unit of a service and supplying one unit of labor.
                                                                           H     L    H      L
This is the unique (Walrasian ) trading equilibrium. In other words, pb = pb = pd = pd =1.


           Now consider the production side. There are markets for two Arrow securities in period 1, one
paying a unit of wheat in period 4 in state H and the other paying a unit of wheat in period 4 in state L.
Since all parties are risk neutral it is clear that Arrow security prices q H , q L will be proportional to
probabilities. Also given constant returns to scale neither project can make a profit and at least one must

break even. Thus q H   / R , q L  (1   ) / R , where R is the expected rate of return on the risky asset,
and we normalize the price of period 1 wheat to be one. At these prices only the risky project is
employed: all the wheat is invested in that.
        Summarizing, we have


        Proposition 1: In the unique Arrow-Debreu equilibrium all wheat is invested in the risky project

        and pb = pb = pd = pd =1, q H   / R , q L  (1   ) / R . The utilities of the doctors and
                 H     L    H     L



                                      1             1
        builders are U d  eR          , U b  eR  , respectively.
                                      2             2


        We see from Proposition 1 that the Arrow-Debreu allocation and prices are independent of the

initial endowment e and R (except for consumption of wheat, which varies one to one with e R ), and
each agent’s utility is linear in wealth. As we have noted in the Arrow-Debreu equilibrium there is a
separation between trade in goods and investment. Given that agents can pledge their human capital,
investment income is not needed to finance trade and so investments are chosen entirely on efficiency
grounds.
           One implication of Proposition 1 is that there is no demand for insurance before an agent learns
his type, i.e., whether he will buy first or sell first. Such an insurance market would open before period 1
and pay wheat in period 1 contingent on an agent’s type (assumed to be verifiable). That is, a doctor in the
east side of town would receive a transfer of wheat from an insurance company, while a builder in the east
side of town would give up the same amount of wheat to the insurance company; and vice versa in the
west side of town. However, according to Proposition 1, the marginal utilities of wealth of the two types
are the same, and hence there is no demand for such insurance in an Arrow-Debreu equilibrium.


2.2 The first-best



                                                                                                               9
              Not surprisingly, in light of the first welfare theorem and the absence of a demand for
insurance, the Arrow-Debreu equilibrium achieves the first-best. In the first-best the planner maximizes
the expected utility of an agent who does not know whether he will buy or sell first (equivalently whether
he will be a doctor or a builder) subject to the aggregate feasibility constraints. That is, the planner
solves:
                   1                       1                                  1                       1          
Max  [ wdH  bdH  (ldH ) 2  wbH  d bH  (lbH ) 2 ]  (1   )[ wdL  bdL  (ldL ) 2  wbL  d bL  (lbL ) 2 ]
                   2                       2                                  2                       2          


subject to:                                   bdH  lbH

                                              dbH  ldH

                                              bdL  lbL

                                              dbL  ldL

                                     wdH  wbH  y s  y r R H

                                     wdL  wbL  y s  y r R L

                                           y s  y r  2e

          i       i                                                                         i   i
where wd , wb stands for wheat consumption of doctors and builders in state i=H,L, ld , lb , stands for
labor services of doctors and builders in state i, etc.

          The solution is easily seen to be

                                   bdH  lbH  dbH  ldH  bdL  lbL  dbL  ldL  1

                                                y s  0 and y r  2e ,

as in the Arrow-Debreu equilibrium.


2.3 Equilibrium with Non-Pledgeable Labor Income
We now drop the assumption that default penalties are infinite. Instead we assume that doctors who have
pledged their period 3 labor income to pay for period 2 goods can just disappear. Knowing this builders
will accept only securities as a means of payment in period 2, i.e., doctors will face liquidity constraints.
We continue to assume that the state of the world H or L is verifiable, and that markets for the H and L


                                                                                                               10
securities exist in period 1. These securities will be supplied by firms investing in projects. Although
there are no explicit default penalties, the securities will be collateralized by the project returns in each
state and so there will be no default in equilibrium (we are supposing that asset returns cannot be stolen
by firms’ managers). These securities will be used as a means of exchange in the period 2 and 3 doctor
and builder markets.
       The timing is: In period 1 markets for wheat (used as input by firms) and Arrow securities open;
in period 2 the market for building services opens and doctors use the Arrow securities they purchased in
period 1 to buy these services (at this stage, since all the uncertainty is resolved, the Arrow securities are
equivalent to riskless bonds); in period 3 the market for doctor services opens and builders use the Arrow
securities they purchased in period 1 plus those they have acquired from doctors in period 2 to buy these
                                                                                 H       L
services; in period 4 Arrow securities pay out and wheat is consumed. Let xd and xd be the quantities of
                                                      H      L
the two Arrow securities bought by doctors and xb and xb the quantities bought by builders. We assume

that doctors and builders can disappear in period 4 and so any promise by them to deliver wheat at that
                                H    L    H   L
time is not credible: hence, xd , xd , xb , xb ≥0. As above, write q H and q L as the respective prices of
                                                                                             H   L   H
the Arrow securities, relative to period 1 wheat, which is normalized to be one. Let pb , pb , pd , and

pdL be the prices of builder and doctor services in the high and low state, respectively, relative to period 4
wheat, which is also normalized to be one . Note that price of the H (resp., L) Arrow security in periods 2
and 3 is 1 if H (resp., L) occurs, and 0 otherwise.
     Consider a doctor’s utility maximization problem. In equilibrium the price of building services in
period 2 cannot exceed 1 since otherwise doctors would strictly prefer to use their securities to purchase
period 4 wheat rather than building services, and so the building market would not clear. Thus we can
assume for the purpose of calculating utility that doctors use all their Arrow securities to buy building
services. (By a parallel argument the price of doctor services in period 3 cannot exceed 1 and so for
purposes of calculating utility we can assume that builders spend all their Arrow securities on doctor
services.) Next consider a doctor’s labor supply decision in period 3. Suppose that we have arrived in one
of the states, and ignore the superscript on the state. Then a doctor will choose his labor supply l d to

                  1
maximize pd ld  ld2 , i.e., set ld  pd . Note that it is too late for the doctor to buy more building services
                  2
and so his marginal return from work is pd (he will use the proceeds to buy wheat in period 4). A doctor’s




                                                                                                                11
labor yields revenue pd2 , which he redeems for wheat in period 4; in addition he incurs an effort cost of

1 2                             1
  pd , and so his net utility is pd2 .
2                               2


                                                            H         L
         It follows that in period 1 a doctor chooses xd and xd to solve:

                               xdH 1 H 2               xdL 1 L 2 
(*)                     Max   H   pd    (1   )  L   pd  
                               pb  2                   pb 2       



 subject to

                                               q H xdH  q L xdL  e .

Note that firm profits are zero in equilibrium given constant returns to scale, and so we do not need to
keep track of any dividends received by consumers.
        A similar calculation applies to builders. The difference is that a builder in period 2 chooses her
                                 pb     1
labor supply lb to maximize         lb  lb 2 . The reason is that a builder’s marginal return from work is
                                 pd     2
 pb
    , since she will use her income to buy doctor services. Thus a builder’s net utility from work is
 pd
          2
1  pb                                      H      L
    . Hence in period 1 a builder chooses xb and xb to solve:
2  pd 

                                     x H 1  p H 2         x L 1  p L 2 
(**)                          Max   H   H    (1   )  bL   bL  
                                        b      b

                                     pd 2  pd           pd 2  pd  

subject to

                                                 q H xbH  q L xbL  e .

              Let y s and y r be the quantity of period 1 wheat invested respectively in the safe and risky
technology. As noted, profit maximization and constant returns to scale imply zero profit: the value of the
return stream of each technology cannot exceed the cost of investing in that technology (i.e., 1); and if the
inequality is strict the technology will not be used. In other words,
(2.1)                       qH  qL  1     where y s  0 if the inequality is strict;


                                                                                                              12
(2.2)                   q H R H  q L R L  1 where y r  0 if the inequality is strict.

     The market clearing conditions in the securities and wheat market in period 1 are given respectively
by

 (2.3)       xdH  xbH  y s  y r R H

     (2.4)                 xdL  xbL  y s  y r R L

        (2.5)                  y s  y r  2e

          Finally, market clearing conditions in the builder and doctor markets in periods 2 and 3 in each
state are:

                                                       xdH   pbH                          1
(2.6)                  pbH  1 . If pbH  1 , then       H
                                                              H
                                                                 . If pb  1 , then xdH  H
                                                                       H

                                                       pb    pd                          pd

                                                     xdL pbL                           1
(2.7)                  pbL  1 . If pbL  1 , then     L
                                                          L . If pbL  1 , then xdL  L
                                                     pb   pd                          pd

                                                       xbH  (( pbH ) 2 / pdH )
(2.8)               pdH  1 . If pdH  1 , then                   H
                                                                                 pdH . If        pdH  1 then
                                                                pd

xbH  ( pbH )2  1 .

                                                     xbL  (( pbL ) 2 / pdL )
(2.9)              pdL  1 . If pdL  1 , then                   L
                                                                               pdL . If pdL  1 then xbL  ( pbL )2  1 .
                                                              pd

(2.6) - (2.9) reflect the fact that, if the price of building (resp., doctor) services is less than one, doctors
(resp., builders) want to spend all their income on building ( resp., doctor) services. On the other hand, if
the price of building or doctor services equals 1, consumers are indifferent between buying the service
and wheat and so the market clears as long as liquidity is at least equal to supply.
          In summary, the above describes a standard Arrow-Debreu equilibrium with one wrinkle:
consumers cannot borrow against future labor income. In what follows we refer to this simply as a “non-
pledgeable competitive equilibrium”.


         The next two lemmas and proposition characterize the non-pledgeable competitive equilibrium
and provide a comparison to the Arrow-Debreu equilibrium/ first-best.


                                                                                                                             13
Lemma 1: In a non-pledgeable competitive equilibrium, the prices and trading levels of doctor and
builder services equal one in the high state ( pd  pb  1 , and xd  1 ).
                                                      H      H             H



Proof: See Appendix.

                                              H
The (rough) intuition is that, given R >1 there is enough liquidity in the high state to support efficient
trade at prices of 1.

Lemma 2: A necessary and sufficient condition for a non-pledgeable competitive equilibrium to be first-
best optimal is 2eR L  1 .

Proof: See Appendix.

The (rough) intuition is that if 2eR L  1 there is enough liquidity to support efficient trade when all
resources are invested in the risky technology, even in the low state.

Proposition 2:

      (1) If 2eR L  1 , then a non-pledgeable competitive equilibrium delivers the first-best.
                                                  4
                        1   1  RL 3
      (2) If 1  2eR  
                    L
                                       then a non-pledgeable competitive equilibrium is such that
                         R 1
                                 H


           investment is first-best efficient (only the risky technology is used), but trading in doctor and
           building services is inefficiently low in the low state relative to the first-best.
                                          4
                      1  1 RL 3
      (3) If 2eR L               then a non-pledgeable competitive equilibrium is such that
                       R 1 
                             H


           investments and trading in labor services are both inefficient relative to the first-best: each
           technology is operated at a positive scale and trade is inefficiently low in the low state.

      Proof: See Appendix 3

.

           Proposition 2 says that the non-pledgeable competitive equilibrium is in one of three regions. If
       L                                                                                               L
2e R exceeds 1 then we achieve the first-best (which we already know from Lemma 2). If 2e R is
smaller than but close to 1 then there is not enough liquidity in the low state and so trade is inefficient.
However, all resources are invested in the risky technology –this follows from the fact that the safe
technology is strictly unprofitable at the prices supporting the first-best and so will continue to be
                                                                                              L
unprofitable in a neighborhood of the first-best (see the Appendix). Finally, if 2e R is much below 1 then



3   In each region the competitive equilibrium is unique. We leave the proof to the reader.

                                                                                                               14
the demand for liquidity is sufficiently great relative to the supply that some resources are switched to the
safe technology, and so both trade and investment are inefficient.
        Note that if R L  0 , the economy will never be at the first-best.

        Another way to understand Proposition 2 is as follows. Given that 2eR L  1 , what determines the
type of distortion is the comparison between the total amount of pledgeable wealth in the bad state and the

ratio of the expected capital loss in the bad state (( 1   ) ( 1  R )) to the expected capital gain in the
                                                                    L


good one (  ( R  1 )). If the expected capital loss is small relative to the expected capital gain, then it is
                 H


still optimal to invest all resources in the risky technology (the first-best outcome) and the inefficiency is
limited to trading in doctor and builder services. If the expected capital loss is relatively large, then the
optimal allocation will require some investment in the storage technology; this reduces the overall losses
in the bad state and also the inefficiency in trading.
        At this stage it is worth asking what happens if there is no aggregate uncertainty in the economy
(one state of the world). Since the high expected return asset now dominates the storage technology (

R  1 ), there is no trade-off between return and liquidity :all investment will be in the high return
technology. We have assumed that e≥1 and R  1 , but let us briefly relax that assumption. There are then

two cases. If   2e R  1 , we achieve the first-best (as in Proposition 2; the single state corresponds to the

high state). If 2e R  1 ,we do not achieve the first-best ( the single state corresponds to the low state).
However, in this case, there is no externality (see Section 2.4 below), and hence no role for government
intervention on the investment side. (In Hart and Zingales (2011) we showed that there will still be an
externality even in the perfect certainty case as long as some investments are not fully collateralizeable
(see also footnote 1).) Note that even in the perfect certainty case there could be a role for fiscal policy
(see Section 3 below). The bottom line is that the certainty case, which can be seen as a finite-horizon
version of Woodford (1990), is less rich than the uncertainty case, and that is why we have supposed
(aggregate) uncertainty.


2.3 Insurance
          A natural question to ask is one we raised with respect to an Arrow-Debreu equilibrium. Since
individuals know their type before they trade they could in principle obtain insurance against their type.
(Insurance markets would open before period 1 and pay wheat in period 1 contingent on an agent’s type,
assumed verifiable.) Will they want to do so? As before the answer is no, but the argument is a little more
complex since we are in a second-best world. We show in the Appendix that, while the utility of an east
side doctor is below that of an east side builder, their marginal utilities of wealth are the same.


                                                                                                                15
Thus there is no demand for insurance.


2.4 Overinvestment in safe assets

        We now consider whether a planner operating under the same constraints as the market can do
better. We assume that the planner can constrain the production decisions of firms, i.e., choose y r (or

equivalently y s ), but cannot interfere in markets in other ways.
                                                                        4
                                           1  1 RL 3
        We will focus on the case 2eR L               . It is easy to see from the proof of
                                            R 1 
                                                  H



Proposition 2 that in a neighborhood of the non-pledgeable equilibrium both technologies are used and

xdL  0, xbL  0. Therefore, from (2.4)-(2.5) there is a one-to-one relationship between y r and xdL :
decreases in the former correspond to decreases in the latter. In what follows we therefore assume that the

planner picks xd  x
                L      CP
                            rather than y r (or equivalently y s ). We will show that the planner can increase

surplus by reducing x CP below the non-pledgeable equilibrium level.

         Suppose that the planner picks xd  x
                                                  L    CP
                                                            in a neighborhood of the equilibrium. Then the market

clearing conditions (2.7) and (2.9) yield
                                                                    1
                                                      pdL   xCP  2

                                                                    3
                                                      pbL   xCP  4 .

Also qH , qL will satisfy (2.1)-(2.2) with equality.


                                                       1                   xL                 
                                                                                   1
                                                                                        
                                                                                             2
The doctors’ utility, which is given by   xdH    (1   )  dL  pdL                         , becomes
                                                2             pb 2                            
   e  q L x CP 1              CP 14 1 CP 
       H
                    (1   )  x   x  . Similarly, the builders’ utility, which is given by
   q             2                   2    
   H 1               1  p L 2           e 1             1        1
                                                                            
  xb    (1   )   bL   , becomes   H    (1   )   xCP  2  .
       2             2  pd           q   2            2          

        The planner maximizes U d  U b . Differentiating the welfare function with respect to x CP yields




                                                                                                                 16
                                   qL            1 CP  34 1          1 CP  12
(2.10)                            H  (1   )[  x   ]  (1   )  x 
                                   q             4         2          4

         We want to prove that (2.10) is negative when we evaluate it at the market equilibrium,
                             4
        1  1 RL 3                                     1 RL qH
xCP                 . From (2.1) and (2.2) we know that         . Hence, we can rewrite (2.10)
         R 1                                           RH 1 qL
               H


                                          4
                       1  1 RL 3
calculated at x CP                as
                        R 1 
                              H



                                                                                               2
                                                       1                                  
                     q   L
                                   1  1  qH    1              1  1  qH                 3
                    H  (1   )[               ]  (1   )            
                     q             4   qL       2              4   qL 


                   qL
                       1  ( xCP )3/4 ((1/ 2)  (1/ 4)( xCP )3/4  (1/ 4)( xCP )1/2 ) 
                   qH 
              =

              <0
since x CP  1.

It follows that the planner can increase surplus by reducing x CP below the non-pledgeable equilibrium

level, or equivalently by reducing y s .


                                                        4
                                   1  1 RL 3
Proposition 3:       When 2eR L                          , the economy overinvests in safe assets.
                                    R 1 
                                          H



         In other words, the non-pledgeable competitive equilibrium will be inefficient as long as there is
                                                                                                   4
                                                                            1  1 RL 3
sufficiently high aggregate uncertainty before trading takes place ( 2eR        L
                                                                                         ). The
                                                                             R 1 
                                                                                   H



intuition is that the non-pledgeability of future labor income creates an additional demand for relatively
safe assets. The reason is that transactional needs generate a form of risk aversion even in risk neutral
people. When an agent has the opportunity/desire to buy, having a great deal of pledgeable wealth in
some states does not compensate her for the risk of having very little pledgeable wealth in other states,
because there are diminishing returns to liquidity: in the former states the gains from trade have been
exhausted and the marginal value of liquidity is zero, whereas in the latter states the agents are wealth-
constrained and the marginal value of liquidity is high. As a result, agents are willing to hold relatively


                                                                                                              17
safe assets even if they have a lower yield. However, in doing so they ignore the negative externality they
impose on other agents (doctors). This externality arises from the fact that when doctors accumulate more
liquidity in the low state this raises the price of building services, which has a first order negative effect
on other doctors who are also liquidity constrained. Of course, builders benefit from the increase in price
but this effect is second order since builders are on their competitive supply curve.
        We have shown that too many resources are invested in manufacturing these relatively safe
assets. An example of this is the investment of emerging economies in low-yielding US Treasury
securities (see Caballero and Krishnamurthy, 2009). The concern of these economies is precisely that they
will not have sufficient collateralizeable wealth in a severe downturn.
        Another (domestic) example is the massive investment in assets that were considered at the time
as relatively safe (or relatively valuable in the most extreme downturns), such as housing and gold.


2.5 Asset Pricing Implications
                                                                                          4
                                                                           1  1 R 
                                                                                      L   3
In spite of the linear utility of the agents, in case 3 (when 2eR L                  ), the price of the
                                                                            R 1 
                                                                                  H



                                                                                               1 RL
high state Arrow security will carry a discount. To see this notice that in case 3 q 
                                                                                    H
                                                                                                      , while in
                                                                                              RH  RL
                                                                         1 RL    
case 1 (the efficient equilibrium) q                                              . Correspondingly, in case
                                    H
                                              ; it is easy to see that
                                          R                              R R
                                                                           H    L
                                                                                   R
                                                                             RH 1
3 the low state Arrow security will carry a premium: in case 3 q 
                                                                L
                                                                                    , while in case 1 (the
                                                                            RH  RL
                              (1   )                                RH 1    (1   )
efficient equilibrium) q                                                    
                        L
                                       , where it is easy to see that H                 .
                                 R                                   R R  L
                                                                                  R
        This result is reminiscent of Barro (2006), who rationalizes the high equity premium and low risk
free rate on the basis of the historical occurrence of rare disasters. Our low state with
                          4
         1  1 RL 3
2eR L               can be thought of as one of those disasters. The main difference is that Barro
          R 1 
                H



rationalizes the equity premium and low risk free rate in the context of a representative agent model with
risk-averse investors, while we do so with heterogeneous agents who are risk neutral.


3. Fiscal Policy



                                                                                                                 18
So far we have ignored the role of the government in providing liquidity. We will now relax this
assumption. Following Holmstrom and Tirole (1998, 2011) and Woodford (1990), we assume the
government can exploit a power it has, which the private sector does not have: the power to tax. In
particular, the government can issue notes to consumers, and these notes will be valuable because they are
backed by future tax receipts. In our finite horizon model notes or money are equivalent, because both of
them must be backed by future taxes. Therefore, since the intervention we consider does not affect the
aggregate wealth of consumers, but only the temporal distribution of this wealth, we label it fiscal policy.
         Holmstrom and Tirole (1998) justify the assumption that it is easier for the government to collect
taxes, than for creditors to collect debts, from consumers on the grounds that the government can audit
incomes or impose jail penalties. While realistic this assumption can be criticized on the grounds that in
principle at least jail could be used as a penalty for the non-payment of private debts—after all debtors’
prisons have existed in the past. We therefore adopt a different rationale. We suppose that the government
can impose sales taxes on certain productive facilities that consumers use and which can be easily
monitored. Private lenders cannot duplicate such an arrangement since they do not have the power to
require (all) facilities to participate.
         To allow for sales taxes we assume that in period 4 our agents consume flour as well as wheat:
one unit of flour yields one unit of utility. There is a milling technology for turning wheat into flour: each
                                                   1 2
agent can obtain  units of flour at the cost of     c units of wheat, where   0 is the agent’s choice
                                                   2
variable. This activity occurs at facilities (mills) that can easily be monitored by the government, and so
the government can impose a per unit flour tax t that cannot be avoided.
         An agent’s utility is now:
                              1 2                1
Doctors: U d  wd  bd         ld  (1  t )d  cd 2
                              2                  2
                              1                 1 2
Builders: U b  wb  db  lb  (1  t )b        cb
                            2

                              2                 2
where t is the tax rate on flour.
         We assume that in period 4 each agent has a large endowment of wheat (in addition to any labor
income and dividends from investment), so that she is not at a corner solution, and hence d , b satisfy

the first order condition
                                                          1 t
                                            d  b           .
                                                           c
This yields



                                                                                                             19
                        1      1
         U d  wd  bd  ld 2  (1  t ) 2 ,
                        2      2c
                        1      1
         U b  wb  db  lb 2  (1  t )2 .
                        2      2c
The total amount raised by taxes on doctors and builders is
                                                   2t (1  t )
(3.1)                                         T               .
                                                       c
        Since in the high state there is ample liquidity, it is natural to focus on the case where the
government issues notes only in the low state. We will suppose that the government can target those who
need the liquidity most: the doctors. (Our analysis so far is consistent with the assumption that it is
verifiable in period 2 whether an agent has to buy or sell first.)4
         In summary, the government’s fiscal policy consists of issuing m notes to each doctor in period 2
if and only if the state L occurs. Each note promises one unit of wheat in period 4.
         Given that government notes must be backed by taxes, we have
                                                         2t (1  t )
(3.2)                                         m T                  .
                                                             c
                                                                                     1
Note that (3.2) implies that T=0 when t=0 and T reaches a maximum at t                . Thus, it is never optimal
                                                                                     2
             1
to set t      since the deadweight loss increases in t
             2
         From a period 2 perspective this very simple model exhibits some Keynesian features when
                           4
         1  1 RL 3
2eR L               . If, when the state is low, the government intervenes with an (unexpected)
          R 1 
                H



hand-out m in period 2, it will have the effect of boosting the level of output by more than m (fiscal
                                          L         L
multiplier). To see this, assume that xd and xb are fixed at their competitive equilibrium levels, which

are less than 1. Consider a small government hand-out of m to the doctors. Then, after the hand-out the
new equilibrium becomes:

                                         xdL  m pbL
                                                 L
                                            pbL  pd

                                         xdL  m
                                                  pdL ,
                                            pdL

4The case where the government cannot target the constrained agents is not qualitatively different, but a bit more
cumbersome.

                                                                                                                     20
which implies
                  3                     1
                                                   pbL
p  ( x  m) and p  ( x  m) . Since l  p and l  L , the fiscal policy increases (the
  L
  b
         L
         d
                  4         L
                            d
                                 L
                                 d
                                        2         L
                                                  d
                                                         L
                                                         d
                                                                 L
                                                                 b
                                                   pd

                                                                                ( pbL ) 2
nominal value of) output (which we measure as pdL ldL  pbL lbL = ( pdL ) 2              ) from 2 xd to 2( xd  m) .
                                                                                                    L        L

                                                                                  pdL
Thus, the fiscal multiplier is 2. The intuition behind the multiplier is very Keynesian: the fiscal stimulus
enables the doctors to buy more building services. This extra demand increases production by builders
and therefore builders can afford to buy more from doctors, raising their production. In turn, this
additional production enables doctors to pay for what they bought from the builders and the additional
taxes.
         Not only does a fiscal policy following a big negative shock increase output more than one-to-
one, but it also increases ex ante welfare. To see this it is sufficient to notice that ex post welfare in state
L is given by

             xL  m 1                            xbL 1  pbL 
                                                                2
                                                                                 
(3.3)    W = Ld
                        pd 
                            L 2
                                
                                  1
                                     (1  t ) 2
                                                              
                                                                    1
                                                                      (1  t ) 2
                                                                                 ,
             pb                                                                
                  L
                      2           2c              pdL 2  pdL  2c


and

             W L    1 L       
                                 3
                                   1 1 L     
                                               1
                                                   (1  t )
(3.4)              [ ( xd  m)   ( xd  m) 2 
                                 4
                                                            ] > 0 for m close to 0.
              m     4             2 4            (1  2t )


         For future reference note that the optimal fiscal intervention in the non-anticipated case is
characterized by

                       1 L       
                                   3
                                     1 1 L     
                                                 1
                                                     (1  t )
(3.5)                 [ ( xd  m)   ( xd  m) 2 
                                   4
                                                              ]=0.
                       4             2 4            (1  2t )
Since t is increasing in m it is easy to see that (3.5) has a unique solution.
         A more interesting question is what happens when the intervention is fully anticipated. We will
consider two cases: one where the government can commit to m ex ante and the other where the
government cannot commit. Also in contrast to Section 2.4 we will suppose that the government cannot
constrain the production decision of firms: its only policy tool is m.


3.1. The case of commitment




                                                                                                                    21
           We will assume that agents have rational expectations about government actions. Suppose that
agents anticipate that m will be injected in the low state. Then, the equilibrium of Section 2.2 changes as
follows:
                                            H          L
           In period 1 a doctor chooses xd and xd to solve:

                             xdH 1 H 2 1               xdL  m 1 L 2 1              
(*)                   Max   H   pd     (1   )       L
                                                                   pd   (1  t ) 2 
                             pb  2       2c            pb      2        2c          



 subject to

                                                  q H xdH  q L xdL  e .

where (*) reflects the fact that the flour tax is zero in state H and t in state L and the doctors receive m in
state L.
                                           H          L
           Similarly, a builder chooses xb and xb to solve:

                                    x H 1  p H 2 1         x L 1  p L 2 1           
(**)                         Max   H   H     (1   )  bL   bL  
                                       b      b
                                                                                 (1  t )2 
                                    pd 2  pd  2c         pd 2  pd  2c            

subject to

                                                   q H xbH  q L xbL  e .
           The other equilibrium conditions (2.1)-(2.6) and (2.8)-(2.9) stay the same, while (2.7) becomes

                                                  xdL  m pbL                              1
(3.6)               pbL  1 . If pbL  1 , then        L
                                                          L . If pbL  1 , then xdL  m  L
                                                     pb   pd                              pd
           The government chooses in period 0 to maximize the expected utility of an agent who does not
know whether he will buy or sell first (equivalently, whether he will be a doctor or a builder). That is, the
government chooses m to maximize the sum of doctor and builder utilities:

                   xH 1       1 xbH 1  pbH 
                                               2
                                                 1
(3.7)      W    H   pd    H   H    
                     d    H 2

                  pb 2       2c pd 2  pd  2c 
                                                  
                     xL  m 1                   xbL 1  pbL 
                                                               2
                                                                        
                              pd   (1  t )  L   L   (1  t ) 
                                 L 2  1                          1
           (1   )   d                       2                      2

                     pb                                               
                          L
                             2        2c         pd 2  pd  2c

where for each m the x’s and the p’s are given by the market equilibrium corresponding to that m.




                                                                                                              22
         The interesting case is when in the absence of fiscal policy investment and trading in labor
                                                                 4
                                           1  1 RL 3
services are both inefficient, i.e. 2eR  
                                       L
                                                        (see Proposition 2). In this case we have
                                            R 1 
                                                  H




                                                    4
                         1  1 RL 3
Proposition 4: If 2eR               , a positive injection of notes ( m  0 ) in the low state is
                        L

                          R 1 
                                H



welfare improving.


Proof:
We know from the proof of Proposition 2 that the competitive equilibrium in the case m=0 has the
following features :


(3.8)        Doctors hold both securities, and so

                                       1 
                                H
                                               ,
                            q           pbL q L

                                                         RH 1             1 RL
         Both technologies are used and so q                           
                                            L                         H
(3.9)                                                           and q             ,
                                                        RH  RL           RH  RL




                                               1  1 RL
(3.10)                 xbL  0 , pbL                     1 .
                                                 RH 1




         Furthermore, it is easy to adapt the proof of Proposition 2 to show that (3.8)-(3.10) will hold in a
competitive equilibrium when the government injects m, for m close to zero. The market clearing
conditions (2.9), (3.6) can be written as

          xdL  m pbL
(3.11)            L,
             pbL  pd


                                                                                                            23
          xdL  m
(3.12)         L
                   pdL ,
             pd
which imply
                     2                       4
(3.13)    p  (p ) , x  m  (p ) .
           L
           d
                   L 3
                   b
                            L
                            d
                                           L 3
                                           b

                                                                                  L                       L
     According to (3.10), the government injection of m does not affect pb . Hence, from (3.13), pd

stays the same and so does xd  m . We may conclude that there is a 100% crowding out of xd by m.
                                   L                                                                 L


         The market clearing conditions, (2.3)-(2.5), imply

                                xdL  2eR L
(3.14)                  ys 
                                  1 RL
                                2e  xdL
(3.15)                   yr 
                                 RL 1
Hence, a fall in xd leads to a decrease in y s , an increase in y r , and an increase in xd  xb .
                    L                                                                        H   H


In summary, we have

                   dxdL        dy s       1     dy r   1
(3.16)                   1 ,              ,         .
                   dm          dm      1  R dm 1  R L
                                            L


Also from (3.2)
                                        dt     c
(3.17)                                               .
                                        dm 2(1  2t )
         To ascertain the effect of m on welfare we differentiate (3.7) with respect to m to obtain:

               dW      dy s dy r H              2         dt         RH 1                (1  t )
(3.18)             [         R ]  (1   )[ (1  t )    ]   [        ]  (1   )
               dm      dm dm                    c         dm         1 R L
                                                                                         (1  2t )


Hence, the optimal choice of m is characterized by the first order condition:

                                                RH 1       (1  t )
(3.19)                                           [       ]           with equality if m  0 .
                                        (1   ) 1  R L
                                                            (1  2t )
Note that the LHS of (3.19) is strictly bigger than 1 given that the expected return of the risky asset
strictly exceeds one. Thus, (3.19) cannot be satisfied at t=0. We may conclude that a government hand-
out ( m  0 ) in the low state is welfare improving.
                                                                                                         QED



                                                                                                               24
         We see that, when the government intervention is expected, the inefficient overinvestment in safe
assets is reduced. Yet, the level of output in periods 2 and 3 is still inefficient. As (3.16) makes clear,
government liquidity completely crowds out private liquidity. As a result, the level of trade remains the
same as in the original equilibrium without government intervention. Nevertheless, when the government
does intervene in period 2, the multiplier is bigger than 1 as per the analysis above.
         Given this tension, what is the optimal level of m? Assume that c is small (the deadweight cost of
taxation is large) and thus it is never desirable for the government to move the economy too far from the
non-intervention equilibrium. We can then be confident that we will remain in a neighborhood of m  0
and so (3.8)-(3.10) continue to hold. The first order condition for the optimal m then follows from (3.19):

                                               RH 1       (1  t )
(3.20)                                         [        ]
                                       (1   ) 1  R L
                                                           (1  2t )
                                                                          1
Since the RHS is strictly increasing in t and converges to  as t          from below, (3.20) has a unique
                                                                          2
solution and the optimal m can be deduced from (3.20).
         In the above we have ignored the possible existence of other government expenses (e.g., to
finance valuable public goods). If they exist, then distortions of extra taxation are first order, not second
order. In such a case it is not obvious that we want to intervene with a fiscal stimulus. In fact, if the
government anticipates the need for such a stimulus in the future it might want to restrain the provision of
public goods (and taxation) beyond what it optimal in isolation to retain the fiscal flexibility to intervene
in case of a disaster.
         In the above we have also considered optimal fiscal policy when fiscal policy is the only
instrument at the government’s disposal. A natural question to ask is what happens if the government can
choose fiscal policy and control the investment allocation. It is not difficult to show that fiscal policy is
still useful : m >0 at the optimum. We leave the details to the reader.




3.2. The case of non-commitment
         Suppose that m is characterized by (3.20) but now the government can change m ex post if state L
occurs. Will it choose to do so? We assume that the government continues to be benevolent: it maximizes
                                                                                                            L   L
the sum of doctor and builder utilities in the low state. The problem in term of commitment is that xd , xb

and production decisions are sunk.

         Given that xd and xb  0 are fixed, market prices for doctor and building services will be given
                         L    L


by (3.11) –(3.12), where m now varies. Total welfare in the low state (see (3.3)) can be written as

                                                                                                                25
                                    1                             1
                                                                                  
                   W L  ( xdL  m) 4   xdL  m    xdL  m  2  (1  t ) 2  .
                                        1             1               1
(3.21)
                                       2             2               c           
         L
Since xd is fixed,

                             W L    1          
                                                  3
                                                    1 1          
                                                                   1
                                                                       (1  t )
(3.22)                             [ ( xdL  m) 4   ( xdL  m) 2            ].
                              m     4              2 4               (1  2t )
                                                                       4
Now apply (3.20) and use (3.11)-(3.12) to write xd  m  ( pb ) 3 . Then,
                                                       L           L



                   W L    1 L 1 1 1 L 32
(3.23)                   [ ( pb )   ( pb )  ( pbL ) 1 ]  0
                    m     4        2 4
since pb  1.
         L


We see that, when the government considers its decision as of period 2, it has an incentive to renege on
the previously announced level of fiscal intervention. In other words,
Proposition 5: The government fiscal policy is time inconsistent.
         Ex post the government will want to give fewer hand-outs than it said it would. The reason is that
the promise to give hand-outs in the low state helps address two problems: the inefficient investment in
period 0 and the inefficiently low level of trade in periods 2 and 3. If the government can renege on its
promise in period 2, however, it will find that at that time its actions affect only one inefficiency: the low
level of trade in periods 2 and 3. Since the government finds it less beneficial to tax people to deal with
one inefficiency rather than two, it will deviate in the direction of intervening less than promised.
         Note that the optimal time-consistent fiscal policy is characterized by

              1 L       
                          3
                            1 1 L     
                                        1
                                            (1  t )
(3.24)       [ ( xd  m)   ( xd  m) 2 
                          4
                                                     ] =0,
              4             2 4            (1  2t )
                                               4
                        1   1  RL 3
                         4
where xd  m  ( p ) = 
       L               L 3
                                       .
                         R 1
                       b         H




3.3 Comparison of fiscal policies


How do the fiscal policies for the three cases—unanticipated, commitment, and non-commitment—
differ? We already know that the commitment level of m is higher than the non-commitment level. If we
compare the non-commitment level with the unanticipated level we see that the first order conditions (3.5)
                                                                                                        L
and (3.24) are the same. However, since there is crowding out when m is anticipated the level of xd is



                                                                                                              26
lower in (3.24) than in (3.5). It follows that the value of m satisfying (3.24) will be higher than that
satisfying (3.5): the non-commitment level is higher than the unanticipated level. The intuition is that
when fiscal policy is not anticipated the desirable crowding out effects do not occur and so it is less
attractive.
Thus the ranking of fiscal policies from high to low is: commitment, non-commitment, unanticipated.




4. An Extension


So far, we have considered borrowers who can breach any promise to pay future labor income by
“disappearing”. In practice some specialist agents may be able to keep track of borrowers and force them
to repay their debts. Specifically, suppose that all payments for building and doctor services take place
through check transfers and that a bank is able to seize these before they are cashed for consumption. In
this way labor income becomes contractible. However, the bank cannot force anyone to work. That is, all
the bank can do is to ensure that someone who defaults has zero consumption. As a result,
uncollateralized lending against future labor income is possible, but there is a repayment constraint. Each
worker can borrow up to the point at which ex post he is indifferent between exerting effort and repaying
the loan and doing nothing and defaulting.
         We analyze this case in a simplified setting in Hart and Zingales (2011), and show that our
results generalize. In particular, lending does not resolve the tension between private and social
objectives. However, lending does improve welfare since it increases the volume of trade without
sacrificing the higher return of the risky investment. Interestingly, lending is not a perfect substitute for
the riskless asset. The reason is that with no private liquidity in the system, the amount borrowed by
doctors equals the purchasing power in the hands of builders, which in turn equals the revenue received
by doctors for their services. But if the revenue equals the debt, it is not in the interest of the doctors to
work, given that they have to exert costly effort. Hence, the doctors will default. To have a functioning
lending market, we need a minimum amount of private liquidity.




5. Conclusions
         We have built a simple framework to analyze the role of fiscal policy in attenuating the impact of
aggregate shocks on private investment choices and aggregate output. We show that the mere lack of
pledgeability of human capital, even in the presence of complete markets for securities, makes the



                                                                                                                 27
competitive equilibrium constrained inefficient. The market will invest too much in producing safe
securities and will dedicate too few resources towards risky investments.
        Our work can be distinguished from that of Holmstrom and Tirole (2011) and Lorenzoni (2008).
Their analyses are based on the idea that the market underprovides liquidity to firms, whereas in our
treatment consumer liquidity needs are the driver. To compare the importance of the two, we looked at
the Survey of Small Businesses Finances and Survey of Consumer Finances. The 2004 Survey of
Consumer Finances finds that 37% of families are financially constrained, where constrained is defined as
a family that applied for credit and has been rejected or has been discouraged from applying by the fear of
being rejected. By contrast, the 2003 Survey of Small Businesses Finances finds that only 15% of small
firms were constrained, using the same definition. Since small firms are more likely to be constrained
than big firms, this evidence seems to suggest that financial constraints are more likely to be a problem
for consumers than for firms.
        In our simple model a fiscal policy following a big negative shock can increase not only ex post
output more than one-to-one (fiscal multiplier), but also ex ante welfare. We have supposed that the
government is able to target directly consumers who are in need of liquidity. If we were to drop this
assumption, an interesting set of problems would arise. Would it be cheaper for the government to bail
out financial intermediaries rather than to hand out money to consumers randomly? If so, how would this
benefit trade off against the potential moral hazard problem financial intermediaries face when they
expect to be bailed out in major downturns? We analyze these and other issues in a separate paper (Hart
and Zingales, 2013).




                                                                                                            28
                                                   References
Allen, Franklin and Gale, Douglas. 2004. “Financial Intermediaries and Markets”. Econometrica
        vol 72, N. 4, 1023-1061.

Barro, Robert J. 2006. Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century. The Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 121, no. 3: 823-866.

Caballero, Ricardo J. Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2009, “ Global Imbalances and Financial Fragility,”
        NBER Working Paper No. 14688

Farhi, Emmanuel, Mike Golosov and Aleh Tsyvinski, 2009, “A Theory of Liquidity and
        Regulation of Financial Intermediation,” Review of Economic Studies, July 2009, Vol.
        76(3).

Geanakoplos, John, and Heraklis Polemarchakis. 1986. “Existence, Regularity and Constrained
      Suboptimality of Competitive Allocations When the Asset Market Is Incomplete.” In
      Essays in Honor of Kenneth Arrow, Vol 3. ed. W. Heller, R. Starr, and D. Starrett, 65–95.
      Cambridge University Press.

Gennaioli, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny "A Model of Shadow Banking", Journal of Finance,
       forthcoming.

Hahn, Frank (1965), “On Some Problems of Proving the Existence of an Equilibrium in a
    Monetary Economy,” in F.H Hahn and F.P.R Breckling The Theory of Interest Rates London
    McMillan 126-135.

Hart, O, 1975, “On the optimality of equilibrium when the market structure is incomplete,” Journal of
        Economic Theory 11: 418-443.

Hart, O., and L. Zingales, (2011) “Inefficient Provision of Liquidity,” NBER working paper 17299.

Hart, O., and L. Zingales, (2013) “Banks Are Where The Liquidity Is” work in progress.

Holmstrom, Bengt, and Jean Tirole. 1998. “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity,” Journal of
     Political Economy, 106(1): 1-40.
Holmstrom, Bengt, and Jean Tirole (2011). Inside and Outside Liquidity. MIT Press.

Jevons, W.S., Money and the Mechanism of Exchange (New York: D. Appleton and Co.
        1876).

Jeanne Olivier and Anton Korinek (2013) “Macroprudential Regulation Versus Mopping Up After The
       Crash,” NBER Working Paper 18675.

Kahle, Kathleen M. and René M. Stulz, forthcoming, “Access to capital, investment, and the financial
        crisis,” Journal of Financial Economics.

Kehoe Timothy J and David K. Levine, “Debt-Constrained Asset Markets,” Review of Economic


                                                                                                        29
        Studies, Vol. 60, No. 4 (Oct., 1993), pp. 865-888.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore. 1997. “Credit Cycles.” Journal of Political Economy,
       105(2): 211–48.

Kiyotaki, N and R. Wright, (1989),” On Money as a Medium of Exchange.” The Journal of
       Political Economy, Vol. 97, No. 4 (Aug., 1989), pp. 927-954

Korinek, A, (2012), “Systemic Risk-Taking: Amplification Effects, Externalities, and Regulatory
Responses,” working paper, University of Maryland.

Kydland; Edward C. Prescott. “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans” The
       Journal of Political Economy, Volume 85, Issue 3 (Jun., 1977), 473-492.

Lorenzoni, Guido: “Inefficient Credit Booms,” The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 75, No. 3, Jul.,
       2008, p. 809-833.

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, 2012, “What Explains High Unemployment? The Aggregate Demand
       Channel,” University of Chicago Working Paper.

Madrigan, V. and T. Philippon, 2011, “Household Leverage and the Recession”, NUY working
       paper.

Ostroy, Joseph and Starr, Ross 1990), "The Transactions Role of Money," in Benjamin
       Friedman and Frank Hahn, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, Vol. I. New York:
       North-Holland, 1990, pp. 3-62.

Philippon, T., (2008) “The Evolution of the US Financial Industry from 1860 to 2007: Theory
        and Evidence,’’ NYU working paper.

Stein, Jeremy, (2012), “Monetary Policy as Financial Stability Regulation,” Quarterly Journal of
         Economics.

Woodford, Michael, 1990, “Debt as Private Liquidity,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 80, No. 2,
      Papers and Proceedings of the Hundred and Second Annual Meeting of the American Economic
      Association (May, 1990), pp.382-388




                                                                                                      30
                                                                    Appendix


Proof of Lemma 1: Suppose pd  1 and pb  1 . Then, by (2.8) and (2.6), xb  xd  ( pd )  1 , which
                                     H                 H                                H     H         H 2


contradicts (2.3).

                                                                                1
Now suppose pd  1 and pb  1 . Then, by (2.8), xbH  ( pdH ) 2                    0 , which is impossible.
                 H               H

                                                                               pdH

Hence pd  1.
          H




        To prove that pb  1 , assume the contrary: pb  1 . We first show that xd                 xdL . Suppose not:
                         H                                              H                    H


xdH  xdL . Then xdL  0 . From the first order conditions for (*),

                                                                   1 
(A1)                                                   H   H
                                                                
                                                   p q b            pbL q L

That is, the utility rate of return on the low state Arrow security for doctors must be at least as high as that
on the high state Arrow security. We also know that there is more output in the high state, so, if
xdH  xdL , builders must be buying the high state security, which means that it must give them an
attractive return, or , from their first order condition,

                                                              1 
(A2)                                                   H
                                                                      ,
                                                   q           pdL q L

where we are using the fact that pd  1 .
                                             H




Putting (A1)-(A2) together yields

                                                   pbL
(A3)                                                H
                                                        pdL .
                                                   pb

If pb  1 , (A3) implies pb  1 , which we have supposed not to be the case. Hence pb  1 . Then we
    L                        H                                                                      L



                                            xdH and  pbL   xdL pdL . Therefore (A3) becomes
                                         2                          2
have, from (2.6) and (2.7), pbH




                                                                                                                     31
                                                                   1

                                                      x     L
                                                              d
                                                                   2            1
                                                                         pdL  2  1
                                                                   1

                                                      x     H
                                                              d
                                                                   2



    H
or xd    xdL , which is a contradiction.

        Hence, xd
                     H
                          xdL . Since a doctor’s utility is increasing in xdL and xdH , a doctor’s budget
constraint will hold with equality. Thus q xd  q xd  e , which implies (q  q ) xd  e . Hence,
                                                      H       H         L   L                         H       L   H


by (2.1), xd  e  1 , implying pb  1 by (2.6).
           H                              H



                                                                                                                          Q.E.D.


Proof of Lemma 2:

To achieve the first-best the supply of building and doctor services must be 1 in each state. Since the
supply of doctor services is given by pd , pd in (2.8), (2.9), it follows that pd  pd  1 . The supply of
                                                  H       L                                       H       L


                              pbH pbL
building services is given by H , L in (2.6)-(2.7), and, substituting pd  pd  1 , we obtain
                                                                       H    L

                              pd pd
pbH  pbL  1. Hence, again from (2.6)-(2.7), xdH  1 and xdL  1 .

        In the first-best all wheat is invested in the high yield project: y s  0 and y r  2e. Therefore,
from (2.4), 2eR  xd  xb  xd  1 . Hence, 2eR L  1 is a necessary condition.
                 L        L       L   L



        To prove sufficiency consider a candidate equilibrium where the prices of doctor and builder
                                                                 (1   )
services equal 1 in both states, q               , q 
                                  H                  L
                                                                           , all wheat is invested in the high yield project ,
                                              R                      R
and the doctors buy at least one unit of each Arrow security. Since q H  q L  1  e , they can afford to do
so. Doctors and builders satisfy their first order conditions and firms maximize profit. Hence this is
indeed a competitive equilibrium.

                                                                                                                          Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 2:

Lemma 2 shows that we achieve the first-best if 2eR L  1 . Consider the case 2eR L  1 . We know from
Lemma 1 that pd  pb  1 . We show first that doctors will hold both securities. Given pb =1, (2.6)
                 H            H                                                                                       H


implies xd >0. Suppose xd  0 . This is inconsistent with pb  1 in (2.7). But if pb  1 , then, from
          H                       L                                                 L                     L




                                                                                                                                 32
(2.7), xd  0 implies pb  0 . This in turn implies that the marginal return on the low state Arrow
        L                  L


security for a doctor is infinite, which means that the first order condition in (*) cannot hold. Therefore,
xdL  0 .

            Since doctors hold both securities, we have

                                                             1 
(A4)                                              H
                                                      
                                              q               pbL q L

Let’s assume first that both technologies are used. Then (2.1) and (2.2) hold as an equality and
        RH 1             1 RL
qL            and q H
                                . Therefore
       RH  RL           RH  RL

                                                              1  1 RL
(A5)                                           pbL                      1
                                                                RH 1

since R  1 .

        It is easy to see that pb  pd . This is clear from (A5) if pd  1 . Suppose pd  1 .Then (2.9)
                                    L         L                                           L       L



                          ( p L ) 2  pb 
                                             L 2                                      2

         
implies p    L 2
             d      x b  bL 
                      L

                            pd        pdL
                                           . Hence, pd  ( pb ) 3  pb since pb  1 . This proves pb  pd . It
                                                     L      L        L        L                    L    L



follows that the rate of return on the low security is strictly less than that on the high security for builders.
So builders will not hold the low security (from the first order condition for (**)): xb  0 .
                                                                                              L



                      From (2.7),

                                        pdL xdL   pbL  ,
                                                                          2
(A6)


from which it follows, since pb  1 and pb  pd , that xd  1 . But then (2.9) in combination with
                                    L                             L           L   L


xbL  0 implies pdL  1 . Hence, again from (2.9),

                                            xdL   pdL  .
                                                                      2
(A7)

Combining (A6) and (A7) we have

                                                              4
(A8)                                x p
                                        L
                                        d
                                                      L
                                                      b      3   .

Hence




                                                                                                               33
                    1   1  R L 2/3 L 1   1  R L 4/3
(A9)         pdL  (             ) , xd  (          ) .
                       RH  1               RH  1
                                                              4
                              1   1  RL 3
        If the solution xd                  2eR , then this candidate equilibrium is feasible. Note
                         L                         L

                               R 1
                                       H



that both technologies are used: since xd  2eR the riskless technology must be used and since, by
                                              L                        L



Lemma 1 and (A7), xd ≥1> xd  xd  xb the risky technology must also be used. Also trade of doctor
                        H         L       L           L


                                                      L            L
and builder services is inefficient since pb , pd are both less than 1.
                                      4
                 1   1  RL 3
        If xd                  2eR , then we solve instead for an equilibrium with xd  2eR ,
            L                         L                                                 L      L

                  R 1
                          H



xbL  0 . In this case, there will be no investment in the storage technology (thus y s  0 ) and the market
clearing condition for securities, (2.3)-(2.4), simplifies to


                                                   xdH  xbH  2eR H ,

                                                  xdL  xbL  2eR L .
(2.7) and (2.9) become
                                                                                  1
                                                                  pdL   2eR L  2
                                                                                  3
                                                                  pbL   2eR L  4 ,

which are below one since 2eR  1 . Doctors hold both Arrow securities since pb , pb  0 and so we
                                  L                                                                  H     L


must have
                                                                 1            1 
                                                  H
                                                                                   3
                                                                                                 .
                                                                  pbL q L
                                              q
                                                                               2eR 
                                                                                   L 4
                                                                                         q   L



This, together with (2.2) with equality, determines q H and q L . Thus, in this equilibrium investment is
efficient but the level of trading is not.                                                           QED


Proof that Insurance Markets have no role
We demonstrate that, even in the second-best, there is no role for markets that open before period 1 and
pay wheat in period 1 contingent on an agent’s type (assumed verifiable). For simplicity, let us focus on

                                                                                                               34
Case 3 of Proposition 2, where there is inefficiency in both investment and trade. (The result applies to
the other cases of Proposition 2 as well.)


Insurance redistributes endowments between those who sell before they buy and those who buy before
they sell; equivalently, since we focus on the east side of town, between builders and doctors. That is,
insurance entails a doctor receiving a transfer  , e    e , from a builder. (We expect  >0 but in
principle we could have  <0.) Note that much of the proof of Lemma 1 applies for any  : in particular,

pdH  1 and xdH  xdL . It is easy to rule out the case where   e , i.e., doctors have no wealth ex post.

To see this note that by the doctor budget constraint we would have xd  xd  0 ; hence xb , xb  0 by
                                                                          H       L               H   L



(2.3)-(2.5) and so pd , pd  0 from (2.8)-(2.9); but then, by (2.6)-(2.7), pb  pb  0 ; this implies that
                     H    L                                                   H           L


the marginal utility of wealth for a doctor is infinite and so an agent would prefer an insurance contract
that gives him positive wealth if he is doctor, i.e.,   e .


So we know that a doctor will have positive wealth. In combination with xd  xd , this implies xd  0 .
                                                                                  H           L           H



Note that the rest of the proof of Lemma 1 applies as long as xd  1 . Suppose xd  1 . It follows from
                                                                  H                           H



(2.3) and (2.5) that xd  0 . In other word doctors and builders both buy the high state Arrow security.
                      L



But then from (*) and (**) the marginal utility of wealth of doctors equals  / qH while the marginal

utility of wealth of builders is  / qH pb . There are two cases: pb  1 and pb  1 . If pb  1 the
                                         H                            H               H           H


marginal utility of wealth of doctors is higher, implying that each doctor will want the maximum
redistribution of wealth. Thus in this case a necessary condition for equilibrium is   e . But then a

doctor’s budget constraint in combination with xd  xd implies xd  1 , whereas we have assumed
                                                      H       L       H



xdH  1 . This is a contradiction. Hence pbH  1 . But then we must have xdH  1 from (2.6), which is
again a contradiction.

We have established that xd  1 , which implies pb  1 by (2.6).
                              H                           H




We may conclude that all of Lemma 1 holds: pd  pb  1 , xd  1 .
                                                  H           H   H




Now turn to the low state. Consider the proof of Proposition 2. Nothing in the logic of the proof depends
on the relative amounts of the doctor’s or builder’s endowments, i.e.,  . In particular, the values of


                                                                                                               35
pbL , pdL , xbL , xdL , qH , qL are pinned down by the conditions that both technologies are used and that doctors
hold both securities. Furthermore, builders prefer the high state security to the low state one. It follows

that the marginal utility of wealth of doctors,  / qH , equals that of builders,  / qH pb (since pb  1 ).
                                                                                            H          H



Thus, it is an equilibrium for no agent to purchase insurance:   0 . (There may be other equilibria but
all are equivalent to one in which there is no insurance If   0 doctors use their additional wealth to buy
more high state Arrow securities.)




                                                                                                               36
