                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     NETWORKS, COMMITMENT, AND COMPETENCE:
                         CASTE IN INDIAN LOCAL POLITICS

                                          Kaivan Munshi
                                         Mark Rosenzweig

                                        Working Paper 19197
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19197


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2013




We are grateful to Ashley Lester for initial collaboration on this project and to Pedro Dal Bo and Adam
McCloskey for many insights that improved this paper. We thank Robin Burgess, Brian Knight, Dilip
Mookherjee, Laura Schechter, and numerous conference and workshop participants for helpful comments.
Bruno Gasperini provided outstanding research experience. Munshi acknowledges research support
from the National Science Foundation through grant SES-0617847. We are responsible for any errors
that may remain. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Kaivan Munshi and Mark Rosenzweig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Networks, Commitment, and Competence: Caste in Indian Local Politics
Kaivan Munshi and Mark Rosenzweig
NBER Working Paper No. 19197
July 2013
JEL No. H11,H4,O12,O43

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper widens the scope of the emerging literature on economic networks by assessing the role
of caste networks in Indian local politics. We test the hypothesis that these networks can discipline
their members to overcome political commitment problems, enabling communities to select their most
competent representatives, while at the same time ensuring that they honor the public goods preferences
of their constituents. Using detailed data on local public goods at the street level and the characteristics
of constituents and their elected representatives at the ward level over multiple terms, and exploiting
the random system of reserving local council seats for caste groups, we find that caste discipline results
in the election of representatives with superior observed characteristics and the provision of a significantly
greater level of public goods. This improvement in political competence occurs without apparently
diminishing leaders' responsiveness to the preferences of their constituents, although the constituency
is narrowly defined by the sub-caste rather than the electorate as a whole.


Kaivan Munshi
Department of Economics
Brown University
Box B/ 64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
munshi@brown.edu

Mark Rosenzweig
Department of Economics
Yale University
Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
mark.rosenzweig@yale.edu
1     Introduction
Economists historically associated networks and other community-based institutions with
nepotism, rent-seeking, and inefficiency. In recent years, however, this view has been
replaced by a moderated position, which recognizes that these institutions can, under ap-
propriate circumstances, facilitate economic activity when markets function imperfectly.
Greif’s (1993) analysis of the Maghribi traders’ coalition and Greif, Milgrom, and Wein-
gast’s (1994) investigation of the medieval merchant guild highlight the role played by
non-market institutions in solving commitment problems in the pre-modern economy. In
the contemporary economy, a voluminous literature documents high levels of risk-sharing
in informal mutual insurance arrangements throughout the world (e.g., Townsend 1994,
Grimard 1997, Ligon, Thomas, and Worrall 2002, Fafchamps and Lund 2003, Cabrales,
Calvo-Armengol, and Jackson 2003). The analysis of networks, as a second-best response
to a variety of market failures, is now a rapidly growing area in economics. This paper
widens the scope of this research program by examining the endogenous response by preex-
isting social groups, exemplified by the sub-caste in rural India, to commitment problems
in representative democracies.
    To illustrate the inefficiency associated with the absence of commitment that we ana-
lyze in this paper, consider a local constituency in which a single political representative
must be elected from among its residents, as in Osborne and Slivinski (1996) and Besley
and Coate (1997). The elected representative must allocate a fixed level of resources (bud-
get) to two public goods, sanitation and street lights, in the constituency. Individuals are
heterogeneous in their preferences for public goods and those elected are not accountable
to the electorate, choosing their preferred policy, measured by the mix of public goods,
once in office. In a local election of this sort, it is straightforward to verify, under reason-
able conditions, that the individual at the median of the distribution of preferences in the
constituency will be selected in equilibrium. Now endogenize the total level of resources
and allow individuals to differ on two dimensions – in their preference for public goods
and their political competence. Assume that these two characteristics are correlated such
that more competent leaders (e.g., individuals with managerial experience), who bring
back a larger budget allocation from the center for their constituency when elected, also
happen to prefer larger expenditures on, say, street lights. The tension that arises when
accountability is absent is that the pivotal median voter would like to elect the most com-
petent individual in the constituency as the leader but at the same time is aware that
the share of resources subsequently allocated to street lights will exceed his own preferred
allocation. If the horizontal (preference) dimension of leadership quality dominates the
vertical (competence) dimension, the median individual will continue to be selected as the


                                               1
leader in equilibrium. This is evidently inefficient, since everyone would be better off if
the most competent individual was selected and he could somehow commit to selecting a
mix of projects that was aligned with the preferences of the median individual.1
       According to the Chicago school (Stigler 1972, Becker 1983), electoral competition will
ensure that the efficient outcome is obtained. If the pool of potential leaders is sufficiently
large, as for example in a presidential election, there will be a wide range of competence
levels at each preference point. The most competent individual with median preferences
will then be selected in equilibrium. When the pool of potential leaders is limited, as in
a local election, the promise of re-election may still be sufficient to discipline the most
competent individual ex post and, therefore, ensure his selection. And even when term
limits weaken these electoral pressures, political parties supporting particular platforms
(preferences) can discipline the candidates they put forward from one election to the next
(Alesina and Spear 1988, Harrington 1992).
       In practice, however, electoral competition is restricted and formal disciplinary insti-
tutions are less active in political systems throughout the world. This is reflected in the
observation from diverse settings that politicians’ own preferences determine their policies.
Washington (2008), for example, shows that politicians with daughters are more likely to
vote for legislation advancing the interests of women in the United States and Chattopad-
hyay and Duflo (2004) show that when women are leaders (council heads) in India, the mix
of public goods conforms more closely to the preferences of women in the population. Con-
sider the Indian local governments that we analyze in this paper and describe in greater
detail in Section 2. Each constituency or ward consists of just 70 households on average
and the ward representative must reside there, severely restricting the pool of potential
leaders. Moreover, the representative’s position is randomly reserved for women and for
members of historically disadvantaged castes from one election to the next, weakening
re-election pressures. Finally, political parties are weak in developing countries, and they
are especially weak at the local level even in countries such as the United States where
they are otherwise well established (Ferreira and Gyourko 2009). Based on the preceding
discussion, mediocre leaders endowed with representative preferences could end up being
   1
     In recent years, two independent literatures have emerged within the field of political economy sepa-
rately addressing the vertical and the horizontal dimensions of leadership quality. One literature assesses
how outside options and compensation in office (or punishments for corruption) alter both the average
competence of candidates and the subsequent effort that democratically-elected leaders exert (Caselli and
Morelli 2004, Messner and Polbern 2004, Ferraz and Finan 2008, 2011, Bobonis et al. 2010). A parallel
literature assesses whether politicians’ own preferences, as opposed to the preferences of the electorate,
determine their policies (Levitt 1996, Pande 2003, Chattopadhyay and Duflo 2004, List and Sturm 2006,
Washington 2008). We bring these two literatures and the two dimensions of leadership quality together
by examining whether political accountability, by allowing candidates to credibly commit to particular
policy choices once in office regardless of their preferences, results in the election of more competent
leaders.



                                                    2
selected in the Indian local governments. Drawing on the recent literature that emphasizes
the endogenous institutional response to market failures, however, we argue that this may
not be the case. In particular, we explore the possibility that a preexisting social group
– the sub-caste – may have expanded the domain of its influence from private economic
activity to the public political sphere when democratic local elections were established in
the 1990s, disciplining the representatives that it puts forward as candidates and allowing
more competent individuals to be selected as representatives.
   Close social interactions within the endogamous sub-caste or jati, which typically spans
a wide geographical area covering many villages, smooth information flows and reduce com-
mitment problems. Not surprisingly, insurance networks have historically been organized,
and continue to be organized, around the sub-caste in rural India (Caldwell, Reddy, and
Caldwell 1986, Munshi and Rosenzweig 2010, Mazzocco and Saini 2012). When urban
jobs became available in the nineteenth century, with colonization and industrialization,
these sub-castes supported the migration of their members and the subsequent forma-
tion of labor market networks (Morris 1965, Chandravarkar 1994, Munshi and Rosenzweig
2006). Recent evidence from urban India indicates that sub-castes continue to support
occupational mobility when payoffs to such mobility emerge (Munshi 2011). We assess
here whether ward representatives elected with the support of their sub-caste are both
more competent and make decisions that reflect the preferences of the group, even if they
do not expect to be elected in the future, to avoid the social and economic punishment
they would face if they chose their individually optimal policies instead.
   The survey data that we use in the empirical analysis and describe below are indicative
of the importance of the sub-caste in local rural Indian politics. Key informants were asked
to list the various sources of financial and organizational support that the elected ward
representatives received in each of the last three elections. As described in Table 1, caste
is clearly the dominant source of support: 82 percent of the elected ward representatives
received support from their caste inside the village and 29 percent received support from
caste members outside the village. Religious groups and wealthy individuals are evidently
much less prevalent sources of support and, more importantly, just 41 percent of local
representatives are reported to have received support from a political party. To establish
a role for the sub-caste in disciplining its representatives, however, additional information
is required. Ideally we would want to compare the characteristics of elected representatives
and the level and mix of public goods across wards that are identical on all dimensions
except for the presence of caste networks. Sub-caste networks are active throughout the
country and so this experiment is unavailable. What we do instead is exploit the 73rd
Amendment of the Indian Constitution, passed in 1991, which randomly changes the set



                                             3
of sub-castes within a ward that are eligible to stand from one election to the next.2 Based
on a model of local representative democracy, this exogenous variation in who is eligible
to run allows us to compare observed outcomes in ward-terms with and without caste
discipline.
       The model, which draws on the citizen-candidate models of Osborne and Slivinski
(1996) and Besley and Coate (1997), begins with the case where residents of the ward,
heterogeneous in both political competence and in preferences for public goods, stand
independently and are not accountable to the electorate once elected. As with the example
discussed above, the first result is that the individual with median preferences in the ward
will be elected unopposed in equilibrium. Next, we allow a group of socially connected
individuals in the ward to put forward their most competent member. It is assumed that
the threat of future punishment is strong enough to ensure that this individual will select
a mix of projects aligned with the preferences of a pivotal member of the group when
elected, even if he only expects to hold office for a single term. In the context of local
Indian elections, the group is the sub-caste. The second result of the model is that the
caste representative will be elected if he is sufficiently more competent than the median
individual in the ward and the gap in preferences between the median individual and the
pivotal member of the sub-caste is sufficiently small. Under conditions which we verify
empirically, this implies that the caste representative will be elected when the population-
share of his group crosses a threshold level. A comparison of ward-terms above and below
the threshold thus provides an estimate of the role of the sub-caste in selecting more
competent leaders and in increasing the level of public goods.
       The survey data that we collected describe the level and the composition (mix) of
public goods, as well as the characteristics of all constituents and their elected ward repre-
sentatives, for three election terms in over one thousand wards covering the major Indian
states. Consistent with the predictions of the model, we find that the caste affiliation of
elected representatives and their characteristics (plausibly associated with competence)
change discontinuously above a threshold share. Assuming that this threshold share di-
vides the sample into ward-terms with and without leadership commitment, our estimates
indicate that the ability to discipline leaders increases overall public good provision within
a ward by 14-17 percent, with a somewhat higher increase when women are leaders.
   2
    A number of studies have exploited the transformation of Indian local governments with the 73rd
Amendment to examine the distribution of public and private goods across and within villages. Broadly
consistent with our model, these studies find increased targeting of resources to historically disadvantaged
castes when the president’s position is reserved for members of those groups (Besley, Pande, Rahman,
and Rao 2004, Duflo, Fischer, and Chattopadhyay 2005, Bardhan, Mookherjee, and Torrado 2005). They
do not, however, derive conditions under which leaders will be disciplined to serve the interests of their
group, nor do they analyze the consequences of this commitment for the competence of leaders selected
in equilibrium.



                                                     4
    A complete assessment of a leader’s quality must be attentive to his choice of the mix of
public goods and not just on the level of resources that he brings back to the constituency.
Our theory tells us that the pivotal individual, whose preferences determine the mix of
public goods, will shift from the median individual in the ward below the threshold to an
individual with central (median) preferences in the leader’s sub-caste above the threshold.
Randomized caste reservation changes who is elected as well as the pivotal individual across
election terms in the ward. Using this source of variation in the identity of the pivotal
individual, we find that the same leader characteristics that increase discontinuously at a
threshold share and are plausibly associated with competence (land wealth, occupation,
schooling) also determine the mix of public goods. This indicates that the tension between
voter preferences and the competence of the elected leader that underlies our model is an
important feature of the local elections we study, highlighting the role played by the sub-
caste in enforcing political accountability.
    To test directly for leadership commitment, we complete the analysis by considering
alternative specifications in which the characteristics of the elected representative rather
than a pivotal individual determine the mix of public goods. Below the threshold, these
characteristics do as good a job of predicting the mix of public goods as the characteristics
of the pivotal individual (with median preferences in the ward) as they should. Above
the threshold, however, they do not - we cannot reject the hypothesis that the ward
representative’s characteristics have no effect on the mix of public goods, which implies
that he is choosing policies that diverge from his own preferences. The increase in the level
of public goods that is observed above the threshold is thus obtained without sacrificing
the leader’s commitment to his constituents (within the sub-caste).
    Although caste discipline may increase efficiency, its distributional consequences are
not necessarily benign. Because the elected caste representative is answerable to the
social group he belongs to, his choices will be aligned with the preferences of a pivotal
individual in his sub-caste rather than the median individual in the constituency. There
is also suggestive evidence indicating that caste representatives are targeting public goods
to their own group. Caste discipline is a second-best solution and, ultimately, there is
no perfect substitute for well-functioning political parties, which could put forward their
representatives on a consistent policy platform, regardless of the reservation that is in
place, from one election to the next.


2     Institutional Setting
The 73rd Amendment of the Indian Constitution, passed in 1991, established a three-tier
system of local governments or panchayats – at the village, block, and district level – with


                                               5
all seats to be filled by direct election. The village panchayats, which often cover multiple
villages, were divided into 10-15 wards. Panchayats were given the power and the resources
to make relatively substantial expenditures on public goods, and regular elections for the
position of panchayat president and for each ward representative have been held every five
years in most states.
       The major responsibilities of the panchayat are to construct and maintain local infras-
tructure (public buildings, water supply and sanitation, roads) and to identify targeted
welfare recipients. Although panchayats raise their own revenues, in large part through
land and water usage taxes, these revenues accounted for just 12.6 percent of total annual
expenditures in 2006-2007, the last complete years for the panchayats in our sample. The
state government is the major source of funding, although panchayats also benefit from
specific central government programs. Most of these external funds are allocated through
the Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY), an infrastructure scheme covering irri-
gation, drinking water, roads, etc., and a Block Grant to the panchayat.3 The panchayat
has complete control over the Block Grant, and assuming that it has similar autonomy
over the revenue that it raises, our data indicate that 50.2 percent of its budget is discre-
tionary. Combining the discretionary and non-discretionary components of the budget,
we will later see that the major expenditure items include the construction and main-
tenance of drinking water and sanitation facilities, roads, electricity, street lights, public
telephones, irrigation infrastructure, and public buildings. The delivery of education and
health services, however, remains under the control of the state government.
       How are panchayat expenditures allocated? The council makes decisions collectively
(the president does not have veto power) and so the ability of an elected ward represen-
tative to channel public goods to his constituency will depend on his influence within the
panchayat as well as his ability to ensure that the earmarked resources reach their destina-
tion. The mix of goods that the representative lobbies for will depend on whether the group
he represents can exert discipline ex post, with the representative choosing his preferred
mix when accountability is absent. What makes the panchayats especially interesting for
an analysis of the consequences of political accountability is the system of randomized
reservation, by caste and by gender, that was also introduced in the 73rd Amendment
in 1991. The rule followed by almost all Indian states is that seats are reserved in each
election for three historically disadvantaged groups – Scheduled Castes (SC), Scheduled
Tribes (ST), and Other Backward Castes (OBC) – in proportion to their share of the
   3
    Based on the balance sheets collected from 40 panchayats in the state of West Bengal, Chattopadhyay
and Duflo (2004) report that the Block Grant accounts for 33 percent, the SGRY (formerly known as the
Jawhar Rozgar Yojana) 30 percent, and welfare programs 15 percent of the external funds. Our all-India
data are broadly consistent with these statistics. These data indicate that in the years 2006 and 2007
Block Grants accounted for 43 percent of external funds and the SGRY another 15 percent of these funds.



                                                  6
population in each district. Within each of these categories, and in constituencies open
to all castes in that election, one-third of the seats are reserved for women (Chattopad-
hyay and Duflo 2004). Seats are reserved randomly across wards and, for the position of
the president, randomly across panchayats, from one election to the next in each district.
The only restriction is that no seat can be reserved for the same group across consecutive
elections (Besley, Pande, and Rao 2007).
       Given the negative priors that the electorate will have about female politicians and
politicians drawn from historically disadvantaged castes, council representatives chosen
in reserved elections have little chance of being subsequently reelected. Chattopadhyay
and Duflo (2004) note that not a single woman in their sample of reserved constituencies
in the state of Rajasthan was elected in the subsequent term (without female reserva-
tion). Exposure can change these priors, but Beaman et al. (2009) find that it takes two
reserved election terms before an increase in women elected in unreserved seats can be
detected. Since reserved elections must be interspersed with unreserved elections within
a constituency, existing (negative) priors will change very slowly and representatives in
most reserved constituencies will be aware that they will hold office for a single term.
The representatives with the greatest chance for re-election are men elected in unreserved
seats. However, the probability that an unreserved election will be followed by another
unreserved election within a constituency is just 0.4.4 Assuming that leaders in reserved
seats are never reelected in the subsequent election, the maximum fraction of incumbent
representatives that can be elected from one term to the next is 0.16. Consistent with
these low rates of re-election, only 14.8 percent of the ward representatives in our sample
had held a panchayat position before. For the purpose of our analysis, reservation severely
reduces the discipline of re-election in Indian local governments. At the same time, reser-
vation randomly changes the set of sub-castes eligible to stand and, hence, the population
share of the most numerous eligible sub-caste, from one election to the next. This allows
us to examine the role of the sub-caste in disciplining its representatives, even when they
only expect to hold office for a single term.
       The basic rule in Hindu society is that individuals cannot marry outside the sub-
caste or jati in which they are born.5 Marriage ties built over many generations give
rise to frequent interactions within a sub-caste and so exclusion from these interactions
serves as a natural and extremely effective mechanism to sustain cooperative behavior.
Recent evidence from urban India indicates that networks organized around the sub-caste
   4
      In our sample of 3,302 ward-terms, 60 percent were unreserved, 11 percent were reserved for SC
candidates, 6 percent were reserved for ST candidates, and 23 percent were reserved for OBC candidates
(see Table 2 below). With one-third of the seats in all categories reserved for women, this implies that
unreserved elections would occur 40 percent of the time.
    5
      Our data indicate that less than five percent of the over 14,000 marriages that are documented for all
of the household heads and their immediate relatives crossed sub-caste lines.


                                                     7
provide jobs for their members and support occupational mobility when returns to mobility
emerge (Munshi and Rosenzweig 2006, Munshi 2011). More importantly for the current
analysis, these networks continue to serve as the main source of mutual insurance for their
members in rural India, particularly for major contingencies such as illness and marriage
(Caldwell, Reddy, and Caldwell 1986, Munshi and Rosenzweig 2010, Mazzocco and Saini,
2012). Exclusion from future social interactions and network services can be a powerful
disciplining device. We assume in the model that the sub-caste can use the threat of such
punishments to discipline its representative even if he only expects to hold political office
for a single term. Note that the size of the sub-caste within the ward will have no bearing
on the level of commitment that can be sustained since the collective punishments are
organized at the level of the sub-caste as a whole, which extends beyond the ward and
beyond the village. As shown below, sub-caste size in a ward and political commitment
are related (in a particular way) only because the population share of the sub-caste affects
the probability that its representative will be elected and a political equilibrium with
commitment will be obtained.


3     The Model
The model developed in this section extends the citizen-candidate models of Osborne
and Slivinski (1996) and Besley and Coate (1997) to a setting in which citizens differ
both in their political competence and in their preferences for different public goods. We
begin with the case where citizens stand as independent candidates, without institutional
support, choosing their most preferred policies, measured by the mix of public goods
provided, once elected. Subsequently, we allow for the possibility that a preexisting social
group can discipline the candidate it puts forward. This allows the candidate to credibly
commit to policies that diverge from his own preferences. The model generates tests of the
central hypothesis that this discipline results in the selection of more competent leaders,
using the data we have collected for this purpose. We make a number of assumptions for
analytical convenience when deriving the results. Theoretical and empirical support for
some of the important assumptions are provided in Section 5.

3.1    Individual Preferences and Leadership Quality
N individuals reside in a political constituency. The constituency is small enough that
individual preferences and competence are common knowledge and no two individuals
have the same preferences. Two public goods are provided in this constituency. Assuming
Cobb-Douglas preferences and taking logs, individual i receives the following utility from



                                             8
spending g1 , g2 on the two goods:

                               Ui = (1 − ωi )ln(g1 ) + ωi ln(g2 ).

For a fixed total budget, G ≡ g1 + g2 , the preceding expression can be rewritten in terms
of the corresponding shares, S1 ≡ g1 /G, S2 ≡ g2 /G:

                         Ui = [(1 − ωi )ln(S1 ) + ωi ln(S2 )] + ln(G).

Utility is separable in the total budget and the mix of public goods, and for a given G it
is straightforward to verify that utility is maximized at S2 = ωi .
    Both the total budget and the mix of public goods; i.e. the share of the budget allocated
to the second public good, are determined by the political leader selected by the residents
of the constituency for a single term. The total budget allocated to the constituency is a
function of the leader’s competence. We allow the amount of resources that leader j is able
to bring back for his constituency from the center to be correlated with ωj . In practice,
ωj will be a function of characteristics such as education, occupation, and wealth. This
is simply saying that these characteristics determine both preferences for different types
of public goods and political competence. Empirical support for this assumption, which
drives the results that follow, will be provided in Sections 6 and 7. In the context of
the model with two public goods, we additionally assume without loss of generality that
political competence is increasing in ωj , which implies that G(ωj ) is an increasing function
of ωj .
    When leader j is elected, he will select a mix of public goods that is aligned with the
preferences of a pivotal individual k; i.e. the share of the budget allocated to the second
public good will be ωk . For the case without commitment, ωk = ωj . Individual i’s utility
when individual j is elected as the leader is thus:

                     Ui = [(1 − ωi )ln(1 − ωk ) + ωi ln(ωk )] + ln(G(ωj )).

The expression in square brackets is maximized when ωk = ωi . It declines in value as ωk
moves away in preference-space from ωi . Taking a linear approximation to this expression
and to the ln(G(ωj )) function, we arrive at a specification of the individual’s utility that
precisely matches the specification in Osborne and Slivinsky (1996) and Besley and Coate
(1997) except for an additional competence term,

                                  Ui = −γ|ωk − ωi | + βωj .

The first term in the expression above represents the horizontal (preference) dimension of
leadership quality, measured by the disutility to individual i when a less preferred mix of

                                               9
public goods is chosen by the leader. The second term represents the vertical (competence)
dimension of leadership quality, measured by the level of resources (total budget) that the
leader can bring back for his constituency. The tension between these two dimensions of
leadership quality is key to the analysis that follows.6

3.2       Equilibrium without Commitment
Elections are contestable and each resident in the constituency chooses whether or not to
stand for election. The decision to stand is accompanied by an entry cost δ, which is close
to zero. After all residents have simultaneously made their entry decision, the election
takes place and the candidate with the most votes is declared the leader. Voters choose
their preferred candidate without coercion or regard to social affiliation per se. We restrict
attention to single-candidate equilibria. Although it is standard practice to consider two-
candidate equilibria in models of multiparty elections, single-candidate equilibria arise
naturally in local elections with complete information where ties between candidates will
seldom occur. In fact, a single candidate stood for election in 65 percent of our ward-terms.
       We begin by considering equilibria without leadership commitment. Individuals stand
as independent candidates, without party or social affiliation. Because leaders are elected
for a single term, this implies that they will choose their preferred mix of public goods
ex post. We assume that the horizontal dimension of leadership quality dominates the
vertical dimension, γ > β, which provides us with the first result.7

Proposition 1.The individual with median preferences in the constituency stands unop-
posed for election.

       It is straightforward to verify that the unique equilibrium is characterized by the indi-
vidual with median preferences in the constituency, m, standing unopposed (the implicit
assumption here is that N is odd). Normalize so that the utility obtained in a constituency
without a leader is zero. The median individual will not deviate from the equilibrium be-
cause βm > 0. No other individual wants to deviate and stand for election (with its asso-
ciated cost) since he would receive fewer votes than the median individual. Any individual
with ω < m would certainly lose to the median individual since all individuals with prefer-
ences greater than m would vote for the median individual. He is more competent than his
   6
     Although much of the analysis in Besley and Coate focuses on the horizontal dimension of leadership
quality, an extension to their model does introduce a vertical (competence) dimension. Besley and Coate
specify a Cobb-Douglas utility function and allow preferences and competence to be correlated, as in our
model. However, individuals choose between a public and a private good in their model, and the leader’s
competence is measured by the ability to provide the public good at lower cost. Both models predict that
the absence of commitment results in the selection of less competent leaders, but our model goes further
to generate tests of this prediction.
   7
     If this were not the case, then the most competent individual would always be selected as the leader.
This is inconsistent with the empirical results reported below.

                                                   10
rival and is closer in preference-space (on the horizontal dimension) to them. To see why
even an individual with ω > m would not stand, consider an alternative candidate with
ability ωj > m. For any individual with ability ω ≤ m, βm − γ(m − ω) > βωj − γ(ωj − ω)
for γ > β. A majority of the electorate will thus continue to vote for the median individ-
ual. By the same argument, no strategy profile in which someone other than the median
individual stands for election can be supported as an equilibrium. When entry costs are
close to zero, the median individual will always deviate from such an equilibrium, stand
for election and subsequently get elected.

3.3    Equilibrium with Commitment
Although we continue to assume that leaders are elected for a single term and that political
parties are absent, we now introduce a social group that is capable of disciplining its
members. This group is characterized by the following properties: (i) its scale or size,
measured by its share of the population in the constituency, Sc , (ii) its location in the
distribution of preferences in the constituency, measured by the preferences of a pivotal
(central) individual, mc , and (iii) the preferences of its most competent member ω c .
   Individuals strictly prefer more to less public goods and so the leader put forward by
the social group will be its most competent member. If social punishments are effective,
this leader can credibly commit to choosing a mix of public goods that is aligned with the
preferences of the pivotal member of the group, with preferences mc < ω c (by definition).
For commitment to be obtained, the social punishment, P , must exceed the gain to the
leader from deviating and choosing his preferred mix of public goods, γ(ω c − mc ). If this
condition is satisfied then the result below tells us that the group’s representative will be
elected if he is sufficiently competent and if mc is sufficiently close to m.

Proposition 2.(a) An equilibrium with commitment is obtained if and only if the in-
dividual with median preferences in the constituency prefers the group representative to
himself as the leader. (b) The leader selected in the equilibrium with commitment is more
competent than the median individual.

   We prove part (a) for two cases: (i) mc < m, and (ii) mc > m. For each case we derive
the condition under which the median individual in the constituency prefers the group
representative to himself as the leader. When this condition is satisfied, we show that the
commitment-equilibrium in which the group representative stands unopposed is the unique
equilibrium. If the derived condition is not satisfied, we show that the equilibrium without
commitment in which the median individual in the constituency stands unopposed is the
unique equilibrium.


                                              11
   Case 1: mc < m.
   The group representative, who is endowed with ability ω c , chooses a mix of projects
that is aligned with the preferences of the pivotal member of his group. The median
individual in the constituency will prefer the representative to himself as the leader if
βω c − γ(m − mc ) > βm. Rearranging terms, the required condition is
                                        ωc − m  γ
                                               > .                                       (1)
                                        m − mc  β
To show that the commitment-equilibrium is the unique equilibrium when inequality (1) is
satisfied, we first show in the Appendix that no one wants to deviate from this equilibrium.
We then verify that no other equilibrium can be supported when condition (1) is satisfied.
To complete the proof of case 1 we show that the equilibrium without commitment, where
the median individual in the constituency stands unopposed, is the unique equilibrium
when condition (1) is not satisfied.
   Case 2: mc > m.
   The median individual in the constituency will now prefer the group representative to
himself as the leader if βω c − γ(mc − m) > βm.
   Rearranging terms, the required condition is
                                        ωc − m  γ
                                               > .                                       (2)
                                        mc − m  β
We go through the same steps as in case 1 to complete the proof of part (a) (see the
Appendix).
   Having established conditions under which a commitment-equilibrium is obtained, we
now proceed to compare the competence of leaders selected in equilibria with and without
commitment. The right hand side of inequality (1) and inequality (2) is positive and the
denominator on the left hand side of both expressions is also positive. Therefore, it must
be that ω c > m in both inequalities to complete the proof of the proposition. Intuitively,
the median individual will only prefer the group representative to himself, as required by
part (a) of the proposition for an equilibrium with commitment, if the group representative
dominates him sufficiently on the vertical dimension (the median individual will not prefer
anyone to himself on the horizontal dimension).

3.4    Group Size, Commitment, and Competence
Inequalities (1) and (2) specify conditions under which an equilibrium with commitment
will be obtained in terms of ω c and mc . However, only a single source of variation in group
characteristics, generated by caste reservation, is available to test the model. To derive
the predictions of the model in terms of a single group characteristic, we begin by placing
restrictions on the relationship between ω c and Sc , mc :

                                             12
   A1. ω c = w(Sc , mc ),    w1 (Sc , mc ) > 0, w2 (Sc , mc ) > 0.
   This assumption simply says that fixing the group’s location in the preference distri-
bution, an increase in its size will increase maximal competence in the group, ω c . Holding
constant the group’s size, a rightward shift in its location will similarly increase ω c .
   Given these mild restrictions, the predictions of the model can be derived in terms
of either Sc or mc . Sc is the group’s population share, which can be directly computed.
In contrast, mc will be measured by multiple characteristics in the empirical analysis,
including the land wealth, occupation, and schooling of the pivotal individual in the group.
It will thus be convenient to derive the predictions of the model in terms of Sc . This
requires us to place additional restrictions on the relationship between mc and Sc . When
a social group is a minority in a population, it tends to be either relatively disadvantaged or
an elite. As it grows larger, it will naturally become more representative of the population.
This implies that mc could be either increasing or decreasing in Sc . We will verify in Section
5 that the former condition applies to our data using alternative measures of mc . This
provides the following restriction:
   A2. mc is increasing in Sc .
   Given A2, it follows from A1 that ω c is increasing in Sc . Proposition 2 can then be
restated as follows:

Proposition 3.(a) The probability that an equilibrium with commitment will be obtained
is zero up to a threshold S and one thereafter until a share S > S. (b) The competence of
the elected leader will increase discontinuously at that threshold.

   mc and ω c are increasing in Sc from assumptions A1 and A2. When Sc is close to zero,
this implies that mc and ω c will be close to zero. The left hand side of inequality (1) will be
negative and the commitment-equilibrium will not be obtained. As Sc increases, the left
hand side will increase monotonically until it just equals the right hand side at a threshold
share S. Notice that mc < m at S, since the left hand side will certainly exceed the right
hand side when mc is very close to m. Once a commitment-equilibrium is obtained, it will
continue to be sustained as Sc increases as long as mc ≤ m. It will also be sustained for
mc > m, from inequality (2), as long as mc − m is sufficiently small. Thus, there exists
a share S > S up to which the commitment-equilibrium will continue to be sustained. If
mc is not increasing too rapidly in Sc , then the commitment-equilibrium will be obtained
over the entire range, Sc ∈ [S c , 1].
   These changes in the political equilibrium map directly into leader competence. Up to
S, the leader’s competence will be m, at S it will increase discontinuously to ω c > m. A
corollary to this result is that the probability that the selected representative belongs to
the group will also increase discontinuously at S.

                                                13
    Competence will continue to increase from S to S since ω c is increasing in Sc . However,
it will decline and return to m above S. The model does not have precise predictions
for the relationship between the leader’s competence and Sc above the threshold. Our
focus in the empirical analysis will thus be on identifying the presence of a threshold
and estimating the increase in competence at that threshold share. This will allow us to
compare competence when leaders can be disciplined with the counter-factual competence
that would have been obtained in a political system with no commitment, measured by
competence below the threshold. The discontinuity at a threshold will also help rule out
an alternative explanation for the increase in competence in Section 6, based on the change
in the pool of potential leaders with reservation rather than the change in the selection
rule as implied by the model.


4      The Data
The data that we use are unique in their geographic scope and detail. They are from
the 2006 Rural Economic and Development Survey, the most recent round of a nationally
representative survey of rural Indian households first carried out in 1968. The survey,
administered by the National Council of Applied Economic Research, covers 242 of the
original 259 villages in 17 major states of India. We make use of two components of the
survey data - the village census and the village inventory - for 13 states in which there
were ward-based elections and complete data in both components.8 The census obtained
information on all households in each of the sampled villages. The village inventory was
designed in part to specifically assess models of public goods delivery, collecting informa-
tion on the characteristics of the elected ward representatives and public good provision
at the street level in each ward in each of the last three panchayat elections prior to the
survey.
    The complete census of households in the sampled villages provides characteristics
that plausibly determine the preferences of each household/individual for different public
goods. The census collected information on the landholdings of each household, as well as
the occupation and education of the household head. We use the value of landholdings (in
logs), a variable indicating whether or not the household head is engaged in a managerial
occupation, and his education (in years) to measure preferences in the empirical analysis.9
   8
     The states are Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Kar-
nataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajastan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, and West
Bengal. Punjab and Jharkhand did not have any ward-based elections and the election data are not
available for Gujarat and Kerala.
   9
     The occupation variable takes the value one if the household head runs either a farm or nonfarm
business and zero if he is employed in a professional occupation, skilled labor, unskilled labor, agricultural
labor, or housework.



                                                     14
       The model assumes that characteristics that determine preferences for different types
of public goods are also associated with political competence. This is the source of the
tension between the horizontal and vertical dimensions of leadership quality that generates
a need for political accountability. We thus use the same variables that are associated
with preferences as determinants of political competence in the empirical analysis (further
support for their association with competence is provided below).
       The village inventory includes a special module that collected information on two
characteristics – the education and the occupation – of all of the elected representatives
from each ward in each of the last three election terms. Schooling of the elected ward
representative is measured in four categories – illiterate, primary graduate, secondary
graduate, and post-secondary graduate – and we convert these categories to years to match
up this variable to the education measure used to measure preferences with the village
census data.10 We similarly construct the same variable for the ward representative’s
occupation as we use to measure preferences with the census data, namely whether or not
he is engaged in a managerial occupation.
       Although the village inventory does not collect information on the representative’s
landholdings, the census data indicate whether or not the household head (or any family
member) was a candidate for the last two elections preceding the survey. 87 percent of
the ward elections had at most two candidates, with 65 percent having a single candidate.
We can thus use information on the the (log) value of land owned by the candidates
in each election, which is available from the census, to construct a measure of political
competence that is highly correlated with the wealth of the elected representative and
which corresponds to the variable that we use to measure preferences.
       The village inventory also obtained information on whether new construction or main-
tenance of specific public goods actually took place on each street in the village for each
term. These local public goods include drinking water, sanitation, improved roads, elec-
tricity, street lights, and public telephones as well as schools, health and family planning
centers, and irrigation facilities. The survey was designed to permit the mapping of street-
level information into wards so that public goods expenditures can be allocated to each
ward, and its constituents, for each election term. The combined data set covers 1085
wards in 136 villages. Ninety-five percent of the wards have information for at least two
elections.
       Households provided their sub-caste and religion in the village census.11 On average,
  10
     Years of schooling are imputed by assigning 4 years of schooling to primary graduates, 10 years of
schooling to secondary graduates, and 14 years of schooling to post-secondary graduates.
  11
     A sub-caste group is any set of households within a village reporting the same sub-caste name. Most of
the Muslim households provided sub-caste (biradari) names. We also counted Muslim households within
a village that were without a formal sub-caste name as a unique sub-caste.



                                                    15
there are seven wards per village, 67 households per ward, and six sub-castes per ward.
The census thus allows us to compute the population share of each sub-caste in each ward.
Proposition 3 tells us that the competence of the elected representative and, hence, the level
of public good provision will increase discontinuously above a threshold population-share.
As discussed below, the most numerous sub-caste is best positioned to challenge the median
individual in a ward election. The simplest test of the proposition would then be to regress
the characteristics of the elected ward representative or the level of public goods received
by the ward (its total budget) on the population share of the most numerous sub-caste.
In a cross-section of wards, a change in the representative’s characteristics and higher
level of public good provision when the share crossed a threshold level would be consistent
with the proposition. However, a ward with a numerically dominant sub-caste is also
likely to be less fractionalized along caste lines. This result could alternatively reflect the
well documented fact that the willingness to invest in public goods, and the accompanying
desire to select a more competent representative, is higher in less fractionalized populations
(see, for example, Miguel and Gugerty 2005). To avoid such potentially confounding
effects, we take advantage of randomized caste reservation in Indian local governments,
which exogenously changes eligibility and thus changes the population share of the most
numerous eligible sub-caste in the ward from one election to the next. This variation in
the population share over time allows us to subsume all permanent characteristics of the
ward, including the demand for public goods by the electorate, in a fixed effect.12
    Is there sufficient variation in the population-share of the most numerous eligible sub-
caste over election terms within a ward to test Proposition 3? As described in Section 2,
ward elections are reserved for Scheduled Castes (SC), Scheduled Tribes (ST), and Other
Backward Castes (OBC) in proportion to the share of these groups in the population at
the district level. Among the 3,300 ward-terms in our sample, 11 percent were reserved
for Scheduled Castes, 6 percent were reserved for Scheduled Tribes, and 23 percent were
reserved for Other Backward Castes. Panel A of Table 2 describes the share of the most
numerous eligible sub-caste in the ward by type of election. These shares are generally
quite large, even in reserved elections, reflecting the fact that neighborhoods in rural India
are often dominated by a single sub-caste. Nevertheless, there is substantial variation in
population shares across reservation categories. Panel B of Table 2 displays the fraction of
ward-terms in which the share of the most numerous eligible sub-caste exceeds alternative
  12
     The implicit assumption when we include the ward fixed effect is that the population of the ward,
or the electorate, remains essentially unchanged over time. This is a reasonable assumption given the
unusually low spatial mobility that is characteristic of rural India. Munshi and Rosenzweig (2010), for
example, report that permanent migration rates of men aged 20-30 out of their origin villages were as low
as 8.7 percent in 1999. The corresponding rates for entire households would be much lower. Indeed, the
census listing data indicate that since 1991 when the local electoral system was put in place, less than 3
percent of new households had migrated into the sample villages.


                                                   16
pre-specified thresholds, by the type of reservation. Matching the descriptive statistics
in Panel A, the proportion of elections in which the threshold is exceeded is largest for
unreserved elections, followed by elections in which the ward candidates are restricted to
ST, OBC, and SC in that order, regardless of the threshold that is specified. Just as
the likelihood that any threshold is crossed varies across different reservation schemes in
Table 2, there will be variation in the likelihood that the threshold will be crossed and
a commitment-equilibrium will emerge from one term to the next within a ward as the
type of reservation changes. It is possible that the pool of potential candidates will be
weaker in reserved (lower caste) elections where a commitment-equilibrium is less likely
to be obtained. All the regression specifications in this paper consequently include a full
set of reservation dummies in addition to ward fixed effects.


5     Testing the Assumptions of the Model
This section provides theoretical and empirical support, in the context of Indian local
politics, for four important assumptions of the model.

    1. Only one social group can compete with the median individual: Many sub-
castes in rural India will be able to support leadership commitment, using ex post social
sanctions as a disciplining device. Restricting attention to a single group in the model is
reasonable, however, if the representative from only one group in the constituency has a
credible chance of winning the election. In our data, there is usually one sub-caste that
is numerically dominant in a ward for any given election type, with a large drop from the
size of the largest sub-caste to next largest. In particular, the average share of the most
numerous sub-caste in the ward across all elections is 0.71, while the average for the next
most numerous sub-caste is 0.22.
    The model implies that numerical dominance is not necessary or sufficient for the
median individual to prefer the group representative. From inequalities (1) and (2), the
                                                               
                                                       ω c −m
group representative will be preferred if V ≡         |m−mc |
                                                                    exceeds a critical value. ω c is an
increasing function of the group’s population share Sc from assumptions A1 and A2. The
probability that the group representative will be elected is therefore increasing in Sc . But
it is also decreasing in |m − mc |. A sub-caste that is smaller than the most numerous
sub-caste but more centrally located in preference-space could, in principle, put its most
competent member forward and win an election.
    The data indicate, however, that the most numerous eligible sub-caste in the ward is
in almost all elections the only sub-caste that can challenge the median individual. In
the equilibrium without commitment, the pivotal individual has median preferences in
the ward. In the equilibrium with commitment, the model stipulates that the pivotal

                                             17
individual is centrally located in preference-space within the group. In the empirical
section of the paper, we assume that this individual has median preferences in the sub-
caste. The preferences of the pivotal individuals, m and mc , will thus be measured by
the median value of each of the three preference variables (land value, occupation, and
education) within the ward and within the sub-caste, respectively. ω c will be the maximal
value of each variable within the sub-caste.
   Given these values of m, mc , and ω c , which are available for each sub-caste from the
census, V is larger for the most numerous sub-caste relative to the next most numerous
sub-caste in the ward more than 92 percent of the time. This result and all of the empirical
results in this paper are robust to the alternative assumption that the pivotal individual
in the commitment-equilibrium is located at either the 40th percentile or 60th percentile
value for each preference variable. It thus seems reasonable to assume, both in the model
and the empirical analysis that a single group – the most numerous eligible sub-caste in
the ward in a given election – is the only viable group to support an equilibrium with
commitment.
   2. Inter-group sanctions and coalitions are ruled out: Exclusion from social in-
teractions is an effective disciplining mechanism within the sub-caste because these interac-
tions are frequent and economically and socially important. Given the spatial segregation
by caste that is characteristic of the Indian village and given the historical restrictions
on inter-caste social interactions, a similar collective disciplining mechanism is unavail-
able to maintain cooperation between sub-castes. Inter-caste coalitions could form even
if punishments were absent if long-term alliances could be maintained. The randomized
reservation scheme described in the previous section rules out long-term political coalitions
and it follows that the caste representative cannot commit to implementing policies that
diverge from the preferred choice of the pivotal member of his group in equilibrium.
   3. Social groups cannot be excluded from receiving public goods: The model
implicitly rules out the targeting of public goods within the constituency. If there is a
private component to the public goods being delivered, as for example with water pipes
and latrines, the caste representative cannot credibly commit ex ante to delivering services
uniformly within the ward once he is elected, following the same argument as above. For
the special case where he targets resources exclusively to his sub-caste, no one outside that
group will vote for him in equilibrium. Without outside support, the requirements for an
equilibrium with commitment are more stringent; condition (1) or (2) must be satisfied and
the share of the most numerous eligible sub-caste must exceed 0.5. The equilibrium with
commitment will then be obtained at max (0.5, S). Note that while the threshold share
may shift with targeting, the qualitative predictions of Proposition 3 remain unchanged.
   4. The median individual in the ward is eligible to stand for election: We


                                               18
assume in the model and in the empirical analysis that the median individual in the ward
is eligible to stand for election in the equilibrium without commitment. This equilibrium
will be obtained in elections where the population share of the most numerous eligible
sub-caste falls below a threshold share, which we later estimate at 0.5. This is more likely
to be the case in reserved elections, where only a subset of the population is eligible to
stand for election. We thus proceed to verify that the median individual, or someone with
preferences very close to that individual, is eligible to stand even in elections where the
population-share of the most numerous eligible sub-caste is less than 0.5.
       Preferences for public goods are measured by land value, occupation, and education.
The individual with the median occupation in the ward was ineligible to stand for election
in less than 3.5 percent of ward-terms below the 0.5 threshold share. The education of the
median individual and the closest eligible individual were statistically indistinguishable
(at the 5 percent level) across those ward-terms. Finally, we could reject the hypothesis
that land value was the same for the median individual and the closest eligible individual,
but the correlation in the wealth of those individuals was as high as 0.92.
       5. Assumption A2: Proposition 3 is derived assuming that mc is increasing in Sc .
We test this important assumption in Table 3, exploiting variation in Sc over election terms
within the ward that is generated by randomized caste reservation. mc is measured by
the median value of lanholdings, occupation, and education in the most numerous eligible
sub-caste in each ward-term.
       Regressing mc on Sc , with ward fixed effects, a full set of reservation and election-term
dummies, and the election year as additional regressors, the coefficient on Sc is positive
and statistically significant when mc is measured by occupation and land value in Table
3.13 Notice, however, that the coefficient on Sc is negative and insignificant when mc is
measured by education. Proposition 3 can thus be tested with wealth and occupation as
measures of competence but not with education.


6        Leadership Selection
Proposition 3 of our model indicates that the elected leader’s competence will be unchanged
up to a threshold and will increase discontinuously at that threshold. The model also
implies that the leader’s caste affiliation will change discontinuously at the threshold. We
begin by providing descriptive evidence supporting these relationships. We then formally
test for a threshold and estimate the change in competence at that threshold.
  13
     Election term dummies are included in all the specifications in this paper to allow for experience
effects in the selection of leaders and public good provision. The election year is included as an additional
regressor to allow for time effects because panchayat elections are not synchronized across the country.




                                                     19
6.1    Descriptive Evidence of a Threshold
The measures of political competence used in the empirical analysis are chosen to match the
three preference variables – land value, occupation, and education. There is independent
reason to expect that they will be associated with competence. Recall from Section 2
that a major task of the ward representative, and the one we focus on here, is to channel
resources to his constituency and to subsequently ensure that the planned construction
and maintenance of public goods actually takes place. Individuals who manage large
enterprizes, such as businessmen and farmers, will be particularly well-suited to manage
public goods delivery, and we would expect larger landowners to be more influential in
the panchayat council. Consistent with the hypothesized link between occupation and
competence, Ferraz and Finan (2010) find that an exogenous increase in politicians’ wages
in Brazil increases legislative effectiveness and changes the occupational background of
elected representatives.
   Education provides many of the skills that are associated with political competence
and is likely to be positively correlated with innate ability to the extent that there is
positive selection into schooling. Ferraz and Finan find that an exogenous increase in
politicians’ wages, which increases legislative effectiveness, also results in the selection
of better educated leaders. We expect education to be positively associated with the
representative’s competence in Indian local governments as well.
   Appendix Table A1 describes the characteristics of potential leaders, measured by the
median characteristic of eligible household heads in each ward in unreserved, SC, ST, and
OBC elections. Table A1 also describes the characteristics of elected male and female
representatives. Three empirical regularities emerge from the table. First, elected male
representatives are much more likely to have managerial experience and have substantially
higher education than typical (invariably male) household heads in eligible households,
within each reservation category. This suggests that there is systematic (non-random)
leader selection. Second, eligible households in unreserved elections have more land wealth,
and heads of these households more education, compared with eligible households in re-
stricted elections (particularly when they are reserved for SC and ST candidates). This
is because in unreserved elections, unlike in the caste-restricted elections, historically ad-
vantaged upper-caste households may also put up candidates. We take account of this
in the empirical analysis by including reservation dummies and by controlling for varia-
tion in the characteristics of potential leaders across election terms. Third, elected female
representatives are substantially disadvantaged with respect to schooling and our measure
of managerial experience. Few women run businesses; almost all women, and no men,
specialize instead in managing households. There is little variation in the occupational


                                             20
measure that we use among female representatives. Moreover, household land wealth does
not reflect management experience for women, who typically do not participate in farm
management decisions. We thus examine the selection of male representatives alone.14
       Proposition 3 indicates that the elected leader’s competence will be unchanged up
to a threshold S and will increase discontinuously at that threshold. We expect this
prediction to hold for the ward representative’s wealth and occupation, but not necessarily
for his education (since assumption A2 is not satisfied for that variable). A corollary of
Proposition 3 is that the probability that the ward representative belongs to the most
numerous eligible sub-caste should also increase discontinuously at S. The predictions of
the model can be examined by estimating the following equation,

                                    yjt = φ(Sjt ) + Xjt γ + ξjt ,                                 (3)

where yjt is the relevant leader characteristic (competence or caste affiliation) in ward j
in term t, Sjt is the share of the most numerous eligible sub-caste in that ward-term, with
φ(Sjt ) a flexible function of Sjt , Xjt is a vector of additional regressors that includes ward
fixed effects, a full set of reservation dummies, election-term dummies, and the election
year, and ξjt is a mean-zero disturbance term.
       We are interested in characterizing the nonparametric relationship between yjt and Sjt .
We estimate this relationship in two steps. In the first step, we partial out the additional
regressors, Xjt , by estimating an equation that replaces the φ(Sjt ) function with a vector
of dummy variables:
                                             5
                                             X
                                yjt = λ0 +         λl Dljt + Xjt γ + ξjt ,                        (4)
                                             l=1
where D1jt − D5jt are indicator variables that take the value one if Sjt ∈ (0.2, 0.35],
(0.35, 0.5], (0.5, 0.65], (0.65, 0.8], and (0.8, 1.0], respectively. The reference category, which
determines the constant term, λ0 , in this equation is Sjt ∈ [0, 0.2]. Equation (4) will
lead naturally to a (restricted) specification that is commonly used in the change-point
literature (e.g. Bai 1994, Perron 2007) and which we use for the formal threshold-tests
that follow.
       The estimated γ from equation (4) can be used to construct the conditional outcome,
ỹjt = yjt − (Xjt − X)γ̂, where X, which is the sample average of each additional regressor
is included to preserve the mean of the outcome. In the second step, ỹjt is regressed
nonparametrically on Sjt :
                                        ỹjt = φ(Sjt ) + ξjt .                                    (5)
       Figure 1 reports nonparametric estimates of the (conditional) probability that any
candidate belongs to the most numerous eligible sub-caste in each ward-term regressed
  14
    This is not a choice-based sample because almost no women were elected in ward-terms that were not
randomly reserved for them.

                                                    21
on its population share. The village inventory did not collect information on the elected
representative’s sub-caste. However, this information is available from the village census
for all candidates in the last two panchayat elections. We thus replace actual leader
characteristics with a binary variable indicating whether any candidate belonged to the
most numerous eligible sub-caste in each ward-term. As noted, at most two candidates
stood for election in 87 percent of all elections and a single candidate stood for election in
65 percent of those elections, and so this variable will be highly correlated with the elected
representative’s caste affiliation. As a robustness test, Figure 1 also reports estimates with
an alternative three-step procedure for constructing the conditional outcome.15 We see in
the figure with both procedures that there is no relationship between the probability that a
candidate belongs to the most numerous eligible sub-caste and the population share up to
a threshold close to 0.5, a sharp increase at that threshold, and no relationship thereafter.
The magnitude of the mean-shift at the threshold is very large, increasing the probability
from 0.45 to 0.65 with the two-step procedure.
       Figure 2 reports nonparametric estimates of the three (conditional) competence char-
acteristics regressed on the share of the most numerous eligible sub-caste. The ward
representative’s competence, measured by the probability that the representative holds
a managerial job and (log) land wealth, increases discontinuously at precisely the share,
just below 0.5, where we observed a mean-shift in Figure 1. As with the probability that
a candidate belongs to the most numerous eligible sub-caste, there is no relationship be-
tween these competence measures and the population share to the left and right of the
threshold, although the relationship is quite noisy at low population shares. Once again,
the magnitude of the mean-shift at the threshold is very large, with an increase in the
probability that the elected representative is engaged in a managerial job from 0.5 to 0.8
and an increase in (log) land wealth from 5 to 7. Recall that Proposition 3 cannot be
tested with education since Assumption A2 is not satisfied for that variable. As expected,
no threshold is discernable with that measure of leadership competence in Figure 2.

6.2       Testing for a Threshold
Figures 1-2 match closely with our model relating leadership selection to the population
share of the most numerous eligible sub-caste. There is no relationship between the elected
representative’s caste affiliation and characteristics associated with his competence (land
value and occupation) up to a threshold population share, at which point there is a sharp
change in leader characteristics. Past the threshold, where the model has less precise
  15
    Following Robinson (1988), in the first step we estimate yjt and each variable in Xjt nonparametrically
                            Y                       X
on Sjt : yjt = φY (Sjt ) + ξjt , Xjt = φX (Sjt ) + ξjt . In the second step, we estimate γ from the equation,
 Y      X
ξjt = ξjt γ + ujt .



                                                     22
predictions, no relationship is observed between these leader characteristics and the pop-
ulation share. The focus of the analysis that follows will be to formally locate a threshold
and to estimate the mean-shift at that threshold. This will allow us to compare leader
characteristics in the equilibrium with and without political commitment.
       We test the null hypothesis of no structural change versus the alternative hypothesis
that a threshold is present by estimating the following equation:

                                       ỹjt = β1 + β2 Djt + jt ,                                   (6)

where ỹjt is the conditional leader characteristic used in Figures 1-2, and Djt is an indicator
variable that is equal to one if the population share in ward j in term t, Sjt , is greater
than a threshold S and is zero otherwise. jt is a mean-zero disturbance term. The
structure imposed on the data with this regression specification is consistent with the
patterns observed in Figures 1-2, where the (conditional) outcomes are constant to the
left and right of the threshold. It is also consistent with our estimates of equation (4).
The estimated coefficients from that equation (not reported) indicate that λ1 = λ2 = 0
and λ3 = λ4 = λ5 .
       If the location of the threshold, S, were known, we could estimate the mean-shift co-
efficient, β2 , at the threshold to compare leader competence in regimes with and without
political commitment. Because the location is unknown, we must estimate both S and
β2 . The problem of estimating a mean-shift at an unknown threshold has received con-
siderable attention in the econometrics literature. While the traditional solution was to
use Maximum Likelihood to estimate S and β2 simultaneously in equation (6), the more
recent approach has been to apply Least Squares to first estimate the change-point and
then to estimate the mean-shift.16 To derive the Least Squares estimate of S we simply
estimate equation (6) for many different values of the assumed threshold, S. The Least
Squares estimate of S is then,

                                       Ŝ = argminS RSS(S),

where RSS(S) is the residual sum of squares when equation (6) is estimated with the
assumed threshold at S. Intuitively, equation (6) will best fit the data, and RSS(S) will
attain its minimum value, when S = S. Andrews (1993) shows that the search for a
minimum value must be restricted to a subset of the unit interval for tests of a structural
break to have sufficient power. In practice, we estimate equation (6) for thresholds S ∈
[0.25, 0.75] in increments of 0.001. Matching Figures 1-2, Ŝ = 0.5 with each of our leader
characteristics, with the exception of education, as shown below.
  16
   The Least Squares method allows for a broader specification of correlation structure in the data than
Maximum Likelihood estimation, does not place restrictions on the error distribution function, and is
computationally simple (Bai 1994).

                                                  23
   The Least Squares method provides us with an estimate of the threshold location. It
does not, however, tell us if the structural break is statistically significant. To estab-
lish significance, we begin by placing bounds on the threshold’s location. Consider the
hypothesis that any assumed threshold, S, is equal to the true threshold:

                                        H0 : S = S.

When the data generating process is consistent with equation (6), S is consistently es-
timated by Ŝ. It follows that S can then be replaced by Ŝ when testing the preceding
hypothesis. Hansen (1999) proposes a likelihood ratio test of this hypothesis based on the
statistic
                                      RSS(S) − RSS(Ŝ)
                            LR(S) =                      · N.
                                            RSS(Ŝ)
The null hypothesis will be rejected when the assumed threshold is sufficiently far from the
true threshold; i.e. when LR(S) exceeds a critical value. Hansen derives the asymptotic
distribution of the LR(S) statistic, allowing this critical value to be computed. We will
focus on the 5 percent critical value in the empirical analysis that follows.
   Notice that the LR(S) statistic is simply a normalization of the RSS(S) statistic,
reaching its minimum value – zero – at the assumed threshold S = Ŝ. The range of
assumed thresholds close to Ŝ for which LR(S) is less than the 5 percent critical value
thus defines the 95 percent confidence interval for the threshold location. When the data
generating process is characterized by a threshold, as in equation (6), the LR(S) statistic
will decline steeply as the assumed threshold nears Ŝ from either side. This will allow
us to place precise statistical bounds on the location of the threshold. We expect this to
be the case for the leader’s caste affiliation and for the competence characteristics – land
value and occupation – that satisfy assumption A2 and which revealed a structural break
in Figures 1-2. This should not be the case for the competence characteristic – education
– that does not satisfy that assumption and for which no break was observed in Figure 2.
   Figures 3 and 4 plot the LR(S) statistic for assumed thresholds ranging from 0.25
to 0.75 in increments of 0.001 for our leader characteristics. Matching the discontinuous
change in the probability that the elected representative belongs to the most numerous
eligible sub-caste at 0.5 in Figure 1, the LR(S) statistic declines steeply when the assumed
threshold approaches 0.5 from either side in Figure 3. The asymptotic critical value allows
us to place tight bounds on the location of the threshold, which lies between 0.48 and
0.5 with 95 percent confidence. Figure 4 repeats this exercise with the leader competence
characteristics reported in Figure 2. The likelihood ratio statistic attains its minimum
value at an assumed threshold of 0.5 with land value and occupation in Figure 4. This
matches the discontinuous change in these characteristics at that population share in
Figure 2. While the LR(S) statistic associated with land value and occupation declines

                                             24
steeply as the assumed threshold approaches 0.5 from either side, restricting the 95 percent
confidence interval to the 0.48-0.5 range, this is not the case with the representative’s
education, as expected. The 95 percent confidence interval extends all the way from 0.47
to 0.64 with that variable. Education does not satisfy assumption A2 and so a structural
break is not predicted (or observed) for that variable. Education will thus be excluded
from the discussion that follows.
    Having located a common threshold for the representative’s caste affiliation, land
wealth, and occupation, we proceed to estimate the mean-shift at that threshold. We
estimate equation (6), replacing the conditional outcome, ỹjt , with the unconditional out-
come, yjt , and including ward fixed effects, a full set of reservation dummies, election-term
dummies, and the election year as additional regressors. It is straightforward to verify
that we would arrive at the same specification if we placed the restrictions λ1 = λ2 = 0
and λ3 = λ4 = λ5 on equation (4). The threshold location was estimated precisely for the
representative’s caste affiliation, and for his land wealth and occupation, in Figures 3-4.
This allows us to treat it as “fixed” when estimating the leader equation (Hansen 1999).
    The results reported in Table 4, Columns 1-3, are consistent with the presence of a
threshold at 0.5. The mean-shift coefficient is positive and significant at the five percent
level for the representative’s caste affiliation and for his land wealth and occupation.17
Based on the average values for the male ward representatives in our sample, the point
estimates indicate that the average land value of the elected ward representatives is 56
percent higher and their managerial experience is 30 percent higher in the regime with
political commitment.
    Our interpretation of Figures 1-2 is that a political equilibrium in which the ward
representative is accountable to his group emerges when its population share reaches 0.5,
allowing more competent representatives to be selected. An alternative explanation for
these results is that the pool of potential leaders changes discontinuously at that threshold.
The regression specifications in Columns 1-4 include reservation dummies to allow for the
possibility that the pool of potential candidates will be weaker in reserved elections where
a commitment-equilibrium is less likely to be obtained. Suppose, however, that the most
competent individuals within each sub-caste tend to cluster together in a relatively small
number of villages, while less competent individuals are spatially dispersed. A positive
relationship between the share of the most numerous eligible sub-caste and leadership
  17
     Hansen (1999) and Perron (2007) propose likelihood ratio and Wald tests, respectively, to test the
hypothesis that there is no structural break, β2 = 0, in equation (6). These tests, which are based on overall
goodness of fit measures, are asymptotically equivalent (Andrews 1993). As expected, the likelihood ratio
and Wald statistics computed at Ŝ = 0.5 match closely with each transformed leader characteristic, ỹjt .
Hansen also proposes a bootstrap procedure to compute critical values for the likelihood ratio statistic.
Using this procedure we reject the null hypothesis of no structural break with 95 percent confidence with
each transformed leader characteristic, consistent with the results in Table 4.


                                                     25
competence, net of the average reservation effect, could then simply reflect the fact that
the most competent members within each sub-caste tend to be located in villages and,
therefore, wards where they account for a disproportionate share of the population.
       Because we have information on the sub-caste of every household in each ward, we
can identify all potential leaders in each ward-term depending on its reservation status.
We consequently include measures of the competence distribution among the potential
leaders (the eligible citizen candidates) in each ward-term – the median and 25th and
75th percentiles of each characteristic – as additional regressors in Table 4, Columns
5-7 after locating the corresponding thresholds for the conditional outcomes using the
Least Squares method described above. Comparing the threshold location, the 95 percent
confidence interval, and the estimated mean-shift, the results are essentially unchanged
for the representative’s occupation and land wealth (Columns 2-3 versus Columns 4-5).
       We complete the analysis of leadership selection with a more stringent test to rule out
the possibility that the observed changes in the characteristics of the elected ward represen-
tatives in Figure 2 are being driven by underlying changes in the pool of potential leaders.
This test replaces the actual characteristics of the elected representative with potential
leader characteristics in Figure 5. Using the same two-step estimation procedure that was
used to generate Figure 2, we nonparametrically regress the 25th and 75th percentile of
each characteristic, based on the distribution of potential leaders in each ward-term, on
the share of the most numerous eligible sub-caste. In contrast with Figure 2, the main
finding from Figure 5 is that no discontinuity is discernable at 0.5 with any characteristic,
effectively ruling out this alternative explanation for the results that are obtained.18 The
leadership selection rule is evidently changing when the share reaches 0.5, as implied by
our theory.


7        Public Good Provision
According to the model, the level of public goods (total budget) is determined by the
competence of the selected leader, while the mix of public goods is a function of the
characteristics of a pivotal individual. We estimate the determinants of local public good
provision taking into account both the relevant pivotal individual’s preference for the mix
of public goods and the leader’s competence, with a specification of the form

                           Gkjt = (αk + δk Zjt )(1 + θDjt ) + hj + ζkjt .                          (7)

The first term in parentheses on the right hand side of equation (7) tells us how each
dollar received by the ward is allocated to different public goods, k. αk , δk are public-
  18
   The pool of potential leaders within the most numerous eligible sub-caste does not change discontin-
uously at 0.5 either (not reported).

                                                  26
good specific preference parameters and Zjt measures the characteristics and, hence, the
preferences of the pivotal household or individual in ward j in term t for different public
goods. The second term in parentheses tells us how many dollars are received by the
ward. The structure of this term is consistent with the discontinuous increase in leadership
competence at a threshold population share that we observed in Figure 2, and the absence
of any relationship between competence and the population share to the left and right of
that threshold. Djt = 1 if the share of the most numerous eligible sub-caste in ward j in
term t, Sjt , is greater than or equal to the threshold share S and Djt = 0 if Sjt is less than
S. The competence parameter θ thus measures the discontinuous increase in the total
budget that is implied by Proposition 3 (and Figure 2) with a switch to the equilibrium
with commitment at S.
   The product of the two terms in parentheses in equation (7) tells us how many dollars
are allocated to each public good k. This determines Gkjt , the fraction of households
in ward j that received good k in term t. In general, the level of public goods received
by a ward is determined by a collective decision-making process, which will depend not
only on the competence or bargaining power of the ward representative but also on the
characteristics of other ward representatives and the panchayat president. However, ran-
dom and independent reservation in elections across wards and for the president’s position
implies that changes in the characteristics of the ward representative (and the political
equilibrium) will be uncorrelated with changes in the characteristics of other elected rep-
resentatives in the panchayat. Once ward fixed effects, hj , are included, this allows us to
ignore the characteristics of other elected representatives, which are subsumed in the ζkjt
term in the equation above.
   When Djt = 0, the pivotal household in the equilibrium without commitment is the
median household in the ward. When Djt = 1 and the regime shifts to the commitment-
equilibrium, the pivotal household becomes the median household from the most numerous
eligible sub-caste in that ward-term. The δk parameters that map pivotal voter charac-
teristics to the provision of public goods are thus identified off changes in the identity
of the pivotal household within the ward over time resulting from exogenous changes in
the political equilibrium. Note that if the reservation system does not change the politi-
cal equilibrium in the ward, or if there is only one dominant household that dictates the
composition of public goods no matter who is elected, then the δk parameters will not be
identified. Differencing out the ward fixed effects, hj , the competence parameter θ and
the preference parameters αk , δk can be estimated using nonlinear least squares.
   Gkjt in equation (7) is measured as the fraction of households in ward j who received
a particular good k in a given election term t, where public good provision is defined
to include both new construction and maintenance. This variable was constructed by


                                              27
matching the locations of households and goods, based on the street location of each public
goods investment and the street addresses of the households. Our analysis focuses on six
goods for which the benefits have a significant local and spatial component; that is, goods
for which attachment or proximity to the household is desirable. The goods are: drinking
water, sanitation, improved roads, electricity, street lights, and public telephones.19 These
six goods account for 15.2 percent of all local public spending, which is four times the
amount spent on schools and health facilities.20 Appendix Table A2 reports the fraction of
households in the ward that received each public good, averaged across wards and election
terms, by type of reservation. It is apparent that a large fraction of households benefited
directly from expenditures on water, roads, and sanitation, while a much smaller fraction
benefited in any term from expenditures on electricity, street lights, and public telephones.
Individuals or households with different characteristics will have different preferences for
these public goods. We have thus allowed the preference parameters αk and δk in equation
(7) to differ for each public good indexed by k.
       Table 5 reports estimates of the public goods delivery equation, based on the as-
sumption that 0.5 is the threshold above which an equilibrium with commitment can be
sustained. This assumption is consistent with the threshold location derived for different
leader characteristics in Figures 3-4. These characteristics were obtained from distinct
data sources: the village census for land wealth and caste affiliation, and the village inven-
tory for occupation. Nevertheless, the threshold was independently located precisely at 0.5
with each characteristic, as reported in Table 4. In a previous version of the paper (Munshi
and Rosenzweig 2008) we implemented an alternative test to locate the true threshold by
estimating equation (7) with different assumed thresholds. We showed theoretically that
the estimated θ coefficient would be increasing monotonically as the assumed threshold
increased and shifted closer to the true threshold, with a trend-break in this relationship
at the true threshold, if the data generating process was consistent with the model. This
test has been replaced by formal statistical tests for a threshold and its location, based on
the pattern of leadership selection. It is worth noting that the alternative test based on
the provision of public goods also located the threshold precisely at 0.5.
  19
      Public irrigation investments or school buildings, for example, are valued local public goods whose
placement close to a ward resident, or even within the ward (defined by place of residence) may not be
desirable. Some public goods, in contrast, have a private dimension. For example, water could be piped
to some households but not to others within a ward. We do not have information on the distribution
of public goods at the household level, only at the street level. Thus, it is not possible to carry out an
analysis of within-ward discrimination in public goods provision.
   20
      Key informants in the village were asked to rank 12 issues, by importance, that came under the
purview of the elected panchayat. Inadequate roads and drinking water were ranked 1 and 2, followed
by health, schooling, sanitation, street lights and electrification. Note that the low spending on health
and education and the relatively low level of importance assigned to these goods by the key informants
reflects the fact that they are largely allocated at the state level and so fall outside the purview of the
village panchayat, as discussed in Section 2.


                                                    28
   The first three columns Table 5 report estimates from the basic specification, equation
(7), measuring the pivotal individual’s characteristics sequentially by owned land value,
occupation, and education. The next three columns of Table 5 report estimates from an
augmented specification that allows competence to vary by the gender of the elected ward
representative with the same sequence of pivotal individual characteristics:

          Gkjt = (1 + w1r )(αk + δk Zjt ) + (1 + w2r )θDjt (αk + δk Zjt ) + hj + ζkjt ,

where w1r , w2r estimate the effect of female reservation, separately in the equilibrium with
and without commitment, on overall resources.
   The preference parameter estimates in Table 5 are precisely estimated, with the inter-
cepts αk matching the pattern of public good provision in Appendix Table A2. Recall that
a relatively large fraction of households benefited from expenditures on water, sanitation,
and roads in each ward-term. Public telephones are the reference category in Table 5,
and we see that the drinking water, sanitation, and roads intercepts are relatively large in
magnitude and very precisely estimated.
   The results in Table 5 also indicate that elected ward representatives are responsive to
the preferences of the pivotal individuals in their constituencies. Recall that the median
individual in the ward is assumed to be pivotal when Djt = 0, whereas the median indi-
vidual in the most numerous eligible sub-caste is pivotal when Djt = 1. The δk estimates
indicate, consistent with the model, that the characteristics of the pivotal household have
a significant effect on the mix of public goods in the ward. We can reject the joint hy-
pothesis that the pivotal characteristic has no effect on the distribution of public goods
with 95 percent confidence for land value, occupation, and education. The individual δk
coefficients imply, for example, that relative to public telephone investment (the reference
category), when the pivotal household has greater land wealth the allocation of resources
to roads is increased and the allocation to electricity is reduced. When the pivotal indi-
vidual (household head) is employed in a managerial occupation, we see a relative increase
in the resources allocated to electricity and street lights. The same characteristics were
shown to increase discontinuously at a threshold in the leadership selection equation, which
indicates that there is indeed a trade-off between the horizontal and vertical dimensions
of leadership quality in this context.
   The θ estimates reported in Table 5 indicate that there is not only a change in the
pivotal individual when there is a change in the political equilibrium but also a change in
the ward representative’s competence. The competence parameter θ in Table 5 is positive
and significant across both specifications and for all measures of the pivotal individual’s
characteristics, ranging in magnitude from 0.14 to 0.17 in Columns 1-3. Political account-
ability substantially increases the overall level of public resources the ward receives. The

                                               29
threshold is crossed in 58 percent of ward-terms. This implies that the discipline imposed
by caste networks increases public goods provision by 8-10 percent in a ward relative to
the counter-factual without commitment.
       Does the competence of the elected representative vary by gender? Below the thresh-
old, in the equilibrium without commitment, we expect the representative – male or female
– to have preferences that are as close as possible to the median individual in the ward. It
is not obvious a priori how the mapping from these preferences to competence will vary
by gender. We see in Table 5, Columns 4-6 that female representatives are 5-6 percent less
competent than male representatives in the equilibrium without commitment. Above the
threshold, where the most competent member of the most numerous eligible sub-caste will
be elected, however, we see that female representatives are 11-12 percent more competent
than male representatives. These results indicate that caste discipline has a stronger ef-
fect on the competence of female representatives than it does for men, although this is not
reflected in conventional measures of leadership competence.21 Given that the equilibrium
with commitment is obtained in a majority of ward-terms, these statistically significant
gender effects also imply that female representatives are more competent than male rep-
resentatives on average.22 In a related robustness test, we allowed the competence of the
elected representatives to vary by reservation category and gender. Although some of the
reservation-category coefficients are individually significant in the augmented specification
(not reported), we cannot reject the hypothesis that all the reservation coefficients, above
and below the threshold, are jointly zero.


8        Political Commitment
Once ward fixed effects are included, our ability to identify the effects of the pivotal indi-
vidual’s characteristics on the mix of public goods in Table 5 indicates that there was a
shift in the pivotal individual above and below the threshold share within a ward across
terms. The estimates are obtained assuming that the elected leader in the commitment-
equilibrium (above the threshold share) chooses projects that are aligned with the prefer-
ences of the median individual in the most numerous eligible sub-caste, regardless of his
own preferences, while in an equilibrium without commitment (below the threshold share)
the median individual in the ward, who is selected as the leader, will choose his preferred
  21
     In contrast with the strong (discontinuous) competence-share relationship that we obtain for the male
representatives in Figure 2, no relationship with any characteristic is obtained for female representatives
(not reported). These representatives are evidently being selected on attributes that are poorly measured
by the usual characteristics obtained in household surveys.
  22
     These findings are broadly consistent with recent evidence in Beaman et al. (2009). Their results,
however, are obtained for panchayat-level elections for the president’s position in which the commitment-
equilibrium is less likely to be obtained (a single sub-caste is less likely to be numerically dominant).



                                                    30
mix of projects.
   The estimated location of the threshold at 0.5 suggests that the caste representative
obtains little electoral support outside his social group. As discussed above, this result
would be obtained if he targets public goods to his own sub-caste within the ward when
elected and max (0.5, S)=0.5. An alternative explanation is that once a sub-caste attains
a majority it is assured of electoral power and so can enter into a repeated game with any
competent individual in the ward. Although the sub-caste must still coordinate to ensure
that all its members vote for the same candidate, the long-term nature of the arrangement
between the sub-caste and this candidate ensures ex post commitment even if he does
not belong to that group. Randomized caste and gender reservation, which exogenously
changes the pool of eligible leaders from one election to the next within a ward, makes
this explanation less relevant for Indian local politics. Consistent with this argument, we
saw in Figures 1 and 2 that there was a discontinuous increase, at the same threshold,
in both the probability that elected representatives belong to the most numerous eligible
sub-caste and in characteristics associated with their competence.
   A second alternative explanation is that an influential (and competent) member of
the sub-caste gets elected when it attains a numerical majority, taking advantage of caste
identity to retain the rents from political power for himself. To rule out this explanation
and to provide additional support for the commitment hypothesis, we proceed to evaluate
the predictive power of the pivotal characteristic, Zjt , measured by the joint significance
of the preference parameter estimates (δk ), under different assumptions about the identity
of the pivotal individual. We compare the benchmark specification implied by the model
against two alternative allocation schemes: (i) The pivotal individual in the equilibrium
without commitment (share < 0.5) is the person elected, which is consistent with our
model. Replacing the characteristics of the median individual in the ward with those of
the elected representative should not have a systematic effect on the preference parameter
estimates in this case. (ii) The pivotal individual in the commitment-equilibrium (share
> 0.5) is the elected representative. This is inconsistent with our model, which assumes
that the representative chooses a mix of projects that is aligned with the preferences of a
centrally located member of his sub-caste. A strong test of the commitment hypothesis
is that the joint significance of the preference parameter estimates should decline when
the median member of the most numerous eligible sub-caste is replaced by the (more
competent) representative as the pivotal individual.
   Land wealth information is only available for candidates (not elected council mem-
bers) over two election terms. Given that 87 percent of all elections had at most two
candidates and 65 percent had a single candidate, we can use the average land wealth
of the candidates in each ward-term in place of the leader’s characteristics once again


                                            31
when testing commitment in Table 6, Columns 1-3. For occupation and education, we
replace the pivotal individual’s characteristics with the elected representative’s charac-
teristics, as described above, when testing for commitment in Table 6, Columns 4-6 and
7-9. Comparing the benchmark specification with the alternative specification where the
characteristics of the median individual in the ward are replaced by the leader’s (or candi-
dates’) characteristics below the threshold, the F-statistic measuring the joint significance
of the preference parameter estimates decreases when land wealth and occupation are used
to measure preferences, but increases when preferences are measured by education. Notice
that the preference parameters are precisely estimated (significant at the 5 percent level)
with both specifications and all three characteristics (land wealth, occupation, and educa-
tion). In contrast, the F-statistic declines substantially with all three characteristics when
the leader is assumed to be pivotal for population shares greater than 0.5. Indeed, we
cannot reject the hypothesis (at the 5 percent level) that the characteristics of the elected
representative have no effect on the distribution of public goods for shares greater than
0.5, consistent with commitment above the threshold.


9     Conclusion
This paper tests the hypothesis that caste networks expanded the domain of their influ-
ence from private economic activity to the public political sphere when democratic local
elections were established in India in the 1990s. In particular, we assess whether these
networks were able to overcome political commitment problems, enabling sub-castes to
select their most competent representatives, while at the same time ensuring that they
honored the public goods preferences of their constituents.
    The empirical analysis uses detailed data on local public goods at the street level and
the characteristics of constituents and their elected representatives at the ward level over
multiple terms. Exploiting the system of randomized caste reservation, which changes the
population-share of the most numerous eligible sub-caste across ward-terms, we find that
caste discipline is associated with an increase in public good provision and a change in
the characteristics of selected representatives. In particular, the land wealth of elected
representatives is 56 percent greater and managerial experience is 30 percent higher when
caste discipline is present. Our results indicate that the same characteristics that we
associate with leadership competence also determine preferences for public goods. For
example, we find that individuals with greater land wealth prefer investments in roads
over investments in electricity. Individuals in managerial occupations have a relatively
strong preference for electricity and street lights. This correlation between competence and
preferences highlights the commitment problem, which the sub-caste overcomes. Indeed,


                                             32
we find that the (more competent) representative’s own characteristics have no effect on
the mix of public goods that is chosen in ward-terms where caste discipline is predicted to
be present, which implies that he is choosing policies that diverge from his own preferences.
   Although our findings suggest that community involvement in politics does not nec-
essarily result in bad governance, they need to be placed in the appropriate perspective.
While the sub-caste may be able to control the leaders it nominates at the ward level, it
will have less influence at higher levels of government where a single sub-caste is rarely
dominant. The negative effect of caste-identity politics on leadership selection and out-
comes has been documented at the state level in India (e.g. Banerjee and Pande 2007) and
similar negative outcomes have been associated with parochial politics in other parts of
the world. Moreover, as our results show, the elected caste representative is answerable to
the social group he belongs to and so his choices will be aligned with the preferences of a
pivotal member of his sub-caste rather than the median voter in the constituency. The fact
that the more competent caste representative can only be elected when his group attains
a majority in the ward also suggests that outsiders may not benefit from the resources
he provides. Caste politics is a second-best solution and, ultimately, there is no perfect
substitute for well functioning political institutions (parties) in a competitive democratic
system.
   Our results also shed light on the equity and efficiency consequences of political reserva-
tion in India, evaluated in terms of the the horizontal and vertical dimensions of leadership
quality. The advantage of caste reservation is that it transfers leadership in a ward where
an upper caste has a majority to the median individual, allowing a mix of public goods
to be chosen that is aligned with the preferences of the electorate rather than a narrowly
defined caste group. The disadvantage of caste (and gender) reservation is that the exoge-
nous turnover that goes with it prevents the ward from using the promise of re-election
to discipline its most competent member. Moreover, caste reservation, by decreasing the
population-share of the most numerous eligible sub-caste, also reduces the probability that
an equilibrium with (caste) commitment will be obtained. Our estimates indicate that
caste discipline increases public good provision by 14-17 percent. Given that in two-thirds
of wards one sub-caste has a majority of the constituents, political competence could be
roughly 9-11 percent higher because of caste networks in Indian local governments relative
to the counterfactual system in which politicians were unable to commit. The reservation
system, by reducing the number of elections in which any sub-caste holds a majority to
58 percent, reduces these gains from caste discipline by 13.4 percent.




                                             33
10       Appendix
Proof of Proposition 2(a)

   Case 1: mc < m. To show that the commitment-equilibrium is the unique equilibrium
when inequality (1) is satisfied, we first need to show that no one wants to deviate from
this equilibrium:
   (i) Any individual with ω < mc would lose a straight contest with the group represen-
tative because he is more competent (ω c > mc by definition) and because mc is closer in
preference-space to all individuals with ω greater than or equal to m.
   (ii) Any individual with ω ∈ [mc , m] prefers the group representative to himself as the
leader. The median individual prefers the group representative to himself from condition
(1). Now consider an individual with ω ∈ [mc , m). This individual will also prefer the
group representative to himself if βω c − γ(ω − mc ) > βω. Rearranging the inequality, it is
straightforward to show, by substituting for ω c from inequality (1) that (ω c − ω) − βγ (ω −
                   
             γ
mc ) >       β
                 + 1 (m − ω) > 0.
   (iii) Any individual with ωj > m would lose a straight contest with the group represen-
tative because all individuals with ω ≤ m would vote against him. Consider individuals
with ω ∈ [0, mc ). We need to show that βω c − γ(mc − ω) > βωj − γ(ωj − ω). Rearranging
the inequality, the required condition is (ωj − mc ) − βγ (ωj − ω c ) > 0, which is satisfied since
mc < ω c and β < γ. We saw above that individuals with ω ∈ [mc , m] prefer the group rep-
resentative to themselves as the leader. They will also prefer themselves to the individual
with ωj > m since γ > β. This implies that they will prefer the group representative to
that individual.
   Verifying that no other equilibrium can be supported when condition (1) is satisfied
is also straightforward. A strategy profile in which an individual, other than the median
individual in the constituency, stands unopposed is not an equilibrium since the median
individual would deviate and stand against him. A strategy profile in which the median
individual stands unopposed is also not an equilibrium. The group would put its represen-
tative forward and everyone with ω less than or equal to m would vote for him. Individuals
with ω less than mc would prefer the group representative because he dominates the me-
dian individual on both the horizontal and vertical dimension. The median individual
prefers the group representative to himself. It follows that individuals with ω between mc
and m would also prefer the group representative since his chosen mix of goods is even
closer to their preferred mix.
   Having established that the commitment-equilibrium is the unique equilibrium when
condition (1) is satisfied, all that remains is to show that the equilibrium without com-
mitment, where the median individual in the constituency standing unopposed, is the


                                                34
unique equilibrium when condition (1) is not satisfied. No other individual outside the
group wants to deviate from this equilibrium since he will certainly lose to the median
individual in a straight contest. The group will also not put forward a candidate since
its representative will now lose to the median individual in a straight contest, with all
individuals with ω greater than or equal to m voting for the median individual. Consider
an individual with ω ∈ [m, 1]. For this claim to be true, βm−γ(ω −m) > βω c −γ(ω −mc ).
Rearranging the inequality, the required condition is β(ω c − m) − γ(m − mc ) < 0, which is
evidently satisfied when the sign of inequality (1) is reversed. By the same argument, no
other strategy profile could be supported as an equilibrium since the median individual
would always deviate and stand for election.
   Case 2: mc > m. To show that the commitment-equilibrium is the unique equilibrium
when condition (2) is satisfied, we must first establish that no one wants to deviate from
this equilibrium. Following the same steps as in case 1, it is straightforward to verify
that (i) individuals with ability ω ∈ [0, m) would lose a straight contest with the group
representative, (ii) individuals with ability ω ∈ [m, mc ] prefer the group representative to
themselves as the leader, and (iii) individuals with ability ω ∈ (mc , 1] would lose a straight
contest with the group representative. Following the same argument as in case 1, it is also
straightforward to verify that no other equilibrium can be sustained when condition (2)
is satisfied, and that the equilibrium without commitment is the unique equilibrium when
that condition is not satisfied, to complete the proof.




                                              35
References
 [1] Alesina, Alberto and Stephen E. Spear. 1988. “An Overlapping Generations Model
    of Electoral Competition,” Journal of Public Economics 37: 359-379.

 [2] Andrews, Donald W.K. 1993. “Tests for Parameter Instability and Structural Change
    with Unknown Change Point,” Econometrica 61(4): 821-856.

 [3] Bai, Jushan. 1994. “Least Squares Estimation of a Shift in Linear Processes,” Journal
    of Time Series Analysis 15: 453-472.

 [4] Banerjee, Abhijit and Rohini Pande. 2007. “Parochial Politics: Ethnic Preferences and
    Politician Corruption,” Harvard University, Kennedy School of Government, type-
    script.

 [5] Bardhan, Pranab, Dilip Mookherjee, and Monica Parra Torrado. 2005. “Impact of
    Reservations of Panchayat Pradhans on Targeting in West Bengal,” University of
    California at Berkeley, department of economics, typescript.

 [6] Beaman, Lori, Raghabendra Chattopadhyay, Esther Duflo, Rohini Pande, and Petia
    Topalova. 2009. “Powerful Women: Does Exposure Reduce Prejudice?” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 124(4): 1497-1540.

 [7] Becker, Gary S. 1983. “A Theory of Competition Among Pressure Groups for Political
    Influence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 98(3):371-400.

 [8] Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate. 1997. “An Economic Model of Representative
    Democracy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(1): 85-114.

 [9] Besley, Timothy, Rohini Pande, Lupin Rahman, and Vijayendra Rao. 2004. “The Pol-
    itics of Public Good Provision: Evidence from Indian Local Governments,” Journal
    of the European Economic Association 2(2-3): 416-426.

[10] Besley, Timothy, Rohini Pande, and Vijayendra Rao. 2007. “Just Rewards? Local
    Politics and Public Resource Allocation in South India,” Harvard University, Kennedy
    School of Government, typescript.

[11] Bobonis, Gustavo J., Luis R. Camara-Fuertes, and Rainer Schwabe. 2010. “Does
    Exposing Corrupt Politicians Reduce Corruption?,” University of Toronto, typescript.

[12] Cabrales, Antonio, Antoni Calvo-Armengol, and Matthew O. Jackson. 2003. “La
    Crema: A Case Study of Mutual Fire Insurance,” Journal of Political Economy
    111(2): 425-458.

                                           36
[13] Caldwell, John C., P.H. Reddy, Pat Caldwell. 1986. “Periodic High Risk as a Cause of
    Fertility Decline in a Changing Rural Environment: Survival Strategies in the 1980-
    1983 South Indian Drought,” Economic Development and Cultural Change pp.677-
    701.

[14] Caselli, Francesco and Massimo Morelli. 2004. “Bad politicians,” Journal of Public
    Economics 88: 759-782.

[15] Chandavarkar, Rajnarayan. 1994. The Origins of Industrial Capitalism in India:
    Business strategies and the working classes in Bombay, 1900-1940. Cambridge: Cam-
    bridge University Press.

[16] Chattopadhyay, Raghabendra and Esther Duflo. 2004. “Women as Policy Makers:
    Evidence from a Randomized Policy Experiment in India,” Econometrica 72(5): 1409-
    1443.

[17] Duflo, Esther, Greg Fischer, and Raghabendra Chattopadhyay. 2005. “Efficiency and
    rent seeking in local government: Evidence from randomized policy experiments in
    India,” MIT department of economics, typescript.

[18] Fafchamps, Marcel and Susan Lund. 2003. “Risk Sharing Networks in Rural Philip-
    pines,” Journal of Development Economics 71: 261-287.

[19] Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan. 2008. “Exposing Corrupt Politicians: The Ef-
    fects of Brazils Publicly Released Audits on Electoral Outcomes”, Quarterly Journal
    of Economics 123: 703-745.

[20] Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan. 2011. “Electoral Accountability and Corrup-
    tion: Evidence from the Audit Reports of Local Governments, ” American Economic
    Review, 101: 1274-1311.

[21] Ferreira, Fernando V. and Joseph Gyourko. 2009. “Do Political Parties Matter? Ev-
    idence from U.S. Cities,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(1): 349-397.

[22] Greif, Avner. 1993. “Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early
    Trade: the Maghribi Traders’ Coalition,” American Economic Review 83(3)525-48.

[23] Greif, Avner, Paul Milgrom, and Barry R. Weingast. 1994. “Coordination, Com-
    mitment, and Enforcement: The Case of the Merchant Guild,” Journal of Political
    Economy 102(4): 745-776.

[24] Grimard, Franque. 1997. “Household Consumption Smoothing through Ethnic Ties:
    Evidence from Cote d’Ivoire,” Journal of Development Economics 53(3): 319-422.

                                           37
[25] Hansen, Bruce E. 1999. “Threshold effects in non-dynamic panels: Estimation, test-
    ing, and inference,” Journal of Econometrics 93: 345-368.

[26] Hansen, Bruce E. 2000. “Sample Splitting and Threshold Estimation,” Econometrica
    68(3):575-603.

[27] Harrington, Jr., Joseph E. 1992. “The role of party reputation in the formation of
    policy,” Journal of Public Economics 49: 107-121.

[28] Levitt, Steven D. 1996. “How do Senators Vote? Disentangling the Role of Voter Pref-
    erences, Party Affiliation and Senate Ideology,” American Economic Review 86(3):
    425-441.

[29] Ligon, Ethan, Jonathan P. Thomas and Tim Worrall. 2002. “Informal Insur-
    ance Arrangements with Limited Commitment: Theory and Evidence from Village
    Economies,” Review of Economic Studies 69: 209-244.

[30] List, John and Daniel Sturm. 2006. “How Elections Matter: Theory and Evidence
    from Environmental Policy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(4): 1249-1281.

[31] Mazzocco, Maurizio and Shiv Saini. 2012. “Testing Efficient Risk-Sharing with Het-
    erogeneous Risk Preferences,” American Economic Review 102(1): 428-468.

[32] Messner, Matthias and Mattias Polborn. 2004. “Paying Politicians,” Journal of Public
    Economics 88 : 2423-2445.

[33] Miguel, Edward and Mary Kay Gugerty. 2005. “Ethnic Diversity, Social Sanctions,
    and Public Goods in Kenya,” Journal of Public Economics 89: 2325-2368.

[34] Morris, Morris David. 1965. The Emergence of an Industrial Labor Force in India:
    A Study of the Bombay Cotton Mills, 1854-1947. Berkeley: University of California
    Press.

[35] Munshi, Kaivan and Mark Rosenzweig. 2006. “Traditional Institutions Meet the Mod-
    ern World: Caste, Gender and Schooling Choice in a Globalizing Economy,” American
    Economic Review 96(4):1225-1252.

[36] Munshi, Kaivan and Mark Rosenzweig. 2008. “The Efficacy of Parochial Politics:
    Caste, Commitment, and Competence in Indian Local Governments,” NBER Working
    Paper 14335.

[37] Munshi, Kaivan and Mark Rosenzweig. 2010. “Why is Mobility in India so Low?
    Mutual Insurance, Marriage, and Migration,” Brown University department of eco-
    nomics, typescript.

                                           38
[38] Munshi, Kaivan. 2011. “Strength in Numbers: Networks as a Solution to Occupational
    Traps,” Review of Economic Studies 78:1069-1101.

[39] Osborne, Martin and Al Slivinski. 1996. “A Model of Political Competition with
    Citizen-Candidates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(1): 65-96.

[40] Pande, Rohini. 2003. “Can Mandated Political Representation Increase Policy In-
    fluence for Disadvantaged Minorities? Theory and Evidence from India,” American
    Economic Review 93(4): 1132-1151.

[41] Perron, Pierre. 2007. “Dealing with Structural Breaks,” in Palgrave Handbook of
    Econometrics, Vol. 1: Econometric Theory, eds. Terence C. Mills and Kerry Patter-
    son, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

[42] Robinson, Peter. 1988. “Root-N-Consistent Semiparametric Regression,” Economet-
    rica 56: 931-954.

[43] Stigler, George T. 1972. “Economic Performance and Political Competition,” Social
    Choice 13:91-106.

[44] Townsend, Robert. 1994. “Risk and Insurance in Village India,” Econometrica 62(3):
    171-84.

[45] Washington, Ebonya. 2008. “Female Socialization: How Daughters Affect their Legis-
    lator Fathers’ Voting on Women’s Issues,” American Economic Review 98(1): 311-332.




                                          39
                 Table 1: Sources of Support for Ward Representatives



Source of support:                                 within village        outside village
                                                        (1)                    (2)
From caste                                               82                       29
From religion                                            28                       13
From wealthy individuals                                 38                       --

From a political party                                   --                       41

The statistics are computed over the last three local governments in each ward.
Each statistic reflects the percent of representaives who received support from a given source.
             Table 2: Share of the Largest Eligible Sub-Caste in the Ward

Type of election:                       Open                SC                ST             OBC
                                         (1)                (2)               (3)             (4)

Panel A: Distribution of shares
          25 percentile                  0.42              0.14              0.16            0.20
          50 percentile                  0.60              0.33              0.57            0.41
          75 percentile                  0.85              0.65              0.95            0.69

  Panel B: Fraction of ward-
  terms where share exceeds
               0.3                       0.92              0.52              0.67            0.63
               0.4                       0.79              0.46              0.61            0.53
               0.5                       0.67              0.37              0.52            0.44
Total number of observations            1,973               373              187             769

 SC=scheduled caste, ST=scheduled tribe, OBC=other backward caste.
Information on reservation and election outcomes is obtained for three terms in each ward.
Table 3: Relationship between Caste-Median and Share of Most Numerous Eligible Sub-Caste


    Dependent variable:                                                       caste-median
    Preference characteristic:                   log(land value)                manager                    education
                                                       (1)                        (2)                         (3)
    share                                              1.23                        0.12                       -0.17
                                                      (0.45)                      (0.04)                     (0.24)
    Reservation dummies                                 Yes                        Yes                        Yes
    Number of observations                             3029                       3029                        3029

    Standard errors in parentheses are robust to heteroscedasticity and clustered residuals within each ward-term.
    Caste-median is median value of preference characteristic in the most numerous eligible sub-caste in the ward-term
    Share is the population-share of the most numerous eligible sub-caste in the ward-term
    All regressions include ward fixed effects, reservation dummies, term dummies, and election year.
    Managerial occupation takes value one for business and farming,
      zero for profesional occupations, agricultural labor, skilled and unskilled labor, technicians, and housewife.
    Education is measured in years of schooling.
                                                        Table 4: Representative
                                                      and Candidate Characteristics


                                                                                              ward representative characteristics
                                          Probability that a candidate
                                          is from the most numerous
                                          sub-caste                            log(land value)       manager        log(land value)          manager
                                                       (1)                           (2)               (3)                (4)                  (5)


Mean-shift at threshold                                 0.44                         2.82               0.21              3.10                0.17
                                                       (0.13)                       (1.05)             (0.06)            (1.07)               (0.08)
Reservation dummies                                      Yes                         Yes                Yes               Yes                  Yes

Potential rep. characteristics                           No                           No                 No               Yes                  Yes

Number of observations                                  1145                         1681              1994               1681                1852

Threshold location                                      0.49                         0.50               0.50              0.50                0.50

95% confidence interval                             [0.48,0.50]                  [0.48,0.50]        [0.49,0.50]       [0.48,0.50]        [0.49,0.50]

Standard errors in parentheses are robust to heteroscedasticity and clustered residuals within each ward-term.
All regressions include ward fixed effects, reservation dummies, term dummies, and election year.
Potential representative characteristics are 25th, 50th, and 75th percentile of the distribution of eligible individuals in the ward-term.
Managerial occupation takes value one for business and farming,
      zero for profesional occupations, agricultural labor, skilled and unskilled labor, technicians, and housewife.
Each regression is estimated at the threshold derived from the Likelihood Ratio test.
Threshold in Column 1 is based on two-step procedure. The threshold with the three-step procedure is 0.47.
                                                  Table 5: Public Goods Parameters


Dependent variable:                                                      public good provision
Specification:                       no female representative interactions                  female representative interactions
Pivotal characteristic:         log(land value)      manager          education        log(land value)      manager              education
                                      (1)              (2)               (3)                 (4)              (5)                   (6)
Water intercept                       0.55              0.58             0.55                0.55              0.57                 0.56
                                    (0.02)            (0.04)            (0.02)             (0.02)            (0.02)                (0.02)
Sanitation intercept                  0.28              0.34             0.31                0.28              0.29                 0.31
                                    (0.02)            (0.04)            (0.02)             (0.02)            (0.02)                (0.02)
Roads intercept                       0.50              0.57             0.56                0.50              0.55                 0.57
                                    (0.02)            (0.04)            (0.02)             (0.03)            (0.02)                (0.02)
Electricity intercept                 0.12             -0.03             0.08                0.11              0.08                 0.08
                                    (0.02)            (0.03)            (0.01)             (0.02)            (0.01)                (0.01)
Street lights intercept               0.10             -0.03             0.09                0.09              0.08                 0.09
                                    (0.02)            (0.03)            (0.01)             (0.02)            (0.01)                (0.01)
Pivotal char. x water                 3.24             -0.02             2.82                3.45              0.01                 1.45
                                    (2.05)            (0.04)            (3.31)             (2.11)            (0.02)                (3.51)
Pivotal char. x sanitation            3.84             -0.04             -1.05               4.05              0.03                 -2.28
                                    (2.19)            (0.04)            (3.49)             (2.25)            (0.02)                (3.68)
Pivotal char. x roads                 8.98            -0.005             -1.22               9.07              0.04                 -2.75
                                    (2.28)            (0.04)            (3.55)             (2.35)            (0.02)                (3.75)
Pivotal char. x electricity          -6.33              0.10             -4.44              -6.20             -0.04                 -5.67
                                    (1.78)            (0.03)            (2.62)             (1.81)            (0.02)                (2.81)
Pivotal char. x street lights        -2.26              0.12             -3.19              -1.76             -0.01                 -4.26
                                    (1.77)            (0.03)            (2.65)             (1.79)            (0.02)                (2.85)
Theta                                 0.14              0.16             0.17                0.10              0.12                 0.14
                                    (0.03)            (0.03)            (0.03)             (0.03)            (0.03)                (0.03)
Woman (above threshold)                --                --                --               0.11              0.11                  0.12
                                                                                           (0.04)            (0.04)                (0.04)
Woman (below threshold)               --                 --                --               -0.05             -0.06                 -0.06
                                                                                           (0.03)            (0.03)                (0.03)
 all pivotal char.-goods=0
         F-statistic                17.00              10.68             2.32              16.67              5.81                  2.83
         (p value)                  (0.00)             (0.00)           (0.04)             (0.00)            (0.00)                (0.01)

Number of observations              14,250            14,215            14,255             14,250            14,215                14,255

Standard errors in parentheses are robust to heteroscedasticity and clustered residuals within each ward-term.
The dependent variable is computed as the fraction of households in the ward who received a given public good in a given term.
     Public telephone is the excluded local public good.
Pivotal characteristic is the median in the ward (most numerous sub-caste) when a commitment-equilibrium is assumed to be absent (present).
A commitment-equilibrium is assumed to be present when the share of the most numerous eligible sub-caste exceeds 0.5.
Land value is measured in Rupees. Coefficients on land value-goods in Columns 1 and 4 must be divided by 10 3.
Managerial occupation takes the value one for business and farming,
     zero for professional occupations, agricultural labor, skilled labor, unskilled labor, technician, and housewife.
Education is measured as years of schooling. Coefficient on education-goods in Columns 3 and 6 must be divided by 10 3.
All regressions include ward fixed effects, term dummies and the election year.
                                                                   Table 6: Political Commitment Tests


Dependent variable:                                                                                public good provision
Pivotal characteristic:                             log(land value)                                  manager                                            education
                                                       rep. for        rep. for                      rep. for        rep. for                      rep. for share   rep. for share
Pivotal individual:                     medians                                      medians                                         medians
                                                     share < 0.5      share >0.5                   share < 0.5      share >0.5                         < 0.5             >0.5
                                           (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)              (9)
Pivotal char. x water                      0.16           0.04            0.15          0.21            0.11           -0.21            0.21            0.27             0.17
                                         (0.25)         (0.16)          (0.14)         (0.21)         (0.14)          (0.13)          (0.33)           (0.16)          (0.15)
Pivotal char. x sanitation                 0.27           0.21            0.35          0.36            0.22           -0.08           -0.14            0.30             0.01
                                         (0.27)         (0.17)          (0.15)         (0.22)         (0.15)          (0.14)          (0.34)           (0.18)          (0.16)
Pivotal char. x roads                      0.64           0.49            0.01          0.48            0.15           -0.06           -0.15            -0.41           -0.21
                                         (0.28)         (0.17)          (0.15)         (0.23)         (0.15)          (0.14)          (0.35)           (0.19)          (0.16)
Pivotal char. x electricity               -0.83          -0.60           -0.10          -0.55          -0.39           -0.26           -0.52            -0.25           -0.09
                                         (0.22)         (0.13)          (0.10)         (0.17)         (0.11)          (0.10)          (0.26)           (0.13)          (0.11)
Pivotal char. x street lights             -0.19          -0.13           -0.04          -0.20          -0.04            0.02           -0.35            0.02             0.05
                                         (0.21)         (0.13)          (0.11)         (0.17)         (0.12)          (0.11)          (0.26)           (0.14)          (0.12)
Theta                                     0.21           0.20            0.27           0.14           0.18            0.17            0.16             0.16            0.17
                                         (0.04)         (0.05)          (0.05)         (0.03)         (0.03)          (0.03)          (0.03)           (0.03)          (0.03)
 all pivotal char.xgoods=0 (F stat)      12.68           7.19            1.79          8.34            3.55            2.15            2.78             3.97            1.27
              (p value)                   0.00           0.00            0.11          0.00            0.00            0.06            0.02             0.00            0.27
Number of observations                    9110          9110            9110          14235           14245           14240           14130            14135           14135

Standard errors in parentheses are robust to heteroscedasticity and clustered residuals within each ward-term.
The dependent variable is the fraction of households in the ward who received a given public good in a given term. Public telephone is excluded public good.
medians: pivotal individual is median in the ward (most numerous sub-caste) for share <0.5 (share>0.5).
Ward representative is pivotal for share<0.5 in Columns 2, 5, and 8.
Ward representative is pivotal for share>0.5 in Columns 3, 6, and 9.
Managerial occupation takes the value one for business and farming, zero for professional occupations, agricultural labor,
skilled labor, unskilled labor, technician, and housewife. Coefficient on manager-goods in Columns 4-6 must be divided by 10.
Land value coefficents in Columns 1-3 must be divided by 10 2.
Education is measured as years of schooling. Coefficient on education-goods in Columns 7-9 must be divided by 10 2.
All regressions include ward fixed effects, reservation dummies, term dummies, the election year, and public good dummies.
                     Table A1: Pivotal Individual and Ward Representative Characteristics


Election type:                                 Open                       SC                       ST                 OBC
                                                (1)                       (2)                      (3)                 (4)

Panel A: Median individuals
Land value                                     94.80                     47.35                    63.35                94.76
                                             (173.19)                  (105.85)                 (182.02)             (157.49)
Managerial occupation                          0.34                      0.33                     0.40                 0.42
                                              (0.47)                    (0.47)                   (0.46)               (0.49)
Education                                      4.46                      3.53                     3.30                 4.03
                                              (3.76)                    (3.59)                   (3.65)               (3.36)
Panel B: Male representatives
Land value                                     99.55                    81.50                    58.36                83.21
                                              (23.69)                  (20.16)                  (19.91)              (15.23)
Managerial occupation                          0.75                      0.38                     0.82                 0.72
                                              (0.43)                    (0.49)                   (0.38)               (0.45)
Education                                      7.42                      6.01                     5.30                 7.05
                                              (4.43)                    (4.49)                   (3.99)               (4.30)

Panel C: Female representatives
Land value                                     95.61                    43.01                    31.50                62.44
                                              (30.23)                  (10.10)                  (40.86)              (91.83)
Managerial occupation                          0.10                      0.32                     0.05                 0.54
                                              (0.30)                    (0.47)                   (0.22)               (0.50)
Education                                      3.23                      5.78                     2.22                 4.72
                                              (3.83)                    (4.39)                   (2.05)               (4.17)

All characteristics in Panel A are measured as the median value in the ward for the relevant reservation category.
The means (standard deviations) of these characteristics across all wards are reported in the table.
Representatives' occupation and education is obtained for last three terms in each ward.
Information on land value is based on all candidates in the ward over the last two terms.
Information on the landholdings of elected representatives was not collected
Land value is measured in thousands of Rupees.
Managerial occupation takes the value one for business and farming and zero for
professional occupations, agricultural labor, skilled labor, unskilled labor, technicians, and housewife.
Education is measured as years of schooling.
SC=scheduled caste, ST=scheduled tribe, OBC=other backward caste.
    Table A2: Fraction of Households in the Ward Receiving Public Goods in each Term



Type of election:                 Open                   SC          ST       OBC
                                   (1)                   (2)         (3)       (4)
Water                              0.69                  0.73        0.78      0.72
                                  (0.40)                (0.39)      (0.71)    (0.39)
Sanitation                         0.42                  0.42        0.55      0.42
                                  (0.46)                (0.46)      (0.47)    (0.46)
Roads                              0.69                  0.72        0.74      0.73
                                  (0.41)                (0.40)      (0.41)    (0.39)
Telephones                         0.07                  0.12        0.08      0.10
                                  (0.24)                (0.30)      (0.25)    (0.28)
Electricity                        0.14                  0.20        0.17      0.20
                                  (0.34)                (0.38)      (0.36)    (0.38)
Street lighting                    0.16                  0.19        0.19      0.22
                                  (0.36)                (0.38)      (0.39)    (0.40)
Number of observations            1,704                  373         176       619

Means and standard deviations (in parentheses).
SC=scheduled caste, ST=scheduled tribe, OBC=other backward caste.
Statistics are based on the last three terms in each ward.
