                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      REAL ESTATE VALUATION, CURRENT ACCOUNT AND CREDIT GROWTH
               PATTERNS, BEFORE AND AFTER THE 2008-9 CRISIS

                                          Joshua Aizenman
                                           Yothin Jinjarak

                                        Working Paper 19190
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19190


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2013




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank Livio Stracca and the participants at the conference
on "Current Account Imbalances and International Financial Integration," hosted by the European
Commission in Brussels, 6-7 December 2013, as well as the seminar at Victoria University of Wellington,
for useful comments and suggestions.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Joshua Aizenman and Yothin Jinjarak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Real Estate Valuation, Current Account and Credit Growth Patterns, Before and After the
2008-9 Crisis
Joshua Aizenman and Yothin Jinjarak
NBER Working Paper No. 19190
June 2013, Revised March 2014
JEL No. F15,F21,F32,R21,R31

                                             ABSTRACT

We explore the stability of the conditioning variables accounting for the real estate valuation before
and after the crisis of 2008-9, in a panel of 36 countries, recognizing the crisis break. We validate the
robustness of the association between the real estate valuation and lagged current account patterns,
both before and after the crisis. The most economically significant variable in accounting for real estate
valuation changes turned out to be the lagged real estate valuation appreciation (real estate inflation
minus CPI inflation), followed by lagged declines of the current account/GDP, lagged domestic credit/GDP
growth, and lagged equity market valuation appreciation (equity market appreciation minus CPI inflation).
A one standard deviation increase in lagged real estate appreciation is associated with a 10 % increase
in the present real estate appreciation, larger than the impact of a one standard deviation deterioration
in the lagged current account/GDP (5%) and of the lagged domestic credit/GDP growth (3%). The
results are supportive of both current account and credit growth channels, with the momentum channels
playing the most important role. Smaller current account/GDP surpluses or larger deficits may serve
as warning signals, especially when coinciding with credit expansion and real estate appreciation during
the past several quarters.


Joshua Aizenman
Economics and SIR
USC
University Park
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043
and NBER
aizenman@usc.edu

Yothin Jinjarak
DeFiMS SOAS
University of London, United Kingdom
and ADB Institute, Japan
yj5@soas.ac.uk
1.      Introduction and overview

       The global crisis of 2008-9 sparked a vibrant debate on the factors contributing to the
crisis. Were global imbalances or excessive credit growth the key suspects? Contributors to the
debate include Borio and Disyatat (2011), conjecturing that the main causing factor to the
financial crisis was not “excess saving” but the “excess elasticity” of the international monetary
and financial system; and Obstfeld (2012:20), noting that “The balance sheet mismatches of
leveraged entities provide the most direct indicators of potential instability, much more so than
do global imbalances, though the imbalances may well be a symptom that deeper financial
threats are gathering.” Against this background, we revisit these questions in the context of the
real estate market. The macro importance of the real estate market is well appreciated by now.
A prime example of it has been the U.S., where Leamer (2007)’s title succinctly summarized it:
“Housing is the business cycle.” 

       A priori, one expects that both the current account and credit growth trends would impact
the valuation of national real estates. A primary link between real estate valuation and the
current account deficit follows from national accounting and the absorption approach. Growing
current account deficits is a signal of a growing gap between the spending of domestic residents
[absorption] and their output. As long as the demand for key non-traded durable assets, like real
estate, is positively correlated with absorption, one expects higher current account deficits to be
associated with higher real estate valuation. Yet, as most households co-finance the purchase of
their dwelling through the banking system, greater financial depth and accelerated growth rate of
credit tend to increase the demand for houses, probably increasing the real estate valuation.

       Thus, one expects that both current account and credit trends matter for the valuation of
real estate, and a priori there is no obvious reason to surmise which of the two should dominate.
In Aizenman and Jinjarak (2009) we looked empirically at these issues in 41 countries, for the
years 1990–2005, investigating the association between lagged current account deteriorations
and the appreciation of the real estate prices/GDP deflator, controlling for macro factors
associated with real estate valuation [lagged GDP/capita growth, inflation, financial depth,
institution, urban population growth and the real interest rate]. We found a strong positive
association between lagged current account deteriorations and an appreciation of the real estate,
where the real appreciation is magnified by financial depth, and mitigated by the quality of

                                                 2

institutions. Intriguingly, the economic importance of current account variations, in accounting
for the real estate valuation, exceeds that of the other variables, including the real interest rate
and inflation.

        A growing literature identified several related channels contributing to the positive
association of the current account and credit growth patterns with real estate valuation. Tomura
(2010) analyzed the roles of credit market conditions in the endogenous formation of housing-
market boom–bust cycles, in a business cycle model. When households are uncertain about the
duration of a temporary high income growth period, expected future house prices rise during a
high growth period and fall at the end of the period. These developments induce in his model
expectation-driven boom–bust cycles in house prices, only if the economy is open to
international capital flows. Furthermore, high maximum loan-to-value ratios for residential
mortgages per se do not cause boom–bust cycles without international capital flows. Laibson
and Mollerstrom (2010) noted that national asset bubbles may explain the international
imbalances -- the bubbles raised consumption, resulting in large trade deficits. In their sample of
18 OECD countries plus China, movements in home prices alone explain half of the variation in
trade deficits. Gete’s (2010) model showed that an increased demand for housing may generate
trade deficits without the need for wealth effects or trade in capital goods, and that housing
booms are larger if the country can run a trade deficit. These predictions were found consistent
with the pre-crisis experience of the OECD countries. Adam et al. (2011) outlined an open
economy asset pricing model with households characterized by subjective beliefs about price
behavior and update these beliefs using Bayes' rule. They show that the resulting belief dynamics
propagate considerable economic shocks and contribute to replicating the empirical evidence of
the association between current account patterns and real estate valuations. Belief dynamics can
temporarily delink house prices from fundamentals, so that low interest rates can fuel a house
price boom.

        As there is no reason for the relative importance of the current account and the credit
patterns to stay stable overtime in accounting real estate valuation, we explore in this paper the
degree to which the pre global crisis patterns continues to hold after the crisis. Specifically, we
look at the following questions:



                                                   3

i.     Stability of the key conditioning variables accounting for the real estate valuation before
       and after the crisis; specifically the relative importance of the current account and credit
       growth patterns.
ii.    The importance of ‘momentum’ in the pricing of real estate, as measured by the impact of
       lagged real estate appreciation in accounting for the present real estate appreciation,
       controlling for other macro factors. This issue is related to concerns about possible
       bubble dynamics, where lagged appreciation is reinforcing expectations of future
       appreciation.
iii.   Symmetry of the patterns during real estate appreciation versus real estate depreciation.
iv.    The possible two way causality between current account and real estate valuation
       patterns.
v.     The degree to which the valuation of equities is accented by similar conditioning
       variables.

       Overall, our paper reveals a complex of time varying patterns, yet it validates the
robustness of the association between real estate valuation of lagged current account patterns
both before and after the crisis. The base regression is a dynamic panel estimate of 36 countries,
during the periods 2005:I -2012:IV, recognizing the crisis break. It accounts for the appreciation
rate of the real estate valuation (real estate inflation minus CPI inflation) as explained by the
following correlates: lagged appreciation rate of the real estate valuation, lagged decline in the
current account/GDP, lagged changes in the domestic credit/GDP, lagged changes in the equity
market valuation appreciation (equity market appreciation minus CPI inflation), and a vector of
lagged changes of macro controls [inflation, growth of industrial production, TED spreads,
sovereign spreads, VIX, and international reserves]. The most economically significant variable
in accounting for real estate valuation changes turned out to be the lagged real estate valuation
appreciation, followed by lagged declines of the current account/GDP, lagged domestic
credit/GDP growth, and lagged equity market valuation appreciation. The first three effects are
economically substantial: a one standard deviation increase in lagged real estate appreciation is
associated with a 10 % increase in the present real estate appreciation, much larger than the
impact of a one standard deviation decline in the lagged current account (5%), and that of lagged
increase in the domestic credit/GDP growth (3%). Thus, the results are supportive of both current


                                                  4

account and credit growth channels, with the animal-spirits and expectations channels playing
the most important role in the boom and bust of real estate valuation.

       While positive reverse feedback of real estate appreciation to current account
deteriorations cannot be ruled out theoretically, we find that it is not supported during our sample
period. We find support for a positive feedback of real estate appreciation to equity market
appreciation, which is consistent with the wealth effects from real estate valuation to equity
investment.

2.     Sample

       We use quarterly data to understand how short- to medium-term adjustment of the real
estate valuation interacts with current accounts, domestic credit, and relevant macro and global
variables. Using quarterly data comes at a cost of sample length: subject to data availability, our
data covers the period of 2005:I to 2012:IV. Obviously we miss out earlier episodes of real
estate booms and busts. However, in the present context of our investigation this may not be so
costly since previous cycles would be varying across countries, meaning that there would be a
variety of other driving factors in country-specific episodes. On the other hand, the current
sample period fits well with our interests that specifically focus on the real estate valuation over
the global crisis, with quarterly adjustment dynamics. Alternatively, using annual data instead
would allow for a longer sample period back in the historical past, but could not capture the
dynamics of short- to medium-term interactions between real estate data and confounding macro
fundamentals that we try to understand.

       The data are drawn from several sources, as shown in Appendix A, including Oxford
Economics, Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU), Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED), and
Credit Market Analysis (CMA). Our main variable of interests is real estate valuation
appreciation (real estate inflation minus CPI inflation). As a user of secondary data, we are made
well aware that the primary collection method of our most important variable, the real estate
valuation series, is known to be highly heterogeneous across countries. National statistical
offices and local real estate agencies have their own approaches in compiling the data; e.g. some
are repeated sales, others are not; some include both residential and commercial, others do not,
etc. Hence, pooling real estate series across countries amounts to an aggregation problem. Our


                                                  5

real estate series, which are drawn from a compilation of Oxford Economics database, are also
subject to this data issue, as is the case in other earlier studies and datasets.1 Yet, as is shown in
Aizenman and Jinjarak (2009) using real estate data from different cross-country databases,
residential series and commercial real estate series, the econometric evidence are largely
consistent across the data sets on the empirical relationships of real estate, current account, and
macro variables.

              Altogether there are 36 countries in the sample, covering both developed and emerging
markets. Appendix A provides the list of countries and Appendix B shows geographically the
locality of real estate markets included. Some of these are large, hot spot markets, widely
monitored and publicized by the press, e.g. China and the US, whereas many others are smaller
in size and may not be known as boom-bust spots in the global real estate markets. As shown by
standard deviation of real estate valuation appreciation highlighted in the figure of Appendix B,
several of these countries are considered highly volatile markets for the period before and after
the global crisis.

2.1 Preliminary statistics

              Panel unit root tests suggest that real estate valuation appreciation, current account/GDP
deterioration, and domestic credit growth/GDP are all nonstationary. As the power of unit root
tests undoubtedly varies across study samples, not to mention panel data extension of the tests,
we report both Im-Pesaran-Shin statistic and Levin-Lin statistic (Appendix C). These two tests
assume that all series are non-stationary under the null hypothesis; the former is consistent under
the alternative that only a fraction of the series are stationary, while the latter assumes that all
series are stationary under the alternative. Both tests appear consistent with each other in our
sample, pointing to the existence of unit roots in the series. Next, we examine whether there is
any co-integrating relationship among these variables.2




1
  The cross-country series currently available are not sufficiently detailed to resolve the issues, as well as in term of
cross-series comparability, in contrast to, for example, Standard and Poor’s (S&P) Case-Shiller for the US real estate
series.
2
  To smooth seasonal fluctuations in quarterly real estate valuation appreciation, current account/GDP deterioration,
and domestic credit growth/GDP, we use their four-quarter moving averages (current plus three lags) here and in the
following estimation.

                                                               6

        The panel co-integration test does not reject the null of no co-integration between real
estate valuation appreciation and current account/GDP deterioration; real estate valuation
appreciation and domestic credit growth/GDP; real estate valuation appreciation and equity
market valuation appreciation (equity market appreciation minus CPI inflation); current account
/GDP deterioration and domestic credit growth/GDP. The panel co-integration test statistics
have the null of no integration for all cross-sections of countries, based on Westerlund panel
error-correction-model (ECM) tests. We report test statistics both when an alternative is error
correction term less than zero for at least one country, and when an alternative is error correction
term less than zero for all countries. Both statistics are consistent with each other in rejecting co-
integration. While there is some weak evidence of co-integration between current account/GDP
deterioration and domestic credit growth/GDP, this is not statistically significant at the 5 percent
level of the test.

        Based on the panel unit-root and panel co-integration tests, the application of dynamic
panel data estimation in first-differenced series is deemed necessary for the real estate and macro
variables in our sample. With 36 countries and over 20 quarterly periods for each country, the
fixed-effect estimation may also be applicable. However, given that several series are known to
be highly persistent in the panel of countries (i.e. real estate prices, current accounts, domestic
credit growth, as well as equity prices), including lagged terms of dependent variables on the
right-hand side of estimating equations may entail empirical correlation between the lagged
regressors and the error terms, and hence the endogeneity issue. For these reasons, we focus in
the following on coefficient estimates from dynamic panel estimation as our main econometric
evidence.

2.2 Patterns of real estate valuation appreciation and current account/GDP deterioration

        Mean reversion in real estate appreciation across national markets is quite noticeable in
the data. As shown in Figure 1, we plot cumulative real estate valuation appreciation for the
period of 2005:I-2007:III on the horizontal axis, and cumulative real estate valuation
appreciation for the period of 2008:III-2012:IV on the vertical axis. The relationship between
cumulative real estate appreciation between the two periods is negative: the slope coefficient
from OLS estimation is -0.5 and is statistically significant at the 1 percent level, with R2 = 0.28.
Ireland, Spain, South Africa, United States, and United Kingdom provide clear example of mean

                                                  7

revision before and after the global crisis. There are a few outliers in this relationship; including
mostly small markets, i.e. Hong Kong, Ireland, and Romania (not included in the plot for
illustrative purposes).

              Once we plot the country-specific evolution of real estate valuation appreciation series, it
appears that there are large differences across countries in the associated patterns against the
backdrop of the global financial crisis. Shown in Figure 2A, real estate valuation varied
markedly before and after the global crisis events, as marked by the two vertical lines for
2007:III (Northern Rock event) and for 2008:III (Lehman Brother event), respectively. While
real estate valuation appreciation of some countries increased until the crisis events (e.g. Canada,
Ireland), for several others the real estate valuation appreciation valuation were already spiraling
downward even before the global crisis (e.g. US, South Africa). For some markets, the real
estate valuation appreciation appear to bounce back soon after the global financial panic (e.g.
Australia), while for a few others, national real estate markets continued to be highly volatile
(e.g. Hong Kong, Singapore).

              The patterns of current account/GDP deterioration and domestic credit growth/GDP were
also heterogeneous across countries over the periods before and after the global financial crisis.
As shown in Figure 2A for current account/GDP deterioration and in Figure 2B for domestic
credit growth/GDP, the quarterly adjustment dynamics of these two variables tracked real estate
valuation appreciation in some countries quite well, whereas for several others there appeared no
relationship between the two variables and the real estate valuation appreciation valuation.
Hence, as an alternative to using the global crisis events (i.e. Northern Rock even and Lehman
Brothers event) to mark the turning points, we assign a new binary variable "Current
account/GDP's deterioration Break" to identify a country-specific break date, or structural shift,
in the empirical association between real estate valuation appreciation and current account/GDP
deterioration, according to QLR statistics3; and a new binary variable "Domestic credit/GDP's
Break", which is defined similarly for the stock of domestic credit/GDP. As shown in figures 2A


3
    Quandt likelihood ratio test for a break at an unknown break date (Stock and Watson, 2012). Here we are mainly
interested in empirical breaks of the association between real estate valuation appreciation and current account/GDP
deterioration (or growth of domestic credit/GDP) in each country over the sample period of 2005:I-2012:IV. For
identification of extreme capital flow episodes from 1986-2009, see Forbes and Warnock (2012).

                                                               8

and 2B, these empirical turning points closely resemble the global crisis events for a majority of
countries (notably, i.e. US, UK, Australia, Spain), whereas they were not the same turning points
in a number of countries.

3. Baseline Results

3.1 The Global Financial Crisis

              From our baseline estimation, real estate valuation is positively and significantly
associated with current account deficits in both periods before and after the crisis of 2008-09.
Real estate valuation is positively associated with domestic credit growth to a lesser degree,
statistically significant only in the period before the crisis [see Appendix D for the empirical
specification]. Column 1 of Table 1 provides the main results, using 2007:III (Northern Rock
event) as the turning point that marked the global financial crisis, while column 2 uses 2008:III
(Lehman Brothers event) as an alternative turning point. Both estimation results are consistent
with each other, suggesting that the association of real estate valuation appreciation with current
account/GDP deterioration and with domestic credit growth/GDP are positive and statistically
significant (accounting coefficient estimates on the four lags of current account deficit and
domestic credit growth).4

              The baseline results also show that equity market appreciation and inflation are
empirically associated with real estate valuation, while the relationship with other variables
(growth, global interest rate, sovereign risk, reserve accumulation) is not supported in the current
sample. The positive association between real estate valuation appreciation and equity market
valuation appreciation is consistent with the wealth effects from real estate valuation to equity
investment, as capital gains in the equity investment spillover to the real estate sector. The
association between real estate valuation appreciation and inflation is negative as one might
expect. The coefficients of other variables are not statistically significant; for some variables,
coefficient estimates have an unexpected sign (i.e. growth of industrial production, TED spread,
and foreign reserve accumulation).



4
 The coefficients are obtained from the Arellano-Bond dynamic panel estimation. While only lagged real estate
valuation appreciation is treated as an endogenous regressor, the autocorrelation test suggests that AR(2) is only
marginally significant at the 10 percent level, but not at the 5 percent level.

                                                               9

              Interestingly, coefficient estimates of lagged real estate valuation appreciation indicate
persistence in real estate valuation up to two quarters, consistent with popular commentaries that
real estate markets are driven by animal spirits and momentum, with macroeconomic and
regulatory environment playing a supporting role. The lagged real estate coefficients are equal
to 0.6 for the first two quarters and statistically significant at the 1 percent level, suggesting that
more than half of real estate valuation was carried on from one quarter to the next three quarters
on average.5 However, our sample focuses on a specific episode before and after the global
crisis. Hence, the findings do not imply that expectation-driven persistence in real estate
valuation may last only half a year, but instead that this observed momentum appears to be the
case over the period of 2005:I to 2012:IV.

3.2 Breaks in current account deficits and domestic credit growth

              The positive association between real estate appreciation and current account
deterioration remains robust for alternative turning points in their relationship, but the
association between real estate appreciation and domestic credit growth does not. As shown
earlier in Figures 2A and 2B, for a majority of countries, the global crisis events (Northern Rock
in 2007:III and Lehman Brothers in 2008:III) coincided with the empirical turning points in the
relationship between real estate valuation appreciation and current account/GDP deterioration, as
well as the relationship between real estate valuation appreciation and domestic credit
growth/GDP. To verify, instead of using a Global crisis binary variable as done in Table 1, we
use in Table 2 a new binary variable "Current account/GDP deterioration's Break" that identifies
a country-specific turning point in the association between real estate appreciation and current
account/GDP deterioration, according to QLR statistics as described in Section 2.2; "Growth of
domestic credit/GDP's Break" is defined similarly for domestic credit growth/GDP; both are
depicted in Figure 2. These country-specific breaks enter the estimation of Table 2 individually,
and also as interaction terms with current account deficit/GDP series and with growth of
domestic credit/GDP series. Table 2 column 1 reports the dynamic panel estimates from these
new specifications. We find that the positive association between real estate valuation
appreciation and current account/GDP deterioration is still statistically significant, while the

5
 The coefficient estimate on a third lag is negative, but much smaller than the first two, so the net effect remains
positive for three quarters. In Section 4, we revisit the economic significance of lagged real estate valuation in more
details.

                                                               10

positive association between real estate valuation appreciation and growth of domestic
credit/GDP becomes insignificant.

              In addition, with these alternative turning points, using the fixed-effect estimation does
not change the main finding on the positive and statistically significant association between real
estate valuation and current account deficit. As shown in column 2 of Table 2, the coefficient
estimates of current account/GDP deterioration remain statistically significant in the fixed-effect
estimation; the coefficient estimates of lagged real estate valuation appreciation and equity
market valuation appreciation also remain statistically significant. Further, current account
deficit/GDP enters the estimation positive and statistically significant both individually and as
interaction terms. The explanatory power, as measured by R2 in column 2, suggests that the
estimation is able to explain about 80 percent of variation in the real estate valuation over the
period of 2005:I to 2012:IV. Since a drawback of fixed-effect estimation is a lack of empirical
treatment on endogeneity in the presence of lagged dependent variable (real estate valuation
appreciation), we take the fixed-effect estimates as supportive evidence and continue onwards
with the dynamic panel estimation in the following.6

3.3 Current account deterioration vis-à-vis of domestic credit growth

              Horseracing lagged current account/GDP changes vis-à-vis lagged growth of domestic
credit/GDP suggests that the former is more statistically significant in the empirical association
with real estate valuation changes. The findings in Tables 1 and 2 indicates that the positive
association between real estate valuation appreciation and lagged current account /GDP declines
is always statistically significant, whereas the association between real estate valuation
appreciation and lagged growth of domestic credit/GDP is insignificant in several specifications
(i.e. columns 1 and 2 of Table 2). Perhaps this difference might be due to common underlying

6
  For real estate valuation and current account relationship, it is beyond a scope of the study to defend either method
of the panel estimation. Hypothetically, in the context of reduced-form analysis, endogenous regressors may include
not only lagged real estate valuation appreciation, but also additional lags of the right-hand-side variables, i.e.
current account/GDP deterioration, growth of domestic credit/GDP, and equity market valuation appreciation.
Alternatively, one may consider current account as endogenous and study the present value of current account with
real estate valuation (and for that matter, other asset prices) and VAR (although the causal ordering has never been
clear in such setting for all contemporaneous coordinates). Essentially, in the general-equilibrium analysis, all the
variables would be endogenous, even the incidence of global crises. Hence, since we take no stance and there is no
point to be too defensive about the main specifications reported in this paper, instead we hereby provide a battery of
results based on various specifications for the readers to judge.

                                                               11

factors in both current account and credit growth series; the patterns illustrated in Figures 2A and
2B seem to suggest that both series tracked real estate valuation appreciation quite well for a
majority of countries, before and after the global crisis. Alternatively, the difference might be
due to insufficient lagged adjustment allowed for these two variables in the estimation.
Accordingly, in Table 3 we allow for four lags of current account/GDP deterioration in column
1, excluding growth of domestic credit/GDP and a binary variable for global crisis or a binary
variable for turning points in the association between real estate valuation appreciation and
current account/GDP deterioration. Similarly, we allow for four lags of growth of domestic
credit/GDP in column 2, excluding current account /GDP declines and a binary variable for
global crisis or for the turning points in growth of domestic credit/GDP. Based on these
alternative specifications, the findings are consistent with the coefficient estimates of Tables 1
and 2. Without growth of domestic credit/GDP in the estimation, the association between real
estate valuation appreciation and current account/GDP deterioration remains positive and
significant (column 1). On the other hand, without current account/GDP deterioration in the
estimation, the association between real estate valuation appreciation and growth of domestic
credit/GDP is still weak and insignificant at all lags (column 2).

       Based on statistical pair-wise correlation and panel co-integration tests, multi-collinearity
between current account deterioration and growth of domestic credit is unlikely, at least for the
2005:I-2012:IV sample. As discussed earlier via Appendix C, the panel co-integration tests
cannot reject the null of no co-integration between current account/GDP declines and growth of
domestic credit/GDP. We also find that the pair-wise correlation between the two series is only
0.1 across countries in our sample. Nevertheless, this does not imply that we should rule out
altogether potential feedback between current account deficit changes and growth of domestic
credit in other samples, presumably with a longer sample and covering episodes other than we
currently examine. Useful extension may also try to understand causality between current
account changes and credit growth across time and countries. One may suspect some
intertwining of household debt accumulation, consumption of durables, and domestic
indebtedness in foreign currency become important factors in such setting.




                                                 12

4. Sensitivity Analysis

4.1 Reverse feedback

       We find that reverse and positive feedback of real estate appreciation to current account
deterioration is not supported by the data over the crisis period. To investigate for possible
feedback from real estate valuation appreciation, Table 4 column 1 reverses the empirical
specification of column 1 in Table 1 by placing current account/GDP declines on the left-hand
side of the estimating equation. This specification is not a straightjacket model of current
account, but is a simple verification of possible influence on current account from real estate
valuation. The coefficient estimates suggest that there is no evidence of positive feedback of real
estate valuation appreciation to current account/GDP declines in the data. As shown in Table 4,
the coefficient estimates of real estate valuation appreciation, while statistically significant, have
negative sign, opposite to what one might expect, before and after the global crisis period. This
counterintuitive finding seems to be rather consistent with the panel co-integration tests in
Appendix C where we cannot reject the null of no co-integration between current account/GDP
deterioration and real estate valuation appreciation. However, these non-findings do not rule out
positive and reverse feedback of real estate appreciation to current account deteriorations in other
samples, but only that any support for such reverse feedback is not prevalent during 2005:I-
2012:IV period that we study.

       On the other hand, and contrary to panel co-integration tests, the coefficient estimates of
dynamic panel estimation suggest positive feedback of real estate appreciation to equity market
appreciation, a finding consistent with the wealth effects from real estate valuation to equity
investment. In column 2 of Table 4, we replace a left-hand-side variable of the estimating
equation with equity market valuation appreciation. As shown in the column, a positive
association between equity market valuation appreciation and real estate valuation appreciation
is statistically significant before and after the global crisis period. However, we suspect that
common underlying causes of these two variables may not be the same. In the present context,
the association between equity market valuation appreciation and current account/GDP
deterioration is negative before the global financial crisis (Table 4 column 2), whereas the
association is positive between real estate valuation appreciation and current account/GDP
declines (earlier in Table 1 column 1). Interestingly, the relationship between equity market

                                                  13

valuation appreciation and growth of industrial production, TED spread, sovereign CDS, and
foreign reserve accumulation in Table 4 are also statistically significant with expected signs, in
contrast to the equation of real estate valuation in Table 1. This finding may also imply that the
momentum and animal-spirits channels in the real estate valuation can change rather
independently from those in equity investment over the crisis period.7

4.2 Asymmetric adjustment

              Additional sensitivity checks show that for appreciation episode of the real estate
valuation, a positive association between real estate appreciation and current account
deterioration is statistically significant, while the positive association between real estate
appreciation and growth of domestic credit is statistically significant but to a lesser degree. In
Table 5, we allow for asymmetric adjustment, assigning different coefficients for the estimation
of real estate valuation appreciation (column 1) and the estimation of real estate valuation
depreciation (column 2); the specification is closely resembled to that in Table 1, but here we
separate the whole sample into real estate appreciation sample and real estate depreciation
sample. For the real estate appreciation episode, estimation results are largely consistent with the
results from the whole-sample estimation in column 1 of Table 1; an exception is coefficient
estimates of equity market valuation appreciation and inflation are insignificant. For the real
estate depreciation episode, the estimation results are markedly different from the whole-sample
estimation, as only lagged real estate valuation appreciation and equity market valuation
appreciation are found statistically significant in the association with the real estate valuation.
Hence, we find that when real estate markets were on the rise, the real estate valuation adjusts
with respect to macro variables differently from when the markets were declining. Asymmetric
bubbly dynamics are evident in the real estate valuation.

4.3 Additional Results

              To explore alternative hypotheses and specifications, we provide additional results in
Table 7. First, we estimated two new regressions, one replacing the current account deficit with
gross inflows, and another replacing the current account deficit with gross inflows plus gross

7
 Carroll, Otsuka, and Slacalek (2011) find that an eventual marginal propensity to consume from a $1 change in
housing wealth is about 9 cents, substantially larger than the effect of shocks to financial wealth. Hence, our
emphasis placed on the real estate valuation has additional merit at a macro level.

                                                               14

outflows, based on the data from IMF Balance of Payments Statistics. The results, reported in
columns (1) and (2) of Table 7, suggest that the association between the gross flows and real
estate valuation appreciation is not as strong as the association between the current account
deficit and real estate valuation appreciation. We also consider the composition of capital flows,
focusing the debt inflows, net flows, and inflows plus outflows in columns (3), (4), and (5),
respectively. The results suggest that these disaggregated flows are not statistically associated
with the real estate valuation appreciation. One limitation of using the gross flows and debt
flows is that the quarterly data of these flows are only available for a subset of countries; in the
present estimation, using the series reduced our sample by half.

              Second, we added two new regressions, one for countries faced with banking crisis
during the sample period, and another for countries without the banking crisis, based on the
identification of Laeven and Valencia (2012).8 The results, shown in columns (6) and (7) of
Table 7, suggest that the domestic credit growth is more statistically significant in the banking
crisis group, while both the current account and the credit growth are significant in the non crisis
group. Third, we added two new regressions, one for countries with high level of financial
openness, and another for countries with low level of financial openness. The level of financial
openness is derived from Chinn and Ito (2013) de jure measure of financial openness. Countries
with the index above the 2004 global average of financial openness as of the first quarter of 2005
(beginning of the sample) are considered having high level of financial openness; the other
countries are considered having low level of financial openness.9 The results, reported in
columns (8) and (9) of Table 7, suggest that while the positive association between current
account deterioration and real estate valuation appreciation holds for both high financial
openness group and low financial openness group, the coefficients are more statistically
significant for the latter.

              Fourth, we added two new regressions for Euro area countries and non-Euro countries in
columns (10) and (11) of Table 7, respectively. The results suggest that the relationship between
real estate valuation with the current account and the credit growth are more statistically

8
  This group of countries includes Austria, Belgium, Switzerland, Germany, Denmark, Spain, France, United
Kingdom, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, Sweden, and United States. These countries are
identified as facing the banking crisis in 2008:Q3, except United States, in 2007:Q4.
9
  High financial openness group includes: AT, AU, BE, CA, CH, CZ, DE, DK, ES, FI, FR, GB, GR, HK, HU, ID,
IE, IT, JP, NL, NO, NZ, PT, RO, SE, SG, TW, and US.

                                                               15

significant in the non-Euro group. Potentially the asset bubbles may be driven by the Tri-lemma
consideration, and this linkage should be taken into account more rigorously in a longer period
and larger set of countries. We also added two additional regressions for OECD and non-OECD
countries, shown in columns (12) and (13) of Table 7; the results suggest that the credit growth is
more statistically significant in the former, whereas the current account change is more
statistically significant in the latter. Hence, it seems that there is some heterogeneity in the
factors driving real estate valuation between these groups of countries. Lastly, we added a
regression using a new control based on estimates of mortgage origination in USA as measure
that may help capture the common shock driving real estate markets across countries. The result,
reported in column (14) of Table 7, suggests that this variable cannot sufficiently explain the
variation in real estate valuation across countries. Nevertheless, the underlying common causes,
interdependence of real estate bubbles across countries, as well as volume, building consents,
and construction cycles, warrant further investigation in the future extensions.

4.4. Economic Significance

       Based on sample standard deviation and estimation results, the economic significance on
real estate valuation is driven mostly by lagged real estate appreciation, followed by current
account deterioration, growth of domestic credit, and equity market appreciation. We reach this
conclusion by accounting for all our main findings and sensitivity checks, including in particular
positive feedback of real estate appreciation to equity market appreciation (Table 4) and
asymmetric adjustment in real estate appreciation and in depreciation episodes (Table 5).
Essentially, we revise the empirical specification of column 1 in Table 1, hereby verifying our
estimation in Table 6 by treating real estate appreciation and equity market appreciation both as
endogenous regressors. Our benchmark findings are reported in Table 6, for the whole sample in
column 1, and for the episode of real estate appreciation in column 2. Next, we calculate the
economic significance on real estate valuation of each macro variable by multiplying one
standard deviation of each variable with its coefficient estimate of column 1 in Table 6. As
shown in Figure 3 for the real estate valuation on annualized basis, the most economically
significant variable is lagged real estate valuation appreciation (10.4%), then lagged decline in
the current account /GDP (5.0%), lagged growth of domestic credit/GDP (3.0%), and lagged
equity market valuation appreciation (1.5%), for our sample of 36 countries during 2005-12.


                                                  16

5. Concluding Remarks

              Our paper confirmed a robust positive association between the appreciation of real estate
valuation and increases in current account deficits and the growth rates of credit (both as
fractions of the GDP) in 36 countries, covering the OECD and emerging markets, before and
after the global financial crisis. While the relative impact of current account deterioration is
larger than that of credit growth in our sample, one should recognize that the growth of
credit/GDP is a noisy measure of the effective credit growth in the real estate market. Data
limitations prevented us from controlling directly for the credit conditions in the real estate
markets, and factors like the stringency of credit standards, required down payment, the effective
spreads in the mortgage markets, etc.10 Thus, there is no reason to expect that the relative ranking
of the importance of the current account versus the credit channels in accounting for real estate
appreciations should be stable overtime.11 Yet, as theory suggests, both channels are potent.
Smaller current account/GDP surpluses or larger deficits may serve as warning signals,
especially when coinciding with credit expansion and real estate appreciation during the past
several quarters.

              Notwithstanding these results, the most important factor accounting for the appreciation
of real estate turned out to be the impact of momentum: the lagged quarterly appreciations in the
past year. This effect is large: a real estate appreciation of 1% in a given quarter was associated
with a projected real appreciation of more than 1% in the next three quarters.12 This result is
consistent with Shiller’s (2000) concerns regarding Irrational Exuberance in the USA in the early


10
   Favilukis et al. (2012) found that credit standard variables provide the most important information in accounting
for the in house price growth in the U.S. over the period 1992-2010. They made a similar, though a weaker
inference for a sample of 11 OECD countries. See also Ferrero (2011) on the role of relaxation of collateral
constraint on the current account-real estate price correlation, and Kuttner and Shim on the role of non-interest rate
measures in the real estate markets across countries.
11
   In principle, counter cyclical leverage policy in the face of credit booms facilitated by hot money inflows and
other factors may mitigate the impact of credit booms and raising current account deficits. Yet, the implementation
of these polices is frequently subject to policy lags, and leakages allowing the private sector to bypass regulations
[see Calvo (2012)]. Indeed, in the US, it took the crisis of 2008-9 to induce the tightening of the credit standards.
12
   The sum of the statistically significant quarterly lags is a 1.08 for the whole sample, and 1.17 for real state
appreciation episodes (see Table 6). These results suggest that the momentum effect is stronger on the appreciation
than the depreciation side. While this is only an approximation, it is worth noting the significance of momentum; on
the predictability and momentum of real estate markets, see also Sinai (2013), Ghysels et al. (2013), and Piazzesi
and Schneider (2009).

                                                               17

2000s, with Case, Shiller, and Thompson (2012)’s findings on the significant role of expectation
for demand in real estate markets, and with Glaeser, Gottlieb, and Gyourko (2013)’s questioning
the role of cheap credit on real estate boom. Importantly, our results were derived in a sample of
36 countries, suggesting that Shiller’s concerns apply globally. The painful adjustment in the
real estate markets of the US, Spain and other affected countries in the aftermath of the crisis of
2008-9, and the key importance of momentum effects call for further research on policies that
would mitigate possible bubble-dynamics.



                                            References

Adam, Klaus, Pei Kuang and Albert Marcet (2011) “House Price Booms and the Current
       Account,” NBER Chapters, in: NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2011 (26): 77-122.
Aizenman, Joshua and Yothin Jinjarak (2009), “Current Account Patterns and National Real
       Estate Markets,” Journal of Urban Economics, 66(2): 75-89.
Borio, Claudio and Piti Disyatat (2011), “Current account patterns and national real estate
       markets Global imbalances and the financial crisis: Link or no link” BIS Working
       Papers Number 346.
Case, Karl E., Robert J. Shiller, and Anne K. Thompson (2012), “What have they been thinking?
       Homebuyer behavior in hot and cold markets,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
       2: 265-298.
Calvo, Guillermo (2012), “On Capital Inflows, Liquidity and Bubbles,” manuscript, Columbia
       University.
Carroll, Christopher D., Misuzu Otsuka, and Jiri Slacalek (2011), “How large are housing and
       financial wealth effects? A new approach,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking,
       43(1): 55-79.
Chinn, Menzie, and Hiro Ito (2013): http://web.pdx.edu/~ito/Chinn-Ito_website.htm.
Favilukis Jack, David Kohn, Sydney C. Ludvigson and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh (2012),
       “International Capital Flows and House Prices: Theory and Evidence,” NBER Working
       Paper No. 17751.
Ferrero, Andrea, 2011, "House Prices Booms and Current Account Deficits." Unpublished paper.



                                                 18

Forbes, Kristin J. and Francis E. Warnock (2012), “Capital flow waves: Surges, stops, flight, and
       retrenchment,” Journal of International Economics, 88(2): 235-251.
Gete, Pedro (2010), “Housing Markets and Current Account Dynamics,” manuscript,
       Georgetown University.
Ghysels, Eric, Alberto Plazzi, and Walter Torous (2013). “Forecasting Real Estate Prices,” in
       Chapter 9, Handbook of Economic Forecasting, G. Elliott and A. Timmermann (eds.),
       Vol. 2, Part A: 509-580.
Glaeser, Edward L., Joshua D. Gottlieb, and Joseph Gyourko (2013), “Can cheap credit explain
       the housing boom?” in Housing and the Financial Crisis, E. Glaeser and T. Sinai
       (editors), University of Chicago Press.
Kuttner, Kenneth, and Ilhyock Shim (2013). “Can Non-Interest Rate Policies Stabilize Housing
       Markets? Evidence from a Panel of 57 Economies,” NBER Working Paper No. 19723.
Laven, Luc, and Fabian Valencia (2012), “Systemic Banking Crises Database: An Update,” IMF
       Working Paper No. 12/163.
Laibson, David and Johanna Mollerstrom (2010). “Capital Flows, Consumption Booms and
       Asset Bubbles: A Behavioural Alternative to the Savings Glut Hypothesis,” Economic
       Journal, 120(544): 354-374.
Leamr, Edward E. (2007). “Housing is the business cycle,” Proceedings, Federal Reserve Bank
       of Kansas City, pages 149-233.
Obstfeld, Maurice (2012). “Does the Current Account Still Matter?” American Economic
       Review, 102(3): 1-23.
Piazzesi, Monika, and Martin Schneider (2009). “Momentum Traders in the Housing Market:
       Survey Evidence and a Search Model,” American Economic Review, 99(2): 406-411.
Shiller, Robert (2000). Irrational exuberance, Princeton University Press. See also the 2nd
       edition, 2005.
Sinai, Todd (2012). “House Price Moments in Boom-Bust Cycles,” NBER Working Paper No.
       18059.
Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson (2012), Introduction to Econometrics, 3rd edition, Pearson,
       Essex, England.
Tomura, Hajime, (2010) “International capital flows and expectation-driven boom–bust cycles in
       the housing market,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 34(10): 1993–2009.


                                                 19

Appendix A. Quarterly Data, 2005:I-2012:IV.

Variable                           Description
Real estate valuation appreciation Nominal growth of national real estate price indices,
                                   minus consumer price inflation. Source: Oxford
                                   Economics, Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU).
  Current account deficit/GDP Current account deficits (billion US$) divided by gross
                                   domestic product (billion US$). Source: EIU.
 Growth of domestic credit/GDP Bank lending (billion local currency) divided by gross
                                   domestic product (billion local currency). Source: EIU.

    Equity market valuation        Change in US$ value of national stockmarket indices,
         appreciation              minus consumer price inflation. Source: EIU.
         CPI inflation             Consumer price inflation. Source: EIU.
 Growth of industrial production   Change in national industrial production indices.
                                   Source EIU.
           TED spread              3-month LIBOR (based on US$) minus 3-month US
                                   Treasury bill rate (secondary market). Source: FRED
                                   (online).
              VIX                  CBOE Volatility Index: VIX. Source: FRED (online).
         Sovereign CDS             Sovereign credit default swap prices for 5-year contract
                                   (basis points). Source: CMA.
  Foreign reserve accumulation     Change in foreign-exchange reserves (billion US$),
                                   divided by gross domestic product (billion US$).
                                   Source: EIU.
  Gross inflows and outflows of    Changes in incurrance of liabilities and acquisition of
   capital flows and debt flows    assets (million US$). Source: IMF BOPS.
     Banking crisis incidence      Country-specific incidence of banking crisis. Source:
                                   Laeven and Valencia (2012).
       Financial openness          Country-specific de jure measure of financial openness.
                                   Source: Chinn and Ito (2013).
  Mortgage Origination in USA      Estimates of mortgage origination in USA. Source:
                                   Mortgage Bankers Association.

36 countries in the sample and country codes in figures. Australia:AU, Austria:AT,
Belgium:BE, Bulgaria:BG, Canada:CA, China:CN, Czech Republic:CZ, Denmark:DK,
Finland:FI, France:FR, Germany:DE, Greece:GR, Hong Kong:HK, Hungary:HU,
Indonesia:ID, Ireland:IE, Italy:IT, Japan:JP, Korea:KR, Malaysia:MY, Netherlands:NL,
New Zealand:NZ, Norway:NO, Poland:PL, Portugal:PT, Romania:RO, Singapore:SG,
Slovakia:SK, South Africa:ZA, Spain:ES, Sweden:SE, Switzerland:CH, Taiwan:TW,
Thailand:TH, United Kingdom:GB, United States:US
Appendix B. Volatility of Real Estate Valuation.
This figure shows standard deviation of real estate valuation appreciation over the period 2005:I - 2012:IV for all 36 countries in the sample.




      [2.1,3.7]
      (3.7,4.7]
      (4.7,6.8]
      (6.8,10.5]
      (10.5,39.6]
      No data
Appendix C. Panel Unit Root and Cointegration Tests.
This table reports t-statistic [1% critical value in bracket] of Im-Pesaran-Shin test and Levin-
Lin tests for unit root in panel data. Both tests assume that all series are non-stationary under
the null hypothesis; the former is consistent under the alternative that only a fraction of the
series are stationary, while the latter assumes that all series are stationary under the alternative.
The panel cointegration test statistics [p-value in bracket] for real estate valuation appreciation
series, current account deficit/GDP series, equity market appreciation series, and domestic
credit growth series, have the null of no integration for all cross section of countries, based on
Westerlund ECM tests. The tests include four lags of each variable, using quarterly data over
the period 2005:I-2012:IV for all 36 countries in the sample.


              Series\Test                  Im-Pesaran-Shin Statistic        Levin-Lin Statistic


  Real estate valuation appreciation            -1.449 [-1.810]               -9.488 [-0.776]


     Current account deficit/GDP                -0.897 [-1.810]               -5.328 [3.991]


   Growth of domestic credit/GDP                -1.199 [-1.820]               -5.114 [4.477]


                                             Real estate valuation         Real estate valuation
          Panel co-integration
                                            appreciation - Current         appreciation - Credit
         (Westerlund Statistic)
                                            account deficits/GDP               growth/GDP
 alternative: error correction term <0
                                                -7.170 [0.514]                -7.649 [0.317]
        for at least one country

 alternative: error correction term <0
                                                -3.851 [0.745]                -1.649 [1.000]
             for all country


                                                                             Current account
          Panel co-integration             Real estate appreciation -
                                                                         deficit/GDP - Domestic
         (Westerlund Statistic)           Equity market appreciation
                                                                           credit growth/GDP
 alternative: error correction term <0
                                                -4.969 [0.993]                -8.449 [0.093]
        for at least one country

 alternative: error correction term <0
                                                -4.629 [0.361]                -4.571 [0.394]
             for all country
Appendix D. Empirical Specification.
The estimation methodology is Arellano-Bond dynamic panel regression. All the variables of
Tables 1-7 are in changes, denoted by Δ, for both dependent and explanatory variables. The
regression equation is
                                                              4
∆ [ Real estate appreciation − Inflation ]it = β0 + ∑ β1,t−τ ∆ [ Real estate appreciation − Inflation ]it−τ
                                                             τ =1
                                     Before Break                                        After Break
   2 0                                               2 1                          
+ ∑ β 2,t−τ ∆ [ CAD / GDP ]it−τ                   + ∑ β 2,t−τ ∆ [ CAD / GDP ]it−τ 
   τ =1                                              τ =1                         
                                     Before Break                                        After Break
   2 0                                               2 1                         
+ ∑ β3,t−τ ∆ [ DCR / GDP ]it−τ                    + ∑ β3,t−τ ∆ [ DCR / GDP ]it−τ 
   τ =1                                              τ =1                        
   2
+ ∑ β 4,t−τ {∆ [ CAD / GDP ]it−τ × ∆ [ DCR / GDP ]it−τ }
  τ =1
   4
+ ∑ β5,t−τ ∆ [ Equity market appreciation − Inflation ]it−τ
  τ =1

    ′ θ + ε it
+ X t−1

Where t denotes time (quarterly); i country; CAD/GDP current-account deficit/GDP; DCR/GDP
domestic credit/GDP; and X denotes a vector of controls in changes, including CPI inflation,
growth of industrial production, TED spread, VIX, Sovereign CDS spread, and foreign reserve
accumulation.
Table 1. Global Financial Crisis and Real Estate Appreciation.
This table reports dynamic panel estimation, using quarterly data over the period 2005:I-2012:IV. The
dependent variable is Δreal estate valuation appreciation (changes in nominal price growth minus CPI
inflation). The Global financial crisis's Break is a 1/0 binary variable, equals to 1 before 2007:III
(Nothern Rock event) for estimation in the first column, whereas, alternatively, it is equal to 1 before
2008:III (Lehman Brothers event) in the second column; see also Figure A. The crisis breaks enter the
estimation individually, as well as interaction terms with changes in current account deficit/GDP
(ΔCAD/GDP) and with changes in domestic credit/GDP (ΔDCR/GDP) series. Standard errors are in
parentheses, with *** (**,*) denotes statistical significance at 1 (5,10) percent.
Dep. Var. : ΔReal estate appreciation                                (1)                        (2)
                                            lag           Break (Crisis) 2007:III    Break (Crisis) 2008: III
Regressors                                               coefficient (std. err.)    coefficient (std. err.)
ΔReal estate valuation appreciation           1                 0.63 (0.02)***             0.63 (0.02)***
                                              2                 0.64 (0.04)***             0.62 (0.04)***
                                              3                -0.20 (0.06)***            -0.19 (0.06)***
                                              4                 0.00 (0.03)               -0.00 (0.03)
Before Global financial crisis's Break    binary (1/0)          2.35 (1.47)               -1.68 (1.05)
            ΔCAD/GDP × Before Break           1                 1.40 (0.90)               -1.58 (0.79)**
                                              2                 1.53 (0.77)**              2.65 (0.68)***
              ΔCAD/GDP × After Break          1                 0.33 (0.65)                0.55 (0.66)
                                              2                 1.92 (0.65)***             1.91 (0.66)***
             ΔDCR/GDP × Before Break          1                 1.37 (0.39)***             0.88 (0.33)***
                                              2                -0.35 (0.26)               -0.32 (0.25)
              ΔDCR/GDP × After Break          1                 0.19 (0.19)                0.16 (0.19)
                                              2                 0.17 (0.14)                0.16 (0.14)
ΔCAD/GDP × ΔDCR/GDP                           1                -0.02 (0.01)               -0.01 (0.01)
                                              2                 0.00 (0.01)                0.00 (0.01)
ΔEquity market valuation appreciation         1                 0.21 (0.04)***             0.21 (0.04)***
                                              2                -0.16 (0.07)**             -0.14 (0.07)*
                                              3                 0.07 (0.06)                0.07 (0.06)
                                              4                -0.00 (0.02)               -0.00 (0.02)
ΔCPI inflation                                1                -0.95 (0.50)*              -1.18 (0.51)**
ΔGrowth of industrial production              1                -0.09 (0.10)               -0.07 (0.10)
ΔTED spread                                   1                 2.06 (1.75)                0.99 (1.71)
ΔVIX                                          1                -0.05 (0.09)                0.11 (0.10)
ΔSovereign CDS                                1                -0.07 (0.22)               -0.11 (0.22)
Foreign reserve accumulation                  1                 0.06 (0.06)                0.08 (0.06)
constant                                      0                -0.77 (0.51)               -0.05 (0.57)
observations                                                     791                        791
Arellano-Bond AR(2) test p-value                              0.084                           .
Table 2. Turning Points of Current Account Deficit/GDP and Growth of Domestic Credit/GDP.
This table reports dynamic panel estimation (first column) and fixed-effect estimation (second
column), using quarterly data over the period 2005:I-2012:IV. The dependent variable is Δreal estate
valuation appreciation (nominal price growth minus CPI inflation). Instead of using a Global crisis
binary variable as done in Table 1, this table uses a new binary variable "Current account deficit/GDP's
Break" to identify country-specific turning point in the association between real estate appreciation and
current account deficit/GDP, according to QLR statistics; "Growth of domestic credit/GDP's Break" is
defined similarly for stock of domestic credit/GDP; see also Figure 2. These country-specific breaks
enter the estimation individually, and as interaction terms with ΔCAD/GDP and ΔDCR/GDP series.
Standard errors in parentheses, with *** (**,*) for significance at 1 (5,10) percent.
Dep. Var. : ΔReal estate appreciation                                 (1)                    (2)
                                                lag Dynamic panel estimation Fixed-effect estimation
Regressors                                                coefficient (std. err.) coefficient (std. err.)
ΔReal estate valuation appreciation              1               0.64 (0.02)***          0.63 (0.02)***
                                                 2               0.62 (0.04)***          0.65 (0.05)***
                                                 3              -0.17 (0.06)***         -0.19 (0.07)***
                                                 4              -0.01 (0.03)            -0.01 (0.03)
Current account deficit/GDP's Break          binary (1/0)        0.80 (1.18)             2.93 (1.53)*
              ΔCAD/GDP × Before Break 1                          0.09 (0.73)             0.21 (0.69)
                                                 2               2.11 (0.69)***          1.49 (0.64)**
                ΔCAD/GDP × After Break 1                         0.38 (0.66)             0.23 (0.63)
                                                 2               1.99 (0.65)***          1.56 (0.61)**
Growth of domestic credit/GDP's Break        binary (1/0)       -1.67 (1.22)            -1.45 (1.45)
              ΔDCR/GDP × Before Break 1                          0.36 (0.29)             0.20 (0.21)
                                                 2              -0.01 (0.20)             0.00 (0.15)
                ΔDCR/GDP × After Break 1                         0.19 (0.20)             0.04 (0.18)
                                                 2               0.18 (0.15)             0.15 (0.14)
ΔCAD/GDP × ΔDCR/GDP | Before Break 1                            -0.01 (0.01)            -0.01 (0.01)
ΔCAD/GDP × ΔDCR/GDP | After Break                1              -0.00 (0.01)            -0.00 (0.01)
ΔEquity market valuation appreciation            1               0.21 (0.04)***          0.15 (0.04)***
                                                 2              -0.15 (0.07)**          -0.09 (0.07)
                                                 3               0.07 (0.06)             0.02 (0.06)
                                                 4              -0.00 (0.02)             0.01 (0.02)
ΔCPI inflation                                   1              -1.23 (0.50)**          -0.40 (0.46)
ΔGrowth of industrial production                 1              -0.07 (0.10)            -0.08 (0.09)
ΔTED spread                                      1               0.66 (1.70)             0.41 (1.68)
ΔVIX                                             1              -0.01 (0.08)            -0.01 (0.08)
ΔSovereign CDS                                   1              -0.10 (0.23)            -0.05 (0.27)
Foreign reserve accumulation                     1               0.04 (0.06)             0.04 (0.06)
constant                                         0              -0.32 (0.66)            -1.40 (0.73)*
observations                                                      791                     791
                                                                                     2
Arellano-Bond AR(2) test p-value                                    .              R = 0.81
Table 3. Current Account Deficit vis-à-vis Growth of Domestic Credit on Real Estate Valuation.
This table reports dynamic panel estimation, using quarterly data over the period 2005:I-2012:IV. The
dependent variable is Δreal estate valuation appreciation (nominal price growth minus CPI inflation).
Standard errors are in parentheses, with *** (**,*) denotes statistical significance at 1 (5,10) percent.
Dep. Var. : ΔReal estate appreciation                           (1)                         (2)
                                            lag
Regressors                                        coefficient   (std. err.)   coefficient   (std. err.)
ΔReal estate valuation appreciation          1           0.64   (0.02)***            0.64   (0.02)***
                                             2           0.63   (0.04)***            0.61   (0.04)***
                                             3          -0.18   (0.06)***           -0.15   (0.06)**
                                             4          -0.01   (0.03)              -0.02   (0.03)
ΔCurrent account deficit/GDP                 1          -0.56   (0.75)
                                             2           5.33   (1.64)***
                                             3          -3.02   (1.67)*
                                             4           0.56   (0.61)
ΔGrowth of domestic credit/GDP               1                                       0.15   (0.23)
                                             2                                       0.23   (0.45)
                                             3                                      -0.18   (0.40)
                                             4                                       0.08   (0.14)
ΔEquity market valuation appreciation        1           0.20   (0.04)***            0.23   (0.04)***
                                             2          -0.13   (0.07)*             -0.17   (0.07)**
                                             3           0.06   (0.06)               0.08   (0.06)
                                             4          -0.00   (0.02)              -0.01   (0.02)
ΔCPI inflation                               1          -1.25   (0.49)**            -1.20   (0.50)**
ΔGrowth of industrial production             1          -0.04   (0.10)              -0.08   (0.10)
ΔTED spread                                  1           0.58   (1.70)               1.42   (1.68)
ΔVIX                                         1          -0.02   (0.08)              -0.02   (0.08)
ΔSovereign CDS                               1          -0.06   (0.22)              -0.08   (0.22)
Foreign reserve accumulation                 1           0.06   (0.06)               0.06   (0.06)
constant                                     0          -1.05   (0.44)**            -0.93   (0.44)**
observations                                              765                         765
Arellano-Bond AR(2) test p-value                            .                           .
Table 4. Reverse Feedback of Real Estate Appreciation to Current Account and Equity Market.
This table reports dynamic panel estimation, using quarterly data over the period 2005:I-2012:IV. The
dependent variable is Δcurrent account deficit/GDP in the first column and Δequity market appreciation
in the second column. The Global financial crisis's Break is a 1/0 binary variable, equals to 1 before
2007:III (Nothern Rock event); see also Figure 2. The crisis break enters the estimation individually,
and as interaction terms with real estate appreciation/CPI series. Standard errors are in parentheses,
with *** (**,*) denotes statistical significance at 1 (5,10) percent.
                                                                            (1)                       (2)
                                                   lag                 ΔCAD/GDP             ΔEquity Appreciation
Regressors                                                      coefficient (std. err.)   coefficient (std. err.)
ΔCAD/GDP                                             1                 0.40 (0.04)***           -3.87 (1.42)***
                                                     2                 0.61 (0.08)***            0.87 (3.28)
                                                     3                -0.91 (0.08)***           -1.48 (3.38)
                                                     4                 0.33 (0.03)***            0.34 (1.24)
Before Global financial crisis's Break           binary (1/0)          0.17 (0.10)*              4.87 (2.19)**
      ΔReal estate appreciation × Before Break       1                -0.01 (0.02)               1.46 (0.67)**
                                                     2                -0.05 (0.02)**            -0.07 (0.73)
       ΔReal estate appreciation × After Break       1                -0.04 (0.01)***            1.02 (0.42)**
                                                     2                -0.01 (0.02)              -0.01 (0.58)
ΔEquity market valuation appreciation                1                 0.00 (0.00)              -0.56 (0.07)***
                                                     2                 0.00 (0.00)               1.43 (0.13)***
                                                     3                -0.00 (0.00)              -1.24 (0.11)***
                                                     4                 0.00 (0.00)               0.41 (0.03)***
ΔCPI inflation                                       1                 0.06 (0.03)**            -6.19 (0.95)***
ΔGrowth of industrial production                     1                 0.01 (0.01)*              0.56 (0.19)***
ΔTED spread                                          1                 0.20 (0.11)*           -12.64 (3.15)***
ΔVIX                                                 1                -0.01 (0.01)               0.01 (0.16)
ΔSovereign CDS                                       1                -0.02 (0.01)              -0.72 (0.43)*
Foreign reserve accumulation                         1                 0.01 (0.00)**             0.22 (0.12)*
constant                                             0                -0.07 (0.03)**            -2.30 (0.96)**
observations                                                            789                       791
Arellano-Bond AR(2) test p-value                                     0.921                     0.600
Table 5. Appreciation vis-à-vis Depreciation Episodes of Real Estate Valuation.
This table reports dynamic panel estimation on the episode of real estate market appreciation in the
first column and on the episode of real estate market depreciation in the second column, using
quarterly data over the period 2005:I-2012:IV. The dependent variable is Δreal estate valuation
appreciation (nominal price growth minus CPI inflation). Instead of using a Global crisis binary
variable, as in Table 2 this table uses a binary variable "Current account deficit/GDP's Break" to
identify country-specific turning point in the association between real estate appreciation and current
account deficit/GDP, according to QLR statistics; "Domestic credit/GDP's Break" is defined similarly
for growth of domestic credit/GDP; see also Figure 2. The country-specific breaks enter the
estimation individually, and as interaction terms with ΔCAD/GDP and ΔDCR/GDP series. Constant
term included, not reported. Standard errors in parentheses; *** (**,*) denotes significance at 1 (5,10)
Dep. Var. : ΔReal estate appreciation                               (1)                      (2)
                                               lag Appreciation Episodes          Depreciation Episodes
Regressors                                               coefficient (std. err.) coefficient (std. err.)
ΔReal estate valuation appreciation             1               0.60 (0.03)***          0.65 (0.03)***
                                                2               0.87 (0.07)***          0.54 (0.05)***
                                                3              -0.29 (0.10)***         -0.20 (0.07)***
                                                4               0.03 (0.05)             0.00 (0.04)
Current account deficit/GDP's Break         binary (1/0)        2.26 (1.46)             0.68 (1.33)
              ΔCAD/GDP × Before Break 1                        -0.86 (0.88)             0.35 (0.85)
                                                2               2.83 (0.90)***          0.32 (0.79)
               ΔCAD/GDP × After Break 1                        -0.75 (0.81)             0.79 (0.76)
                                                2               2.70 (0.81)***          0.25 (0.77)
Growth of domestic credit/GDP's Break binary (1/0)             -1.23 (1.44)            -1.25 (1.31)
              ΔDCR/GDP × Before Break 1                         0.13 (0.40)             0.15 (0.24)
                                                2               0.27 (0.26)            -0.08 (0.17)
               ΔDCR/GDP × After Break 1                        -0.08 (0.27)             0.36 (0.22)
                                                2               0.54 (0.21)**          -0.14 (0.16)
ΔCAD/GDP × ΔDCR/GDP | Before Break 1                           -0.01 (0.01)            -0.00 (0.01)
ΔCAD/GDP × ΔDCR/GDP | After Break               1              -0.01 (0.01)            -0.01 (0.01)
ΔEquity market valuation appreciation           1               0.08 (0.06)             0.24 (0.04)***
                                                2               0.00 (0.10)            -0.21 (0.07)***
                                                3              -0.03 (0.08)             0.09 (0.06)
                                                4               0.02 (0.03)            -0.01 (0.02)
ΔCPI inflation                                  1               0.11 (0.74)            -1.13 (0.47)**
ΔGrowth of industrial production                1              -0.17 (0.14)            -0.08 (0.10)
ΔTED spread                                     1              -2.89 (2.80)             0.89 (1.80)
ΔVIX                                            1              -0.04 (0.14)            -0.03 (0.09)
ΔSovereign CDS                                  1              -1.62 (1.98)            -0.14 (0.22)
Foreign reserve accumulation                    1               0.01 (0.07)            -0.04 (0.08)
observations                                                     367                     424
Arellano-Bond AR(2) test p-value                              0.495                        .
Table 6. Benchmark Results.
This table reports dynamic panel estimation, using quarterly data over the period 2005:I-2012:IV.
The dependent variable is Δreal estate valuation appreciation (nominal price growth minus CPI
inflation). The empirical specification is similar to that of Table 1 columm (1), but in this table both
lagged Δreal estate appreciation and lagged Δequity market appreciation are endogenous regressors.
The Global financial crisis's Break is a 1/0 binary variable, equals to 1 before 2007:III (Nothern
Rock event) for estimation; see also Figure A. The crisis breaks enter the estimation individually, as
well as interaction terms with current account deficit/GDP (ΔCAD/GDP) and with domestic
credit/GDP (ΔDCR/GDP) series. Standard errors in parentheses, with *** (**,*) denotes statistical
significance at 1 (5,10) percent.
Dep. Var. : ΔReal estate appreciation                                  (1)                      (2)
                                               lag              Whole Sample          Appreciation Episodes
Regressors                                                  coefficient (std. err.)   coefficient (std. err.)
ΔReal estate valuation appreciation              1                 0.63 (0.02)***            0.60 (0.03)***
                                                 2                 0.65 (0.04)***            0.88 (0.07)***
                                                 3                -0.20 (0.06)***           -0.31 (0.10)***
                                                 4                -0.00 (0.03)               0.03 (0.05)
Before Global financial crisis's Break       binary (1/0)          1.82 (1.06)*              1.93 (1.32)
              ΔCAD/GDP × Before Break            1                 0.79 (0.68)               0.02 (0.83)
                                                 2                 1.50 (0.61)**             1.98 (0.82)**
                ΔCAD/GDP × After Break           1                 0.35 (0.55)              -0.59 (0.75)
                                                 2                 1.67 (0.55)***            2.29 (0.78)***
               ΔDCR/GDP × Before Break           1                 0.81 (0.27)***            0.36 (0.36)
                                                 2                -0.19 (0.19)               0.22 (0.25)
                ΔDCR/GDP × After Break           1                 0.12 (0.15)              -0.04 (0.25)
                                                 2                 0.11 (0.11)               0.42 (0.20)**
ΔCAD/GDP × ΔDCR/GDP | Before Break               1                -0.01 (0.01)              -0.01 (0.01)
ΔCAD/GDP × ΔDCR/GDP | After Break                1                -0.00 (0.01)              -0.00 (0.01)
ΔEquity market valuation appreciation            1                 0.15 (0.03)***            0.07 (0.05)
                                                 2                -0.10 (0.06)               0.01 (0.10)
                                                 3                 0.03 (0.05)              -0.03 (0.08)
                                                 4                 0.01 (0.02)               0.02 (0.03)
ΔCPI inflation                                   1                -0.53 (0.42)               0.24 (0.71)
ΔGrowth of industrial production                 1                -0.06 (0.08)              -0.15 (0.13)
ΔTED spread                                      1                 1.52 (1.56)              -0.96 (2.81)
ΔVIX                                             1                -0.04 (0.08)              -0.08 (0.14)
ΔSovereign CDS                                   1                -0.10 (0.21)              -1.16 (1.91)
Foreign reserve accumulation                     1                 0.05 (0.05)               0.02 (0.07)
constant                                         0                -0.95 (0.47)**            -1.18 (0.77)
observations                                                        791                       367
Arellano-Bond AR(2) test p-value                                 0.495                     0.468
Table 7. Additional Results.
This table reports dynamic panel estimation, using quarterly data over the period 2005:I-2012:IV. The dependent variable is Δreal estate valuation appreciation (nominal price growth minus CPI inflation). The empirical specification is
similar to that of Table 1 columm (1), but in this table both lagged Δreal estate appreciation and lagged Δequity market appreciation are endogenous regressors. The Global financial crisis's Break is a 1/0 binary variable, equals to 1 before
2007:III (Nothern Rock event) for estimation; see also Figure A. The crisis breaks enter the estimation individually, as well as interaction terms with current account deficit/GDP (ΔCAD/GDP) and with domestic credit/GDP (ΔDCR/GDP)
series. Standard errors in parentheses, with *** (**,*) denotes statistical significance at 1 (5,10) percent.
Dep. Var. : ΔReal estate appreciation                                  (1)                     (2)                      (3)                       (4)                        (5)                        (6)                        (7)
                                              lag            CAD=Gross Inflows     CAD=Inflows+Outflows       CAD=Debt Inflows         CAD=Net Debt Flows        CAD=Debt In+Outflows        Banking Crisis Group      No Banking Crisis Group
Regressors                                                 coefficient (std. err.) coefficient (std. err.)   coefficient (std. err.)   coefficient (std. err.)    coefficient (std. err.)    coefficient (std. err.)    coefficient (std. err.)
ΔReal estate valuation appreciation             1                 0.70 (0.02)***          0.70 (0.02)***            0.71 (0.02)***            0.71 (0.02)***             0.71 (0.02)***             0.62 (0.02)***             0.64 (0.03)***
                                                2                 0.57 (0.04)***          0.57 (0.04)***            0.60 (0.04)***            0.79 (0.05)***             0.80 (0.05)***             0.89 (0.05)***             0.58 (0.06)***
                                                3                -0.08 (0.06)            -0.08 (0.06)              -0.13 (0.06)**            -0.11 (0.08)               -0.11 (0.08)               -0.39 (0.08)***            -0.16 (0.08)*
                                                4                -0.04 (0.03)            -0.04 (0.03)              -0.01 (0.03)               0.02 (0.04)                0.03 (0.04)                0.10 (0.04)**             -0.01 (0.04)
Before Global financial crisis's Break      binary (1/0)          2.32 (1.22)*            2.30 (1.22)*              1.92 (0.93)**             2.88 (1.04)***             2.83 (1.03)***            -0.59 (0.88)                4.08 (1.85)**
             ΔCAD/GDP × Before Break            1                 1.82 (3.35)             1.05 (1.73)               5.01 (26.34)              5.83 (19.99)               9.38 (19.68)              -0.33 (0.68)                1.66 (0.95)*
                                                2                -0.48 (1.88)            -0.31 (0.98)              -9.21 (14.84)           -10.22 (11.44)             -19.43 (11.57)*               0.91 (0.63)                1.21 (0.88)
               ΔCAD/GDP × After Break           1                 0.39 (0.94)             0.24 (0.49)              -1.62 (6.29)              -0.50 (5.12)                6.32 (5.24)               -0.24 (0.58)                0.97 (0.83)
                                                2                -0.14 (0.53)            -0.08 (0.28)              -0.26 (3.59)              -1.50 (2.96)               -4.74 (3.02)                0.63 (0.59)                1.65 (0.81)**
              ΔDCR/GDP × Before Break           1                 0.89 (0.28)***          0.89 (0.28)***            0.77 (0.23)***            0.68 (0.23)***             0.71 (0.23)***             0.46 (0.19)**              1.11 (0.54)**
                                                2                -0.26 (0.19)            -0.26 (0.19)              -0.34 (0.16)**            -0.29 (0.15)*              -0.26 (0.15)*              -0.27 (0.13)**             -0.01 (0.36)
               ΔDCR/GDP × After Break           1                 0.01 (0.15)             0.01 (0.15)               0.03 (0.14)               0.00 (0.14)                0.02 (0.14)                0.10 (0.11)               -0.03 (0.30)
                                                2                 0.08 (0.12)             0.07 (0.12)               0.06 (0.11)               0.02 (0.10)                0.02 (0.10)               -0.04 (0.08)                0.47 (0.24)*
ΔEquity market valuation appreciation           1                 0.08 (0.04)*            0.08 (0.04)*              0.10 (0.03)***            0.05 (0.04)                0.05 (0.04)                0.14 (0.04)***             0.15 (0.05)***
                                                2                -0.00 (0.07)            -0.00 (0.07)              -0.02 (0.06)              -0.00 (0.07)                0.01 (0.07)               -0.18 (0.06)***            -0.02 (0.10)
                                                3                -0.01 (0.06)            -0.02 (0.06)              -0.01 (0.05)               0.02 (0.06)                0.02 (0.06)                0.14 (0.05)***            -0.06 (0.08)
                                                4                 0.01 (0.02)             0.01 (0.02)               0.02 (0.01)              -0.00 (0.02)               -0.00 (0.02)               -0.03 (0.02)*               0.04 (0.03)
ΔCPI inflation                                  1                -0.32 (0.53)            -0.30 (0.53)               0.37 (0.43)               1.48 (0.59)**              1.45 (0.58)**             -0.14 (0.51)               -0.12 (0.60)
ΔGrowth of industrial production                1                 0.38 (0.13)***          0.38 (0.13)***            0.16 (0.10)               0.15 (0.12)                0.14 (0.11)               -0.03 (0.10)               -0.15 (0.12)
ΔTED spread                                     1                 3.20 (1.67)*            3.18 (1.67)*              2.95 (1.44)**             1.75 (1.66)                1.62 (1.63)                1.49 (1.35)               -0.98 (2.88)
ΔVIX                                            1                -0.03 (0.08)            -0.03 (0.08)              -0.04 (0.07)              -0.06 (0.08)               -0.06 (0.08)               -0.06 (0.07)                0.03 (0.14)
ΔSovereign CDS                                  1                -0.11 (0.18)            -0.11 (0.18)              -0.12 (0.17)              -0.06 (0.15)               -0.06 (0.15)               -0.08 (0.13)               -1.57 (1.45)
Foreign reserve accumulation                    1                 0.02 (0.06)             0.02 (0.06)               0.02 (0.05)               0.07 (0.06)                0.07 (0.06)                0.03 (0.05)                0.04 (0.09)
constant                                        0                -0.67 (0.49)            -0.67 (0.49)              -0.93 (0.42)**            -1.27 (0.47)***            -1.26 (0.46)***            -1.01 (0.40)**             -1.03 (0.83)
observations                                                      523                     523                        588                      383                        383                         398                       393
Arellano-Bond AR(2) test p-value                                0.348                   0.337                           .                   0.688                      0.633                      0.445                      0.529
Dep. Var. : ΔReal estate appreciation                                  (8)                     (9)                     (10)                      (11)                       (12)                       (13)                       (14)
                                              lag          High Financial Openness Low Financial Openness     Euro Area Countries       Non Euro Countries           OECD Countries           Non OECD Episodes             Whole Sample
Regressors                                                 coefficient (std. err.) coefficient (std. err.)   coefficient (std. err.)   coefficient (std. err.)    coefficient (std. err.)    coefficient (std. err.)    coefficient (std. err.)
ΔReal estate valuation appreciation             1                 0.60 (0.02)***          0.72 (0.04)***            0.66 (0.02)***            0.63 (0.03)***             0.66 (0.02)***             0.61 (0.04)***             0.64 (0.02)***
                                                2                 0.64 (0.05)***          0.64 (0.08)***            0.80 (0.06)***            0.61 (0.05)***             0.76 (0.05)***             0.51 (0.07)***             0.64 (0.04)***
                                                3                -0.23 (0.07)***         -0.06 (0.13)              -0.34 (0.09)***           -0.18 (0.07)**             -0.18 (0.08)**             -0.15 (0.10)               -0.19 (0.06)***
                                                4                 0.01 (0.03)            -0.06 (0.07)               0.10 (0.05)**            -0.01 (0.04)               -0.04 (0.04)                0.00 (0.05)               -0.00 (0.03)
Before Global financial crisis's Break      binary (1/0)          0.77 (1.17)             3.64 (2.18)*              0.34 (0.95)               2.52 (1.51)*               2.53 (1.07)**             -2.08 (2.49)                1.71 (1.05)
             ΔCAD/GDP × Before Break            1                 0.79 (0.75)             0.61 (1.05)              -1.21 (0.82)               1.49 (0.79)*              -0.00 (0.81)                1.55 (1.03)                0.83 (0.67)
                                                2                 0.91 (0.69)             3.22 (1.11)***           -0.22 (0.78)               1.26 (0.74)*               0.62 (0.74)                1.79 (0.99)*               1.52 (0.61)**
               ΔCAD/GDP × After Break           1                 0.63 (0.65)             0.28 (0.93)              -1.17 (0.73)               0.87 (0.68)                0.00 (0.72)                1.15 (0.90)                0.33 (0.54)
                                                2                 1.03 (0.63)             3.41 (1.03)***           -0.65 (0.75)               1.69 (0.67)**              0.42 (0.69)                2.27 (0.91)**              1.72 (0.55)***
              ΔDCR/GDP × Before Break           1                 0.61 (0.27)**           1.00 (0.74)               0.25 (0.20)               1.10 (0.43)***             0.82 (0.26)***            -0.18 (0.71)                0.76 (0.27)***
                                                2                -0.15 (0.18)            -0.27 (0.51)              -0.28 (0.13)**            -0.12 (0.29)               -0.28 (0.18)                0.45 (0.45)               -0.15 (0.18)
               ΔDCR/GDP × After Break           1                 0.09 (0.15)            -0.18 (0.48)               0.03 (0.11)               0.05 (0.24)                0.05 (0.15)                0.13 (0.33)                0.12 (0.15)
                                                2                 0.14 (0.11)            -0.19 (0.40)              -0.04 (0.08)               0.32 (0.19)*               0.10 (0.11)                0.06 (0.27)                0.11 (0.11)
ΔEquity market valuation appreciation           1                 0.19 (0.04)***          0.11 (0.06)*              0.13 (0.04)***            0.17 (0.04)***             0.06 (0.04)                0.24 (0.06)***             0.16 (0.03)***
                                                2                -0.13 (0.07)*           -0.02 (0.11)              -0.14 (0.07)*             -0.08 (0.08)               -0.03 (0.07)               -0.12 (0.12)               -0.10 (0.06)
                                                3                 0.06 (0.06)            -0.02 (0.10)               0.10 (0.06)*              0.00 (0.07)                0.04 (0.06)               -0.02 (0.10)                0.03 (0.05)
                                                4                -0.00 (0.02)             0.01 (0.03)              -0.01 (0.02)               0.01 (0.02)               -0.01 (0.02)                0.04 (0.03)                0.01 (0.02)
ΔCPI inflation                                  1                -0.05 (0.50)             0.59 (0.75)               1.35 (0.65)**            -0.62 (0.50)                0.36 (0.59)               -0.90 (0.65)               -0.45 (0.41)
ΔGrowth of industrial production                1                 0.12 (0.10)            -0.57 (0.17)***            0.03 (0.11)              -0.13 (0.11)                0.27 (0.11)**             -0.34 (0.14)**             -0.06 (0.09)
ΔTED spread                                     1                 1.84 (1.71)            -5.14 (3.69)               1.03 (1.50)              -0.05 (2.31)                1.40 (1.60)               -2.01 (3.72)
ΔVIX                                            1                -0.04 (0.09)             0.17 (0.18)              -0.02 (0.08)              -0.01 (0.11)                0.03 (0.08)               -0.04 (0.17)               0.01   (0.05)
ΔSovereign CDS                                  1                -0.06 (0.20)            -2.44 (1.82)              -0.10 (0.12)              -0.84 (1.16)               -0.07 (0.18)               -1.52 (1.60)              -0.12   (0.21)
Foreign reserve accumulation                    1                 0.14 (0.06)**          -0.09 (0.10)              -0.13 (0.37)               0.04 (0.06)                0.06 (0.06)                0.03 (0.09)               0.05   (0.05)
Growth of Mortgage Origination in USA           1                                                                                                                                                                             0.00   (0.00)
constant                                        0              -1.03 (0.51)**          -0.80 (1.01)               -1.19 (0.51)**            -0.86 (0.64)              -1.25 (0.48)***             -0.19 (1.08)               -0.99   (0.47)**
observations                                                     613                     178                        268                       523                       572                         219                        791
Arellano-Bond AR(2) test p-value                               0.589                   0.056                      0.674                     0.459                     0.961                       0.465                      0.348
Figure 1. Mean Reversion in Real Estate Appreciation.
This figure plots cumulative real estate valuation appreciation (real estate inflation minus CPI inflation) for 2005:I-2007:III and for 2008:III-
2012:IV.
The OLS estimates are given by              y = -0.5x+0.8     R2 = 0.28.
                                          (s.e.) (0.1) (4.3)

                                                                                                      (,




                                                     89
                                                                                34                             "7
                                                                                  '(                            )6
                                                                                                     -&
                                                                                       !"

                                                                                        !# ')                  -%
                                                                           +%




                              9
                                                                                        ,0
                                                                                         12    '!     ./            .0
                                                                             2" "(          '*             )*            $&
                                                                                                                                   25
                                                                /+
                                                                                               &$                             *!
                                                                                        )5      /"        -,
                                                                                             #-
                                                                     (#                                                       +,
                                                                                                      &0                           $%
                                                                                                      %-




      89
   0:;<=:>?;?:=@;<A;?BCD=;EEF:GB;?BCD=H99IJ///H9KHJ/L
                                                                                                               /%

                                                          H9                  9                 H9                 M9             N9
                                                                          0:;<=:>?;?:=@;<A;?BCD=;EEF:GB;?BCD=H998J/H99OJ///
Figure 2A. Real Estate Valuation Appreciation and Current Account Deficit/GDP.

                                      -.                                                                  -/                                                                 01                                                                   02                                                                3-                                                                  34




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




      ($
                                                                 $                                                                   '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ($
                                                                                                                                                                                                        "                                                                    #&                                                                (                                                                   $
                                                                                                                                     !                                                                  #                                                                    #$




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "




      &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               )&




                                                                          & ($
                                                                 #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                &
                                                                                                                                     &                                                                  $                                                                    (&




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                     "                                                                                                                                       ($




      $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     $
                                                                 "                                                                                                                                     #                                                                                                                                     $                                                                   ($
                                                                                                                                     %                                                                  "                                                                   &




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        $




                                                                       & $
                                                                                                                                     #                                                                                                                                       $                                                                                                                                     (&




   &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   &




                                                                                                                                          #$ $ #$ "$ !$
                                                                 !                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                                                     )&




                                                                                                                                                                                                               ($ $ ($ #$ %$
                                      35                                                                  36                                                                 71                                                                   78                                                                19                                                                  :;




                                                                                                                                             &




      ($
                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ($
                                                                 #                                                                                                                                     &                                                                   (                                                                ($                                                                  #




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ($
                                                                                                                                     "                                                                                                                                       #




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        &
                                                                                                                                                                                                        &)&




      &
                                                                 "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *                                                                   $




                                                                          ($ #$
                                                                                                                                     #                                                                                                                                       %




                                                                                                                                             $
                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     $
                                                                 !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        $
                                                                                                                                     $                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #




      $
                                                                                                                                                                                                        !)&                                                                 "
                                                                 *                                                                                                                                                                                                          &                                                                "                                                                   "
                                                                                                                                     #                                                                 '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     &
                                                                 ($




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ($




                                                                                                                                          &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #




   &
                                                                                                                                     "                                                                 ')&                                                                 !                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                       ($ $
                                                                                                                                                                                                               #$($ $ ($ #$
                                      :<                                                                  20                                                                 2<                                                                   48                                                                4/                                                                  ;7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        $
                                                                 #)&




                                                                          ($
                                                                                                                                     "                                                                  (&                                                                   $                                                                 *                                                                   (
                                                                 #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                   $




      ($ #$
                                                                 ()&                                                                 %                                                                  ($                                                                   &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               "




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                 (                                                                   #                                                                  &                                                                    ($                                                               #
                                                                 )&                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            $                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (&

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ($
                                                                 $                                                                   (                                                                  $




                                                                                                                                          ($& $ & ($
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #                                                                  %




   ($ $
                                                                       #$ ($ $
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ($ $ ($ #$
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (& ($ &
                                      ;1                                                                  ;.                                                                 =>                                                                   8<                                                                ?@                                                                  5A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        &

                                                                                                                                     "




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ($
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             $




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ($




      ($
                                                                 !                                                                                                                                      (                                                                                                                                     ($                                                                 "
                                                                 "




                                                                          & ($
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        $



                                                                                                                                     %                                                                  #                                                                   (                                                                (#
                                                                 #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                        %                                                                   #                                                                ("




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     $
                                                                 $                                                                   #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                 #                                                                                                                                     "                                                                   %                                                                (!




                                                                       & $
                                                                                                                                          # $ # " !
                                                                                                                                     (




                                                                                                                                                                                                               &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   &
                                                                 "                                                                                                                                     &                                                                   "                                                                (*                                                                 ($




   #$ ($ $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ($ &




                                      5B                                                                  56                                                                 >A                                                                   >.                                                                <B                                                                  91
                                                                                                                                     ($                                                                 '                                                                    (#                                                                ("
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ($




                                                                 (#                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '
                                                                 (%                                                                 *                                                                  !                                                                    ($                                                                (#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        &




      ($ #$
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     &$ ($$
                                                                                                                                                                                                        &                                                                                                                                      ($                                                                  *
                                                                 ("                                                                 !                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                 (&                                                                                                                                    "                                                                    !                                                                 *                                                                   +
                                                                 (!                                                                 "                                                                  %                                                                    "                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                             $ #$ "$ !$
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ($
                                                                                                                                     #                                                                  #                                                                    #                                                                 "




                                                                       ($& $ & ($
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ! " # $ #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     & $




                                                                 ('




   ($ $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   &$ $




                                      92                                                                  98                                                                 .4                                                                   .C                                                                /9                                                                  6-




                                                                                                                                             &
                                                                 (&                                                                 *                                                                  ($                                                                   #                                                                !                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                     !                                                                  &                                                                    "
                                                                 #$                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           &                                                                   ()&




                                                                                                                                             $
                                                                                                                                     "                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                        $
                                                                 #&                                                                 #                                                                                                                                       *                                                                "                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                     $                                                                  &                                                                   ($




                                                                                                                                          &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %




                                                                       ($ $ ($ #$ %$
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ($& $ & ($




                                                                                                                                                                                                               & $ & ($ (&
                                                                                                                                     #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            )&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ($ $ ($ #$ %$




                                                                 %$                                                                                                                                    ($                                                                  (#




   #$($ $ ($ #$
                    #$$&,(
                             #$$',(
                                      #$$+,(
                                               #$((,(
                                                        #$(%,(
                                                                                        #$$&,(
                                                                                                 #$$',(
                                                                                                          #$$+,(
                                                                                                                   #$((,(
                                                                                                                            #$(%,(
                                                                                                                                                           #$$&,(
                                                                                                                                                                    #$$',(
                                                                                                                                                                             #$$+,(
                                                                                                                                                                                      #$((,(
                                                                                                                                                                                               #$(%,(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #$$&,(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #$$',(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #$$+,(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #$((,(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #$(%,(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #$$&,(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #$$',(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #$$+,(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #$((,(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #$(%,(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #$$&,(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #$$',(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #$$+,(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #$((,(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #$(%,(




Note: Real estate appreciation is a darker line on the left scale. The two vertical lines denote 2007:III and 2008:III, respectively.
The circle denotes structural break in the relationship, based on QLR statistics, between the current-account deficit/GDP and
the real estate valuation appreciation in the sample period.
Figure 2B. Real Estate Valuation Appreciation and Growth of Domestic Credit/GDP.

                                      -.                                                                  -/                                                                  01                                                                  02                                                                3-                                                                  34




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (




      "!
                                                                 %!                                                                                                                                      "&




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     "!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #!                                                                $'&                                                                 "&
                                                                                                                                     #&
                                                                 $!                                                                                                                                                                                                          "!                                                                $




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %




      &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     &
                                                                                                                                     #!                                                                  "!




                                                                          & "!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                                                     "!
                                                                 #!                                                                  "&                                                                                                                                                                                                        #'&




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #




      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                         &                                                                   "!                                                                                                                                   &
                                                                 "!                                                                  "!                                                                                                                                      #!                                                               #




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




                                                                       & !
                                                                 !                                                                   &                                                                   !                                                                                                                                     "'&                                                                 !




   &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   &




                                                                                                                                           #! ! #! %! (!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             $!




                                                                                                                                                                                                               "! ! "! #! $!
                                      35                                                                  36                                                                  71                                                                  78                                                                19                                                                  :;




                                                                                                                                              &




      "!
                                                                                                                                     "!                                                                                                                                                                                                        (!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "!
                                                                 $&                                                                                                                                      %                                                                   $!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     "!
                                                                 $!                                                                  &                                                                                                                                       #!                                                                %!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        &




      &
                                                                          "! #!
                                                                 #&                                                                                                                                      #




                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                                                       "!                                                                #!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                 #!




      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                 "&                                                                  &                                                                                                                                      !                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     &
                                                                                                                                                                                                         #




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   "!




                                                                                                                                           &
                                                                 "!




   &
                                                                                                                                     "!                                                                                                                                     "!                                                               #!




                                                                       "! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                               #!"! ! "! #!
                                      :<                                                                  20                                                                  2<                                                                  48                                                                4/                                                                  ;7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                 "&




                                                                          "!
                                                                                                                                     #!                                                                  %!                                                                  (!                                                                "&                                                                  "#
                                                                                                                                                                                                         #!                                                                  %!                                                                "!                                                                  "!
                                                                                                                                     "!




      "! #!
                                                                 "!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               &




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     &
                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                   #!                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                 &                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                         #!                                                                 !                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               &                                                                  #

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     "!
                                                                 !                                                                   "!




                                                                                                                                           "!& ! & "!
                                                                                                                                                                                                         %!                                                                 #!




   "! !
                                                                       #! "! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                               "! ! "! #!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   "& "! &
                                      ;1                                                                  ;.                                                                  =>                                                                  8<                                                                ?@                                                                  5A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        &

                                                                                                                                                                                                         "!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  "!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     "!




      "!
                                                                 %!                                                                  #!                                                                                                                                      "&                                                                "&                                                                  $!
                                                                                                                                                                                                         &




                                                                          & "!
                                                                                                                                     "&                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !



                                                                 #!                                                                                                                                                                                                          "!                                                                "!
                                                                                                                                     "!                                                                  !                                                                                                                                                                                                         "!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                 !                                                                                                                                                                                                           &                                                                 &
                                                                                                                                     &                                                                   &                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




                                                                       & !
                                                                                                                                           # ! # % (
                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                                                       !                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                               &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   &
                                                                 #!                                                                                                                                     "!                                                                                                                                                                                                       "!




   #! "! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     "! &




                                      5B                                                                  56                                                                  >A                                                                  >.                                                                <B                                                                  91
                                                                 "(                                                                  #!                                                                  #!                                                                  #!                                                                #!                                                                  "&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "!




                                                                 "%                                                                  "&                                                                  "&                                                                                                                                    "&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        &




      "! #!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     &! "!!
                                                                 "#                                                                  "!                                                                  "!                                                                  "!                                                                                                                                    "!
                                                                                                                                     &                                                                                                                                                                                                         "!
                                                                 "!                                                                                                                                      &                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               &                                                                   &
                                                                 )                                                                   !                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                              ! #! %! (!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             "!




                                                                       "!& ! & "!
                                                                 (                                                                   &                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                               ( % # ! #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     & !




                                                                                                                                                                                                         &




   "! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   &! !




                                      92                                                                  98                                                                  .4                                                                  .C                                                                /9                                                                  6-




                                                                                                                                              &
                                                                 #!                                                                                                                                      #!                                                                                                                                    "!                                                                  %
                                                                 "&                                                                                                                                      "&                                                                                                                                    &                                                                   $




                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                 "!
                                                                                                                                                                                                         "!                                                                                                                                    !                                                                   #
                                                                 &
                                                                 !                                                                                                                                       &                                                                                                                                     &                                                                  "




                                                                                                                                           &




                                                                       "! ! "! #! $!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   "!& ! & "!




                                                                                                                                                                                                               & ! & "! "&
                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     "! ! "! #! $!




                                                                 &                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            "!




   #!"! ! "! #!
                    #!!&*"
                             #!!+*"
                                      #!!,*"
                                               #!""*"
                                                        #!"$*"
                                                                                        #!!&*"
                                                                                                 #!!+*"
                                                                                                          #!!,*"
                                                                                                                   #!""*"
                                                                                                                            #!"$*"
                                                                                                                                                            #!!&*"
                                                                                                                                                                     #!!+*"
                                                                                                                                                                              #!!,*"
                                                                                                                                                                                       #!""*"
                                                                                                                                                                                                #!"$*"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #!!&*"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #!!+*"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #!!,*"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #!""*"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #!"$*"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #!!&*"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #!!+*"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #!!,*"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #!""*"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #!"$*"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #!!&*"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #!!+*"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #!!,*"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #!""*"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #!"$*"




Note: Real estate appreciation is a darker line on the left scale. The two vertical lines denote 2007:III and 2008:III, respectively.
The circle denotes structural break in the relationship, based on QLR statistics, between the growth of domestic credit/GDP and
the real estate valuation appreciation in the sample period.
           Figure 3. Economic Significance of Macro Variables on Real Estate Valuation.



12.0%

                                                                    This figure shows the adjustment of real estate
                  10.4%
                                                                    valuation appreciation (the appreciation rate of
10.0%                                                               the real estate inflation minus CPI inflation) due
                                                                    to a one-standard-deviation increase of changes
                                                                    of each macroeconomic variable, based on the
                                                                    regression of Table 6 for the whole sample.
8.0%



6.0%
                                                 5.0%


4.0%
                                                                              3.0%


2.0%                                                                                                           1.5%



0.0%
        Lagged real estate valuation   Lagged decrease of current   Lagged growth of domestic Lagged equity market valuation
               appreciation                 account/GDP                    credit/GDP                 appreciation
