                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   NO TAXATION WITHOUT INFORMATION:
        DETERRENCE AND SELF-ENFORCEMENT IN THE VALUE ADDED TAXˆ

                                          Dina Pomeranz

                                       Working Paper 19199
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19199


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2013




I thank Alberto Alesina, Samuel Asher, Lorenzo Casaburi, Raj Chetty, David Cutler, Oeindrila Dube,
Martin Feldstein, Brigham Frandsen, Edward Glaeser, Dominik Hangartner, Lakshmi Iyer, Kelsey
Jack, Matthew Gentzkow, Louis Kaplow, Felipe Kast, Lawrence Katz, Henrik Kleven, Wojciech Kopczuk,
Michael Kremer, Josh Lerner, Jeffrey Liebman, Stephan Litschig, Isaac Mbiti, Stephan Meier, Sendhil
Mullainathan, Paul Niehaus, Suresh Naidu, Giacomo Ponzetto, Joel Slemrod, Matthew Weinzierl,
Justin Wolfers, Danny Yagan, Tristan Zajonc and participants at various seminars and conferences
for helpful comments and discussions. I am exceedingly grateful to the Chilean Tax Authority for
outstanding collaboration and funding of the implementation and to the Swiss Study Foundation, the
David Rockefeller Center for Latin American Studies, and the Project on Justice Welfare and Economics
for research and travel grants that made this project possible. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Dina Pomeranz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
No Taxation without Information: Deterrence and Self-Enforcement in the Value Added Taxˆ
Dina Pomeranz
NBER Working Paper No. 19199
July 2013
JEL No. H25,H26,O17,O23

                                              ABSTRACT

Tax evasion generates billions of dollars of losses in government revenue and creates large distortions,
especially in developing countries. Claims that the VAT facilitates tax enforcement by generating
paper trails on transactions between firms have contributed to widespread VAT adoption worldwide,
but there is little empirical evidence about this mechanism. This paper analyzes the role of third party
information for VAT enforcement through two randomized experiments among over 400,000 Chilean
firms. Announcing additional monitoring has less impact on transactions that are subject to a paper
trail, indicating the paper trail's preventive deterrence effect. Tax enforcement leads to strong spillovers
up the VAT chain, increasing compliance by firms' suppliers. These findings confirm that when evasion
is taken into account, significant differences emerge between otherwise equivalent forms of taxation.


Dina Pomeranz
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 213
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
dpomeranz@hbs.edu
1       Introduction
    A fundamental constraint for taxation is that governments need to be able to observe
transactions in the economy in order to be able to impose a tax on them. A growing literature
therefore argues that understanding information flows is central to effective taxation. When
governments imperfectly observe transactions, important differences emerge between forms
of taxation that are equivalent in standard models of taxation but differ in the information
they generate for the government (Slemrod, 2008).1 Third-party reporting, verifiable paper
trails, and whistle-blowers are thought to play an important role in facilitating tax enforce-
ment (Kopczuk and Slemrod, 2006; Kleven et al., 2009, 2011; Kumler et al., 2012). The
challenge of enforcing taxation is particularly severe in developing countries, where many
transactions in the economy are not readily observable by the government, and it has been
argued that these limited sources of information can explain some of the key differences in
tax systems between developed and developing countries (Gordon and Li, 2009; Besley and
Persson, 2012).2
    The Value Added Tax (VAT) is a stark example of a tax believed to facilitate enforce-
ment through a built-in incentive structure that generates a third-party reported paper trail
on transactions between firms, which makes it harder to hide the transaction from the gov-
ernment (e.g. Tait, 1972; Burgess and Stern, 1993; Agha and Haughton, 1996; Kopczuk and
Slemrod, 2006). This belief has contributed to one of the most significant developments in
tax policy of recent decades (Keen and Lockwood, 2010): a striking increase in VAT adoption
from 47 countries in 1990 to over 140 today (Bird and Gendron, 2007). There is, however,
surprisingly little evidence evaluating these self-enforcing properties of the VAT.
    This paper investigates the role of third-party reported paper trails for tax enforcement,
and tests for the self-enforcing properties in the VAT through two randomized field experi-
ments with over 445,000 firms in Chile. A first experiment, the large-scale “Letter Message
Experiment,” evaluates the effects of the VAT paper trail across the entire economy in a
fully developed VAT system. It investigates whether the presence of the VAT paper trail
lowers the tax payment response to an increase in the perceived audit probability of ran-
domly chosen firms. This would suggest that the paper trail has a preventive deterrence
    1
     Information constraints have been a key feature of models in the optimal taxation literature as well.
While ability is not observable in these models, most transactions in the economy are typically assumed to
be observable.
   2
     Tax evasion is a fundamental challenge for developing countries, where on average, the informal sector
represents about 40% of GDP, ranging up to 70% (Schneider et al., 2010). High evasion rates can not only
severely restrict funding for basic public infrastructure, they can also lead to significant distortions in the
economy. Even in the US, overall tax evasion is estimated to be around 16% (Internal Revenue Service,
2008), a loss similar in size to the entire corporate income tax.



                                                      2
effect on evasion. Since a paper trail facilitates detection of evasion during the audit, one
would expect firms to respond more to an increase in the audit probability where a paper
trail is present, if evasion levels are equal across transactions. Observing that a given firm
responds less on its transactions that are covered by a paper trail therefore suggests that
the preventive deterrence effect of the paper trail was strong enough to reduce evasion to
the point where an increase in the audit probability has a smaller effect. The experiment
exploits the fact that the incentive structure built into the VAT system, which generates the
paper trail, breaks down at the final production stage, where sales are made to consumers,
rather than other firms: while it is in firms’ interest to ask suppliers for receipts in order to
deduct input costs from their VAT bill, consumers have no incentive to do so.
    The Chilean Tax Authority sent letters indicating an increased audit probability to over
100 thousand randomly selected firms. While the letters generate an immediate and strong
increase in VAT payments, this effect is much weaker on transactions between firms, where
the paper trail is present, than on sales to final consumers, where there is no VAT paper trail.
This holds true not only when comparing between firms with different shares of final sales,
but also when comparing the response of different types of transactions within a given firm.
Consistent with a model by Kleven et al. (2009) about the impact of firm size on evasion,
I also find that small firms respond more to the deterrence message. There is suggestive
evidence that a substantial fraction of the higher response in smaller firms may be driven by
their higher propensity to sell at the retail level, where the VAT paper trail is absent.3
    Conceptually, this type of intervention represents an indirect use of randomized experi-
ments, as defined by Khwaja and Mian (2011). It allows studying an existing policy at large
scale, even if the policy itself cannot be randomized. The idea is to test whether randomly
induced variation of another factor that interacts with the policy (in our case the perceived
audit probability) generates the response that would be predicted based on the underlying
mechanism if the policy is effective. The two experiments provide both types of interventions
in the classification of Ludwig et al. (2011). The Letter Message Experiment is an (indirect)
policy evaluation, aimed at testing whether the policy works on a nation-wide level, while
the second experiment, the “Spillover Experiment,” is a mechanism experiment, aimed at
showing the underlying mechanism that leads the policy to be effective.
    The Spillover Experiment was designed to find direct evidence for the self-enforcing mech-
   3
    In order to test whether the impact of the letter really stems from deterrence, I also compare its effect
to both a motivational letter that appeals to tax morale and social norms, and a placebo letter that contains
information that is irrelevant for tax compliance. The methodology of analyzing the impact of different letter
messages on tax payments was first developed by Slemrod et al. (2001), and has recently been employed
by Engstrom and Hesselius (2007) and Fellner et al. (Forthcoming), shedding light on the impact of deterrence
and motivational appeals on tax payments by individuals in developed countries.



                                                      3
anism that underlies the findings of the Letter Message Experiment. It examines the trans-
mission of tax enforcement through the VAT paper trail up the production chain. The idea
is to jumpstart the effect in a sample where it is not currently well enforced, by injecting
deterrence into the system and observing how it promulgates along the paper trail and up the
production chain. Half of a selected sample of firms suspected of tax evasion was randomly
selected to receive an announcement of an upcoming audit. The whole sample was later
summoned for an audit, and for the 1,527 firms that the tax authority was able to audit,
information about their pre-treatment trading partners was collected.4 The randomly ad-
ministered audit announcement leads to strong spillover effects that increase VAT payments
by the suppliers of the treated firms. In line with the asymmetric incentives between clients
and suppliers in the self-enforcing mechanism of the VAT, tax payments of client firms do
not increase.
    Taken together, the two experiments show that for a given firm, the VAT paper trail
acts as a substitute to the firm’s own audit probability, and globally the paper trail acts
as a complement to the audit probability, since its effectiveness gets multiplied through
the spillover effects. This represents the first micro-empirical evidence for the self-enforcing
properties of the VAT. Previous evidence has been limited to cross-country comparisons,
investigating whether countries that adopt a VAT subsequently raise more taxes (e.g. Nellor,
1987; Ebrill, 2001).
    These findings provide the first evidence of how tax enforcement generates spillovers
through firms’ trading networks, and together with Rincke and Traxler (2011), they represent
one of the first documentations of spillovers in tax enforcement overall. The results imply
that when choosing an optimal audit strategy, a tax authority may not only want to consider
the expected deterrence effect on the audited firm, but also the multiplier effect through the
firm’s trading network.
    This paper also provides evidence for a larger, mostly theoretical literature on the impor-
tance of information and third-party reporting for effective taxation, particularly in devel-
oping countries (e.g. Kopczuk and Slemrod, 2006; Gordon and Li, 2009; Kleven et al., 2009).
Because evasion is by its nature difficult to detect, and micro-level tax data is highly confi-
dential, there has been a dearth of micro-empirical evidence (Slemrod and Yitzhaki, 2002).
One notable exception in this area is an intervention conducted concurrently to this field
experiment by Kleven et al. (2011), who analyze the individual income tax in Denmark and
formalize the distinction between third-party and self-reported income. They find that eva-
sion is generally low, except for the small fraction of income for which the government does
not already possess third party-reported information. These results confirm related findings
  4
      For a discussion of attrition at the auditing stage, see the implementation section below.


                                                       4
for the income tax on a more aggregate level by the US Taxpayer Compliance Measurement
Program (TCMP) (Internal Revenue Service, 1996, 2006).5
    The paper extends the findings of this literature in several ways. First, it looks at tax
compliance by firms, rather than by individuals. Raising and enforcing tax payments from
firms strongly reduces the number of agents the tax authorities must oversee (Kopczuk
and Slemrod, 2006), and thus may be a more feasible approach for developing countries
to increase tax revenue. Firms can play an important role of aggregators of information
that facilitates tax enforcement. Second, it analyzes tax compliance in a developing country
context. Evasion rates are much higher in poorer countries, and while there is a growing
empirical literature investigating taxation in such contexts (e.g. Engel et al., 1998; Fisman
and Wei, 2004; Olken and Singhal, 2011; Carrillo et al., 2012; Kleven and Waseem, 2012;
Kumler et al., 2012), there is still very little micro-empirical evidence.
    Third, the findings speak to the interplay of information with deterrence in tax enforce-
ment. In the sample of the Spillover Experiment, prior to the audit announcement, self-
enforcement was incomplete at best. The deterrence effect from the audit announcement
was necessary to trigger the effectiveness of the paper trail, showing that it is the interaction
of information with deterrence that leads to effective tax enforcement. Finally, and partic-
ularly relevant for developing countries, the paper finds that third-party records strongly
affect tax compliance even in a context where they are not automatically accessible to the
tax authority. For most transactions in Chile, as in most developing countries, records are
kept in handwritten books. The tax authority can verify them during audits, but in contrast
to many developed countries, these records are not available in electronic form for automatic
cross-checks.
    The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides background on
the VAT in Chile and on the mechanism of the self-enforcement hypothesis of the VAT,
Section 3 describes study design, data and estimation strategy, and Section 4 shows the
results of the Letter Message Experiment and the Spillover Experiment in turn. Section 5
concludes.
   5
     Alm et al. (2007) study a related question in a lab setting, by experimentally varying the portion of an
individual’s income that is subject to third-party reporting, and find that cheating increases as individuals
earn larger shares of income that are not perfectly detectable.




                                                     5
2       Context
2.1     Background on the VAT and its Use in Chile
    As its name suggests, the Value Added Tax is paid on the value added at each production
stage: firms pay VAT on the difference between total sales and total input costs. The overall
tax base - total value added in the production chain – is therefore equivalent to that of a
sales tax, which is paid on the entire final value at the retail stage.6 The main difference
between a VAT and a retail sales tax lies in the way it is collected and in who remits the
tax to the government, a difference that is irrelevant in most standard tax models, but is
thought to have significant implications when taking tax administration and tax evasion into
account (Slemrod, 2008).
    To comply with VAT obligations, firms have to maintain books of sales and purchases
with corresponding original receipts of transactions, in order to document their declared
amounts of their “tax debit” (sales and other sources of revenue) and “tax credit” (input
costs).7 The book of purchases therefore contains documentation about the sales of firms’
suppliers. This leads to the third-party paper trail along the production chain (henceforth
referred to as “paper trail”). The client firm maintains a record about the sales of the
supplier, which allows for the possibility that the tax authority can cross-check the two
firms’ records against each other. In Chile, as in many other countries, most firms do not
have to submit this information to the tax authority. Only very large firms and a small
number of firms who choose to use an online filing system do so. For all other firms, this
information can potentially be accessed by the tax authority through an audit, but not as a
matter of routine. Understanding whether the paper trail can have a preventive deterrence
effect even in these settings is of particular interest. This is also the reason that the tax
authority does not generally know which firms deal with which other firms. For this reason,
the spillover experiment was designed to collect information about firms’ trading partners
up and down the production chain.
    A large majority of countries around the world currently have a VAT, and for many
developing countries it represents the largest source of tax revenue. In Chile, the VAT
accounts for about half of tax revenues (Servicio de Impuestos Internos, 2010a). Chile has a
single 19% VAT rate on sale of goods and services across all types of products, which is paid
    6
     This equivalence holds when the VAT has a uniform rate and no exemptions.
    7
     This collection method is commonly known as the “credit-invoice method”. The vast majority of coun-
tries with a VAT currently use the credit-invoice method with a few exceptions such as Japan that uses the
subtraction method (Grinberg, 2010).




                                                    6
monthly.8 Only very few industries are exempt, and there is no lower threshold, firms of all
sizes are subject to the VAT.9 This context allows for analysis of the VAT across a large set
of different types of firms, without the interference of confounding institutional factors such
as industry-specific exemptions or varying taxation rates. Official estimates of VAT evasion
in Chile, based on the comparison of collected VAT to aggregate consumption data from the
central bank, have ranged between 27% and 12% since 1990, with significant fluctuations
from one year to the next (Servicio de Impuestos Internos, 2010b).10


2.2      Mechanism of the “Self-Enforcing” Properties of the VAT
    The “self-enforcement”-hypothesis in the VAT is based on the idea that firms have an
incentive to ask their suppliers for receipts because they can deduct input costs from their
VAT bill (Agha and Haughton, 1996). This incentive builds the creation of paper trails
directly into the tax structure. Since the amounts are recorded in two sets of books, the
risk of cross-checks is thought to deter firms from reporting differing amounts (Bird and
Gendron, 2007). In this way, the buyer acts as the third-party, recording a transaction,
which creates a liability for the supplier. An important feature of this mechanism is that the
two sides of a transaction in inter-business trade have opposing incentives: the buyer benefits
from overstating the input cost, while the seller benefits from understating the sale. In the
middle of the VAT chain, there is therefore no scope for gains from collusion between the two
parties. This mechanism breaks down at the final production stage, with sales to the final
consumer, who has no incentive to ask for a receipt. There is therefore no “self-enforcing”
effect for final transactions.11
    There are several reasons why this self-enforcing mechanism might not work in practice.
First, as mentioned above, most firms do not have to report this third-party information
   8
      If the tax credit is greater than the debit for a given month, the excess can be carried over to the
following month and used as a VAT credit (Servicio de Impuestos Internos, 2011).
    9
      Only the following entities are VAT exempt: news organizations, transportation, education, public
universities and hospitals, the central bank, the social security administration, the ministry of national
defense, the national postal services, and the public lottery. As is usual for a VAT, exports are excluded,
and exporters are reimbursed for the VAT cost embedded in the purchase price of their inputs.
   10
      To prevent fraudulent production of fake input receipts from non-existing firms or duplications, all
receipts used for VAT purposes have to be pre-approved and stamped in the offices of the Chilean tax
authority. The tax authority uses the part of the cross-checkable information that is electronically on file
to calculate whether tax declarations display any discrepancies. For the largest discrepancies, letters are
sent informing firms of the discrepancy, and requiring them to explain or correct the situation. Tax officials
regularly visit retail stores to check that the books are kept in order and correct receipts are used, however,
typically no cross-checks or audits ensue from these visits, unless there is suspicion of grave infraction.
   11
      For this reason, several countries have tried to increase the incentive for the final consumer, by introducing
such measures as imposing fines for consumers who do not ask for a receipt, organizing lotteries with consumer
receipt, allowing consumers to deduct a fraction of their VAT payments from their income tax, etc.



                                                         7
directly to the government. The self-enforcing mechanism therefore depends on the deter-
rence effect of a cross-check conducted during a possible audit. The word “self-enforcement”
is therefore misleading, since it can be expected to work only in interaction with credible
deterrence on part of the tax authority. Second, since the mechanism breaks down at the
final stage, it can potentially unravel from the bottom, if collusion builds up all the way
from the final stage.
    If the mechanism works, we would expect to see a preventive deterrence effect on trans-
actions covered by the paper trail. This will affect how firms respond to an increase in the
audit probability in the following way. The information contained in the paper trail facili-
tates detection of evasion during an audit. At a given level of evasion, one would therefore
expect firms to respond more to an increased audit risk on transactions where a paper trail is
present. The anticipation of this ease of detection can create a preventive deterrence effect,
which reduces evasions ex-ante on transactions with a paper trail. If this deterrence effect is
strong enough, it may reduce evasion to the point where an increase in the audit probability
has a smaller effect on transactions covered by a paper trail (as there is less evasion on these
transactions to begin with). At that point, the paper trail and the audit probability will
interact in a substitutive way. Observing firms responding less on transactions with a paper
trail therefore suggests that ex-ante evasion was lower on these transactions. The Letter
Message Experiment tests whether this is the case.12
    We can distinguish two forms of VAT evasion on inter-firm transactions. Through “Omis-
sion” a transaction is completely omitted from the books of both the seller and the buyer
firm. This requires collusion, and as discussed above only reduces overall VAT payments if it
is carried through all the way to the end of the production chain. “Discrepancies”, represents
evasion where a paper trail is created, but with discrepancies in the amounts that the buyer
and seller report for the transaction.13 This type of evasion is based on the hope that the
tax authority will not cross-check the records.
    The Spillover Experiment complements the findings of the Letter Message Experiment by
showing the mechanism by which the preventive deterrence effect on inter-firm transactions
discussed above comes about. It analyzes the spillover effects of randomly generated audit
pre-announcements on firms’ trading partners. These spillover effects can operate through a
reduction of both types of evasion on inter-firm evasion described above.

                                                  [Table 1]
  12
     As discussed in more detail in the results section, the necessary assumption is that a lower response is
not driven by other differences within firms for the type of transactions covered by a paper trail.
  13
     In order to reduce tax liability, the seller will tend to understate the value of a transaction, while the
buyer will tend to inflate it.


                                                      8
    In the case of omission, an increase in the audit probability of a trading partner increases
the likelihood that this partner will insist that the transaction be “on the books.” Hence,
the audit pre-announcement can generate a paper trail. As illustrated in Table 1, this has
asymmetric effects depending on whether a firm is a supplier or a client of the treated firm
(i.e. of the firm that receives the pre-announcement). If the treated firm starts demanding
a receipt, this will lead to an increase in suppliers’ declared sales and therefore in suppliers’
tax liability. For client firms, on the contrary, it will lead to an increase in declarable input
costs, thereby lowering their tax liability. In the case of discrepancies, the spillover effects
are symmetric for both suppliers and clients. The increased risk of cross-checks will lead
all firms to revise their declared transactions in the direction of the actual value, increasing
their tax liabilities.
    Taking both types of evasion together, the effect of an increase in the audit probability
on reported tax liability is unambiguously positive in the case of the suppliers, while in the
case of clients, it is ambiguous depending on which type of inter-firm evasion dominates. The
Spillover Experiment tests whether increasing a firm’s audit probability indeed increases VAT
payments by its trading partners, and whether this effect is asymmetrically concentrated on
its suppliers.


3     Study Design, Data and Empirical Specification
3.1    Study Design: Letter Message Experiment
    Both randomized field studies analyzed in this paper were conducted in collaboration with
the Chilean Tax Authority (“Servicio de Impuestos Internos”). Research design diagrams
for both experiments can be found in Figure A8 of the Appendix. The goal of the “Letter
Message Experiment” is to evaluate the effectiveness of the VAT paper trail across the entire
economy in a fully developed, well-functioning VAT system. Through letters sent by the tax
authority, we vary the perceived audit probability of randomly chosen firms. The goal is to
test for differential responses by whether or not transactions are covered by the VAT paper
trail, i.e. whether the transactions are between other firms or to the final consumers. As
discussed in Section 2, if we find that transactions that are subject to a paper trail respond
less to an increase in the perceived audit probability, this indicates that the paper trail had
a preventive deterrence effect prior to the intervention.
    The main intervention consists of a letter containing a message of deterrence sent to
102,000 randomly selected firms in a stratified sample among most firms in the country. The
letter is aimed at increasing the perceived audit probability by informing the firm that it has


                                               9
been randomly chosen for an analysis and that if any irregularities are detected, it may be
audited (see Appendix A for the full text of all letters). This intervention did not affect the
actual audit probability. Formally, the content of the message was nevertheless factually true
– as certified after careful consideration by the tax authority’s legal department – since the
tax authority routinely analyses all firms, and firms may always be audited if irregularities
are detected.14 The impact of the letter is measured by comparing the VAT payments of
recipient firms to payments by the 306,600 firms randomly selected not to receive any letter.
    The goal of the Letter Message Experiment is, however, not to measure the overall effect
of the letter on firm compliance. The intention is to shed light on the effectiveness of the
paper trail by analyzing how it interacts with the expected audit probability. This is achieved
by comparing the responsiveness of line-items in the VAT declaration that are covered by
the paper trail, i.e. transactions between two firms – to line items that are not – i.e. sales to
final consumers. We can do this both across firms with different shares of their sales going
to final consumers, and within firms by comparing the responsiveness of different line-items
to each other. The latter allows holding constant any difference that may exist across firms
with different shares of final sales, such as firm size, risk aversion, ease of hiding evasion etc.
    Finally, the Letter Message Experiment also allows comparing the effect across different
types of firms.15 In particular, I can test predictions about firm size. Kleven et al. (2009),
for example, posit that large firms evade fewer taxes, since firms with more employees run a
higher risk that a whistle-blower among their employees informs the government about unre-
ported transactions. The employees in this case function as potential third-party reporters.
We might therefore expect that firm size, similarly to the VAT paper trail, has a preventive
deterrence effect that leads to a lower response to an increase in the audit probability. At the
same time, smaller firms also tend to have a larger share of sales going to final consumers.
Controlling for both firm size and share of final sales, we can get a sense of how much of the
differential response by size may be driven by the degree of retail sales.16
  14
      It is important to note that even though used surprisingly frequently in practice, sending out deterrence
letters which are not backed up by a corresponding increase in the actual audit probability is not a policy
that seems sustainable in the long-run. As a tool of analysis, it can be used to study differential responses by
line item or type of tax payer, both for academic research or to optimize audit strategies (see Marshall and
Pomeranz, 2011). However, ideally, tax authorities or other enforcement agencies using it should combine it
with real changes in audit policy, particularly if repeated regularly, since it could otherwise start undermining
the agency’s credibility. Nevertheless, the strong response to the second wave of this experiment suggests
that the deterrence letters do not lose their power very quickly.
   15
      The Letter Message Experiment was also used to analyze other firm characteristics not reported in this
paper, which are of interest to the tax authority, such as firm age, region, industry, etc. Based on the analysis
of what type of firms are more likely to respond, we developed an instrument to optimize audit strategies
for the Chilean Tax Authority (see Marshall and Pomeranz, 2011).
   16
      However, it is important to keep in mind that such cross-firm comparisons have to be interpreted with
caution, since in contrast to the within-firm estimates used to study the paper trail, other unobserved firm



                                                       10
    In order to test whether the impact of the letter really stems from deterrence, two addi-
tional letters, sent to a sample of about 18,500 each, were included in the study: a tax morale
letter aimed at affecting perceived social norms and a “placebo” letter to test whether the
simple fact of receiving mail from the tax authority was driving the impact. The placebo
letter simply informs firms about some new features on the tax authority’s website. The
tax morale letter contains a message aimed at increasing the perceived social norm of tax
compliance.17


3.2     Study Design: Spillover Experiment
    While the Letter Message Experiment studies whether overall for representative firms,
the paper trail interacts in a substitutive way with the audit probability, the Spillover Ex-
periment is designed to show the underlying self-enforcing mechanisms in action. It analyzes
whether, as predicted by the self-enforcement hypothesis, increased tax enforcement on one
firm generates spillovers to its trading partners up the VAT chain. In order to analyze
how the self-enforcing mechanism gets triggered by injecting deterrence into the system, the
Spillover Experiment focuses on a set of firms where compliance is ex-ante expected to be
low.
    The intervention of the Spillover Experiment is as follows. 5,600 firms were scheduled
for an audit by the tax authority. Half of them were randomly selected to receive a pre-
announcement for this audit (see Appendix Figure A4). The other half did not receive any
message from the tax authority. Half a year later, the tax authority started summoning
all firms in the sample to appear at the tax office for an audit. Since the tax authority
does not have information on which firms trade with which, information about trading
partners was collected during the audits. For the firms the tax authority was able to audit,18
auditors recorded information about the trading partners from the transaction records in
the firms’ books of sales and purchases for the three months prior to the mailing of the
pre-announcement. This made it possible to identify the firms’ main suppliers and clients in
a period not yet affected by the treatment.
    Based on this information, the spillover effects of the audit pre-announcement on suppliers
and clients of the treated firms can be measured by comparing their declared VAT to the
declared VAT of suppliers and clients of the control firms, before and after the time when the
characteristics may affect the differential estimates.
  17
     Motivational messages have been found to increase voluntary cooperation in some instances. For exam-
ple, Dal Bó and Dal Bó (2009) find that moral suasion can increase cooperation in the lab, especially when
coupled with deterrence, and Fellner et al. (Forthcoming) find that social norm letters increase compliance
with broadcast tax obligations for those who live in regions with generally low compliance.
  18
     For a discussion of attrition at the auditing stage see Section 3.3 below.


                                                    11
audit pre-announcement was sent out. Finding that trading partners of treated firms increase
their declared VAT compared to trading partners of control firms indicates a spillover effect,
since whether or not ones’ trading partner was treated is randomly assigned.


3.3    Implementation and Data
    The universe of firms considered in this study consists of almost all firms in Chile that
were operating in June 2008 and had declared a positive amount of VAT for at least one
month between July 2007 and June 2008. A subsample of 5,600 firms was selected for the
Spillover Experiment, the remainder is in the Deterrence Letter Experiment. The only firms
that were excluded from the study were very large firms and firms in the Letter Message
Experiment that had undeliverable addresses and could therefore not receive a letter. The
main data used in the study consists of information from the monthly VAT declarations by
firms, starting in January 2008. In addition, I merge this data with some firm characteristics
such as firm size, number of employees, industry, etc.

Implementation and Summary Statistics: Letter Message Experiment

Most letters in the Letter Message Experiment were sent in early December 2008, affecting
tax declarations starting in November 2008, which are due in the following month. A smaller,
also randomly chosen second wave of letters was mailed five months later, in order to study
whether the effectiveness of the letters decreased over time.
    In order to increase compliance with treatment assignment in the study sample, we
were able to undertake a special procedure with the Chilean Postal Service to exclude firms
with invalid postal addresses from both the treatment and the control group of the Letter
Message Experiment, leaving a sample of 445,734 firms. This allowed me to reduce the share
of treatment firms that did not receive the letter from around 26% to 6%, thus substantially
increasing statistical power. Table 2 presents summary statistics for the treatment groups in
the Letter Message Experiment, compared to the control group. None of the differences in
average characteristics between the treatment groups and the control group are statistically
significant at the 10%-level.

                                          [Table 2]

   Firms in the Letter Message Experiment pay an average of 264,000 pesos (equivalent to
about 500 USD) in monthly VAT, with a median of approximately 70,000 (equivalent to
about 140 USD). The large difference between the mean and the median indicates a very


                                             12
large dispersion in the distribution of tax payments. As discussed below, this dispersion has
implications for the empirical specification of the analysis.
    Firms in Chile are categorized into five groups by size, based on their sales revenues during
the preceding tax year: micro, small, medium, large-sized firms, and firms with no sales in
the preceding tax year.19 Micro-sized firms are by far the largest group, comprising 74.5%
of the firms. The second largest group are small firms (18.2%), followed by medium (2.8%),
and firms with no sales in the preceding year (1.5%). The remaining three percent are new
firms that have not been yet classified. Firms are also balanced across the treatment groups
with respect to their position in the production chain: 28.8% are retailers that sell only to
final consumers and 38.2% are intermediary firms that sell only to other firms. Overall, the
share of sales that go to final consumers is 45.6%.

Implementation and Summary Statistics: Spillover Experiment

The letters containing the audit pre-announcement for the Spillover Experiment were also
sent in early December 2008, affecting tax payments starting in November 2008. The sample
selected for this analysis consists of mostly rural, micro size firms, with tax declarations that
show patterns suggestive of evasion. These firms had submitted VAT declarations regularly
each month and had not been found guilty of any infractions, but they continually reported
sales smaller than their input costs, without going out of business.20 Since many of these
small firms were located in remote areas, there was a substantial fraction with no valid postal
address. In these cases, the tax authority agreed to deliver the audit pre-announcement in
person to the firms’ location. They were able to reach 96% of assigned firms, but there were
several weeks of delay for part of them.
    Table 3, Columns (1) and (2) present summary statistics for the 5,600 firms in the original
sample of the Spillover Experiment. None of the differences between treatment and control
group are statistically significant at the 10% level. Since this sample was selected for having
suspiciously high input costs compared to their sales, it is not surprising that their reported
sales/input-ratio is suspiciously low, averaging only 0.67, and their actual mean declared
VAT is negative. The mean of -18,452 pesos indicates that on average, these firms declare
about 37 US dollars more in tax deduction from input costs than liabilities from sales, and
the median VAT declaration is zero. The sample consists of very small, rural firms, mostly in
remote areas: all are micro size, and they are among the smallest even within that category,
  19
     Micro size firms sell less than the equivalent of 100,000 USD per year, small firms have sales between
100,000 and 1.1 million USD, medium size firms between 1.1 and 4.2 million USD, and large firms over 4.2
million USD.
  20
     Even though sales can temporarily be lower than input costs, for example when firms make large invest-
ments into costly inputs, over the long-run, this pattern raises suspicion.


                                                    13
with an average of 2.3 on the official firm size sub-classification within micro size, which
ranges from 2 to 4.21 Compared to other firms in the country, they also have a smaller share
of final sales (16%), and are more likely to be in the agricultural sector (54%).

                                                    [Table 3]

    The fact that information about the trading partners was obtained during the audits
lead to substantial attrition in the final sample for the Spillover Experiment. Due to ad-
ministrative delays in the delivery of the audit notices, followed by the consequences of a
very large earthquake, only about 27% of the 5,600 firms were actually audited, and they
provided information about 2,829 trading partners. One potential concern of this attrition
rate is that it might introduce selection bias if it creates differences between the treatment
and control group within the remaining sample. Since the attrition was mainly driven by
the degree to which an area was affected by the earthquake, it is plausibly exogenous to the
randomly assigned treatment. Columns (3) and (4) of Table 3 suggest that this is indeed
the case. Treatment and control firms do not differ in their probability of being audited and
there is no significant difference in the characteristics of treatment and control firms among
the audited sample, apart from a somewhat higher proportion of firms in the agricultural
sector.
    A separate potential issue is that firms that received a pre-announcement might have
selectively removed or changed the trading partners in their books compared to those that
did not receive a pre-announcement. There are several reason why this does not seem to be
a concern in practice. First, as shown in Columns (5) and (6), trading partners of treated
firms do not differ from those of control firms, except for a slightly lower share of months in
which they failed to submit a declaration. Second, due to the audit method of the Chilean
Tax Authority, such differential manipulations between treated and control firms are not
very likely, since all audited firms, including those in the control group, receive an audit
notice in written form weeks before they come in to the tax office to get audited. Finally,
even if firms would have selectively removed their most delinquent trading partners from
their books, this would actually lead to a downward biased estimate of the spillover effects.
    As the rest of the balance table shows, overall, the trading partners in the Spillover
Experiment are substantially larger than the audited firms, both in terms of their VAT paid
and their official size category. The have about the same average age and a slightly higher
share of their sales going to final consumers, and are much less likely to be in the agricultural
sector. Their sales/input-ratio is in a much less suspicious range, with an average of 1.6.
About 57% of trading partners are suppliers of the audited firms, while the rest are clients.
  21
   Given that the official size classification is based on declared sales, and that this sample is suspected of
under-declaring their true sales, this is likely to be an underestimate of the true size of these firms’ operations.


                                                        14
3.4     Empirical Strategy
    The main outcome variable used is declared VAT, i.e. 19% of declared sales minus
declared input costs.22 As discussed above, the dispersion of monthly declared VAT is very
large. It ranges from -800 billion pesos (equivalent to -1.7 billion USD) to 16 billion pesos (33
million USD). For illustration, Figure A5 in the Appendix shows this very large dispersion,
even excluding the top and bottom 5% of values. At the same time, there is a large density
at zero. Such a large variance and the fat tails of the distribution imply that analyzing the
impact of the intervention on the mean of declared VAT does not lead to any significant
results, because the resulting variance is extremely large. I therefore use quantile regressions
as well as linear probability models for the likelihood that declared VAT is larger than three
key thresholds: (1) zero for the extensive margin, (2) VAT declared in the same month of
the previous year, and (3) the predicted value based on the control group.
    The latter two specifications have the advantage of not being sensitive to scale. This
is important, given that much of the analysis does not focus on the overall impact of the
treatment, but rather on the comparison of the response for different types of transactions or
firms. Since the amount in pesos will mechanically be larger in larger types of transactions or
firms, and the probability of declaring zero VAT will be smaller, both the quantile regressions
and the extensive margin are not appropriate to analyze differential responses. For such
comparisons, measures that captured relative changes are indicated.
    Quantile regressions provide an indication of the magnitude of the impact, while being
much less sensitive to extreme values than the mean. The specification used throughout is a
difference-in-difference approach, comparing treated firms to control firms and pre-treatment
to post-treatment period. The specification for the quantile regressions is therefore

                         Qτ (V ATit |Zi , t) = ατ + βτ (Zi · post) + γτ Zi + ∂t ,                      (1)

where Zi is the treatment assignment dummy indicating that a firm is in the treatment
group, ∂t stands for month fixed effects and Zi · post indicates treatment, i.e. a firm in the
treatment group in the post-treatment period.
    The linear probability models are analyzed using the following specifications:

                              Tit = α + β(Zi · post) + γZi + ∂t + eit ,                                (2)
  22
    This value can be negative, as input costs can exceed sales in a given month. In this case the firm can
carry the negative amount over to the next month as a tax credit. All measures used in this paper exclude
the carry-over from the previous month, so that the analysis focuses on the new transactions in the current
month.




                                                    15
    where Tit is the binary tax outcome for individual i in month t. The probability of de-
tecting any positive amount, Tit = LargerZeroit , captures the extensive margin. However,
similar to the quantile regression, this measure will vary with the size of transactions or
firms. For analysis of differential responses, a measure capturing relative change is required.
One specification that satisfies this concern is the linear probability model with the outcome
dummy indicating whether declared VAT is higher in the current month compared to the
same month a year earlier: Tit = V AT Increaseit . This outcome has several benefits com-
pared to alternative measures. First, as opposed to log specifications or count data models, it
is applicable to variables that include zero or negative values, such as is the case for declared
VAT. In addition, it provides a relative measure indicating a change in tax declarations
compared to the firm’s own history, it is robust against outliers, and at the same time takes
into account firms in all parts of the VAT distribution.23
    One possible remaining confounding factor could be differential time trends between
different types of transactions, which could lead to differences in the probability of an increase
compared to the previous year. As a robustness check, I therefore also run a specification
with an outcome dummy that indicates whether declared VAT is higher than the predicted
value for that firm in that month: Tit = LargerP redictedit . The prediction is based on
median regressions among the firms in the control group and uses as predictors the firms’
pre-treatment VAT payments, as well as those characteristics, for which differential treatment
effects are evaluated in this paper, such as size and the share of sales to final consumers.24
    When comparing the impact of the letter messages for different line-items, I use an
additional within-firm estimation to hold any differential firm characteristics constant. For
example, when comparing sales to input costs, there are two observations for each firm and
month: one for its sales and one for its input costs. An interaction term between the type of
transaction and treatment captures the differential impact on different line-items. Including
the necessary controls, this gives the following regression:

 LineItemIncreaseitl = α + β(ci · post) + ci + ∂t + φ(Zi · post · l) + η(post · l) + ιl + eitl , (3)

where l indicates the line-item, ci captures the firm fixed effects controlling for any between-
  23
      One of the alternative specifications is quantile regressions using a normalized version of monthly tax
payments in the form of monthly VAT/(pre-treatment average VAT). However, this specification is very
sensitive to firms with very small pre-treatment averages, which end up with very high values when dividing
by their pre-treatment value. Also, since the median of some line-items is zero, median regressions for these
line-items are not informative, and the choice of alternative quantiles becomes to a certain extent arbitrary.
   24
      Predicted medians are used instead of means, since due to the high variance, the predicted mean is
again not very informative, and few firms end up close to their predicted mean. The predicting regression is
                                                              0
therefore: Qτ (V ATi |preV ATi , Xi ) = ατ + βτ preV ATi + Xi γτ , where preVAT is the firm’s average monthly
VAT prior to November 2008.


                                                     16
firm variation, and ci · post captures firm fixed-effects times treatment period, to control for
any differential trends within the firms. φ therefore represents the coefficient of interest: the
differential response of line item l for the treatment group in the treatment period.
    All regression analysis of the Letter Message Experiment includes both waves of mailing.
To this effect, treatment firms are included until four months after treatment (the time during
which the overall effect of the deterrence letter is the strongest), which is until February 2009
for the first wave and June 2009 for the second, and control firms are included until June
2009.25 Since in the implementation of the Spillover Experiments some pre-announcement
letters were delivered with delays, a six months post-treatment window is used in the Spillover
Experiment. This corresponds to an average of four months after delivering of the letter, to
be equivalent to the post-treatment window of the Letter Message Experiment.26
    Given that the random variation affects only the firms’ perceived audit probabilities,
holding everything else constant, following Engel et al. (2001), I interpret changes in declared
income in response to the randomized interventions as changes in tax evasion. There may,
however, also be a response of real economic activity. The increased tax payments following
the increased perceived audit risk reduce business profitability and may lead to increased
prices, which, in turn, may decrease demand. All this may lead firms to reduce production.
The observed increase in declared VAT may therefore be an underestimate of the reduction
in evasion resulting from the treatment, since a reduction in production would lead to a
decrease in declared VAT.


4      Results
4.1     Letter Message Experiment
    The Letter Message Experiment examines how the VAT-generated paper trail interacts
with tax enforcement for representative firms across Chile, by testing whether the increase in
the expected audit probability induced by the deterrence letter has a lower effect on reporting
of transactions that are subject to the VAT paper trail – i.e. transactions between two firms
– compared to transactions that are not – i.e. sales to the final consumer. The following
section first establishes the overall effectiveness of the deterrence message. It then shows
  25
     Due to the random assignment, dropping one treatment group at an earlier date does not effect the
validity of the results. All specifications include month fixed effects. Robustness checks using six post-
treatment months, available upon request, show similar results.
  26
     Results from a time-varying instrumental variables approach, aimed at calculating the corresponding
Treatment-on-the-Treated effect (available upon request), find similar if slightly larger effects than the Intent-
to-Treat results reported in the paper. Robustness checks using four post-treatment months of the Intent-
to-Treat specification are similar, if somewhat less statistically significant.


                                                       17
that this increase in the perceived audit probability indeed has a smaller impact where the
VAT paper trail is present, even when looking at differential effects within firms, holding all
firm characteristics constant.

Overall Effectiveness of Deterrence

    Panel A in Figure 1 shows the impact of the deterrence letter on declared VAT of recipient
firms, compared to the control group, which received no letter. The x-axis indicates time,
with monthly observations. The vertical line represents the month when the letters were
mailed. The graph shows the percent difference between medians of the treated and control
firms in each month. We see a marked jump in tax payments after receipt of the deterrence
letter. The median VAT income declared increases by about 12 percent and then slowly
decreases again to reach the same levels as the control group after about 18 months.27
This large response speaks to the credibility of the Chilean Tax Authority in shifting firms’
perceived monitoring risk and also indicates that firms do have scope to increase their tax
declarations in the face of heightened deterrence.

                                                  [Figure 1]

    Table A1 in the Appendix confirms the dynamics of the effect of the deterrence letter in
regression form. The horizontal line marks the time of the mailing, with t1 indicating the
first month affected by the letter, and the rows below showing monthly effects through one
year after mailing. Using the binary variables discussed above, it confirms the same pattern
shown for the median in the graphical results above: a marked increase immediately after
the mailing of the letter, and a steady decline thereafter.28 Given the large size of the treated
group, it is of course plausible that there were spillover effects on the control group. This
would bias the estimated effect of the treatment downwards since the spillover effects would
reduce evasion in the control group as well.
    In order to establish whether it is really deterrence that drives the effect, I compare the
impact of the deterrence letter to that of the tax morale and placebo letters. Panels B and
C of Figure 1 show their impact. In contrast to the deterrence letter, no marked increase
is visible at the time of the mailing. The apparent first increase in Panel B happens before
  27
     Figure A6 shows a similar pattern for the second wave of mailing. It indicates that even five months after
the first wave, the deterrence message is perceived as credible. If anything, the treatment effect is stronger,
increasing the median by up to 18%. A possible reason is that tax evasion is suspected to have increased in
this period due to a downturn in the economy. All regression analysis include both waves of mailing.
  28
     Since the first four months have the strongest overall effect, all subsequent analysis for the Letter Message
Experiment is conducted using four post-treatment months. Robustness checks using six post-treatment
months, available upon request, show similar effects.


                                                       18
mailing of the letter, and the second increase that occurs almost a year later is very unlikely
to be due to the morale letter. The variance is larger due to the smaller sample size. This
comparison shows that it is the content of the deterrence letter that drives the response, not
simply the fact of receiving mail from the tax authority.
    Table 4 shows the same result in regressions for the mean and the four outcome variables
discussed above: median VAT, probability of declaring more than in the same month of
the previous year, probability of declaring more than predicted, and probability of declaring
any positive amount. All specifications confirm a highly significant impact of the deterrence
message, except for the regression using mean VAT, which as expected does not provide
statistically significant results.29

                                                  [Table 4]

Interaction with the Paper Trail

    It is important to remember that evaluating the direct impact of the letters messages is
not the focus of this paper. The goal is to use the randomly induced change in expected
audit risk to back out information about the effectiveness of the VAT paper trail. Having
established that the tax authority was able to credibly increase the expected audit proba-
bility, this section therefore turns to the analysis of the differential impact for transactions
covered by the VAT paper trail. It first compares different types of transactions overall and
then focuses on intra-firm analysis, in order to hold all firm-specific characteristics constant.
    Table 5 displays the treatment effect of the deterrence message for the different types of
transactions. The first two columns show the two components of the VAT: sales and input
costs. By definition, input costs are based on transactions between firms and are therefore
subject to a paper trail. If the paper trail has a preventive deterrence effect, one would
therefore expect less of a response to the additional deterrence message for input costs than
for sales. In line with the self-enforcement hypothesis, Columns (1) and (2) indeed show a
significant response in sales, but not in input costs. The probability of increasing declared
sales compared to the previous year increases highly significantly by 1.17%, while there is
an insignificant coefficient of 0.16% for input costs.30
  29
     The tax morale letter only has a significant effect on the margin of declaring a positive amount. In line
with this, quantile results not shown here find no significant effects overall, except for an increase by those
with very low or negative declared VAT. For these firms, receiving a letter about high compliance by others
may have a deterrence effect, as it may raise speculation that the tax authority suspects them of evasion.
  30
     This of course does not mean that only 1.13% of the firms responded to treatment, as firms may for many
other reasons be already above that threshold without the treatment, or far below it. The interpretation
of these coefficients is the percent of firms that were pushed over the threshold of last year’s payment due
to the increase from treatment. These coefficients unfortunately do not have a very intuitive interpretation,
but they are well equipped to show relative responses between different types of firms or transactions.


                                                      19
                                                [Table 5]

    The Chilean tax forms allow me to further disentangle the effect by distinguishing two
types of sales: intermediary sales to other firms and final sales to consumers, where the
former are covered by the VAT paper trail and the latter are not. Columns (3) and (4) show
that the effect is again concentrated on the type of transaction not covered by the paper
trail, the sales to the final consumer. The probability of increasing final sales compared to
the previous year goes up by 1.33% and is highly significant, while there is only a statistically
insignificant effect of 0.12% for intermediate sales.
    The above analysis excludes retail firms that sell only to final consumers, and upstream
firms that sell only to other firms. This limits the degree to which the differential response
is driven by cross-firm variation. Since by definition pure retailers cannot respond on inter-
mediate sales or upstream firms on final sales. When including the entire universe of firms
in the analysis (see Appendix Table A2), results are still consistent with the self-enforcing
hypothesis. We see a much stronger response on sales than on inputs, and on final sales than
on intermediate sales. In this sample, there is some response on inter-firm sales. However,
this specification of course has to be interpreted with much caution, since many other char-
acteristics that can affect the response to a deterrence message, such as firm size, tax morale,
risk aversion, etc. could potentially be correlated with being a retailer or an upstream firm.
    Even though Table 5 only compare transactions among firms that have both types of sales,
we can go one step further in ruling out spurious effects stemming from variation between
firms, by confirming these findings in a within-firm estimation in Table 6. The regressions in
Table 6 follow the specification of Equation (3) in Section 3.4. This specification uses a data
set that contains an observation for each line item for each firm in a given month. Including
firm fixed effects and firm fixed effects times post-treatment period allows comparing the
response to the deterrence message between different line items within a firm. Any observable
or unobservable firm characteristics, both overall and for the treatment period, are thus held
constant.31 Column (1) compares the effect between sales and input costs, and confirms that
the response is clearly concentrated on sales, even when comparing transactions within the
firm. Column (2) compares the impact between final and intermediary sales, and again finds
that the response is much stronger in final than in intermediary sales.

                                                [Table 6]

   These results confirm that the finding of a lower response on transactions already covered
by a paper trail is not driven by heterogeneity between firms. As discussed in Section 2.2
  31
    To address the large computational demands of two sets of high-dimensional fixed effects, Stata routine
reg2hdfe was used (Guimaraes and Portugal, 2010). Including fixed effects X post did not change the results.


                                                    20
above, considering that at a given level of evasion, an audit can be expected to be more
effective where a paper trail is present, the fact that the response is lower on these trans-
actions suggests that the paper trail had a preventive deterrence effect, leading to ex ante
lower levels of evasion on transactions covered by the paper trail prior to the intervention.
Through the indirect experimental approach (Khwaja and Mian, 2011) of injecting deter-
rence into the system and observing the differential response, we can back out an indication
of lower evasion on transactions covered by a VAT paper trail.
    While we can hold constant any heterogeneity between firms, such as firm owners’ risk
aversion and tax morale, firm size, industry, etc. the necessary assumption for this inference
is that the lower response to the deterrence message is not driven by a difference within
firms between their final sales and their other transactions. There are of course differences
between final and intermediate transactions within a firm, since it is not randomly assigned
whether the client is a consumer or another firm. We can also not test directly whether
firms interpret the letter to target final sales in particular, though this did not seem to be
the case based on the qualitative interviews I conducted when pre-testing the letters. The
Spillover Experiment in Section 4.2 will therefore complement the findings of the Letter
Message Experiment by showing the underlying mechanism in action.

Interaction with Firm Size

As discussed in Section 3.1, another dimension along which the information flows about tax
liabilities are thought to vary is firm size. Differently to the VAT paper trail, where we can
analyze types of transactions within a given firm, the analysis by firm size necessarily implies
comparison across firms. Nevertheless, we can still see some interesting correlations. The
following section shows how the treatment effect varies with firm size, and how this relates
to the degree with which firms’ sales are subject to the VAT paper trail.
    Table 7 analyses how the treatment effect varies with both firm size and the share of sales
going to final consumers. Column(1) shows that, consistent with the findings in the previous
section, firms with a larger share of final sales respond more strongly to the deterrence letter.
Columns (2) and (3) of Table 7 look at two different measures of firm size: the official two-
digit Chilean size classification, based on firms’ revenues in the preceding year, and the log
of the number of employees in the pre-treatment year. For both measures, the treatment
effect decreases with size. Figure A7 in the appendix also displays the impact based on
three median regressions, one for each of the official Chilean size categories: micro, small
and medium. This is consistent with the idea of Kleven et al. (2009) that larger firms evade
fewer taxes since collusion is harder with a large number of employees. There may, of course,



                                               21
be many other reasons for this differential response by size.32 With respect to the VAT, the
question arises whether the fact that small firms have a higher proportion of retail sales may
be driving the differential response by firm size to some extent.

                                                  [Table 7]

    Columns (4) and (5) include interactions of treatment with both the share of final sales
and a size measure. As a result, the coefficients on the size measures are reduced significantly.
In Panel A, looking at the probability of declaring more than in the previous year, the size
coefficients are reduced by about 40 percent, but stay significant, while in Panel B, looking
at the probability of declaring more than predicted, they are reduced by about two thirds,
and are no longer statistically significant. The coefficient on the share of final sales stays
highly significant in all specifications.
    Since the specification in Panel B controls for differential trends for these different groups
of firms over time, it provides the more reliable estimate. This would suggest that almost
two thirds of the larger response in smaller firms can be explained by the larger degree to
which their sales go to final consumers, and are therefore not covered by the VAT paper trail.
However, this type of specific magnitude resulting from a horse-race regression between two
correlated variables of course needs to be interpreted with much caution.33 Nevertheless, the
results suggest that a significant part of the higher evasion in smaller firms may be driven
by a weaker VAT paper trail.


4.2     Spillover Experiment
    The Letter Message Experiment showed in the previous section that in Chile overall,
in general equilibrium across the whole country, an increase in deterrence generates less
of a response on transactions already covered by a VAT paper trail, suggesting that the
paper trail has a preventive deterrence effect. The Spillover Experiment compliments these
findings and is designed to find direct evidence for the underlying self-enforcing mechanism.
As discussed in Section 3.2 above, the experiment injects deterrence into the system in this
low compliance environment, to test for spillovers along the production chain. I measure
  32
     Firms of different sizes may for example vary in their priors about the underlying audit probability, risk
aversion, use of other sources of paper trails such as electronic billing, etc. An additional reason for lower
evasion may be that in small firms, for example in a mom and pop store, the person making the evasion
decision (e.g. whether or not to give a receipt) is also the residual claimant of the tax money saved, while
in large firms, such as for example chain stores, this decision is usually made by an employee who does not
benefit directly from evading the tax.
  33
     If one of the variables is measured with more measurement error than the other, attenuation bias will
lead it to look relatively less important.



                                                      22
such spillovers by comparing VAT declarations for trading partners of the treated firms to
trading partners of the control firms before and after the audit pre-announcement.

                                                [Table 8]

    Table 8 shows the impact of the audit pre-announcement on VAT payments of all trading
partners. There is a significant increase in the declared VAT of related firms in the months
following the audit pre-announcements, showing that the pre-announcement had compliance
effects beyond the treated firm, promulgating through the network of their trading partners.
    These results represent the first documentation of tax enforcement on one firm generating
spillovers to other firms. Given these strong spillover effects, it might be in the interest of
tax authorities to take these indirect effects into account, when designing an audit strategy.
However, the overall spillover effects cannot by themselves establish that the channel is the
VAT chain. Such spillovers could also simply result from a perception of a general increase
in the audit risk by firms that are in communication with the treated firms.
    Columns (3) and(4) of Table 8 therefore importantly test for the asymmetry in the
prediction of the VAT self-enforcement hypothesis as detailed in Section 2.2 and displayed
in Table 1. The spillover effects are shown separately for client and supplier firms.34 In
line with the predictions, there are strong increases in declared VAT for suppliers, and no
significant effects for client firms. This establishes the directionality of the spillover effects
up the VAT chain. We can now rule out that the spillovers are simply the results of general
conversations about the audit pre-announcement with trading partners, leading to an overall
perception of increased audit risk in the area.
    One remaining concern is that this differential effect might be driven by the fact that
client and supplier firms are clearly different from each other. I therefore test for robustness
of this result by including a series of control variables and their interaction with treatment,
treatment period, etc. in Columns (5) and (6) of Table 8. The included control variables
are firm size, the sales’ input ratio (a proxy that the Chilean Tax Authority uses to assess
suspicion of evasion), share of sales to the final customers (a measure of the degree to which
the firm is an intermediate firm vs. a retailer), and finally a categorization of whether the
firm’s industry is classified by the tax authority as “hard-to-monitor.” The findings remain
robust even after inclusion of the control variables, indicating that it is not the different
nature of supplier and client firms, but rather their position in the VAT chain that seems to
be driving the result.
  34
    The very small number of trading partners that show up both as a client and as a supplier of some
of the audited firms are recorded both as a client and as a provider. All results are clustered at the level
of the audited firm. Any spillovers between the treatment and control group can be expected to lead to a
downward bias of the estimated spillover effects.


                                                    23
    The findings of the Spillover Experiment provide several insights. First, as predicted by
the self-enforcement hypothesis, the built-in paper trail of the VAT leads to spillovers of
enforcement along the production chain. Monitoring a firm increases tax payments by its
upstream trading partners. Second, this indicates that when taking the whole network of
firms into account, the paper trail globally acts as a complement to the audit probability: it
augments the effectiveness of an increase in the audit probability for one firm, by increasing
VAT payments by other firms.
    Third, the mere existence of information through the paper trail – not surprisingly – is
not in itself self-enforcing in an environment where the risk of cross-checks is low. Prior to the
audit announcement introduced through this study, self-enforcement was incomplete at best
among this sample of firms, even though a VAT system was in place. The small firms in this
sample, mostly located in remote areas, were probably correctly anticipating that the risk
of the tax authority double-checking their declarations was low. The additional deterrence
effect resulting from the pre-announced audits was necessary to trigger the effectiveness of
the VAT paper trail, indicating that it is only the interaction of information with deterrence
that leads to effective tax enforcement.


5     Conclusion
    This paper investigates the effectiveness of the Value Added Tax in facilitating tax en-
forcement and sheds light on the role of information and third-party paper trails for taxation.
It provides the first micro-empirical evidence for the self-enforcing power of the paper trail
in the VAT and for spillovers in tax enforcement through firms’ trading networks more gen-
erally, and shows that in line with a growing recent literature, information reporting plays a
crucial role for effective taxation.
    Two randomized field experiments shed light on the role of the paper trail in the VAT.
The Letter Message Experiment looks at the entire economy of Chile and investigates the
deterrence effect of the VAT paper trail in general equilibrium in a well-functioning VAT
system. It finds that holding firm characteristics constant, transactions that are already
subject to the VAT paper trail respond much less to an increase in the perceived audit
probability. Since for a given level of evasion, an audit can be expected to be more effective
where a paper trail is present, the fact that the response is lower suggests that the paper trail
had a preventive deterrence effect, leading to lower levels of evasion on transactions covered
by the paper trail. In line with predictions of Kleven et al. (2009), the Letter Message
Experiment also finds a stronger response for smaller firms. Controlling for the degree of



                                               24
retail sales reduces this differential response considerably, suggesting that a significant part
of the higher evasion among smaller firms may be driven by a weaker paper trail.
    The Spillover Experiment looks at the underlying dynamic that creates the preventive
deterrence effect of the paper trail, and is designed to show the self-enforcing mechanism in
action. It finds that as predicted by the self-enforcement hypothesis, increasing the audit
probability of firms suspected of evasion generates spillovers up the VAT paper trail that
lead to an increase of their suppliers’ tax payments. These multiplier effects indicate that
globally the VAT paper trail acts as a complement to the audit probability.
    The combined findings of both experiments also show that while in Chile overall, the
VAT paper trail seems to be highly effective, the mere existence of a VAT system, in the
absence of credible deterrence, does not lead to “self-enforcement” – as exemplified by the
low compliance among the sample of the Spillover Experiment prior to the intervention. It
is the interaction of information with deterrence that leads to effective tax enforcement.
    These results have a number of implications for public finance in developing countries and
for tax policy in general. First, and most broadly, in line with findings from the literature
on corruption and illegal capture of public funds, such as Reinikka and Svensson (2004), the
conclusions confirm that verifiable paper trails on financial flows can provide a powerful tool,
rendering misappropriation of funds more difficult.
    Second, the results are informative for the choice of tax instruments. They suggest that
forms of taxation such as the VAT, which leave a stronger paper trail and thereby generate
more information for the tax authority, provide an advantage for tax collection over other
forms of taxation, such as a retail sales tax. Other mechanisms that provide information to
the government, such as online billing systems or electronic receipts, as recently introduced
by Brazil and Kenya, may have high returns. Further research is required to investigate
the effectiveness of such mechanisms, as well as the dimensions of generalizability of these
findings. For example, the Chilean Tax Authority has a reputation of being highly effective
and having low levels of corruption. So the question arises how this may affect the results.
On one hand, the paper trail may be more important in high corruption environments, as it
reduces the discretion of tax officials (e.g. Baurer, 2005). At the same time, the paper trail
may be less effective where enforcement can be circumvented by paying off the tax auditor.
    Third, the spillover effects are relevant for the design of optimal audit strategies. When
choosing which firms to audit, a tax authority may not only want to consider the expected
impact on the audited firm, but also the multiplier effect through a firm’s trading network.
In particular, the higher response in final sales and spillovers along the supply chain suggest
that increasing the audit probability at the end of the production chain is beneficial both
because it yields higher direct returns and because the spillovers will transmit the effect up


                                              25
the production chain. At the same time, enforcement at the final sales stage is also more
costly, given the absence of a paper trail and the smaller average firm size. Further research
is required to analyze how to optimally allocate audit probabilities to different nodes in the
network.
    Fourth, as Emran and Stiglitz (2005) point out, the VAT is only effective among firms in
the formal sector, and a heavy reliance on the VAT can therefore increase the inter-sectorial
distortions between formal and informal sectors. De Paula and Scheinkman (2010) find that
where the VAT is present, formalized firms tend to trade with other formalized firms, since
these can provide them with receipts that allow them to deduct the input costs from VAT
payments, while informal firms tend to trade among themselves. Combined with the spillover
findings, this suggests that enforcing formalization at the final stage of production might
potentially contribute to formalizing entire production chains.
    Fifth, the differential enforcement through the paper trail at different production stages
leads to differences in effective tax rates and potential distortions in the market. If the evasion
rate is higher for downstream firms, a flat VAT rate will result in upstream firms paying a
higher effective tax rate. This difference in the tax rate may lead to incentives for increased
vertical integration at the last production stage and can create distortions in production
between intermediary goods and final goods. On the other hand, if small firms can evade
more, this may lead firms to stay inefficiently small to reduce their effective tax burden.
Further research is required to investigate whether such distortions will be economically
significant and warrant a revision of the frequently postulated recommendation that, putting
aside redistributive considerations, a flat nominal VAT rate is optimal (e.g. Ebrill, 2001).
    Finally, the results suggest a possible explanation for the differences in tax evasion be-
tween developed and developing economies. In many developing countries, home production
plays an important role, gains from trade and division of labor are relatively small, and pro-
duction chains tend to be shorter. Moreover, if gains from trade are small, division of labor
may not only be low, but also more elastic with respect to taxation. If the division of labor
leads to transactions between agents, which – in contrast to home production – are traceable
by the tax authority, small taxes may be enough to discourage such divisions and thereby
erode the traceable tax base. All these factors may make it harder for developing countries to
develop an effective tax system, since they reduce the number of transactions that can lead
to verifiable paper trails – through the VAT or through other forms of third-party reporting.




                                                26
6      References
Adimark, “Imagen del Servicio de Impuestos Internos,” Santiago de Chile 2006.
Agha, Ali and Jonathan Haughton, “Designing VAT Systems: Some Efficiency Considera-
 tions,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 1996, 78 (3), 303–308.
Allingham, Michael G. and Agnar Sandmo, “Income Tax Evasion: A Theoretical Analysis,”
  Journal of Public Economics, 1972, 1 (3-4), 323–338.
Alm, James, John A. Deskins, and Michael McKee, “Do Individuals Comply on Income not
  Reported by Their Employer?,” Research Paper Series 07-34, Andrew Young School of Policy
  Studies 2007.
Andreoni, James, Brian Erard, and Jonathan Feinstein, “Tax Compliance,” Journal of
 Economic Literature, 1998, 36 (2), 818–860.
Baurer, Lewis I., “Tax Administrations and Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) in Developing
 Countries,” The World Bank 2005.
Besley, Tim and Torsten Persson, “Public Finance and Development,” in A. J. Auberach and
 M. S. Feldstein, eds., Draft Chapter for the Handbook of Public Economics, 2012.
Bird, Richard and Pierre-Pascal Gendron, The VAT in Developing and Transitional Coun-
  tries, Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Burgess, Robin and Nicholas Stern, “Taxation and Development,” Journal of Economic Lit-
 erature, 1993, 31 (2), 762–830.
Carrillo, Paul, M Shahe Emran, and Anita Rivadeneira, “Do Cheaters Bunch Together?
 Profit Taxes, Withholding Rates and Tax Evasion,” Working Paper, George Washington Uni-
 versity 2012.
Dal Bó, Ernesto and Petro Dal Bó, “Do the Right Thing: The Effects of Moral Suasion on
 Cooperation,” NBER Working Papers 15559, National Bureau of Economic Research 2009.
Das-Gupta, Arindam and Ira N. Gang, “Value Added Tax Evasion, Auditing and Transactions
 Matching,” in J. McLaren, ed., Institutional Elements of Tax Design and Reform, Washington,
 D.C.: The World Bank Technical Paper No. 539, 2003.
De Paula, Aureo and Jose A. Scheinkman, “Value-Added Taxes, Chain Effects, and Infor-
 mality,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2010, 2 (4).
Ebrill, Liam, The Modern VAT, International Monetary Fund, 2001.
Emran, Shahe and Joseph Stiglitz, “On Selective Indirect Tax Reform in Developing Coun-
 tries,” Journal of Public Economics, 2005, 89 (4), 599–623.
Engel, Eduardo, Alexander Galetovic, and Claudio E. Raddatz, “Estimacion de la Evasion
 del IVA Mediante el Metodo de Punto Fijo,” Estudios Tributarios. Internal Revenue Service,
 Santiago, Chile, 1998.
    ,   , and      , “A Note on Enforcement Spending and VAT Revenues,” Review of Economics
    and Statistics, 2001, 83 (2), 384–387.
Engstrom, Per and Patrik Hesselius, “The Information Theory: Theory and Application,”
 Working Paper 17, Institute for Labour Market Policy Evaluation 2007.


                                             27
Feld, Lars and Bruno S. Frey, “Trust Breeds Trust: How Taxpayers are Treated,” Economics
  of Governance, 2002, 3 (2), 87–99.
Fellner, Gerlinde, Rupert Sausgruber, and Christian Traxler, “Testing Enforcement
  Strategies in the Field: Legal Threat, Moral Appeal and Social Information,” Journal of the
  European Economic Association, Forthcoming.
Fisman, Raymond and Shang-Jin Wei, “Tax Rates and Tax Evasion: Evidence from Missing
  Imports in China,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112, 471–500.
Gordon, Roger H. and Wei Li, “Tax Structures in Developing Countries: Many Puzzles and a
 Possible Explanation,” Journal of Public Economics, 2009, 93 (7-8), 855–866.
Grinberg, Itai, “Where Credit is Due: Advantages of the Credit-Invoice Method for Partial
 Replacement VAT,” Tax Law Review, 2010, 63 (2).
Guimaraes, Paulo and Pedro Portugal, “A Simple Feasible Alternative Procedure to Estimate
 Models with High-Dimensional Fixed Effects,” Stata Journal, 2010, 10 (4), 628–649.
Hemming, Richard and John Kay, “The United Kingdom, In The Value Added Tax: Lessons
 from Europe,” in H.J. Aaron, ed., H.J. Aaron, ed., Chicago: Washington: Brookings Institution,
 1981.
Internal Revenue Service, “Federal Tax Compliance Research: Individual Income Tax Gap
  Estimates for 1985, 1988, and 1992,” IRS Publication - Washington, D.C 1415 (Rev. 4-96) 1996.
  , “Updated Estimates of the Tax Year 2001 Individual Income Tax Underreporting Gap,”
  Overview - Washington, D.C. 2006.
  , “Congressional Justification,” Washington, D.C. 2008.
Keen, Michael and Ben Lockwood, “The Value Added Tax: its Causes and Consequences,”
 Journal of Development Economics, 2010, 92 (2), 138–151.
  and Stephen Smith, “VAT Fraud and Evasion: What Do We know and What Can Be Done?,”
  National Tax Journal, 2006, LIX(4), 861–887.
Khwaja, Asim Ijaz and Atif R. Mian, “Rent Seeking and Corruption in Financial Markets,”
 Annual Review of Economics, 2011, 3, 579–600.
Kleven, Henrik J. and Mazhar Waseem, “Behavioral Responses to Notches: Evidence from
  Pakistani Tax Records,” Working Paper Series, London School of Economics 2012.
  , Claus T. Kreiner, and Emmanuel Saez, “Why can Modern Governments Tax so Much?
  An Agency Model of Firms as Fiscal Intermediaries,” NBER Working Papers 15218, National
  Bureau of Economic Research 2009.
  , Martin Knudsen, Claus T. Kreiner, Soren L. Pedersen, and Emmanuel Saez, “Un-
  willing or Unable to Cheat? Evidence from a Tax Audit Experiment in Denmark,” Econometrica,
  2011, 79 (3), 651–692.
Kopczuk, Wojciech and Joel Slemrod, “Putting Firms into Optimal Tax Theory,” The Amer-
 ican Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 2006, 96 (2), 130–134.
Kumler, Todd J., Eric A. Verhoogen, and Judith Frias, “Enlisting Workers in Monitoring
 Firms: Payroll Tax Compliance in Mexico,” Columbia University Department of Economics
 Discussion Papers, 2012, 96.


                                              28
Ludwig, Jens, Jeffrey R. Kling, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Mechanism Experiments and
  Policy Evaluations,” NBER Working Papers 17062, National Bureau of Economic Research 2011.
Marshall, Cristobal and Dina Pomeranz, “Improving Tax Audit Strategies through Random-
 ized Enforcement Messages: Methodology and Application in Chile,” Working Paper, 2011.
Mideplan, “Resultados CASEN 2009: Nuevas Cifras de Distribucion del Ingreso,” Ministerio de
 Planificación - Gobierno de Chile 2010.
Nellor, David, “The Effect of the Value-Added Tax on the Tax Ratio,” IMF Working Papers
 87/47, International Monetary Fund 1987.
Olken, Benjamin A. and Monica Singhal, “Informal Taxation,” American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics, 2011, 3 (4).
Reinikka, Ritva and Jakob Svensson, “The Power of Information: Evidence from a Newspaper
 Campaign to Reduce Capture,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3239, The World
 Bank 2004.
Rincke, Johannes and Christian Traxler, “Enforcement Spillovers,” The Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 2011, 93 (4), 1224–34.
Schneider, Friedrich, Andreas Buehn, and Claudio E. Montenegro, “Shadow Economies
  All Over the World: New Estimates for 162 Countries from 1999 to 2007,” World Bank Discussion
  Papers, The World Bank 2010.
Servicio de Impuestos Internos, “Ingresos Tributarios Anuales 1993 a 2009,” Santiago de Chile
  2010.
  , “Tasa de Evasion IVA 1990-2008,” Subdireccion de Estudios. Santiago de Chile 2010.
  , “Impuesto al Valor Agregado (IVA),” http://www.sii.cl/portales/inversionistas/imp_
  chile/impuestos_iva_ing.htm, April 2011. Accessed: 19/11/2012.
Slemrod, Joel, “Does It Matter Who Writes the Check to the Government? The Economics of
  Tax Remittance,” National Tax Journal, 2008, 61 (2), 251–75.
  and Shlomo Yitzhaki, “Tax avoidance, evasion, and administration,” in A. J. Auberach and
  M. S. Feldstein, eds., Handbook of Public Economics, 2002.
  , Marsha Blumenthal, and Charles Christian, “Taxpayer Response to an Increased Prob-
  ability of Audit: Evidence from a Controlled Experiment in Minnesota,” Journal of Public
  Economics, 2001, 79 (3), 455–483.
Tait, Alan, Value Added Tax, London, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1972.
United States Office of Management and Budget, “Budget of the United States Government,
 Fiscal Year 2009,” Washington, DC 2008.




                                              29
                                                                                                            Deterrence vs. Control (Median)

                                                                           10
                                        Percent Difference in Median VAT

                                                                           5
                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                            Mailing of Letters
                                                                           -5




                                                                                        -18                  -12                  -6                                                 0           6                  12

                                                                                                                                            Month

                                                                                                                                  Panel A


                                                                                 Motivational vs. Control (Median)                                                                         Placebo vs. Control (Median)
                                                                                                                                                                                10
     Percent Difference in Median VAT




                                                                                                                                             Percent Difference in Median VAT
                                        10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mailing of Letters
                                                                                                                                                                                5
                                        5




                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                -5




                                                                                                             Mailing of Letters
                                        -5




                                                                           -18    -12      -6           0        6           12                                                      -18   -12     -6           0       6           12

                                                                                                Month                                                                                                   Month



                                                                                         Panel B                                                                                                 Panel C

                                                                                           Figure 1: Impact of the three types of letters


Notes: This figure plots the monthly percent difference between the medians of the treatment and the control
group for each type of letter: (median VAT treatment group - median VAT control group) / (median VAT
control group), normalizing pre-treatment percent difference to zero. The y-axis indicates time, with monthly
observations, and zero indicates the last month before the mailing of the letters. The vertical line marks
mailing of the letters. The figure shows the first wave of mailing. For the second (much smaller) wave of
mailing, see Figure A6.


                                                                                                                                       30
           Table 1: Two Forms of VAT Evasion on Inter-Firm Transactions

        Position in supply chain                Omission                      Discrepancies

        Supplier                           Sales ↑      VAT ↑               Sales ↑      VAT ↑


                                          Inputs ↑                         Inputs ↓
        Treated firm                                    VAT (↑)                          VAT ↑
                                           Sales ↑                          Sales ↑


        Client                            Inputs ↑      VAT ↓              Inputs ↓      VAT ↑


Notes: “Omission” stands for the type of evasion where a transaction is omitted from the books of both
the seller and the buyer firm. “Discrepancies” stands for the type of evasion where the books of the
seller and the buyer reveal discrepancies. Buyers, for whom inputs represent a tax deduction, will tend
to overstate the value of the transaction, while sellers, for whom the transaction represents a tax liability,
will tend to understate its value. The arrows indicate the expected direction of change for the line item
in question resulting from an increased audit probability on the treated firm.




                                                   31
Table 2: Letter Message Experiment: Baseline Summary Statistics and Balance of Ran-
domization

                                       (1)                  (2)                (3)             (4)
                                  Control Group        Difference        Difference      Difference
                                                     to Deterrence     to Tax Morale     to Placebo
    Monthly VAT (mean)                264,029            3,105                305          -10,565
                                      (1,871)           (3,744)            (7,869)         (7,472)
    Monthly VAT (median)              69,892              -779              -1,841              7
                                       (458)             (920)             (1,959)         (1,836)
    Firm age in months                  108               -0.32              -0.43           -0.60
                                       (0.12)            (0.25)             (0.51)          (0.51)
    % Non-filed declarations             4.3              -0.03              -0.07           -0.02
                                       (0.02)            (0.05)             (0.10)          (0.10)
    % No sales year prior                1.5              -0.05               0.06           -0.01
                                       (0.02)            (0.04)             (0.09)          (0.09)
    % Micro size                        74.5              -0.04              -0.28            -0.6
                                       (0.08)            (0.16)             (0.33)          (0.33)
    % Small size                        18.2             0.028               0.102          -0.055
                                       (0.07)            (0.14)             (0.29)          (0.29)
    % Medium size                        2.8               0.01               0.02            0.07
                                       (0.03)            (0.06)             (0.12)          (0.13)
    % Retail firms                      28.7              -0.06              -0.28           -0.13
                                       (0.08)            (0.16)             (0.34)          (0.34)
    % Intermediary firms                38.2               0.15               0.31           -0.08
                                       (0.09)            (0.18)             (0.37)          (0.37)
    % Final sales                       45.6              -0.10              -0.29           -0.07
                                       (0.08)            (0.17)             (0.35)          (0.35)
    Number of firms                   306,605           102,031            18,579          18,519

   Notes: Each row shows a regression of the pre-treatment variable in question on treatment dummies and
   a constant term. The constant term captures the value for the control group. Monthly VAT winzorized
   at the top and bottom 0.1%. Columns (2)-(4) show the difference of the treatment groups to the control
   group. None of the differences are statistically significant at the 10%-level. Monetary amounts are in
   Chilean pesos, with 500 pesos approximately equivalent to 1 USD. Robust standard errors in parentheses,
   clustered at the firm level for all variables except for median tax paid, for which the table shows the
   result of a median regression for October 2008, the month before the tax payment. All other observations
   are monthly for ten months prior to treatment (from January 2008).




                                                   32
                    Table 3: Spillover Experiment: Baseline Summary Statistics and Balance of Randomization

                                             All Firms                       Audited Firms                        Trading Partners
                                          (1)          (2)                   (3)          (4)                      (5)               (6)
                                     Control Group Difference           Control Group Difference           Trading Partners Difference
                                                                                                           of Control Group
         Monthly VAT (mean)               -18,452         -3,849             -8,024          -16,385           1,077,915          11,845
                                         (11,370)        (12,326)           (6,271)         (12,988)            (81,348)       (115,061)
         Monthly VAT (median)                 0              0                   0                0             244,872          -11,454
                                             (0)            (0)                (0)               (0)            (16,869)        (23,470)
         Firm age in months               130.93           -0.43            138.98             -3.33             126.46              1.5
                                           (1.19)         (1.69)             (2.18)           (3.13)             (1.77)           (2.52)
         % Non-filed declaration            1.09            0.1               0.40             -0.21               1.30           -0.42*
                                           (0.13)         (0.18)             (0.11)           (0.13)             (0.19)           (0.23)
         Size category                      2.28        -0.000047             2.34              0.02              5.90              0.03
                                           (0.01)         (0.01)             (0.02)           (0.03)             (0.06)           (0.09)
         % Retail firms                     6.82           -0.54               7.27            -1.16              2.22             -0.56
33




                                           (0.48)         (0.66)             (0.94)           (1.28)             (0.48)           (0.60)
         % Intermediary firms              66.32           -0.46             63.01              1.01              35.25            -1.53
                                           (0.89)         (1.27)             (1.76)           (2.46)             (1.50)           (2.14)
         % Final sales                     15.66           -0.35              19.37            -2.99              22.60             0.25
                                           (0.65)         (0.91)             (1.35)           (1.82)             (1.08)           (1.46)
         Sales/input                        0.68           -0.01              0.73             -0.03               1.64            -0.14
                                           (0.01)         (0.01)             (0.02)           (0.02)             (0.10)           (0.11)
         % Agriculture                     54.00           0.71               45.31          5.34**               18.07             2.00
                                           (0.94)         (1.33)             (1.81)           (2.55)             (1.29)           (1.83)
         % Audited                         27.04           0.46                100                0
                                           (0.84)         (1.19)                (.)              (.)
         % Suppliers                                                                                             57.13              -1.32
                                                                                                                 (1.44)            (2.10)
         Number of firms                  2,800           2,800               757             770                1,444              1385

     Notes: This table shows summary statistics for the pre-treatment period and balance of randomization for three groups: the 5,600 firms in the
     sample of the Spillover Experiment, the firms that were actually audited, and the trading partners of the audited firms. Each row shows three
     regressions of the pre-treatment variable in question on a dummy indicating treatment assignment and a constant term: Columns (1) and (2) for
     the firms in the full Spillover Experiment sample, Columns (3) and (4) for the audited firms, and Columns (5) and (6) for the trading partners.
     Observations are monthly for ten months prior to treatment, starting in January 2008. The constant terms shown in Columns (1), (3) and (5)
     capture the values for the control group. Columns (2), (4) and (6) show the difference of the treatment group to the control group. Monetary
     amounts are in Chilean pesos, with 500 Chilean pesos approximately equivalent to 1 USD. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at
     the firm level for Columns (1) to (4) and at the audited firm’s level for Columns (5) and (6). *** = p<0.01, ** = p<0.05, * = p<0.1
                    Table 4: Letter Message Experiment: Intent-to-Treat Effects on VAT Payments by Type of Letter

                                                 (1)              (2)                  (3)                       (4)                   (5)
                                              Mean VAT          Median          Percent VAT >             Percent VAT >          Percent VAT
                                                                 VAT             Previous Year              Predicted               > Zero
           Deterrence letter X post              -1144         5,302***             1.40***                   1.42***              0.53***
                                                (2804)          (1,214)              (0.12)                    (0.10)                (0.09)
           Tax morale letter X post              -1840           1,419                 0.40                     0.30                0.44**
                                                (6082)          (2,552)              (0.25)                    (0.22)                (0.20)
           Placebo letter X post                  835            1,430                -0.11                     -0.19                 -0.14
                                                (6243)          (2,598)              (0.26)                    (0.23)                (0.20)
           Constant                           268810***        69,459***           47.50***                  48.27***              67.30***
                                                (1799)           (432)               (0.07)                    (0.07)                (0.06)
34




           Month fixed effects                    Yes             Yes                  Yes                       Yes                   Yes
           Firm fixed effects                     Yes             No                   Yes                       Yes                   Yes
           Treatment Assignment                    No             Yes                   No                       No                     No
           Number of observations             7,892,076         445,734            7,892,076                 7,892,076            7,892,076
           Number of firms                     445,734          445,734             445,734                   445,734               445,734
           Adjusted R2                            0.40                                 0.14                     0.28                   0.47

     Notes: Column (1) shows a regression of the mean declared VAT on treatment dummies, winzorized at the top and bottom 0.1%. Column (2)
     shows a median regression of the mean post-treatment VAT, and Columns (3)-(5) show linear probability regressions of the probability of an increase
     in declared VAT since the previous year, the probability of declaring more than predicted and the probability of declaring any positive amount.
     Coefficients and standard errors of the linear probability regressions are multiplied by 100 to express effects in percent. Monetary amounts are in
     Chilean pesos, with 500 Chilean pesos approximately equivalent to 1 USD. Standard errors in parentheses, robust and clustered at the firm level for
     Columns (1) and (3)-(5). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                Table 5: Impact of Deterrence Letter on Different Types of Transactions

                                                 (1)                     (2)                         (3)                           (4)
                                           Percent Sales        Percent Input Costs         Percent Intermediary          Percent Final Sales
                                                  >                       >                       Sales >                           >
                                           Previous Year           Previous Year               Previous Year                Previous Year
          Deterrence letter X post            1.17***                   0.16                        0.12                        1.33***
                                               (0.22)                  (0.21)                      (0.19)                        (0.21)
          Constant                           55.39***                53.25***                     38.37***                     45.04***
                                               (0.13)                  (0.13)                      (0.12)                        (0.12)
35




          Month fixed effects                   Yes                     Yes                          Yes                          Yes
          Firm fixed effects                    Yes                     Yes                          Yes                          Yes
          Number of observations             2,392,529               2,392,529                   2,392,529                     2,392,529
          Number of firms                     133,156                 133,156                     133,156                       133,156
          Adjusted R2                           0.25                    0.22                        0.30                          0.32


     Notes: Regressions of the probability of the line item (total sales, total input costs, intermediary sales, and final sales) being higher than in the
     same month the previous year. Sample of firms that have both final and intermediary sales in the year prior to treatment. Coefficients and
     standard errors are multiplied by 100 to express effects in percent. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the firm level. *** p<0.01,
     ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
     Table 6: Within-Firm Estimator of Differential Response by Type of Transaction

                                                    Percent Line-Item >       Percent Line-Item >
                                                       Previous Year             Previous Year
        Deterrence letter X sales X post                  1.26***
                                                           (0.17)
        Deterrence letter X final sales X post                                       1.23***
                                                                                      (0.23)
        Sales                                               1.98***
                                                             (0.51)
        Final sales                                                                  5.64***
                                                                                      (0.12)
        Sales X post                                          Yes
        Final Sales X post                                                             Yes
        Firm fixed effects X post                             Yes                      Yes
        Month fixed effects                                   Yes                      Yes
        Firm fixed effects                                    Yes                      Yes
        Number of observations                             4,785,058                4,785,058
        Number of firms                                     133,156                  133,156
        R2                                                    0.32                     0.24

Notes: Regression of the probability of the line item being higher than in the same month the previous year
in a data set that contains multiple line items per firm and month. Column (1) compares increases in sales to
increases in input costs within a given firm, Column (2) compares final sales to intermediate sales. The reg2hdfe
routine (Guimaraes and Portugal, 2010), used to produce the large number two-level fixed effects (firm fixed
effects and firm fixed effect X post), does not produce a constant term. Sample of firms that have both final
and intermediary sales in the period prior to treatment. Coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 100
to express effects in percent. Sample contains all firms that have both final and intermediary sales in the period
prior to treatment. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the firm level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.




                                                     36
          Table 7: Interaction of Firm Size and Share of Sales to Final Consumers

     Panel A:                                               Percent VAT > Previous Year
                                                (1)           (2)         (3)      (4)           (5)
     Deterrence letter X final sales share    1.61***                            1.48***       1.43***
                                               (0.26)                             (0.27)        (0.26)
     Deterrence letter X size category                    -0.17***              -0.10***
                                                            (0.04)                (0.04)
     Deterrence letter X log employees                                -0.45***                 -0.29**
                                                                        (0.11)                  (0.12)
     Deterrence letter                        0.68***      2.63***     1.66***   1.49***       0.92***
                                               (0.16)       (0.29)      (0.13)    (0.35)        (0.19)
     Constant                                47.53***     48.87*** 47.50*** 48.89***          47.53***
                                               (0.08)       (0.08)      (0.08)    (0.08)        (0.08)
     Final sales share X post                   Yes           No          No       Yes           Yes
     Size measure X post                         No          Yes         Yes       Yes           Yes
     Firm fixed effects                         Yes          Yes         Yes       Yes           Yes
     Month dummies                              Yes          Yes         Yes       Yes           Yes
     Observations                            7,308,631    7,116,590 7,340,994 7,084,823       7,308,631
     Number of Firms                          406,834      396,135     408,636   394,367       406,834
     Adjusted R2                                0.14         0.14        0.14      0.14          0.14
     Panel B:                                                  Percent VAT > Predicted
                                                (1)           (2)          (3)      (4)          (5)
     Deterrence Letter X final sales share    1.51***                            1.51***       1.44***
                                               (0.23)                             (0.25)        (0.24)
     Deterrence Letter X size category                    -0.10***                 -0.03
                                                            (0.03)                (0.04)
     Deterrence Letter X log employees                                 -0.28***                  -0.11
                                                                         (0.10)                 (0.11)
     Deterrence Letter                        0.74***      2.15***      1.57***  1.00***       0.83***
                                               (0.14)       (0.26)       (0.12)   (0.32)        (0.16)
     Constant                                48.48***     49.79*** 48.26*** 50.01***          48.48***
                                               (0.08)       (0.08)       (0.08)   (0.08)        (0.08)
     Final sales share X post                   Yes           No           No       Yes           Yes
     Size measure X post                         No          Yes          Yes       Yes           Yes
     Firm fixed effects                         Yes          Yes          Yes       Yes           Yes
     Month fixed effects                        Yes          Yes          Yes       Yes           Yes
     Observations                            7,308,631    7,116,590 7,340,994 7,084,823       7,308,631
     Number of Firms                          406,834      396,135      408,636  394,367       406,834
     Adjusted R2                                0.28         0.26         0.29     0.26          0.28


Notes: Regression of the probability of monthly VAT declared being higher than in the same month the previous
year (Panel A) and on being higher than predicted (Panel B). Coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by
100 to express effects in percent. Sample includes all firms in the deterrence treatment and in the control group.
Number of observations vary due to missing observations for some variables. Final sales share is not defined for
firms with zero sales in preceding year, size category is not available for new firms. Robust standard errors in
parentheses, clustered at the firm level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                                     37
                                      Table 8: Spillover Effects on Trading Partners’ VAT Payments

                                                    (1)                (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
                                               Percent VAT          Percent        Percent VAT          Percent        Percent VAT          Percent
                                                > Previous          VAT >           > Previous          VAT >           > Previous          VAT >
                                                   Year            Predicted           Year            Predicted           Year            Predicted
     Audit announcement X                         2.50**             2.08*
     post                                         (1.15)             (1.12)
     Audit announcement X                                                             4.57***            4.06***           4.43***           3.96***
     supplier X post                                                                   (1.56)             (1.51)            (1.53)            (1.53)
     Audit announcement X                                                               -0.26              -0.26             -0.13             -0.25
     client X post                                                                     (1.66)             (1.52)            (1.69)            (1.56)
     Supplier X post                                                                    -0.71               0.34             -1.19             0.61
                                                                                       (1.62)             (1.58)            (1.66)            (1.64)
     Constant                                    52.07***          49.06***          52.07***           49.06***          52.75***          50.11***
38




                                                  (0.95)            (0.94)             (0.95)             (0.94)            (0.96)            (0.96)
     Controls X post                                No                No                 No                  No               Yes               Yes
     Controls X
     audit announcement X post                       No                 No               No                 No              Yes                Yes
     Month fixed effects                            Yes                Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes                Yes
     Firm fixed effects                             Yes                Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes                Yes
     Number of observations                        45,264            45,264            45,264            45,264            44,288            44,288
     Number of firms                               2,829              2,829            2,829              2,829            2,768              2,768
     Adjusted R2                                    0.05               0.11             0.05               0.11             0.05               0.10

      Notes: Regressions for trading partners of audited firms. Column (1), (3) and (5) shows the probability of an increase in declared VAT since the
      previous year, Column (2), (4) and (6) shows the probability of declaring more than predicted. The controls in Columns (4) and (6) are firm
      sales, sales/input-ratio, share of sales going to final consumers, and industry categorized as “hard-to-monitor.” Time period includes six months
      after mailing of the audit announcements. Coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 100 to express effects in percent. Robust standard
      errors in parentheses, clustered at the level of the audited firm. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
    APPENDIX FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION



A     Letter Templates (Translated from Spanish)




                                                                              Santiago, November 19th 2008.

             Mr(s). Abc
             Business XYZ
             210 Example Street
             Concepción

             Ref: SII informs about analysis of your company

             Mr. (s) Taxpayer:

             This is an informational letter and, therefore, does not require that you take any action vis-à-
             vis the SII.

             We would like to inform you that in a process of random selection process among the micro,
             small and medium size enterprises (MSMEs), YOUR FIRM HAS BEEN SELECTED FOR
             ANALYSIS. In the event that any irregularities are detected, you could be summond for an
             audit.

             Our intention is to inform you of the usual actions that the SII carries out, and at the same time
             to remind you to always declare all purchases, sales and services, and deduct only the credits
             to which you are entitled.

             We emphasize that this letter DOES NOT REQUIRE ANY PROCEEDINGS with the SII, and
             therefore YOU DO NOT NEED TO VISIT our offices.

             On the SII Web site www.sii.cl, you may select the option "Contact Us" to ask questions or
             make suggestions, or you may call our Help Desk, telephone numbers 2-395 11 15, for
             clarification regarding the use of electronic tax services.


             Yours sincerely,




                                                    Internal Revenue Service




                                 Figure A1: Deterrence Letter




                                                          39
                                                                   Santiago, November 19th 2008


Mr. (s)
Business XYZ
210 Example Street
Concepción



     Did you know that Chile has one of the highest levels of tax
                    compliance in the world?

Dear Taxpayer:

We wish to inform you that 98.3% of the taxes in our country are paid on a voluntary basis.
This has allowed Chile to have one of the highest levels of tax compliance worldwide,
according to information from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD).

This success is a result of the fact that the majority of Chileans declare and pay taxes in
accordance with the provisions of the law.

We invite you to continue on this path and together achieve the country we all want, a Chile
with more and more integrity, solidarity and development.

Yours sincerely,




                                    Internal Revenue Service




                      Figure A2: Tax Morale Letter


                                            40
                                                                Santiago, November 19th 2008.


Mr(s) Abc
Business XYZ
210 Example Street
Concepción



Ref: Visit the Web site of the Internal Revenue Service (www.sii.cl)


Dear Taxpayer:

We want to tell you that the SII Virtual Office now has an option called "Electronic Tax
Folder", a tool that allows taxpayers to bring together in a single electronic document,
statements and tax information that they are required to submit to banks or other institutions.

For more information, you can visit the SII Virtual Office website (www.sii.cl), menu “Tax
Status”, option “Electronic Tax Folder”.

In our Virtual Office you will also find online deals, news, economic indicators, tax
information, FAQs and guidelines for most of your dealings with the SII, such as tax returns,
changes in information and payment of contributions.

Take advantage of the internet: visit www.sii.cl.

Yours sincerely,



                                  Internal Revenue Service




                        Figure A3: Placebo Letter


                                           41
                                                                 Santiago, November 19th 2008.

Mr. (s)
Business XYZ
210 Example Street
Concepción


Ref: Information about the SII future audit process.

Dear Taxpayer:

This is an informational letter and, therefore, does not require that you take any action vis-à-
vis the SII.

We wish to inform you that according to control policies carried out by our institution, and
under Law 18,320, YOU WILL RECEIVE A NOTIFICATION THAT YOU WILL BE
AUDITED AT SOME POINT BETWEEN JUNE AND AUGUST 2009.

The purpose of this letter is to give you time to prepare your records for future audit. Later,
you can expect a FORMAL NOTIFICATION LETTER, which will inform you which SII
office you need to attend, what documents you need to bring and the date of the audit.

As such, YOU SHOULD NOT APPROACH THE SII OFFICES before receiving the formal
notification letter.

Also, remember that you can declare, correct or amend your earlier statements in the SII
Virtual Office on the internet (www.sii.cl).


Yours sincerely,




                                    Internal Revenue Service




                   Figure A4: Pre-Announcement Letter


                                            42
                                                                                  20


B          Figure
    Additional    1: Distribution of monthly taxes paid
               Figures
                             excluding the top and bottom 5%

              6.0e-06
              4.0e-06
    Density
              2.0e-06
              0




                        0   500000   1000000    1500000   2000000    2500000
                                        net_VAT


Figure A5: Distribution of monthly declared VAT excluding the top and bottom 5%

                                        Figure 2




                                        43
                                                            2nd Wave: Deterrence vs. Control (Median)



                                                 20
              Percent Difference in Median VAT

                                                 15
                                                 10
                                                 5
                                                 0




                                                                                              2nd Wave
                                                 -5




                                                      -24        -18    -12        -6    0       6       12

                                                                               Month


                           Figure A6: Impact of Deterrence Letter: Second Wave of Mailing


Notes: This figure plots the monthly percent difference between the medians of the treatment and the
control group of the deterrence letter for the second wave of mailing: (median VAT treatment group - median
VAT control group) / (median VAT control group), normalizing pre-treatment percent difference to zero.
The y-axis indicates time, with monthly observations, and zero indicates the last month before the mailing
of the letters. The vertical line marks mailing of the letters. Since the second wave of mailing is much
smaller than the first, the figure shows a more noisy pattern than the first wave displayed in Figure 1, Panel A.




                                                                              44
                                                        14%
              Effect size in percent of control group




                                                        12%

                                                        10%

                                                        8%

                                                        6%

                                                        4%

                                                        2%

                                                        0%
                                                                  Micro              Small         Medium




                                                         Figure A7: Impact by Firm Size (Median Regression)


Notes: Each bar represents a separate median regression for each size category. The numbers on top of the
bars indicate the coefficient on being in the deterrence letter treatment group of a median regression of mean
monthly VAT payments in the four months following treatment. The height of the bar indicates the effect
in percent relative to the mean in the control group in that size category. *** = p<0.01, ** = p<0.05, * =
p<0.1




                                                                                45
C      Additional Tables

Dynamics over Time

       Table A1: Deterrence Letter Experiment: Monthly Effects on VAT Payments

                                         (1)                            (2)                    (3)
                            Percent VAT > Previous Year    Percent VAT > Predicted   Percent VAT > Zero
      Deterrence X t-5                  -0.02                         -0.12                  -0.07
                                       (0.17)                        (0.18)                 (0.17)
      Deterrence X t-4                  0.26                           0.03                   0.02
                                       (0.17)                        (0.18)                 (0.17)
      Deterrence X t-3                  0.10                         -0.29*                  -0.03
                                       (0.17)                        (0.18)                 (0.17)
      Deterrence X t-2                  0.05                         -0.30*                  -0.14
                                       (0.17)                        (0.18)                 (0.17)
      Deterrence X t-1                  0.19                          -0.07                  -0.09
                                       (0.17)                        (0.18)                 (0.17)
      Deterrence X t1                 1.07***                       1.17***                0.48***
                                       (0.17)                        (0.18)                 (0.17)
      Deterrence X t2                 1.76***                       1.73***                0.56***
                                       (0.17)                        (0.18)                 (0.17)
      Deterrence X t3                 1.46***                       1.30***                0.48***
                                       (0.17)                        (0.18)                 (0.17)
      Deterrence X t4                 1.64***                       1.21***                0.46***
                                       (0.17)                        (0.18)                 (0.17)
      Deterrence X t5                 0.99***                       0.83***                  -0.15
                                       (0.17)                        (0.18)                 (0.17)
      Deterrence X t6                 0.94***                       0.72***                   0.12
                                       (0.17)                        (0.18)                 (0.17)
      Deterrence X t7                 0.88***                       0.59***                   0.04
                                       (0.17)                        (0.18)                 (0.17)
      Deterrence X t8                 0.92***                       0.63***                   0.17
                                       (0.19)                        (0.20)                 (0.20)
      Deterrence X t9                 0.85***                       0.75***                   0.31
                                       (0.19)                        (0.20)                 (0.20)
      Deterrence X t10                0.87***                       0.68***                   0.10
                                       (0.19)                        (0.20)                 (0.20)
      Deterrence X t11                0.73***                       0.82***                   0.16
                                       (0.19)                        (0.20)                 (0.20)
      Deterrence X t12                0.77***                       0.51***                   0.12
                                       (0.19)                        (0.20)                 (0.20)
      Constant                        47.00***                     48.26***               65.31***
                                       (0.09)                        (0.09)                 (0.09)
      Month fixed effects                Yes                           Yes                    Yes
      Number of obs.                 6,859,747                     6,859,747              6,859,747
      Number of firms                 408,636                       408,636                408,636
      R2                               0.004                         0.000                  0.005


    Notes: Each column shows a linear probability regression on interaction terms of being assigned to
    receive a deterrence letter with month dummies. Coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 100
    to express effects in percent. Sample includes all firms in the deterrence treatment and the control group.
    Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the firm level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                      46
     Alternate Sample for Table 5

     Table A2: Impact of Deterrence Letter on Different Types of Transaction
     Sample Including Pure Retailers and Intermediary Firms

                                              (1)                        (2)                           (3)                          (4)
                                       Percent Sales >        Percent Input Costs >         Percent Intermediary          Percent Final Sales >
                                        Previous Year             Previous Year             Sales > Previous Year            Previous Year
        Deterrence                         1.01***                     -0.02                        0.22**                       0.90***
                                            (0.12)                    (0.12)                         (0.10)                       (0.10)
        Constant                          50.07***                  48.94***                       29.40***                     29.03***
                                            (0.07)                    (0.07)                         (0.06)                       (0.06)
        Month fixed effects                  Yes                        Yes                           Yes                          Yes
        Firm fixed effects                   Yes                        Yes                           Yes                          Yes
        Number of observations            7,340,994                 7,340,994                     7,340,994                     7,340,994
47




        Number of firms                    408,636                   408,636                        408,636                      408,636
        Adjusted R2                          0.28                       0.25                          0.38                         0.47

        Notes: Regressions of the probability of the line item (total sales, total input costs, intermediary sales, and final sales) being higher than in
        the same month the previous year, among the full sample including pure retailers and intermediary firms. Coefficients and standard errors are
        multiplied by 100 to express effects in percent. Sample includes all firms in the deterrence treatment and the control group. Robust standard
        errors in parentheses, clustered at the firm level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
D   Research Design Diagrams


                                         Letter Message Experiment

       Deterrence               Tax morale message          Placebo message              Control group
       message                  Information about           Information about            No letter
       Indicating increased     social norm                 website                      N=306,605)
       audit probability        (N = 18’579 firms)          (N = 18’519 firms)
       (N = 102’031 firms)




            To test effectiveness                Does the VAT-chain
            of paper trail                      affect the response?
                                               Interactions with size?




                                          Spillover Experiment

                                  Treatment                           Control
                                   N=2800                             N=2800




                                    Audit
                              pre-announcement




                                  Summoned                          Summoned
                                   for audit                         for audit




                          Suppliers      Clients of          Suppliers      Clients of
                          of treated     treated             of control     control




                                            Spillover effects:
                                       Comparing trading partners of
                                           treated vs. control



                                                 Figure A8




                                                        48
