NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO INSURERS RISK-SELECT AGAINST EACH OTHER? EVIDENCE FROM MEDICAID
AND IMPLICATIONS FOR HEALTH REFORM
Ilyana Kuziemko
Katherine Meckel
Maya Rossin-Slater
Working Paper 19198
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19198
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2013

We are grateful to Janet Currie, Tal Gross, Jon Gruber, Kate Ho, Melissa Kearney, Wojciech Kopczuk,
Doug Miller and Andrea Prat for their feedback as well as seminar participants at Brookings, Columbia
University, Princeton University, the University of Stavanger, and the University of Virginia. We are
indebted to Doneshia Ates, Marc Montrose, and Gene Willard at the Texas Department of State Health
Services (DSHS) for assistance with the data, as well as Stephanie Goodman and David Palmer, the
Spokesperson and Chief Actuary at the Texas DSHS, respectively. Abraham Bae provided excellent
research assistance. Meckel is grateful for support from a Graduate Research Fellowship from the
National Science Foundation. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily
represent the official views of the National Science Foundation. All remaining errors are our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Ilyana Kuziemko, Katherine Meckel, and Maya Rossin-Slater. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Insurers Risk-Select Against Each Other? Evidence from Medicaid and Implications for
Health Reform
Ilyana Kuziemko, Katherine Meckel, and Maya Rossin-Slater
NBER Working Paper No. 19198
July 2013
JEL No. H4,I13,I14,J13
ABSTRACT
Increasingly in U.S. public insurance programs, the state finances and regulates competing, capitated
private health plans but does not itself directly insure beneficiaries through a public fee-for-service
(FFS) plan. We develop a simple model of risk-selection in such settings. Capitation incentivizes
insurers to retain low-cost clients and thus improve their care relative to high-cost clients, who they
prefer would switch to a competitor. We test this prediction using county transitions from FFS Medicaid
to capitated Medicaid managed care (MMC) for pregnant women and infants. We first document
the large health disparities and corresponding cost differences between blacks and Hispanics (who
make up the large majority of Medicaid enrollees in our data), with black births costing nearly double
that of Hispanics. Consistent with the model, black-Hispanic infant health disparities widen under
MMC (e.g., the black-Hispanic mortality gap grows by 42 percent) and black mothers' pre-natal care
worsens relative to that of Hispanics. Remarkably, black birth rates fall (and abortions rise) significantly
after MMC—consistent with mothers reacting to poor care by reducing fertility or plans discouraging
births from high-cost groups. Implications for the ACA exchanges are discussed
Ilyana Kuziemko
Columbia University
Graduate School of Business
3022 Broadway
Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
ik2216@columbia.edu
Katherine Meckel
Columbia University
Department of Economics
New York, NY 10027
khm2110@columbia.edu

Maya Rossin-Slater
2127 North Hall
University of California
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
Mail Stop 9210
mrossin@econ.ucsb.edu

1

Introduction

Increasingly in U.S. public insurance programs, the state finances and regulates competing,
capitated private insurance plans but does not itself directly insure beneficiaries through a
public fee-for-service (FFS) plan. Whereas Medicare debuted in 1965 as a traditional publicly administered FFS program, the 2010 Affordable Care Act (ACA) will expand insurance
coverage almost entirely through this new private model. The ACA insurance exchanges offer private, capitated insurance plans with substantial government subsidies and regulation,
but no public FFS option. The large majority of the ACA Medicaid expansion will occur
under this private model as well, as most states have switched from FFS Medicaid to Medicaid Managed Care (MMC), where Medicaid enrollees choose from private, capitated plans
with no FFS option.1 There is substantial support for similarly changing Medicare—while
it currently offers a traditional public FFS plan that competes alongside private, capitated
Medicare Advantage (MA) plans, in 2011 the House of Representatives passed a bill eliminating the FFS option.2
The possibility that insurers or providers would avoid high-risk individuals is a central
concern for any insurance program (Newhouse, 1996), yet the existing evidence on riskselection does not directly apply to the setting we describe above. Much of the research on
risk-selection has focused on cream-skimming by private MA plans. These papers generally
find that MA plans appear able to direct high-cost beneficiaries to the public, FFS Medicare pool, resulting in overpayments to MA plans.3 But this channel of risk-selection is not
available to private plans in settings such as the ACA exchanges or MMC that do not offer
a public FFS option. Similarly, many papers have found that without guaranteed-issue or
community-rating mandates, private plans risk-select by simply denying high-cost enrollees
1

See
http://www.medicaid.gov/Medicaid-CHIP-Program-Information/By-Topics/Data-andSystems/Downloads/2011-Medicaid-MC-Enrollment-Report.pdf. In 2011, MMC accounted for 74
percent of all Medicaid enrollees.
2
The proposal was known as Medicare Premium Support and failed in the Senate.
3
See, e.g., Langwell and Hadley (1989), Physician Payment Review Commission (1997), Mello et al. (2003)
and Batata (2004).

1

or charging them higher premiums.4 But ACA exchange regulations essentially eliminate
this possibility, and MMC plans must accept any eligible enrollee at the same premium
($0).5 By 2019, via the exchanges and MMC, nearly sixty million Americans will be covered
through this model of strictly private provision of public insurance, yet past work can give
only limited guidance as to whether they will face risk-selection by insurers.6
We present a simple model of insurer incentives that illustrates how risk-selection can still
occur in these new “exchange” settings—i.e., where the government finances capitated private
plans, mandates guaranteed issue and community rating, but does not itself administer a
public FFS plan. We then test the model’s predictions using Texas’ switch from Medicaid
FFS to MMC for pregnant women and infants. Importantly, our model assumes that enrollees
always have the choice of at least two private plans, a condition met in our data, generally
met by state MMC programs and widely expected (indeed, promised) to be met in the ACA
exchanges.7 As in Hart et al. (1997), we also assume that the state cannot write complete
contracts with insurers and thus some scope remains for them to adjust quality of care across
enrollees.8 In fact, Texas explicitly encourages MMC plans to use their discretion to tailor
many benefits individually.
Each period, profit-maximizing plans choose the level of care to provide to high- and lowcost patients (i.e., those whose expected costs are above and below the capitation payment,
4

See Baicker and Dow (2009), for example, and citations therein.
ACA insurers are subject to guaranteed issue but may modestly adjust premiums for age and smoking
status.
6
See
http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/43472-07-24-2012CoverageEstimates.pdf, Table 3. CBO estimates that by 2019, 25 million individuals will be on exchanges
and 43 million in Medicaid. As MMC currently accounts for 74 percent of all Medicaid enrollees (see
footnote 1), we estimate that 0.74*43 = 32 million will be on MMC. This figure is likely an underestimate
as the MMC share of Medicaid enrollees has been steadily growing and will likely exceed 74 percent by
2019. All CBO enrollment projections reflect the June 2012 Supreme Court decision limiting the Medicaid
expansion.
7
See http://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2013/01/8046-02.pdf, p. 2, on the
prevalence of multiple plans in state MMC programs. Unfortunately, the authors write that “generally” enrollees have a choice of at least two plans, but do not give an exact share. Regarding the ACA exchanges, the
Obama Administration has claimed that, based on current data, 90 percent of exchange enrollees will have the
choice of at least five insurers: http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2013/05/30/areobamacares-exchanges-competitive-heres-what-the-experts-say/?wprss=rss_ezra-klein.
8
Given that insurers must approve providers’ charges, this adjustment in care can be directly passed down
to providers.
5

2

respectively). The probability that a patient returns to the same plan in the following period
(e.g., in our context of Medicaid births, that she chooses the same plan for her child’s later
care or for her next pregnancy) increases with the level of care. Consequently, plans have an
incentive to retain low-cost, profitable patients and thus provide them with greater levels of
care relative to high-cost patients. By contrast, plans balance two competing incentives in
treating a high-cost, unprofitable patient—although reducing the level of care may worsen
her outcomes and increase costs in the current period, it will also encourage her to switch
to a competitor in the next period. Unlike many models of adverse selection, plans in our
framework need not be able to predict the costs of enrollees ex-ante or devise a menu of
services that encourage the healthy to self-select (though they may also engage in such
tactics as well). Instead, they can learn about patient costs and profitability over time and
adjust quality of care accordingly based on whether they wish to retain the patient.
Our model has three main predictions that we test in the context of MMC. First, relative
to FFS, MMC will lead to improved care for healthy, low-cost pregnant women and infants
and worse care for unhealthy, high-cost pregnant women and infants. Second, as a result
of the changes in care, health disparities between healthy and unhealthy infants will grow
under MMC. Third, birth rates from high-cost groups will fall, either because, as suggested
in past work, mothers react to diminished care and outcomes by reducing fertility or because
plans specifically discourage births from unprofitable groups.9
To test these predictions, we require, first, a setting in which health care provision switches
from FFS to capitation in a quasi-experimental manner, and, second, groups of enrollees
who we, as researchers, can identify ex-ante as having different baseline health (and thus
expected costs). We argue that Texas’ county-by-county transition from FFS to MMC is a
suitable experiment and focus on changes in outcomes and care between blacks and Hispanics.
In Texas, blacks and Hispanics make up the large majority of Medicaid births, and, as
we document in our empirical analysis, experience vastly different health outcomes. For
9

On the connection between fertility and health care quality, see, e.g., Albanesi and Olivetti (2010), which
we discuss later in the paper.

3

example, mortality, low birth weight and other adverse birth outcomes are nearly twice as
common among black relative to Hispanic births.10 These disparities translate into enormous
differences in costs and profits—in Texas hospital discharge data, black infants have charges
over eighty percent greater than Hispanics, but MMC plans receive the same capitation
payment for the two groups.
Having identified our ex-ante high- and low-costs groups, we use birth records to explore
how their outcomes change after a county switches to MMC. As predicted, black infant
mortality rates significantly increase, while Hispanic rates significantly decrease, causing the
black-Hispanic mortality gap to grow by 42 percent. The black-Hispanic low-birth-weight
and pre-term-birth gaps also increase significantly. While large, our mortality effects are
consistent with past work on the elasticity of infant mortality with respect to quality of care,
as we discuss later.
Along almost all our measures of the quality of pre-natal care, Hispanics experience
improvements relative to blacks, again as predicted. Interestingly, for blacks, MMC leads to
a significant increase in the share of mothers who receive their pre-natal care at public clinics
(generally meant for the uninsured) as opposed to doctors’ offices.
Finally, given that insurers find it unprofitable to cover them and provide them with worse
care, is there a change in birth rates among high-cost mothers after MMC? We document a
significant decrease in black birth rates after a county switches to MMC. Increased abortions
appear to account for a significant share of the effect, though data limitations prevent us
from making a more definitive assessment of the role of abortions versus conceptions. In
summary, under MMC, infants whose costs are likely to exceed the capitation payment die
more frequently, experience worse health outcomes, receive diminished care, or are not born
at all.
We believe our paper makes several contributions. First, it is the only paper, to our
knowledge, to model risk-selection incentives in public “exchange” settings—where the gov10

This black-Hispanic gap in health has also been widely documented in other settings. We review this
evidence in Section 3.

4

ernment regulates and finances competing, private plans but does not itself directly insure
individuals—and to provide empirical evidence consistent with risk-selection in one such
setting, MMC. When viewed dynamically, the possibility a client can switch plans means
competing plans under capitation are not in fact true residual claimants on their patients’
future costs and thus under-provide care to high-cost patients. In settings like Medicare with
both private capitated plans and a public FFS option, the government bears the cost of riskselection in the form of overpayments to private plans; in exchange settings, by contrast, this
cost is borne by enrollees with costs above the capitation payment.
Second, while the comparison is not often made, the ACA exchanges will mirror MMC
in many ways and thus our results have implications for health reform. In addition to the
similarities already noted, since the ACA exchange subsidies are generally unavailable to
those with employer insurance, there will likely be substantial “churn” in the exchange
population as people come and go based on their outside options (as in Medicaid). As such,
the data-collection necessary for effective risk-adjustment in both contexts is difficult, and
in fact few states attempt to adjust MMC capitation payments based on ex-ante health
conditions.11 We discuss additional challenges common to both settings in the conclusion.
Third, our paper further enriches the current understanding of incentives under MMC,
which by 2019 will serve as the primary insurer for roughly 32 million individuals (ten
percent of the U.S. population) and is thus of interest in its own right.12 Two important
papers have made use of the county-by-county switch from FFS to MMC in California,
the same empirical strategy that we adopt for Texas. Duggan (2004) finds MMC increased
costs in California, which he attributes to competing MMC plans’ limited ability to negotiate
favorable rates with providers relative to a consolidated FFS system.13 Aizer et al. (2007) note
that capitation may create incentives to cut costs below the socially-optimal level, and indeed
11

See Winkelman and Damler (2007). They find that only 13 states have implemented MMC riskadjustment or are considering it. Also see Weiner et al. (2012) for a review of issues related to risk-selection
in the ACA insurance exchanges.
12
See footnote 6 for the 32 million figure.
13
Duggan and Hayford (2011) find supporting evidence that MMC increased costs relative to Medicaid
FFS nationally using state panel data.

5

find that pre-natal care and birth outcomes deteriorate under MMC in California.14 Neither
paper finds evidence of risk-selection in California. As we discuss later, this discrepancy in
results between Texas and California is consistent with differences in MMC program details
between the two states. Thus, comparing our results with past work can help illustrate the
tradeoffs involved in MMC program design.
Fourth, this paper finds results along a new margin—where pre-natal care is received—
that suggests cost-shifting on the part of MMC plans. That women on MMC would turn to
clinics meant for the uninsured suggests that plans may be directing their enrollees to free
care instead of covering these costs themselves. In this sense, any savings under MMC are
partially offset (or cost increases understated) by cost-shifting toward other safety-net programs, an example of the potential substitutability across social-welfare programs discussed
by Borghans et al. (2012).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the transition
to MMC in Texas and, in particular, documents the wide discretion that plans have in
denying certain benefits to enrollees, adding plausibility to our thesis that they have the
scope to improve care for profitable enrollees at the expense of unprofitable ones. Section
3 presents a simple dynamic-programming model of plans’ incentives under MMC and lays
out our predictions of how the transition from FFS to MMC will affect birth outcomes,
quality of care, and birth rates for high-cost (black) and low-cost (Hispanic) groups. Section
4 describes our main data sources and empirical strategy. Section 5 presents the results on
birth outcomes and quality of care. Section 6 presents the results on birth rates. Section 7
concludes by discussing welfare and policy implications and recommending areas for future
work.
14

There is an earlier literature on the effect of MMC on pre-natal care and birth outcomes on which we do
not focus. Findings from these papers are mixed perhaps because many rely on cross-sectional comparisons
and pre/post analyses without comparison groups (see Kaestner et al., 2002 for an overview). Such research
designs may suffer from omitted variables bias due to individual selection into managed care or concurrent
macroeconomic trends.

6

2

Background on Medicaid and the Transition to MMC in Texas

After experimenting with a small managed care pilot program in four counties, the Texas
legislature voted in 1995 to begin a staggered, state-wide shift from traditional Medicaid FFS
to Medicaid managed care. The Texas Health and Human Services Commission (HHSC) set
the order in which counties would switch. According to HHSC officials, small urban areas
switched first because they tended to have well-established healthcare provider networks and
it would be easier to work out transitional problems in smaller urban areas as opposed to the
largest ones. Larger urban counties switched next, with rural counties switching only in 2012.
As our key identifying assumption depends on the timing of the roll-out being uncorrelated
with time-varying county characteristics, it is reassuring that the roll-out schedule was set by
a central office and not negotiated by individual counties. Appendix Table 1 provides more
details on the timing of the roll-out for each county. The percentage of the Texas Medicaid
population enrolled in the managed care program (called State of Texas Access Reform, or
STAR) increased from 2.9 in 1994 to 70.8 in 2009.
Participation in managed care among Medicaid enrollees is mandatory following MMC
implementation in each county. Enrollees always have at least two plans in their county from
which to choose, and are randomly assigned to one if they do not choose a plan by a given
deadline after their county’s switch to MMC.15 In Texas, as in almost all states, pregnant
women and infants under one year of age are eligible for Medicaid if their family incomes
fall under 185 percent of the federal poverty line (FPL). While older children face somewhat
stricter Medicaid eligibility limits (133 percent of FPL for ages 1-5 and 100 percent of FPL
for ages 6-18), adult women are essentially only eligible when pregnant.
Insurance providers receive a capitation payment for each enrollee based on historical
Medicaid costs in the locality. For every woman who gives birth, plans receive a Delivery
Supplementary Payment and a newborn premium, which are unadjusted outside of these
15

In the rare cases when a Medicaid-eligible woman shows up at the hospital to deliver without having
already chosen an MMC plan, she is randomly assigned a plan to cover the cost of the delivery and care of
the infant.

7

geographical averages. Because of the supplementary capitation payments associated with
delivery and newborns, MMC does not discourage pregnancy per se, but high-cost births will
cost far more than these fixed supplementary capitation payments and thus represent a large
loss to plans. When we asked the HHSC about whether these basic capitation payments also
applied to very high-cost births (by contrast, California creates a “carve-out” for high-cost
Medicaid births and returns them to FFS-type reimbursement), we were told that plans
would simply make up these losses on profits from low-cost births: “This average [capitation
payment] does include the higher cost deliveries and yes, it would under-pay for those but
then again it overpays for others to make up for it.”16
A final, important point about Texas MMC is that plans are encouraged to tailor benefits
for each beneficiary. As noted in Texas HHSC Medicaid documentation:
Value-added services are additional health care services that an MCO [managed
care organization] voluntarily elects to provide to its clients at no additional
cost to the state. MCOs offer value-added services to attract clients to sign up
with them, including adult dental services and diapers for newborns. Additional
services may be offered to clients on a case-by-case basis at the discretion of the
MCO [emphasis added].17
Plans thus have discretion to deny services to some enrollees while providing them to others.
One optional service the documentation specifically mentions is post-natal in-home follow-up
care, though the above quote suggests extremely wide latitude for other services as well. As
our model in the next section depends on plans being able to improve services for low-cost
patients at the expense of high-cost patients, documenting plan discretion lends plausibility
to our hypothesis.

3

Formalizing and quantifying incentives under MMC

We first lay out a simple model of incentives under MMC versus FFS that generates predictions about how care will diverge for low- and high-cost groups under the two regimes. We
then quantify the empirical importance of cost heterogeneity among Texas infants.
16
17

Email correspondence with the chief actuary for HHSC (March 30, 2012).
See http://www.hhsc.state.tx.us/medicaid/reports/PB8/PDF/Chp-6.pdf, p. 6-7.

8

3.1

Modeling incentives under MMC versus FFS

Consider two types of patients, healthy (H) and sick (S). Patient types are fixed over time.
There are two types of costs that plans incur: those associated with preventive care θ and
those associated with outcomes ci (θ), where c varies by patient type.18 For simplicity, let
cH (θ) = c(θ) and cS (θ) = c(θ) + α, with c0 < 0 and c00 > 0, so the returns to preventive care
are the same across patient type. We do not distinguish between mothers and children and
combine costs for both (so healthy mothers produce healthy infants).
Incentives under MMC. Under MMC, there are at least two plans from which patients
can choose. Plans receive a capitation payment p regardless of patient type. Plans face a
dynamic problem—how they treat a patient today determines whether she will return in the
next period. In our context, “returning the next period” can either mean that the mother
continues using this plan for the infant’s later health care needs or that she returns to this
plan the next time she is pregnant (and thus eligible for Medicaid herself). Let λ(θ) be the
probability a patient choses the same plan in the next period, which is increasing concavely
in the care she receives in the current period, so λ0 > 0 and λ00 < 0. We scale down this
probability by a discount factor δ to reflect the fact that she may exit the Medicaid program
(e.g., no longer meet the income test) and to ensure a finite stream of expected profits.
We assume that plans can quickly learn patient type after a mother enrolls. First, they
might form a reasonable estimate based on basic observables such as age and race. Second,
in an initial check-up, information such as BMI, blood-pressure, and health history will
be gained. Third, diagnostic procedures throughout the pregnancy may reveal even more
detailed information. We thus assume that patient type is observable to the plan at the
point they are making much of their decisions about approving pre- and post-natal care.
Knowing patient type, each plan solves the following dynamic maximization problems:
18

As both these costs are direct functions of θ we could instead formulate the model in terms of a total
cost function, but splitting costs in this manner aids with intuition and maps more closely to the empirical
results.

9


= max

VtS



H
= max p − θ − c(θ) − α + δλ(θ)Vt+1
[Sick]

θ

p − θ − c(θ) +

H
δλ(θ)Vt+1



VtH

[Healthy]

θ

Because for all θ, p − θ − c(θ), the flow payoff from covering type H, is greater than p − θ −
H
S
c(θ) − α, the flow payoffs of covering type S, it holds that Vt+1
> Vt+1
. Differentiating each

of the above expressions with respect to θ yields the following first-order conditions:
H
1 = −c0 (θ) + δλ0 (θ)Vt+1

S
1 = −c0 (θ) + δλ0 (θ)Vt+1

[Healthy]
[Sick].

For healthy patients, plans equate the marginal cost of an additional unit of θ (one) against
two marginal benefits: that increasing θ decreases outcome costs—i.e., −c0 (θ)—while increasH
.
ing the probability that the plan will enjoy the expected future profit stream—i.e., δλ0 (θ)Vt+1
S
For sick patients, the incentives are the same, except that the continuation payoff δλ0 (θ)Vt+1

is smaller than that associated with a healthy patient, or perhaps negative. Either way,
H
S
M M C∗
Vt+1
> Vt+1
and c00 > 0 and λ00 < 0, so it must be that θH
> θSM M C∗ .

Incentives under FFS. For simplicity, we model providers under FFS as being completely
indifferent to outcome costs ci —they merely send the bills back to the state. We assume
that FFS providers get paid some reimbursement rate ρ for θ, and their cost of effort (or
opportunity cost) is e(θ), which is increasing convexly in θ. Thus, for each client they provide
F F S∗
some standard amount of care that satisfies ρ = e0 (θ), and so θH
= θSF F S∗ ≡ θF F S∗ .

Predictions. The key result of the model is a divergence of health inputs θ for healthy and
sick groups under MMC relative to FFS. That is:

M M C∗
F F S∗
(θH
− θSM M C∗ ) − (θH
− θSF F S∗ ) > 0.

Assuming that health inputs have the expected effect on health outcomes, we predict the
10

same divergence in outcomes after the switch from FFS to MMC—outcomes for healthy
clients improve while those for sick clients deteriorate.
Managed care plans under capitation have an incentive to compete for low-cost enrollees
and appear unattractive to high-cost enrollees in the hope they will join a competing plan
in the next period. For example, in our context, MMC plans would have an incentive to
provide discretionary in-home visits (one of the “voluntary benefits” mentioned in the Texas
Medicaid documentation) to clients whose future pregnancies have expected costs below the
capitation payment, so as to retain them as clients. By contrast, they would want highcost clients to sign up with a competing plan during their next pregnancy and would thus
ration such care. Moreover, they may make it more difficult for high-cost groups to enroll
(e.g., demanding more detailed documentation proving eligibility). As such, we predict that
outcomes for high-cost groups will deteriorate relative to low-cost groups.
Moreover, we hypothesize that the switch to MMC will have effects on birth composition
via at least two channels. First, groups whose care diminishes under MMC may lower their
fertility (either through lower conception rates or higher abortion rates) in response. Albanesi
and Olivetti (2010) offer evidence that improved health care for pregnant women during the
1950s contributed to the Baby Boom.19 We do not model our birth-composition prediction
as it is a straight-forward consequence of an increase in the effective price of childbearing for
certain groups and a decrease for others. Second, if the continuation probability λ is not very
responsive to quality of care θ and thus mothers’ inertia is high, then plans might differentially
encourage birth control (which is covered under Medicaid) for high-cost mothers. As such,
we will also test for whether birth rates from high-cost groups fall after MMC.
Caveats to the model. While the above framework is primarily meant to motivate the
empirical work, some of its simplifications and assumptions deserve further discussion. First,
we do not model plans’ incentives to influence initial enrollment—mothers find themselves
19

There is a small literature on whether Medicaid itself or similar programs that provide pre- or post-natal
care are pro-natalist. As discussed by Lopoo and Raissian (2012), as Medicaid has generally provided both
enhanced coverage for the costs related to child birth as well as access to birth control, it is hard to separate
whether the enhanced coverage alone would be pro-natalist.

11

in a certain plan and then make decisions about future enrollment based on the care they
received in the plan. In fact, as in the model of Glazer and McGuire (2000), plans may
design their benefits to deter sick individuals from enrolling ex-ante. Assuming that they do,
it seems likely that they would still engage in the ex-post risk-selection activities we model
after patient type is further revealed.
Second, we assume that utilization of care, health outcomes, and client retention all positively covary. It could instead be the case that utilization does not influence outcomes (e.g.,
if we are at the “flat of the curve,” as in Fuchs, 2004), though, as previously noted, Aizer
et al. found that MMC-induced reductions of care were large enough to affect mortality and
other outcomes. Similarly, it could be that the aspects of health care that induce patient
satisfaction and retention are not those that influence health outcomes.20 Our model implicitly assumes there is sufficient overlap between the aspects of care that positively influence
birth outcomes and those that lead mothers to continue with the MMC plan.
Third, to replicate the MMC setting, consumers pay zero premiums in our model. Future
work might generalize this framework to allow consumers to pay more for enhanced coverage,
as in the ACA exchanges. Depending on the correlations between income, insurance demand,
and health, we suspect that allowing variation in premiums can either increase or decrease
risk-selection.
Finally, our model does not give predictions on average care or outcomes under FFS
versus MMC. For example, if ρ (the FFS reimbursement rate) is very low, then the level of
care θ might increase for both high- and low-cost groups under MMC. While Aizer et al.
(2007) found deleterious effects on average quality of care in California, predictions on average
outcomes are outside our model. As such, welfare effects are not straightforward, an issue
we return to in the conclusion.
20

An interesting example of an aspect of care that generates patient satisfaction but has no clear effects
on outcomes is whether the race of the doctor and patient match. Past work on doctor-patient “raceconcordance” finds that it strongly influence patient satisfaction (LaVeist and Nuru-Jeter, 2002), modestly
influences health care utilization (LaVeist et al., 2003) but has no clear relationship with patient outcomes
(Meghani et al., 2009).

12

3.2

Quantifying these incentives

To test our model, we as researchers need to identify two subgroups of the Medicaid population with substantially divergent health care costs. As we document in the next section,
blacks and Hispanics account for nearly seventy percent of Medicaid births in Texas (and for
each group, over half of births are covered by Medicaid) and here we show they have vastly
different health care costs.
Table 1 compares initial hospital charges for black and Hispanic births using 1999-2004
discharge data, controlling for county and year effects (as capitation payments are adjusted
in this manner, though these controls have only a modest effect).21 Black newborns incur
charges 81 percent greater than do their Hispanic counterparts, or, in absolute terms, an
additional $4,218 (col. 1).22 This absolute difference in initial hospital changes substantially
understates the cost differences of black and Hispanic infants, as the elevated medical costs
of at-risk births persist well beyond the initial hospital stay.23
The differences in costs associated with the mother are also substantial, with black mothers incurring 21 percent greater costs than Hispanics (col. 2). This cost gap is not driven by
differences in mothers’ ages (col. 3), the only relevant individual-level covariate we have in
the discharge data.24
Figures 1(a) and 1(b) show the raw (unadjusted for county and year) difference in black
and Hispanic births by percentile of the cost distribution. The black-Hispanic cost differences
for newborns are positive at every centile, and the median difference is roughly $250. We
21

Unfortunately, discharge data with county identifiers are only available from the third-quarter of 1999
onward, and as such we cannot use it to compare outcomes before and after a county switched to MMC,
since our last group of counties switch in January 1999. Consequently, in light of the results in Section 6 the
cost differences from the discharge data that we report in Table 1 might be viewed as lower bounds, as plans
may have already discouraged the most high-cost black births by 1999.
22
Hospital charge data are imperfect measures of the final cost to the insurer as plans negotiate discounts
from providers. However, these discounts should not vary by demographic groups, so the comparisons in
Table 1 give a good approximation of proportional cost differences.
23
See, e.g., Tommiska et al. (2003) and McCormick et al. (1991).
24
As we cannot link mothers to infants in these data, we cannot control for age-of-mother in the infant
regressions in col. (1). Obviously, all newborns are the same age, so we cannot adjust for their own ages as
we do for mothers.

13

censor at the 95th percentile ($8,452) as otherwise the graph is extremely compressed: the
difference at the 99th percentile is $76,341. The differences in delivery charges associated with
the mother are relatively constant for all percentiles, outside of some noise in the extreme
right tail.
While we focus on the cost differences between blacks and Hispanics, differences by
mother’s age are also significant. While we cannot link mothers and newborns so cannot split
newborn costs by the age of the mother, Table 1 shows that black and Hispanic mothers
age 35 and older have delivery costs 15 percent greater and 14 percent greater than their
younger counterparts, respectively (see cols. 4 and 5). In our birth certificate data that we
describe in the next section, among black and Hispanic mothers the rates of pre-term and
low-birth-weight are roughly thirty percent higher for those above age 35. As such, births to
older mothers represent a small but expensive subset of Medicaid births that plans would
have an incentive to avoid. However, given that older mothers are unlikely to have a future
birth, plans may be less worried about these unprofitable clients returning in future periods.
For this reason, the empirical work generally focuses on differences by race, though we will
show some results by mothers’ age as well.
Before moving on to the empirical work, we emphasize two points. First, the large cost
differences between blacks and Hispanics that we document are completely in line with past
work on differences in birth outcomes. Hispanic infants in the U.S. are remarkably healthy,
and in fact researchers have coined the term “Hispanic paradox” to describe the fact that
despite socio-economic deprivation comparable to blacks, they in fact have birth outcomes
(and, while less relevant for us, adult health outcomes) equal to or better than non-Hispanic
whites.25 Our main contribution in this section is to show that these large differences in
health outcomes translate into equally large differences in initial hospitalization costs, the
metric relevant to plans. We generally take the cost differences between blacks and Hispanics
25

See, for example, Leslie et al. (2003), Haywood L Brown and Howard (2007), Alexander et al. (2003),
and Dominguez (2008).

14

as given, though briefly review potential explanations in the footnote below.26
Second, neither the model nor the empirical results that follow show that plans specifically
discriminate against African-Americans. Rather, our model predicts that plans will improve
the care of low-cost enrollees at the expense of high-cost enrollees, and to test this prediction
we, as researchers, need to use a proxy (race) for ex-ante differences in expected medical
costs. Plans themselves may use these proxies as well, or, because they have access to actual
cost data throughout the pregnancy, may not need to use the proxies that we do.

4

Data and empirical strategy

4.1

Main data source

Our main source of data is the universe of birth records from the Texas Department of
State Health Services (DSHS). These data contain detailed information on the child’s exact
birth date, birth outcomes, medical procedures, maternal demographics and health, and the
mother’s county of residence. Using recorded information on each child’s birth date and
gestation length, we calculate an approximate conception date for each observation. We
merge the birth records data to data on the timing of MMC implementation by the mother’s
county of residence.
As Appendix Table 1 documents, counties switched from FFS to MMC between 1993 and
2006. We drop the four pilot counties that switched in 1993 as we could not determine when
the pilot period ended. Since much of the focus of our analysis is on racial differences in birth
outcomes and the racial composition of births, we do not analyze the January 2006 switch
26

Our reading of the literature suggests that the Hispanic paradox is best explained by the superiority of
diet and other health habits in Latin American countries relative to the U.S. (tellingly, these advantage appear
to dissipate slightly in the second generation with assimilation, see Guendelman and Abrams, 1995). Another
explanation is the “healthy migrant effect”—that only the healthier members of a home country choose to
migrate—though Rubalcava et al. (2008) find only weak evidence that Mexicans who move to the US are
healthier than their counterparts who remain. We do not agree with the claim that the Hispanic paradox is a
statistical illusion driven by so-called “salmon bias”—that immigrants wish to return to their home country
to die and thus are rendered “statically immortal” in U.S. vital statistics data. First, salmon-bias cannot
explain differences in birth outcomes. Second, Abraido-Lanza et al. (1999) shows that the Hispanic paradox
exists for Cuban immigrants (who, for political reasons, almost never return to their home country) and
Puerto Rican immigrants (deaths in Puerto Rico are recorded in U.S. vital statistics data).

15

into MMC as many Texas counties were affected by an influx of black refugees following
Hurricane Katrina in September of 2005.27 Therefore, we limit our sample of analysis to
conceptions by mothers residing in Texas between January 1993 and December 2001, allowing
for roughly three years before the first MMC switch (in December 1995) and three years after
the last MMC switch (in January 1999). Finally, we drop the small number of birth records
with missing information on gestation, parity, mother’s age, mother’s race/ethnicity, and
mother’s marital status. These sample restrictions leave us with 2,814,681 observations in
our main analysis sample.
In Table 2, we present summary statistics for several demographic subsets of mothers.
Black and Hispanic mothers are slightly younger than average, and considerably younger than
married non-Hispanic white mothers. Pre-natal care measures are substantially different for
minorities and non-Hispanic whites. Blacks (75 percent) and Hispanics (71 percent) are less
likely to begin pre-natal care in the first trimester, relative to married whites (90 percent).
Whereas less than four percent of married whites receive their pre-natal care in public clinics,
13 and 19 percent of blacks and Hispanics do, respectively.
Differences in birth outcomes are consistent with the large differences in hospital charges
we presented earlier. Black rates of low-birth-weight, pre-term delivery and child death are,
respectively, 90 percent, 56 percent and 88 percent greater than the corresponding rates for
Hispanics, echoing the roughly 80-percent newborn cost differences we found in the discharge
data. In fact, birth outcomes for all Hispanics (col. 3) are comparable to birth outcomes for
married whites (col. 4), consistent with the “Hispanic paradox” noted earlier.
4.2

Medicaid coverage

One variable not included in Table 2 is Medicaid status, as Texas only included it on the birth
certificate in 2005. However, Medicaid status is actually a problematic variable in the context
27

Results are very similar when we do use the longer sample period and treat the 2006 transition as we
do the earlier transitions, and in fact earlier versions of the paper included them before we realized Katrina
could contaminate our results. It seems prudent to exclude this transition, however, as several of the counties
that switch in 2006 are close to the Louisiana border.

16

of studying MMC because privatizing Medicaid has the effect of making enrollees or providers
incorrectly record the birth as being covered by a private insurer or by “other/unknown”
source, a possibility hypothesized by Aizer et al. (2007).
Indeed, we find that this effect is empirically important when we examine Medicaid status
for conceptions in 2004-2005 versus 2007-2008 in the counties that privatized in 2006. In the
earlier period, 64.7 percent of births in these counties were recorded as covered by Medicaid,
compared to 49.9 percent in the later period, whereas other counties in fact saw a small
increase. Such a large and sudden decrease is inconsistent with declining fertility preferences
among the Medicaid population in these particular counties but not others. It instead points
to this mistaken recording of coverage and suggests that the Medicaid share from the birthcertificate data should be “grossed” up by roughly 1.3 (64.7/49.9). Similarly, in 2005, the
official count of Medicaid births from the Texas DHHS is 1.3 times the count in the birth
certificate data.28 As such, in Appendix Table 2 we gross up by 1.3 the share of Medicaid
births in the birth certificate data to estimate the Medicaid share of births for selected groups
conceived in 2004 (and born in 2005). This correction is of course rough, as different groups
might differentially misreport Medicaid coverage under MMC.
Appendix Table 2 reflects the high share of Medicaid-covered births in Texas (in the 2000s,
it typically ranked in the top six to eight states in this category, reflecting its relatively low
rates of private insurance coverage).29 The majority of black and Hispanic births are covered
by Medicaid, and these rates are just under half even among married mothers. Moreover,
blacks and Hispanics account for 69 percent of reported Medicaid births.30 The Medicaid
share for married white births is roughly a third of that same share for all blacks and
Hispanics, and we will often use these births in placebo tests.31
28

See http://www.hhsc.state.tx.us/medicaid/reports/PB8/PDF/Chp-4.pdf, p. 4-15. The official
count indicates that 54 percent of births are covered by Medicaid, whereas our birth certificate data indicate 41 percent.
29
See http://www.statehealthfacts.org/comparemaptable.jsp?yr=58&typ=2&ind=223&cat=4&sub=
57.
30
From Appendix Table 2: (0.791 ∗ 29262 + 0.584 ∗ 133756)/(0.539 ∗ 273471) = 0.687.
31
We also have educational attainment in the births data and we could conceivably use it in the creation
of placebo groups, but we are uncertain of its accuracy. For example, even among women old enough to have

17

4.3

Empirical Design

We exploit variation in the timing of the roll-out of MMC across counties to create an
event-study design, as in Duggan (2004) and Aizer et al. (2007). To ease the computational
burden, we generally collapse data into county/conception-month cells and weight by cell size
(equivalent to estimating the corresponding individual-level regression with no individuallevel controls).
Our estimating equation thus takes the form:
Yymc = β M M Cymc + Λ0 Wymc + µc + γy + νm + µc ∗ t + ymc

(1)

for births in county c, conceived in year y, month m. Yymc is a birth outcome or demographic
characteristic of interest, such as mortality, birth weight or gestation length. M M Cymc indicates that the conception occurred after MMC rollout in county c. Wyc is a set of county-year
specific controls including population, average income, and the unemployment rate. µc are
county fixed effects, γy are conception-year fixed effects, νm are conception-month fixed effects, µc ∗ t are county-specific linear time trends (to follow Aizer et al.), and ymc is the
error term, which we cluster by county. The key coefficient is β, which measures the effect of
being conceived under MMC on the outcome of interest. To avoid imposing constraints on
coefficients, we estimate equations separately for blacks and Hispanics and then test whether
β Black − β Hisp is of the expected sign and statistically significant.

5

Results on birth outcomes and quality of care

In this section, we first present results on birth outcomes among Hispanic and black mothers
after MMC roll-out. We then explore whether our results are driven by compositional changes
or differences in the quality of care following MMC.
completed high school (age 24 and older, say), women without a high school degree have lower Medicaid
rates than those with a high school degree but no college. However, when we use college-educated white
women as a placebo group instead of married white women, the results are similar and are available upon
request. Another reason we focus on marital status and not education is that the abortions data that we
introduce in Section 6 does not include information on education.

18

5.1

Results on birth outcomes

Table 3 compares changes in mortality for black and Hispanics after MMC. For this and
all other tables in this section, each pair of columns presents first the estimate for blacks
and then the estimate for Hispanics. Toward the bottom of the table, the “Diff/p-val” row
shows in the odd-numbered columns the corresponding differences in the M M C coefficients
(β Black − β Hispanic ) and the even-numbered columns present the p-value associated with the
test of equality across the two coefficients.32
Cols. (1) and (2) show that mortality—measured by whether a death certificate can
be matched with the birth certificate—increases by 0.136 percentage points or

0.136/1.208

=

11.3 percent among black mothers, while falling by 0.100 percentage points or

0.10/0.642

=

15.6 percent among Hispanic mothers. Both effects are statistically significant. This 0.236
percentage-point (or 0.236/(1.208−0.642) = 41.7 percent) increase in the black-Hispanic mortality
gap is itself highly significant (p < .001). Adding basic county-time controls for population,
income and employment has no effect on the results (cols. 3 and 4).33 Cols. (5) and (6)
show that for both groups, the magnitude of the effect increases (markedly so for blacks)
when only unmarried mothers are included (though the smaller sample leads to the Hispanic
result losing precision). The gap remains highly significant and indicates that, among births
to unmarried mothers, the black-Hispanic mortality gap grows by

0.335/(1.283−0.750)

= 62.9

percent.
We display these results graphically by substituting the M M C indicator in equation
(1) with dummy variables for the 36 months before and after county MMC implementation
(normalizing the month of implementation to zero) and plotting these coefficients in Figure 2.
Consistent with the regression results, blacks show a positive shift in mortality for children
32

We test equality using seemingly-unrelated regression in Stata, equivalent to running a single regression
in which every covariate is interacted with a dummy variable for race.
33
We use county-year data on per-capita income and population from the Regional Economic Information
System (REIS), and unemployment data from the Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS) of the
Bureau of Labor Statistics. We interpolate to create monthly measures to avoid sharp jumps at the end of
calendar years.

19

conceived under MMC while Hispanics show a similarly marked, but negative, shift. For
both, the shift is coincident with MMC’s introduction in a county.
Table 4 shows results for other birth outcomes. Again, health significantly worsens for
black infants (cols. 1, 3, 5, 7): incidence of low-birth-weight (defined, as in the medical
literature, < 2, 500 grams), abnormal birth weight (as in the medical literature, <2,500
g or >4,000 g), prematurity and labor/delivery complications increase, by six, five, seven
and sixteen percent, respectively. The corresponding black-Hispanic gaps for the first three
indicators increase by 13, 39 and 22 percent, respectively. Both blacks and Hispanics see
increases in birth complications—this rise is harder to interpret as it can indicate both
increased maternal or fetal distress or more aggressive delivery procedures such as c-sections
(note that the incidence of complications is roughly the same for married whites as for blacks
in Table 2, suggesting it is not simply a correlate of bad outcomes). Finally, Appendix Table
3 cols (1) through (5) show that none of the outcomes in Tables 3 or 4 change for married
whites after MMC.
Interestingly, we find larger movement in the black-Hispanic mortality gap than in the
low-birth-weight or pre-term gap; Aizer et al. (2007) also find that MMC had larger impacts
on mortality than on these intermediate measures (though of course they are looking at
averages, not gaps between subgroups). Aizer et al.’s estimate of the effect of MMC on
neonatal death (a fifty percent increase) is comparable to our estimate of the effect on the
black-Hispanic mortality gap (a 42 percent increase). As such, our results are large, but not
unrealistic.
Our results are consistent with blacks receiving relatively lower-quality care after MMC
(as in our model), but also with negative changes in selection into birth for black infants
versus Hispanics. Table 5 examines whether incidence of maternal risk-factors differentially
change for blacks and Hispanics after MMC. Cols. (1) and (2) show that after MMC mothers
in both groups are younger on average (a result we return to later); cols. (3) and (4) show they
are both less likely to have diabetes or hypertension (though only Hispanics are significant);

20

cols. (5) and (6) show blacks are less likely and Hispanics more likely to smoke (though
neither result is significant on its own). Of the three outcomes, two (age and smoking)
show statistically significant black-Hispanic divergences, both in the direction of blacks being
relatively positively selected after MMC, suggesting the effect of MMC on the divergence of
birth outcomes in Table 3 and 4 is understated.
Indeed, when we re-run regressions in Appendix Tables 4 and 5 for each of the birth
outcome variables using individual-level data and controlling for all plausible pre-determined
covariates on the birth certificate (see Table notes), each result grows slightly in magnitude
for blacks, consistent with mild positive selection post-MMC. The sign of the change for
Hispanics depends on the outcome variable, but in all cases is close to zero. Texas no longer
provides researchers data with mother identifiers, so we cannot compare siblings, but given
how stable the coefficients are with and without controls and the results on selection in Table
5, we are confident that our birth-outcome results are not driven by selection.34
5.2

Results on birth inputs

The birth certificate data provide information on pre-natal care and procedures used at birth,
though as Reichman and Schwartz-Soicher (2007) document, pre-natal care information on
birth certificates (relying on mothers’ recall) is less accurate than birth outcomes data. As
many questions are about the procedures at the actual delivery or asked about the entire
pregnancy (e.g., did you ever visit a public clinic for pre-natal care during your pregnancy),
we generally define someone as “treated” by MMC if they were born, as opposed to conceived,
under MMC.
Table 6 shows results for usage of the following procedures: fetal heart monitoring, ventilator, ultrasound and amniocentesis. The black-Hispanic differences are all in the expected
direction and all but ventilator usage are statistically significant. Though the black-Hispanic
divergence is not significant, the results on ventilator use are potentially interesting. As pre34

It is also reassuring that Aizer et al. find that regressions with and without mother fixed effects yield
similar results.

21

term birth is an important predictor that an infant will need to be on a ventilator, given the
results in Table 4 on pre-term births, standard protocol would have implied a large increase in
ventilator use among blacks and a perhaps an insignificant decrease among Hispanics. While
the implied result obtains for Hispanics, black infants see their ventilator use significantly
fall despite their greater need for the intervention, suggesting diminished care.35
The relative decrease in fetal monitoring and the absolute decrease in ventilator use for
blacks suggests that after MMC, black mothers gave birth in lower-quality hospitals. Indeed,
Aizer et al. find that under MMC Medicaid births were less likely to take place in hospitals
with a neonatal intensive care unit (where infants on ventilators would be admitted) and
more likely to take place in hospitals with higher risk-adjusted infant mortality rates. While
we do not have hospital identifiers in our data and thus cannot test whether hospital quality
diverges for blacks and Hispanics after MMC, the results on birth procedures point in that
direction.
Unlike Aizer et al., we do not find that MMC led to delays in the initiation of pre-natal
care for either blacks or Hispanics (not shown). However, we find interesting patterns on
where women receive pre-natal care, reported in Table 7. Especially among black mothers,
the share who receive their pre-natal care at a public clinic substantially increases, while
the share receiving it in a hospital or private office both decrease. The increase in the share
turning to public clinics is striking—a 3.6 percentage-point, or 27 percent, increase. The
effect for Hispanics is also positive, but smaller and not significant (col. 4).
Texas HHSC told us that these “public clinics” would include Planned Parenthood along
with “clinics that serve the uninsured.” The fact that black mothers would turn to these
clinics at such higher rates after MMC is consistent with plans being slower to enroll them
or providing them more limited care and access, as suggested by the discussion in Section
3. Alternatively, MMC plans may simply be directing clients to free clinics as a way to cut
their costs regardless of the underlying cost or racial background of the clients. While the
35

See http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/007240.htm on the recommended use of
ventilators for premature infants, whose lungs are often insufficiently developed at birth.

22

coefficient in the public clinics regression is not significant for Hispanics, it is positive and
economically non-trivial, and for both blacks and Hispanics we see a fall in pre-natal care in
hospitals. Of course, this cost-cutting is merely passing costs on to the state, counties and
other parties who fund these clinics. If similar practices occur in other states, then the cost
increases that Duggan (2004) attributes to MMC might in fact be understated.
Except for one outcome (ventilator use), there is no change in quality of care measures for
married whites (see Appendix Table 6). Given that we examine in total thirteen outcomes
using our married-white placebo group and this outcome is the only showing a significant
effect, it could well be significant by chance.
In sum, our examination of results on birth outcomes, selection and care access indicate
that widening health disparities between black and Hispanic births are likely driven by
care, rather than selection. As documented in Section 2, MMC plans have vast discretion
to tailor services on a case-by-case basis and appear to have directed more attention to
lower-cost clients at the expense of higher-cost clients. It is worth noting that we cannot
observe many inputs (e.g., the in-home visits noted in the Medicaid documentation) and these
unobservables might also play a large role in the outcome divergences we document. However,
the inputs we can observe generally move in the predicted direction and are consistent with
a significant widening of black-Hispanic health disparities.

6

Results on fertility

Here we test whether births rates of high-cost groups fall after MMC, either because women
respond to worse care and outcomes by reducing fertility or because plans actively discourage
these women from having children so as to limit their exposure to unprofitable births.
6.1

Main results

Table 8 presents regression results based on equation (1) with the black share of births in
a county-month now the outcome variable. In col. (1), this share falls by 0.196 percentage points, or 1.7 percent from the sample mean. As with the mortality results, the effect

23

is concentrated among unmarried black births—col. (2) shows that the share of births to
unmarried black mothers falls by 0.276 percentage points, or 3.95 percent. Col. (3) shows
that this result is robust to adding the county-month controls for the unemployment rate,
population and personal income.
The dependent variables so far in Table 8 is the ratio of black (or unmarried black) births
to all births, and thus could conceivably be driven by an increase in non-black births. Col. (4)
and (5) regress the log of births to black women and black unmarried women, respectively,
and show that the ratio is indeed being driven by a decrease in the numerator of the ratios,
with little effect on all other births (col. 6).36
Figure 3 (a) shows results graphically, again plotting coefficients from dummies corresponding to 36 months before and after a county switched to MMC. A decrease in level and
break from trend coincident with MMC’s introduction can be seen. Because of the rapid
rise in the Hispanic share of births over our sample period (about 0.83 percentage points
per year) and the resulting mechanical decrease in other groups’ share, our results could be
sensitive to how county time trends are specified. In fact, dropping country trends (subfigure
b) or using quadratic trends (subfigure c) produces a more pronounced decrease in the black
share of births (and the corresponding regression coefficients are of greater magnitude than
that in col. 1 using linear trends, not shown), suggesting our choice of linear county time
trends is conservative.
As a robustness check, we dropped each county individually to ensure that no single
county was driving our results—in all cases, the coefficient in col. (1) remained negative
and statistically significant (results available upon request). We also examined whether the
“echo” of this birth composition result could be seen in 2005-2011 American Community
Survey data as the children born during our sample grew older. We would expect this result
to be much noisier, as we proxy county of birth with current county of residence, can only
36

We restrict the sample in cols. (4) and (5) to those counties with at least one black unmarried birth
in every month, to avoid having to take the log of zeros. These counties account for 87 percent of black
unmarried births and 67 percent of all births.

24

observe quarter instead of month of birth, and can only identify 24 counties as the ACS
does not specify smaller counties for confidentiality reasons. Nonetheless, Appendix Figure
1 shows some evidence of a decrease in the black share of cohorts conceived after MMC
(though the corresponding regression result is not quite significant at the ten-percent level,
results available upon request).
Finally, we note that the decrease in black births is not a result of changing migration
patterns among black Texans, either in response to MMC’s introduction or merely in a
manner coincidentally correlated with it. If our birth rate results were driven by entire
families moving we should see enrollment for school-age black children decrease when a
county switches to MMC. Using administrative data from the National Center for Education
Statistics in Appendix Table 7, we find no such effect—the coefficient on MMC introduction
is close to zero and switches signs depending on the specification.
6.2

Exploring mechanisms for the fall in black births

Miscarriages. As we have documented in the previous section, by many measures birth outcomes and pre-natal care deteriorate under MMC for black children, suggesting miscarriages
could account for the “missing” black births. While we do not have data on miscarriages,
past work has shown that male neonates are far more likely to miscarry.37 We thus hypothesize that if miscarriages were driving our results, we would see a corresponding decrease
in the sex ratio among live births. Moreover, because the medical literature has shown that
maternal stress during pregnancy decreases the sex ratio at birth, the male share of births
may itself be of interest as it reflects maternal well-being during pregnancy.38
Table 9 suggests no significant decrease in the male share of births for either blacks or
unmarried blacks (cols. 1 and 2), though in both cases the coefficient of interest is negative, as
predicted. We show the graphical results as well in Figure 4(a) for unmarried black mothers.
37

See Vatten and Skjrven (2004) and Byrne et al. (1987).
This literature tends to exploit exogenous events such as earthquakes or terrorist attacks as well as more
secular events such as business cycle employment variation. See, e.g., Fukuda et al. (1998), Catalano et al.
(2005), and Catalano et al. (2006).
38

25

There is perhaps a small break when MMC starts, though the results are noisy. While we
have not been able to find existing research that would suggest a rough elasticity of the
sex ratio with respect to the miscarriage probability, we suspect that given sample size and
expected effect size, the test may be underpowered.
Interestingly, the male share of births to Hispanics increases (col. 3), significantly so
for unmarried Hispanics (col. 4), and the difference in the male share between blacks and
Hispanics is highly significant among unmarried mothers (not shown). Given the documented
connection between the sex ratio at birth and maternal well-being during pregnancy, this
result is consistent with the model’s prediction of improved care and outcomes for low-cost
mothers. And the graphical results in Figure 4(b) suggest that the break occurs at the time
of MMC implementation.
Abortions. We examine abortion rates from 1998 to 2002, as individual-level abortion data
has only been released consistently from 1998 onward. In these regressions, we consider
someone as “treated” if they conceive after MMC or within three months of its introduction,
since the large majority of abortions in Texas during our sample period occur two to three
months after conception.
Given the shorter sample period, this analysis is obviously limited by being identified from
a set of counties that all switch at the same time—only those counties that switch in 1999
contribute to the identification—as well as having a relatively short pre-period. Nonetheless,
the results are rather striking. In col. (1) of Table 10, the abortion rate among blacks increases
by 1.89 percentage points, or 6.7 percent from a sample mean of 27.9 percent.39 Cols. (2)
and (3) show that this effect is driven by unmarried black mothers, consistent with our
previous result that the fall in black birth rates is concentrated among unmarried women.
Cols. (4) and (5) show, respectively, that the result is unchanged by starting the sample
two months later (in case reporting in the first few months of 1998 was less reliable) and is
39

Some readers have commented that the mean abortion rates in Table 10 appear too high. In fact, abortion
rates in Texas during our sample period were slightly lower than the national average. In 1999, the ratio of
abortions to births plus abortions was 18 percent in Texas, whereas the CDC reported that nationally that
same ratio was 20.3 percent. See http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ss5109a1.htm.

26

smaller but still significant if county trends are dropped (in case the short pre-period leads
to mis-estimated county trends). There is no effect for either Hispanic or Hispanic unmarried
mothers (cols. 6 and 7) and no effect for white married mothers (Appendix Table 6, col. 7).
Re-estimating the main birth-composition result (col. 1 of Table 8) for the same conceptionmonths as in Table 10 suggests that abortion explains 37 percent of “missing” black births.
While the short pre-period concerns us, if the effect for unmarried blacks is driven by, say,
MMC counties differently improving their abortion reporting over the sample period, we
would expect to see some increase as well among similar groups (married blacks, unmarried
Hispanics). We thus conclude that abortion appears to be an important factor explaining
the fall in black births.
In Texas, Medicaid cannot pay for clients’ abortions. However, no restrictions exist on
discussing abortion with Medicaid clients and MMC may contract with doctors who are
more willing to discuss the option.40 In addition, it is also possible that women who are on
the margin of aborting a pregnancy might be influenced by the initial interactions they have
with their providers and insurers. Diminished quality and access to care may make mothers
feel that the pregnancy will be a stressful and overwhelming experience, and we showed
earlier that care appears diminished for black mothers under MMC.
The result on abortion rates may relate to the increases in pre-natal care provided by
public health clinics discussed above, in two potentially reinforcing ways. On the one hand, as
noted above, women who receive their pre-natal care at clinics instead of alternative settings
may come into contact with providers and other clients who are more likely to suggest
abortion as an option. On the other hand, the vast majority of abortions are performed
at clinics (as opposed to a doctor’s office or hospital), so if more mothers are considering
abortion, their contact with clinics increases.41 Some who eventually decide against abortion
40

In fact, in 2012 Governor Rick Perry made a failed attempt to impose such a restriction.
See http://www.austinchronicle.com/blogs/news/2012-10-19/planned-parenthood-out-but-docscan-still-discuss-abortion-in-new-texas-womens-health-program/. While Perry failed in the attempt to restrict discussion of abortion, he succeeded in excluding Planned Parenthood from receiving
funding through a Medicaid-waiver program.
41
See Finer and Henshaw (2003). They report that 93 percent of abortions in 2000 were performed at

27

may simply begin their pre-natal care at, say, the same Planned Parenthood clinic where
they had received information about abortion.
6.3

Do plans actively discourage high-cost births?

While it is in plans interest to limit high-cost births, it could also be the case that the
“missing” black infants are merely the result of MMC being better at providing access to
contraception than FFS, and black mothers having had the greatest unmet demand under
FFS. Though it is worth noting that Kearney and Levine (2009) find, nationally, when lowincome women are provided greater access to contraception, Hispanic births fall differentially,
suggesting Hispanics, not blacks, have greater unmet demand for contraception. Moreover,
the increase in black abortions suggest if anything a rise in unwanted black conceptions
under MMC, inconsistent with greater access to contraception.
In addition, it is perhaps harder to argue that, within the groups most likely to be on
Medicaid, higher-cost subgroups such as older mothers differentially had the greatest unmet
demand for contraception under FFS. Decreases in births among high-cost subgroups might
be seen instead as evidence of a more active role played by plans. Indeed, recall that in Table
5 we saw that the share of births to mothers over 35 fall significantly for both blacks and
Hispanics (by eight and four percent, respectively). There is no such pattern for married
whites (Appendix Table 3, col. 8).
In summary, after MMC, unprofitable births become rarer. Black births—nearly twice
as costly as Hispanic births—fall significantly after MMC. And among black and Hispanics,
births to older mothers also fall significantly. We suspect these results arise from some mix
of high-cost mothers’ limiting fertility in response to poor care and outcomes and plans
differentially discouraging their births, but we do not have the ability to separate these two
mechanisms.
Comparing our results with past work on California MMC nicely illustrates the classic
trade-off between incentives for cost-control and risk-selection. As noted, California has lowerclinics.

28

powered incentives, as expensive cases were “carved out” and passed back to the state.
Aizer et al. credit the carve-out with reducing incentives for preventive care, thus leading to
worse birth outcomes under MMC. As the state both paid capitation payments to plans and
picked up the bill for some adverse outcomes, total costs went up (Duggan, 2004). However,
neither paper finds evidence that high-cost births went “missing” after MMC or that health
disparities widened, as we do. Thus, carving out high-cost births appears to diminish plans’
incentive to reduce long-run costs through preventive care, but it also decreases the incentive
to avoid or discourage high-cost births.

7

Conclusion

We develop a simple dynamic model of risk-selection in “exchange” settings— where the state
finances and regulates competing, capitated private plans but does not itself administer a
public FFS plan. Plans have incentives to retain healthy, low-cost patients, whereas they
prefer their high-cost clients to switch to a competing insurer. As such, they improve care
for the former group at the expense of the latter.
We test this prediction using the transition from FFS Medicaid to Medicaid managed care
in Texas. Black infants in our data have nearly twice the incidence of serious health problems
and are nearly twice as costly as Hispanics, and thus our model predicts their outcomes
should diverge even further under MMC. We show that the black-Hispanic mortality, low
birth weight and pre-term birth gaps increase by 42, 13 and 22 percent, respectively, after a
county switches from FFS to MMC. Quality of pre-natal care and birth procedures generally
improve for Hispanics relative to blacks and black birth rates fall substantially after MMC.
While our model makes sharp predictions on how care and outcomes diverge under MMC,
it does not directly speak to overall welfare. Given the larger number of Hispanics in Texas,
average birth outcomes do not decline despite significant deterioration among black infants.
However, if society wishes to shrink health disparities, then MMC may be inferior to FFS
as it transfers health resources away from a group with poor average health. As the returns

29

to health investments are thought to be lower for the healthy than the sick (Grossman,
1972), such a transfer could lower total welfare. Finally, if health insurance is in part meant
to smooth the utility consequences of ex-ante differences in health, then, relative to FFS,
MMC’s transferring of resources from the sick to the healthy weakens the insurance value of
the Medicaid program.
The welfare effects of changes in birth composition are even more difficult to interpret.
Given the challenges single-parent households face, that the decline in black births is driven
by unmarried mothers could be seen as a positive effect of the reform. However, this view
may be too narrow and the desirability of the result may depend on the mechanism—e.g.,
whether plans are merely supplying birth control to women with previously unmet demand
or if they are actively discouraging births among mothers because of their expected costs.
Future work can hopefully make more progress toward pinning down underlying mechanisms than we have. In fact, this limitation is generally shared by the literature on riskselection: there is ample evidence that private, capitated plans often manage to avoid highcost enrollees, but almost no evidence on how they accomplish this selection. To our knowledge, there is only one audit study on risk-selection, Bauhoff (2012). He finds that even
highly regulated private plans in the German health system are slower to enroll individuals who contact them from high-cost regions of the country. More work along these lines
seems essential, especially in the U.S. context where the ACA will soon provide millions of
individuals health coverage through private, capitated plans.
In our model, an inefficiency arises because plans want clients with costs above the
capitation payment to switch to a competitor and thus reduce their care below the sociallyoptimal level. This result suggests that competition may undermine the underlying policy
goal of capitation—instead of acting as the residual claimant on costs above or below the
capitation payment and thus internalizing patients’ future costs, plans attempt to pass on
these costs to their competitor. This externality problem would not exist with a monopolistic
insurer (though other problems associated with monopoly might arise). As all counties in

30

Texas offer a choice between at least two competing MMC plans, we could not compare
counties with and without competition, but future work might examine other MMC settings.
Introducing risk-adjustment could potentially address the risk-selection results we have
presented, though, historically, governments have been reluctant to risk-adjust based on
race. Adjusting based on past health conditions is very challenging in the MMC setting and,
as previously noted, is rarely attempted. First, plans would have to submit some accounting of their clients’ health conditions to the government, so “intensive” coding becomes a
problem, as it is in Medicare Advantage and the Medicare Prospective Payment System.42
Second, while Medicare can calibrate a risk-adjustment formula by regressing enrollee costs
on dummies for past health conditions using cost and claims data from its FFS pool, state
governments under MMC typically do not have a public FFS option and thus will not have
the cost and claims data that Medicare uses. Third, risk-adjustment formulae typically document existing health conditions using twelve months of pre-data, and use this information to
forecast costs for the following twelve months. A stable client population—as in Medicare—is
thus required, a challenge in Medicaid given the “churning” of the client base.
Each of these three challenges would seem to apply equally to the ACA state exchanges.
Regulators will rely on insurers’ accounting of client health conditions, and as there is no
public FFS option they will not have their own cost and claims data. And as the exchanges
serve those too rich for Medicaid but not so well off as to have employer insurance, their
clients will likely come and go based on outside options—if their situation improves, then
they will move into employer insurance; if their situation deteriorates, then they may need
to switch to Medicaid.
With Medicaid Managed Care, the ACA exchanges, Medicare Part D and the prominence
of Medicare premium-support proposals, the U.S. is moving rapidly toward providing public
health insurance through a model of competing, capitated private insurance plans. Past work
42

See the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services on “intensive coding” among MA plans: http://www.
cms.gov/Medicare/Health-Plans/MedicareAdvtgSpecRateStats/downloads/Advance2008.pdf. See Silverman and Skinner (2004) on provider “up-coding” practices after PPS.

31

has identified challenges associated with this model, including the increase in costs that come
with insurers losing monopsony bargaining power over providers and consumers’ cognitive
overload from choosing among a large set of options.43 Our work points to an additional
concern arising from consumer choice—it tempts insurers to under-serve high-cost clients
in the hope they will switch to a competitor. However, in most contexts consumer choice
and competition are beneficial, and restricting choice among insurers all else equal has been
found to significantly decrease consumer surplus.44 Given the direction of U.S. health policy,
future work to better assess these trade-offs is of growing importance.

References
Abaluck, J. and Gruber, J. (2011). Choice Inconsistencies among the Elderly: Evidence
from Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program. The American Economic Review,
101 (4), 1180–1210.
Abraido-Lanza, A. F., Dohrenwend, B. P., Ng-Mak, D. S. and Turner, J. B.
(1999). The Latino Mortality Paradox: A Test of the “Salmon Bias” and Healthy Migrant
Hypotheses. American Journal of Public Health, 89 (10), 1543–1548.
Aizer, A., Currie, J. and Moretti, E. (2007). Does Managed Care Hurt Health? Evidence from Medicaid Mothers. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89 (3), 385–399.
Albanesi, S. and Olivetti, C. (2010). Maternal Health and the Baby Boom. Working
Paper 16146, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Alexander, G. R., Kogan, M., Bader, D., Carlo, W., Allen, M. and Mor, J.
(2003). US Birth Weight/Gestational Age-Specific Neonatal Mortality: 19951997 Rates
for Whites, Hispanics, and Blacks. Pediatrics, 111 (1), e61–e66.
Baicker, K. and Dow, W. H. (2009). Risk Selection and Risk Adjustment: Improving
Insurance in the Individual and Small Group Markets. Inquiry, 46 (2).
Batata, A. (2004). The Effect of HMOs on Fee-For-Service Health Care Expenditures:
Evidence from Medicare Revisited. Journal of Health Economics, 23 (5), 951 – 963.
Bauhoff, S. (2012). Do health plans risk-select? An audit study on Germany’s Social
Health Insurance. Journal of Public Economics.
Borghans, L., Gielen, A. C. and Luttmer, E. F. (2012). Social Support Substitution and the Earnings Rebound: Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity in Disability
Insurance Reform. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
43
44

See Dafny et al. (2012) and Abaluck and Gruber (2011), respectively.
See Dafny et al. (2013).

32

Byrne, J., Warburton, D., Opitz, J. M. and Reynolds, J. F. (1987). Male Excess
Among Anatomically Normal Fetuses in Spontaneous Abortions. American Journal of
Medical Genetics, 26 (3), 605–611.
Catalano, R., Bruckner, T., Anderson, E. and Gould, J. (2005). Fetal Death Sex
Ratios: A Test of the Economic Stress Hypothesis. International journal of Epidemiology,
34 (4), 944–948.
—, —, Marks, A. and Eskenazi, B. (2006). Exogenous Shocks to the Human Sex Ratio:
The Case of September 11, 2001 in New York City. Human Reproduction, 21 (12), 3127–
3131.
Dafny, L., Duggan, M. and Ramanarayanan, S. (2012). Paying a Premium on Your
Premium? Consolidation in the US Health Insurance Industry. The American Economic
Review, 102 (2), 1161–1185.
—, Ho, K. and Varela, M. (2013). Let Them Have Choice: Gains from Shifting Away from
Employer-sponsored Health Insurance and Toward an Individual Exchange. American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5 (1), 32–58.
Dominguez, T. P. (2008). Race, Racism, and Racial Disparities in Adverse Birth Outcomes. Clinical obstetrics and gynecology, 51, 360–70.
Duggan, M. (2004). Does contracting out increase the efficiency of government programs?
evidence from medicaid hmos. Journal of Public Economics, 88 (12), 2549–2572.
— and Hayford, T. (2011). Has the Shift to Managed Care Reduced Medicaid Expenditures? Evidence from State and Local-Level Mandates. Working Paper 17236, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Finer, L. B. and Henshaw, S. K. (2003). Abortion Incidence and Services in the United
States in 2000. Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health, 35 (1), 6–15.
Fuchs, V. R. (2004). More Variation in Use of Care, More Flat-of-the-Curve Medicine.
Health Affairs, 23, VAR–104.
Fukuda, M., Fukuda, K., Shimizu, T. and Moller, H. (1998). Decline in Sex Ratio at
Birth after Kobe Earthquake. Human Reproduction, 13 (8), 2321–2322.
Glazer, J. and McGuire, T. G. (2000). Optimal Risk Adjustment in Markets with
Adverse Selection: An Application to Managed Care. American Economic Review, 90 (4),
1055–1071.
Grossman, M. (1972). On The Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health.
The Journal of Political Economy, 80 (2), 223–255.
Guendelman, S. and Abrams, B. (1995). Dietary Intake Among Mexican-American
Women: Generational Differences and a Comparison with White Non-Hispanic Women.
American Journal of Public Health, 85 (1), 20–25.
Hart, O., Shleifer, A. and Vishny, R. (1997). The Proper Scope of Government: Theory
and an Application to Prisons*. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112 (4), 1127–1161.

33

Haywood L Brown, Y. J., Monique V Chireau and Howard, D. (2007). The ”Hispanic Paradox”: An Investigation of Racial Disparity in Pregnancy Outcomes at a Tertiary
Care Medical Center. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 197 (2), 197e1 –
197e9.
Kaestner, R., Dubay, L. and Kenney, G. (2002). Medicaid Managed Care and Infant
Health: A National Evaluation. Working Paper 8936, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kearney, M. and Levine, P. (2009). Subsidized Contraception, Fertility, and Sexual
Behavior. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 91 (1), 137–151.
Langwell, K. and Hadley, J. (1989). Evaluation of the Medicare Competition Demonstrations. Health Care Financing Review, 11 (2), 65–80.
LaVeist, T. A. and Nuru-Jeter, A. (2002). Is Doctor-Patient Race Concordance Associated with Greater Satisfaction with Care? Journal of Health and Social Behavior, pp.
296–306.
—, — and Jones, K. E. (2003). The Association of Doctor-Patient Race Concordance with
Health Services Utilization. Journal of Public Health Policy, pp. 312–323.
Leslie, J. C., Galvin, S. L., Diehl, S. J., Bennett, T. A. and Buescher, P. A.
(2003). Infant Mortality, Low Birth Weight, and Prematurity among Hispanic, White,
and African American Women in North Carolina. American Journal of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, 188 (5), 1238 – 1240.
Lopoo, L. M. and Raissian, K. M. (2012). Natalist Policies in the United States. Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management, 31 (4), 905–946.
McCormick, M. C., Bembaum, J. C., Eisenberg, J. M., Kustra, S. L. and
Finnegan, E. (1991). Costs Incurred by Parents of Very Low Birth Weight Infants after
the Initial Neonatal Hospitalization. Pediatrics, 88 (3), 533–541.
Meghani, S. H., Brooks, J. M., Gipson-Jones, T., Waite, R., Whitfield-Harris,
L. and Deatrick, J. A. (2009). Patient-Provider Race-Concordance: Does it Matter in
Improving Minority Patients Health Outcomes? Ethnicity & Health, 14 (1), 107–130.
Mello, M. M., Stearns, S. C., Norton, E. C. and Ricketts, T. C. (2003). Understanding Biased Selection in Medicare HMOs. Health Services Research, 38, 961–992(32).
Newhouse, J. (1996). Reimbursing Health Plans and Health Providers: Efficiency in Production versus Selection. Journal of Economic Literature, 34 (3), 1236–1263.
Physician Payment Review Commission (1997). Testimony of Gail R. Wilensky. Statement before the U.S. House of Rrepresentatives Subcommittee on Health. Comittee on
Ways and Means, February 24, 1997.
Reichman, N. E. and Schwartz-Soicher, O. (2007). Accuracy of Birth Certificate Data
by Risk Factors and Outcomes: Analysis of Data from New Jersey. American Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, 197 (1), 32–e1.

34

Rubalcava, L. N., Teruel, G. M., Thomas, D. and Goldman, N. (2008). The Healthy
Migrant Effect: New Findings From the Mexican Family Life Survey. Journal Information,
98 (1).
Silverman, E. and Skinner, J. (2004). Medicare Upcoding and Hospital Ownership.
Journal of Health Economics, 23 (2), 369–389.
Tommiska, V., Tuominen, R. and Fellman, V. (2003). Economic Costs of Care in
Extremely Low Birthweight Infants during the First 2 Years of Life*. Pediatric Critical
Care Medicine, 4 (2), 157–163.
Vatten, L. J. and Skjrven, R. (2004). Offspring Sex and Pregnancy Outcome by Length
of Gestation. Early Human Development, 76 (1), 47 – 54.
Weiner, J. P., Trish, E., Abrams, C. and Lemke, K. (2012). Adjusting For Risk
Selection in State Health Insurance Exchanges will be Critically Important and Feasible,
but Not Easy. Health Affairs, 31 (2), 306–315.
Winkelman, R. and Damler, R. (2007). Risk adjustment in state medicaid programs.
Health Watch, (57), 14–34.

35

Figure 1: Distribution of hospital charge differences between Blacks and Hispanics
(b) Deliveries

0

−1000

Black minus Hispanic costs
2000
4000
6000

Black minus Hispanic costs
−500
0
500

8000

1000

(a) Newborns

0

20

40
60
Percentile of cost distribution

80

100

0

20

40
60
Percentile of cost distribution

80

100

Notes: Figures are based on data from public-use Texas Hospital discharge data (see
http://www.dshs.state.tx.us/THCIC/Hospitals/Download.shtm to download these data). For each
graph, the value of the Hispanic nth percentile is subtracted from the value of the Black nth percentile.
Because of the extreme skewness of the newborn charges, the graph is truncated at the 95th percentile. The
black-Hispanic difference for the 99th percentile is $76,341.

36

Figure 2: Changes in mortality for black and Hispanic births (note different scales)
(b) Hispanics

−.005

−.002

−.001

Event−time coefficient
0
.005

Event−time coefficient
0
.001

.002

.01

.003

(a) Blacks

−36 −32 −28 −24 −20 −16 −12 −8 −4 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36
Months between conception and MMC implementation

−36 −32 −28 −24 −20 −16 −12 −8 −4 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36
Months between conception and MMC implementation

Notes: These figures show the results from estimating mortality rates for black (Figure a) and Hispanic
(Figure b) births in the 36 months before and after MMC implementation. Specifically, we estimate the
following equation:
Yymc =

−1
X
n=−36

βn Inct +

36
X

βn Inct + ηW indowct + µc + γy + νm + µc ∗ t + ymc ,

n=1

where Intc is an indicator variable for conceptions n months after a county c switched to MMC, meaning
negative values of n indicate conceptions in months before MMC implementation. W indow is an indicator
for being conceived within a six-year window of MMC’s introduction (the range of the figure). This
addition allows us to normalize conceptions the same month as MMC implementation to zero for ease of
interpretation. (Excluding W indow only shifts the level, not the shape, of the figures, as the excluded
group by default becomes all births outside the graphs’ six-year window.) The figure plots the βn
coefficients along with lowess lines (of bandwidth one). Otherwise, the notation follows exactly from our
main estimating equation (1) in the text: c indexes counties, and y and m month and year; Yymc is an
outcome measure for county c in year-month y-m (in this case, black and Hispanic mortality, respectively);
µc are county fixed effects, γy are conception-year fixed effects, and λm are conception-month fixed effects;
µc ∗ t is the county-specific linear time-trend.

37

Figure 3: Black share of all births before and after MMC
(b) Without county time trends

−.01

−.006

Event−time coefficient
−.004
−.002
0

Event−time coefficient
−.005
0

.002

.004

.005

(a) With country linear time trends

−36 −32 −28 −24 −20 −16 −12 −8 −4 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36
Months between conception and MMC implementation

−36 −32 −28 −24 −20 −16 −12 −8 −4 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36
Months between conception and MMC implementation

−.008

−.006

Event−time coefficient
−.004
−.002
0

.002

(c) With county quadratic time trends

−36 −32 −28 −24 −20 −16 −12 −8 −4 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36
Months between conception and MMC implementation

Notes: These figures show the results from estimating the effects on the share of black births in the 36
months before and after MMC implementation (the month of MMC implementation is normalized to zero).
See the notes to Figure 2 for further details on the estimation procedure. Figure (a) includes country linear
time trends (our standard specification), Figure (b) includes no county time trends, and Figure (c) includes
county quadratic time trends.

38

Figure 4: Changes in the male share of births (note different scales)
(b) Unmarried Hispanic mothers

−.03

−.04

−.02

−.02

Event−time coefficient
−.01
0

Event−time coefficient
0
.02

.01

.04

(a) Unnmarried black mothers

−36 −32 −28 −24 −20 −16 −12 −8 −4 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36
Months between conception and MMC implementation

−36 −32 −28 −24 −20 −16 −12 −8 −4 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36
Months between conception and MMC implementation

Notes: These figures show the results from estimating the effects on the male share of black (Figure a) and
Hispanic (Figure b) births in the 36 months before and after MMC implementation (the month of MMC
implementation is normalized to zero). See the notes to Figure 2 for further details on the estimation
procedure.

39

Table 1: Hospital charges for newborns and deliveries
Newborn

Black

Delivery

(1)

(2)

(3)

4218.3∗∗∗
[110.0]

1485.8∗∗∗
[16.52]

1499.7∗∗∗
[16.51]

Age 35 or older
Mean, dept. var.
Mean, ex. group
Pct. diff
Age cat. FE
Sample
Observations

5813.6
5236.6
0.806
No
Bl., H.
816914

7107.5
7002.9
0.212
No
Bl., H.
788637

7107.5
7002.9
0.214
Yes
Bl., H
788637

(4)

(5)

1130.5∗∗∗
[60.70]

963.4∗∗∗
[22.89]

7608.6
7510.8
0.151
No
Bl.
144403

7002.8
6916.9
0.139
No
H.
645682

Notes: Regressions are based on data from public-use Texas Hospital discharge data (see http://www.dshs.
state.tx.us/THCIC/Hospitals/Download.shtm to download these data). All regressions include county
and year fixed effects and include all Hispanic and black births from the third quarter of 1999 through 2004
(county identifiers are missing in the first two quarters of 1999). Col. (3) includes maternal age fixed effects
(age < 20, age ∈ [20, 25), age ∈ [25, 30), age ∈ [30, 35), age ≥ 35). All means of the dependent variable are
reported, as well as the percent difference between the group denoted by the reported regression coefficient
(e.g., blacks, in col. 1) and the excluded group (e.g., Hispanics, in col. 1). That is, “Pct. Diff” just divides
the coefficient by the excluded-group mean. Cols. (1) through (3) include all blacks and Hispanics, col. (4)
includes only blacks and col. (5) includes only Hispanics.

40

Table 2: Summary statistics
(1)
All

(2)
Black

(3)
Hispanic

(4)
Mar. white

Mother’s age

25.76
(6.063)

24.43
(6.055)

24.84
(5.909)

28.05
(5.555)

Low-birth weight
(Birthweight below 2,500 g.)

0.0724
(0.259)

0.125
(0.331)

0.0658
(0.248)

0.0599
(0.237)

Birthweight below 2,500
g. or above 4,000 g.

0.159
(0.365)

0.174
(0.379)

0.145
(0.352)

0.174
(0.379)

Pre-term (Gestation less
than 37 weeks)

0.0923
(0.289)

0.133
(0.340)

0.0859
(0.280)

0.0859
(0.280)

Any labor complications

0.168
(0.374)

0.187
(0.390)

0.159
(0.366)

0.168
(0.374)

Child died (death cert.
matched to birth cert.)

0.00725
(0.0848)

0.0121
(0.109)

0.00642
(0.0799)

0.00614
(0.0781)

Pre-natal care in first
trimester

0.784
(0.412)

0.746
(0.436)

0.714
(0.452)

0.902
(0.298)

Pre-natal care at public
clinic

0.126
(0.332)

0.133
(0.340)

0.191
(0.393)

0.0398
(0.195)

Pre-natal care at
hospital

0.172
(0.378)

0.251
(0.434)

0.212
(0.409)

0.0959
(0.294)

Pre-natal care at private
doctor’s office

0.677
(0.467)

0.600
(0.490)

0.558
(0.497)

0.851
(0.356)

Use of fetal heart
monitor

0.853
(0.354)

0.823
(0.382)

0.860
(0.347)

0.847
(0.360)

Use of fetal ventilator

0.0389
(0.193)

0.0507
(0.219)

0.0294
(0.169)

0.0475
(0.213)

Had ultrasound during
pregnancy

0.494
(0.500)

0.469
(0.499)

0.430
(0.495)

0.583
(0.493)

Had amnioscentisis during
pregnancy

0.0130
(0.113)

0.0115
(0.106)

0.00726
(0.0849)

0.0217
(0.146)

2,814,681

320,534

1,263,661

922,142

Observations

Notes: This table reports means for key variables in the Texas birth records data. The sample of analysis
includes births that were conceived by mothers residing in Texas between January 1993 and December 2001.

41

Table 3: Effect of MMC on mortality rates (×100) for black and Hispanic births
(1)
Bl.

(2)
Hsp.

(3)
Bl.

(4)
Hsp.

(5)
Bl.

(6)
Hsp.

0.136∗
[0.0695]

-0.1000∗∗
[0.0457]

0.133∗
[0.0709]

-0.0947∗∗
[0.0421]

0.242∗∗
[0.119]

-0.114
[0.0731]

County unemp. rate

0.0138
[0.0474]

-0.00783
[0.00765]

Inc. per cap div. by
1000

0.0816
[0.0566]

-0.0351∗∗
[0.0139]

Population div. by
100,000

-0.0959
[0.226]

-0.156∗∗
[0.0705]

1.208
All
0.228
12955
318144

0.642
All
0.000997
22818
1263661

1.283
Unmar.
0.355
11806
196875

0.750
Unmar.
0.00305
18479
419026

Conceived after MMC

Dept. var mean
Sample
Diff/p-val
Reg. obs (cells)
Indiv. obs.

1.208
All
0.236
12955
318144

0.642
All
0.000706
22818
1263661

Notes: These regressions are based on Texas birth records data. The sample of analysis includes births
that were conceived by mothers residing in Texas between January 1993 and December 2001. Units of
observation are county/conception-year/conception-month cells and all regressions are weighted by cell size.
All regressions include year, month and county fixed effects, and county-specific linear time trends. Standard
errors are clustered by county. The “Diff/p-val” row shows in the odd-numbered columns the differences in
the black-Hispanic M M C coefficients and the even-numbered columns present the p-value associated with
the test of equality across the two coefficients.

42

Table 4: Effect of MMC on other birth outcomes (×100) for black and Hispanic births
LBW
(1)
Bl.

Abn. BW

(2)
Hsp.

(3)
Bl.

Conceived after 0.696∗ -0.0854 0.901∗∗
MMC
[0.399] [0.0876] [0.350]

Pre-term

Complic.

(4)
Hsp.

(5)
Bl.

(6)
Hsp.

(7)
Bl.

(8)
Hsp.

-0.227
[0.343]

0.937∗∗
[0.362]

-0.115
[0.277]

3.114∗∗∗
[1.080]

3.881∗
[2.196]

Dept. var mean 12.53
6.581
17.38
14.49
13.37
8.595
18.72
15.90
Diff/p-val
0.782 0.00242 1.128
0.0303
1.052
0.0327
-0.768
0.731
Reg. obs (cells) 12950
22815
12950
22815
12955
22818
12655
22305
Indiv. obs.
318139 1263658 318139 1263658 318144 1263661 312095 1244639
Notes: See notes under Table 3 for more details about the data, sample, and specifications. “LBW” denotes
birth weight < 2, 500g; “Abn. BW” (abnormal birthweight) denotes birthweight < 2, 500 g or >4,000 g;
“Pre-term” denotes gestation < 37 weeks; “Complic” denotes any birth complications.

Table 5: Changes in risk-factors (×100) after MMC for black and Hispanic births
Over age 35

Diab/Hypert.

Smoker

(1)
Bl.

(2)
Hsp.

(3)
Bl.

(4)
Hsp.

(5)
Bl.

(6)
Hsp.

Conceived after
MMC

-0.511∗
[0.286]

-0.221∗∗∗
[0.0793]

-0.115
[0.163]

-0.252∗
[0.140]

-0.359
[0.245]

0.155
[0.167]

Dept. var mean
Diff/p-val
Reg. obs (cells)
Indiv. obs.

6.271
-0.291
12954
318143

6.048
0.0499
22817
1263660

3.506
0.137
12955
318144

3.228
0.384
22818
1263661

6.008
-0.515
12929
318117

2.246
0.00723
22804
1263646

Notes: See notes under Table 3 for more details about the data, sample, and specifications.

43

Table 6: Effect of MMC on pre-natal care measures (×100) for black and Hispanic births
Fetal mon.
(1)
Bl.

Ventilator

(2)
Hsp.

(3)
Bl.

Ultrasound

(4)
Hsp.

(5)
Bl.

Amnio.

(6)
Hsp.

(7)
Bl.

(8)
Hsp.

Born under MMC -1.937 0.717 -1.341∗∗∗ -0.981 -5.452∗∗∗ -1.151 -0.140 0.156∗
[1.176] [1.363] [0.501] [0.670] [1.408] [1.376] [0.112] [0.0797]
Dept. var mean
Diff/p-val
Reg. obs (cells)
Indiv. obs.

82.26 86.02
5.070
2.944
46.84
42.97
-2.653 0.0555 -0.359
0.566
-4.301 0.0113
12955 22818
12955
22818
12955
22818
318144 1263661 318144 1263661 318144 1263661

1.151
0.726
-0.296 0.000201
12955 22818
318144 1263661

Notes: See notes under Table 3 for more details about the data, sample, and specifications. Note that the
key explanatory variable of interest is an indicator for being born after (rather than conceived after) MMC.

Table 7: Effect of MMC on site of pre-natal care (×100) on black and Hispanic births
Pub. Clinic

Hosp.

Private

(1)
Bl.

(2)
Hsp.

(3)
Bl.

(4)
Hsp.

(5)
Bl.

(6)
Hsp.

Born under MMC

3.574∗∗
[1.605]

2.658
[3.135]

-1.673∗∗∗
[0.505]

-4.114∗
[2.393]

-0.552
[0.687]

0.424
[1.091]

Dept. var mean
Diff/p-val
Reg. obs (cells)
Indiv. obs.

13.39
0.915
12655
312095

19.17
0.768
22305
1244639

25.17
2.441
12655
312095

21.13
0.386
22305
1244639

59.85
-0.976
12655
312095

55.66
0.412
22305
1244639

Notes: See notes under Table 3 for more details about the data, sample, and specifications. Note that the
key explanatory variable of interest is an indicator for being born after (rather than conceived after) MMC.

44

Table 8: Effect of MMC on black birth rates
Share black
(1)
Black
Conceived after
MMC

(2)
Bl. unm.

Log
(3)
Bl. unm.

(5)
(6)
Bl. unm. Non-bl.

-0.00196∗∗ -0.00276∗∗∗ -0.00257∗∗∗ -0.0352∗∗∗ -0.0481∗∗∗ -0.0134
[0.000786] [0.000809] [0.000612] [0.0114] [0.00794] [0.0113]
-0.0274∗
[0.0143]

County unemp. rate
County per cap.
income (div. by 10,000)

-0.00921∗∗
[0.00392]

County population
(div. by 100,000)

-0.00917∗
[0.00475]

Mean, dept. var.
Reg. obs. (cells)
Indiv. obs.

(4)
Black

0.113
26021
2814681

0.0699
26021
2814681

0.0699
26021
2814681

5.632
3672
278780

5.136
3672
170500

7.050
3672
1618301

Notes: These regressions are based on Texas birth records data. The sample of analysis includes births
that were conceived by mothers residing in Texas between January 1993 and December 2001. Units of
observation are county/conception-year/conception-month cells. In all columns except when share of births
is the outcome, all county/year/month cells in Texas between 1993 and 2001 are included and each cell is
weighted by cell size. When logs are used in cols. (4) through (6), counties are restricted to those with at
least one black unmarried birth in each month (to avoid taking the log of zero and to have a consistent
sample of counties), a sample which accounts for 67 percent of all births and 87 percent of black unmarried
births. Col. (4) is weighted by the number of black births in a county/year/month, col. (5) is weighted by
the number of black unmarried births in a county/year/month, and column (6) is weighted by the number
of non-black births in a county/year/month. All regressions include year, month and county fixed effects,
and county-specific linear time trends. Standard errors are clustered by county.

45

Table 9: Effect of MMC on male share of births

Conceived after
MMC
Mean, dept. var
Reg. obs. (cells)
Indiv. obs.

(1)
Black
-0.349
[0.512]
50.92
12955
318144

(2)
Bl. unmar.
-0.459
[0.549]
50.91
11806
196875

(3)
Hisp.
0.268
[0.347]
51.03
22818
1263661

(4)
H. unmar.
0.724∗∗
[0.312]
51.06
18479
419026

Notes: See notes under Table 3 for more details about the data, sample, and specifications.

Table 10: Effect of MMC on abortion rates (×100)
Dept. var: Share of conceptions ending in abortion
(1)
Black

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Bl. unm. Bl. mar. Bl. unm. Bl. unm.

(6)
Hisp

(7)
H. unm.

Conceived after or 3 1.886∗∗
mos. before MMC
[0.795]

3.083∗∗∗
[0.752]

-0.682
[0.636]

2.809∗∗∗
[0.721]

1.404∗∗
[0.607]

-0.242
[0.600]

0.258
[1.231]

Mean, dept. var.
County trends
Early cut-off
Reg obs. (cells)
Indiv. obs.

34.67
Yes
No
5649
135732

13.29
Yes
No
4076
63266

34.68
Yes
Yes
5406
129950

34.67
No
No
5649
135732

12.79
Yes
No
10397
704902

24.77
Yes
No
8913
278956

27.87
Yes
No
6134
198998

Notes: These regressions are based on Texas abortion and birth records data. The sample of analysis includes
births that were conceived by mothers residing in Texas between January 1998 and December 2001, since
abortions only began to be reported then. Units of observation are county/conception-year/conception-month
cells and all regressions are weighted by cell size. All regressions include year, month and county fixed effects
and all but col. (5) include linear county time trends. Standard errors are clustered by county.

46

−.02

Coefficient on event−time dummy
0
.02

.04

Appendix Figure 1: Black share of population ages 2-17 (IPUMS data)

−10

−5
0
5
10
Quarters between birth and MMC introduction

15

Notes: These data are taken from the 2005-2011 IPUMS, restricted to individuals born in Texas. Linear
birth-date (measured at the quarter level) county trends are included (the analogue to county linear trends
in conception month in the birth-certificate analysis), as well as county and year- and quarter-of-birth fixed
effects. Conception corresponds to births three-quarters after MMC implementation, so we divide the lowess
lines at that point. The youngest cohort to be born during an MMC transition year would be five to six
years old in 2005 (from those counties switching in 1999) and the oldest would be fourteen to fifteen in 2011
(from those counties switching in December 1995). As such, we include ages slightly below and above these
cut-offs respectively, just as in the birth-certificate analysis we include about three years before and after
the first and last set of counties switch, respectively.

47

Appendix Table 1: Roll Out Schedule for Texas MMC
Date
Aug 1993
Dec 1993
Dec 1995
Sep 1996

Dec 1997
Mar 1998
Jan 1999
Jan 2006

Counties
Travis
Chambers Jefferson Galveston
Liberty, Hardin, Orange
Burnet Williamson Lee Bastrop Fayette Caldwell
Hays Lubbock Terry Lynn Garza Crosby Hockley Llano Hale
Floyd Swisher Randall Deaf Smith Potter Hutshinson Carson
Bexar Atascosa Wilson Guadalupe Comal Kendall Bandera
Medina Tarrant Hood Parker Wise Denton Johnson
Houston
Harris Galveston Brazoria Matagorda Wharton Fort Bend
Austin Waller Montgomery
Dallas Ellis Navarro Kaufman Rockwall Hunt Collin El Paso
Hudspeth
Nueces Kenedy Brooks Kleberg Jim Wells San Patricio
Live Oak Aransas Refugio Bee Goliad Victoria Karnes Calhoun

Notes: This information was obtained from Chapter 6 of the report available here: www.hhsc.state.tx.us/
medicaid/reports/PB8/PinkBookTOC.html

Appendix Table 2: Estimated Medicaid share of births in 2005
(1)
All

(2)
Black

(3)
Hispanic

(4)
White

Medicaid share of births

0.539

0.791

0.584

0.437

Medicaid share of births,
married mothers

0.360

0.429

0.465

0.269

273471

29262

133756

100526

Observations

Notes: Texas does not record Medicaid status on birth certificates until 2005. As we discuss in Section 4,
these numbers appear substantially under-reported, almost certainly due to women or providers who are on
privatized Medicaid mistakenly reporting that the birth is covered by a private insurer instead of Medicaid.
In 2005, the Texas Health and Human Services Commission reported that 54 percent of births were covered
by Medicaid, whereas the birth certificate data indicate that only 41 percent were. We thus “gross up” the
Medicaid share by 1.3 in this table. See Section 4 for additional evidence that the shift from FFS to MMC
results in substantial under-reporting of Medicaid births.

48

Appendix Table 3: Effect of MMC on birth outcomes (×100) for married whites

Conceived after
MMC
Conc. after or
three mos. prior
Mean, dept. var
Reg. obs. (cells)
Underlying

(1)
Mort.
0.0533
[0.0459]

0.614
23898
922142

(2)
LBW
0.0329
[0.151]

5.991
23894
922138

(3)
ABW
-0.0397
[0.182]

(4)
Pret.
0.257
[0.214]

(5)
Comp.
0.684
[0.712]

(6)
Male
-0.113
[0.199]

(7)
Abort

(8)
Old
0.0277
[0.209]

17.44
23894
922138

-0.0524
[0.534]
8.589
16.88
51.27
4.575
11.45
23898 23347 23898
10372
23898
922142 902860 922142 417211 922142

Notes: These regressions are based on Texas birth records data. The sample of analysis includes births
that were conceived by mothers residing in Texas between January 1993 and December 2001. Units of
observation are county/conception-year/conception-month cells and all regressions are weighted by cell size.
All regressions include year, month and county fixed effects, and county-specific linear time trends. Standard
errors are clustered by county.“Mort” denotes a death certificate was matched to the birth cerficite; “LBW”
denotes birth weight < 2, 500g; “ABW” (abnormal birthweight) denotes birthweight < 2, 500 g or >4,000
g; “Pret” denotes pre-term birth; “Comp” denotes any birth complications; “Male” denotes infant’s gender;
“Abort” denotes that the conception was aborted and thus includes the universe of conceptions beginning
in 1998 (when abortion month begins to be recorded); “Old” denotes mother’s age ≥ 35.

Appendix Table 4: Effect of MMC on black birth outcomes after controlling for covariates
(1)
Mort.

(2)
LBW

(3)
ABW

(4)
Pret.

(5)
Any comp.

Conceived after
MMC

0.145∗∗
[0.0716]

0.789∗
[0.408]

0.981∗∗∗
[0.350]

0.981∗∗∗
[0.366]

3.189∗∗∗
[1.063]

Mean, dept. var.
Observations

1.208
318144

12.53
317793

17.38
317793

13.37
318144

18.67
308497

Notes: These regressions are based on individual-level Texas birth records data. The sample of analysis
includes births that were conceived by mothers residing in Texas between January 1993 and December 2001.
All regressions include the typical controls in the cell-aggregated regressions (county, year, and month fixed
effects and county time trends) as well as the following individual-level controls: indicators for married and
first-parity child, age (in four-year bins) fixed effects, and educational attainment fixed effects (no high
school education, high school education, some college and college graduate). Standard errors are clustered
by county.

49

Appendix Table 5: Effect of MMC on Hispanic birth outcomes after controlling for covariates

(1)
Mort.

(2)
LBW

(3)
ABW

(4)
Pret.

(5)
Any comp.

Conceived after
MMC

-0.0941∗∗
[0.0471]

-0.00838
[0.0991]

-0.187
[0.342]

-0.0563
[0.288]

4.007∗
[2.131]

Mean, dept. var.
Observations

0.642
1263661

6.581
1263114

14.49
1263114

8.595
1263661

15.89
1231496

Notes: These regressions are based on individual-level Texas birth records data. The sample of analysis
includes births that were conceived by mothers residing in Texas between January 1993 and December 2001.
All regressions include the typical controls in the cell-aggregated regressions (county, year, and month fixed
effects and county time trends) as well as the following individual-level controls: indicators for married and
first-parity child, age (in four-year bins) fixed effects, and educational attainment fixed effects (no high
school education, high school education, some college and college graduate). Standard errors are clustered
by county.

Appendix Table 6: Effect of MMC on birth inputs (×100) for married whites

Born under MMC
Mean, dept. var
Reg. obs. (cells)
Indiv. obs.

(1)
Fet. mon.
0.591
[1.074]
84.70
23898
922142

(2)
Vent.
-1.523∗∗∗
[0.547]
4.753
23898
922142

(3)
Ultrasound
-3.442
[3.090]
58.31
23898
922142

(4)
Amnio.
-0.0568
[0.178]
2.171
23898
922142

(5)
Pub. clinic
0.00240
[0.00179]
0.0401
23347
902860

Notes: These regressions are based on Texas birth records data. The sample of analysis includes births
that were conceived by mothers residing in Texas between January 1993 and December 2001. Units of
observation are county/conception-year/conception-month cells and all regressions are weighted by cell size.
All regressions include year, month and county fixed effects, and county-specific linear time trends. Standard
errors are clustered by county.

50

Appendix Table 7: Changes in black share of school enrollment after MMC

After MMC
Mean, dept. var.
Number county-year cells

(1)
Share black

(2)
Log bl. enrollment

(3)
Log bl. enroll (w 0s)

-0.000896
[0.000871]

0.00362
[0.0117]

0.00511
[0.0124]

0.140
2738

8.667
2588

8.644
2738

Notes: These data come from the National Center of Education Statistics. Units of observation are countyyear cells. All regressions are weighted by total enrollment in each cell. The sample of analysis includes school
enrollment data from all Texas counties except for the four pilot counties over 1992-1993 to 2001-2002. In
the “Log bl. enroll (w 0s)” specifications, cells with 0 values are recoded to 1. All regressions include county
and year fixed effects and county-specific linear time trends. Standard errors are clustered by county.

51

