                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           BAILOUTS, TIME INCONSISTENCY, AND OPTIMAL REGULATION

                                             V.V. Chari
                                           Patrick J. Kehoe

                                        Working Paper 19192
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19192


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2013




The authors thank Kathy Rolfe and Joan Gieseke for editorial help and the NSF for support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by V.V. Chari and Patrick J. Kehoe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Bailouts, Time Inconsistency, and Optimal Regulation
V.V. Chari and Patrick J. Kehoe
NBER Working Paper No. 19192
June 2013
JEL No. E0,E44,E6,E61

                                              ABSTRACT

We develop a model in which, in order to provide managerial incentives, it is optimal to have costly
bankruptcy. If benevolent governments can commit to their policies, it is optimal not to interfere with
private contracts. Such policies are time inconsistent in the sense that, without commitment, governments
have incentives to bail out firms by buying up the debt of distressed firms and renegotiating their contracts
with managers. From an ex ante perspective, however, such bailouts are costly because they worsen
incentives and thereby reduce welfare. We show that regulation in the form of limits on the debt-to-value
ratio of firms mitigates the time-inconsistency problem by eliminating the incentives of governments
to undertake bailouts. In terms of the cyclical properties of regulation, we show that regulation should
be tightest in aggregate states in which resources lost to bankruptcy in the equilibrium without a government
are largest.


V.V. Chari
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
1035 Heller Hall
271 - 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
varadarajanvchari@gmail.com

Patrick J. Kehoe
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55480-0291
and NBER
pkehoe@res.mpls.frb.fed.us
       Recent experience has shown that governments can and will intervene during financial
crises. During such crises, many firms are faced with the prospect of costly bankruptcy and
liquidation. In order to minimize these costs, governments intervene and bail out debt hold-
ers. Anticipations of such interventions, however, alter the incentives for firms and financial
intermediaries ex ante and by doing so reduce ex ante welfare. If the costs of these altered
incentives exceed the benefits of intervention during crises, governments would refrain from
bailouts if they had the power to commit themselves. In practice, however, governments do
not seem to have this power. The lack of commitment creates a time-inconsistency problem
in that the outcomes are worse without commitment than they are with commitment. Here,
we ask how optimal regulation should be designed to mitigate this problem.
       To answer this question, we develop an infinitely repeated model that highlights the
time-inconsistency problem. In our model, debt contracts between firms and investors are
optimal. Such contracts lead some distressed firms to declare bankruptcy when their pro-
ductivity is suﬃciently low. The desire to avoid the associated costs of bankruptcy provides
incentives for a benevolent government to bail out distressed firms. Anticipation of bailouts
leads managers and investors to design contracts under which the managers exert ineﬃciently
low levels of eﬀort. We show that ex ante regulation in the form of limits on the debt-to-
value ratio of firms mitigates the time-inconsistency problem by eliminating the incentives of
a government to bail out distressed firms. The regulation, we also show, should vary over the
business cycle.
       We begin by analyzing a one-period model without a government. The technology in
the model is as follows. Firms produce output using the eﬀort of managers and the funds of
investors. The productivity of the firm has two idiosyncratic stochastic components: a public
one and a private one. The public component, referred to as the health status of the firm, is
the average level of productivity, which can be either high or low, indicating whether a firm
is healthy or distressed. Higher eﬀort by the managers increases the likelihood that the firm
is healthy, that is, that average productivity is high. The private component is the firm’s
level of productivity relative to the average.
       In the one-period model, managers and investors design optimal contracts intended
to induce eﬀort and share output in the face of three key frictions. First, the eﬀort of the
manager is privately observed by the manager. Second, although the public component of
productivity is costlessly observed by both the manager and the investors, only the manager
costlessly observes the private component of productivity. Investors can observe the private
component only by putting the firm through bankruptcy. We assume that bankruptcy is
costly in that it reduces the productivity of firms proportionately.1 (This feature implies
that our model has costly state verification, as in Townsend (1979), except that we have
proportional rather than fixed costs of verification.) Third, the manager and the investors
cannot commit to the terms of their contracts; that is, if the manager and investors agree to
renegotiate, they can renegotiate the terms of a contract after the manager chooses eﬀort and
the public component of productivity has been realized. This lack of commitment implies
that any contract must be immune to renegotiation.
       We show that costly bankruptcy, together with lack of commitment to the contract,
implies that the optimal contracts between firms and investors are debt contracts. These
contracts specify a fixed payment to investors contingent on the public component as long as
the firm can meet the fixed payment and bankruptcy otherwise. In the event of bankruptcy,
the investors receive all of the proportionately reduced output of the firm. The optimal
contracting problem is, thus, to find the debt contracts with payoﬀs contingent on the public
component, namely, the health of the firms, which provide the best incentives for the managers
to exert eﬀort. The resulting competitive equilibrium is eﬃcient in that a planner, confronted
with the same information and renegotiation frictions, would choose the same outcomes.
       We introduce a benevolent government, in the form of a bailout authority, into the one-
period model in order to investigate the incentives of the government to bail out distressed
firms and show that lack of commitment by this authority leads to a time-inconsistency
problem. If this authority could commit to its policies, it would not intervene because the
competitive equilibrium is eﬃcient.
       Without such commitment, the bailout authority’s policies are very diﬀerent. Consider
an ex post situation in which many distressed firms are about to undergo costly bankruptcies.

   1
     We think of this output reduction as arising from a variety of sources, including replacing incumbent
managers with new managers with fewer firm-specific skills. Alternatively, the reduction in output could
arise because bankruptcy leads specialized forms of capital to be sold for less suitable uses.



                                                    2
The bailout authority has a strong incentive to bail out such distressed firms. We think of such
bailouts as eﬀectively a voluntary renegotiation among managers, investors, and the authority.
This renegotiation must respect the same kinds of constraints as the private renegotiations,
with one important diﬀerence. Unlike private agents, the bailout authority can levy taxes
on healthy firms and use these resources to make payments to distressed firms in order to
induce them to renegotiate their contracts. The availability of tax revenues from healthy firms
eﬀectively relaxes the participation constraints relative to those in private renegotiations.
       The relaxation of participation constraints implies that the bailout authority has
stronger incentives to renegotiate the contracts of distressed firms than do private agents.
These incentives to renegotiate contracts can induce the bailout authority to levy taxes on
healthy firms and use the revenues to bail out distressed firms. Indeed, since intervention has
no ex post costs in the one-period model, the bailout authority bails out all distressed firms
and cancels all bankruptcies. Anticipation of such policies reduces the incentives of managers
to exert eﬀort and leads to a time-inconsistency problem in that outcome incentives without
commitment are ineﬃcient, whereas those with commitment are eﬃcient.
       In the one-period model, since there are no ex post costs to intervention, all debt
holders are bailed out and no bankruptcies occur in equilibrium. In practice, we observe
partial but not complete bailouts. In order to generate such outcomes, we extend the model
to an infinitely repeated version of the one-period model. In this extension, reputational
considerations can impose ex post costs on intervention by aﬀecting private agents’ beliefs
about future policies so that the model allows for partial but not complete bailouts. To see
how ex posts costs can arise, suppose, for example, that an unexpectedly large bailout today
leads private agents to expect that all distressed firms will be bailed out in the future. Such
expectations imply that a bailout authority contemplating an unexpectedly large bailout
may be deterred from doing so, because the current gain from reducing bankruptcy may
be outweighed by future losses from reduced eﬀort. We show that such logic implies that
equilibrium outcomes must satisfy a sustainability constraint, which captures the idea that
current gains from policy deviations must outweigh future losses induced by changes in private
expectations from such deviations. We show that if the discount factor is not too high,
the sustainability constraint binds, and the bailout authority bails out some but not all


                                               3
distressed firms in equilibrium. In this sense, our model is consistent with the view that,
absent regulation, bailouts are bound to occur.
       We go on to show that optimal regulation can entirely eliminate the incentives of the
bailout authority to bail out distressed firms. Such regulation consists of limits on debt-to-
value ratios for firms. These limits reduce the amount of resources at risk of bankruptcy and
thereby reduce the benefits of current bailouts. By improving future incentives, these limits
also raise the cost of current bailouts.
       Regulation is needed because of an externality created by the policies of the bailout
authority without commitment. Any individual firm does not internalize the costs that it
imposes on other firms from increasing its debt level. These costs arise because when all
firms raise their debt levels, the bailout authority is more tempted to intervene ex post. Such
ex post intervention implies that healthy firms have to pay taxes, and incentive problems
worsen. Regulation mitigates the externality created by lack of commitment on the part of
the bailout authority but does not fully eliminate it. Under optimal regulation, welfare is
higher than without any regulation at all, but lower than it would be if the bailout authority
could commit to its policies.
       We then ask how regulatory policy should vary over the business cycle. To answer this
question, we introduce aggregate shocks into our model. The general principle we derive is
that regulation should be tighter when, absent intervention, the lost resources arising from
bankruptcy are larger. The implications for the cyclicality of policy depend on the detailed
specification of how the shocks aﬀect outcomes. We provide one specification in which the
lost resources are highest in recessions, so that countercyclical regulation is optimal; that
is, the optimal ex ante debt limits become tighter during recessions. We provide another
specification in which the lost resources are highest in booms so that procyclical regulation is
optimal; that is, the optimal ex ante debt limits become tighter during booms.
       Related Literature. Our analysis is motivated by the work of Stern and Feldman (2004),
who argue that regulation may be desirable because of lack of commitment.
       A recent and growing literature has analyzed the role of lack of commitment in bailout
policy. An early example of the time-inconsistency problem in regulating financial institutions
is the work of Mailath and Mester (1994). They consider an environment in which a bank


                                               4
chooses the risk level of its investments. In their model, a regulator must decide whether to
close a bank and pay oﬀ depositors. They show that the optimal policy is time inconsistent.
Similarly, Acharya and Yorulmazer (2007) analyze bailout policy in a banking model and
show that adding a bailout authority induces banks to take on correlated risks.
       Much of the more recent literature has emphasized the result that lack of commitment
in bailout policy can lead to multiple Markov equilibria. (See, for example, the work of
Schneider and Tornell (2004), Ennis and Keister (2009), and Farhi and Tirole (2012).) The
multiplicity of equilibria in this work is reminiscent of the kind of multiplicity that arises in
government policy games with a time-inconsistency problem. (See, for example, the work of
Calvo (1988).) In this literature, if banks expect to be bailed out, for example, they take
actions, such as adopting risky financial structures, that then make a government bailout
optimal. If instead banks do not expect to be bailed out, then they do not take such actions,
and bailouts are not optimal.
       Our work here builds on this literature by emphasizing the time-inconsistency problem
associated with bailout policy, but diﬀers from most of the literature by focusing on designing
ex ante policies that mitigate the time-inconsistency problem. The work most closely related
to ours is that of Farhi and Tirole (2012). In their model, under no commitment and no
ex ante regulation, the economy has multiple equilibria, one of which coincides with the
commitment equilibrium, namely, the Ramsey equilibrium, which, by definition, is the best
achievable one. This equilibrium features no government intervention and, in particular,
no bailouts. Farhi and Tirole show that appropriate ex ante regulation reduces the set of
no-commitment equilibria to a single one, the Ramsey equilibrium–the good one. In this
sense, without ex ante regulation, the economy faces a fragility problem: perhaps the good
equilibrium will happen, or perhaps one of many other not-so-good equilibria will. Ex ante
policy fixes this fragility problem, and the good equilibrium always occurs.
       Our model is diﬀerent. In it, when there is no commitment and the bailout authority
is suﬃciently impatient, even the best equilibrium has bailouts and is strictly worse than
the Ramsey equilibrium. In this sense, the economy without commitment has an incentive
problem rather than a fragility problem. We show that appropriate ex ante regulation can
fix the incentive problem, and the best equilibrium then has no bailouts and dominates any


                                               5
no-commitment equilibrium. Overall, we think of our work as complementary to that of
Farhi and Tirole (2012): in both studies, ex ante regulation is beneficial because of a time-
inconsistency problem, but for diﬀerent reasons.
       In related work, Keister (2012) considers an environment in which it is eﬃcient for the
government to provide transfers to intermediaries in distressed states financed by reductions
in government expenditures. In his environment, without a regulatory system, intermediaries
anticipate receiving these transfers and become illiquid. A regulatory system that taxes such
transfers makes the economy less fragile by reducing the set of parameters for which the econ-
omy has multiple equilibria. That regulatory system can also improve welfare by correcting a
subtle externality that arises in his setup because private agents cannot commit to contracts.
More generally, a burgeoning recent literature gives a prominent role to regulation as the
way to correct subtle externalities arising either from lack of commitment by private agents
or from hidden trading. (See, for example, the work of Lorenzoni (2008); Farhi, Golosov,
and Tsyvinski (2009); Bianchi and Mendoza (2010); and Bianchi (2011).) In contrast, in our
work, a subtle externality arises because of lack of commitment by the government.
       Finally, a recent literature has also examined the quantitative eﬀects of policy inter-
ventions like bailouts on the risk-taking decisions of financial institutions. (See, for example,
the work of Gertler, Kiyotaki, and Queralto (2012).)

1. The One-Period Economy with Only Private Agents
       We begin with a one-period version of our benchmark economy with only private
agents. We show that in this economy, optimal contracts take a specific form, called debt
contracts. Some bankruptcies occur, but the competitive equilibrium is eﬃcient.
       Consider a one-period model in which decisions are made in two stages: a first stage
at the beginning of the period and a second stage at the end. The economy has two types
of agents, called managers and investors, both of whom are risk neutral and consume at the
end of the period. The economy has a measure 1 of managers and a measure 1 of investors.
       The technology requires two inputs in the first stage: an eﬀort level  of managers and
an investment of 1 unit of goods per manager. (Later on we extend this model to allow for
heterogeneity and variability in the scale of investment.) This technology transforms these


                                               6
inputs into capital goods. The capital goods can then be used to make consumption goods.
The eﬀort level  of managers is unobserved by investors.
        The amount of capital goods produced in the second stage stochastically depends on
the eﬀort level  of the manager and two idiosyncratic shocks. One of these shocks, denoted
by  ,  ∈ { }, is publicly observed at no cost. This shock determines the average level of
productivity and is called the health status. We refer to  as the healthy state and  as
the distressed state. These states satisfy    . We also assume that   1, which will
ensure that the full information eﬃcient level of eﬀort cannot be sustained in equilibrium.
        The other idiosyncratic shock, denoted by , is privately observed by the manager and
is made public only if the firm declares bankruptcy, as described below. We assume that  has
density () and distribution () with mean 1 and support [ ̄]. The idiosyncratic shocks
 and  are realized after the eﬀort level is chosen and are independently and identically
distributed across firms. Given the state  and the shock    units of capital goods are
produced.
        Given eﬀort level  with probability  () the healthy state is realized, and with
complementary probability  () the distressed state is realized. We assume that  () is an
increasing, strictly concave function of  Thus, higher eﬀort levels increase the probability
of the high productivity level, but do so at a diminishing rate. Notice that since  () is
increasing, this technology satisfies the monotone likelihood ratio property, and since  () is
strictly concave, it satisfies the convexity of distribution function property.2 These assump-
tions guarantee that the first-order approach is valid. (For details on the first-order analysis,
see Rogerson (1985).)
        We imagine that production takes place by firms. In each of these firms, managers
perform two tasks: in the first stage, they exert eﬀort  that, together with funds from
investors, produces capital goods, and in the second stage, they transform capital goods into
final consumption goods.
        After a manager has completed the first task and a certain amount of capital has been

   2
     Recall that the monotone likelihood ratio property is that if   ̂ then  () (̂)  [1 −  ()][1 −
 (̂)] whereas the convexity of distribution property is that the cumulative distribution function induced
by  () namely, 1 −  () has a strictly positive second derivative.



                                                        7
produced, the firm can choose to continue the project under the incumbent manager, or it can
declare bankruptcy. If it continues, then the project produces one unit of output for every
unit of capital, so that the firm’s output is   for  ∈ { }, and the idiosyncratic shock  is
observed only by the manager. If the firm declares bankruptcy, then the incumbent manager
is removed, the firm is monitored, and the idiosyncratic shock  becomes publicly known.
The replacement manager is less eﬃcient and produces consumption goods from the given
capital   according to  , where   1. We let  () = 0 denote that the firm declares
bankruptcy with health state  and shock  and let   () = 1 denote no bankruptcy. Note
that we assume that monitoring is deterministic. (For analyses with stochastic monitoring,
see the work of Townsend (1979) and Mookherjee and Png (1989).)
       We think of replacement managers as being chosen from the pool of managers who
have been replaced due to bankruptcy and randomly assigned to manage capital in a firm that
has undergone bankruptcy. We think of incumbent managers as having developed special-
ized expertise in particular firms and, therefore, as being more productive than replacement
managers who have not developed specialized expertise.
       Managers have no endowments of goods but do have the specialized skills needed
to operate the technology. Investors have  units of endowments but do not have these
specialized skills. Investors choose how much to invest in the technology and can store the
rest of their endowments at a one-for-one rate. (The only role of storage is to pin down the
opportunity costs of funds to be 1.) We assume that   1, so that some amount of the
endowment is always stored. This assumption guarantees that the rate of return to investing
is 1 We also assume that the technology is suﬃciently attractive so that it is always active;
thus, the investors invest one unit of their endowments in the technology and store  − 1
units. (Notice that here we follow a long tradition in financial economics, including the work
of Diamond and Dybvig (1983), of consolidating banks, financial markets, and households
into one entity called investors.)
       Let  () denote the consumption of the managers when the health state is  ∈ { }
and the idiosyncratic shock is . Let  denote the bankruptcy set, namely, the set of idiosyn-
cratic shocks  such that the firms declare bankruptcy when the health state is  ∈ { }
The complementary set  in which no bankruptcy occurs is then implicitly defined by  


                                                8
Managers are risk neutral over consumption and have preferences given by

      X             Z
(1)         ()         () () − 
       


where the consumption of the managers must satisfy a nonnegativity constraint:


(2)    () ≥ 0


Let  () denote the payments the firm makes to the investors when the shocks are  and .
Investors invest 1 unit of their endowment with the managers and store  − 1 units, so their
utility is given by

      X             Z
(3)         ()         () () +  − 1
       


       When the firm does not declare bankruptcy, the consumption level of the managers
and the payments to the investors must satisfy


(4)    () +  () =  


and when the firm does declare bankruptcy, the payments must satisfy


(5)    () +  () =  


The total consumption of investors  () is the sum of the payments  () from the production
technology and  − 1 from storage. Thus, the overall resource constraint in this economy is
given by

      X             ∙Z                      Z                   ¸
(6)         ()          () () +         ()    ()
       


           X            ∙Z                           Z                           ¸
      ≤         ()                   () +                      () +  − 1
                           ()=1                         ()=0

       An allocation, or a contract, consists of  = { ()  ()   ()} The timing is as

                                                                 9
follows. The investors and managers first agree to a contract, and then the managers choose
the eﬀort level  given the contract. After the eﬀort level is chosen, the health status of each
firm  is publicly realized. Investors and managers then renegotiate the contract. Finally, the
idiosyncratic shocks  are realized, and the bankruptcy decisions are made according to the
contract.
        To be part of a competitive equilibrium (CE), a contract has to satisfy various condi-
tions. One is that any contract must be incentive compatible; that is, a manager must prefer
to report the idiosyncratic shock  truthfully rather than misreport it. A manager with a
shock  in the nonbankruptcy set must not have an incentive to misreport any other shock ̂
in this nonbankruptcy set, so that


(7)     () =   −  () ≥   −  (̂) for all  ∈   ̂ ∈  


This constraint implies that for all  ∈   payments to investors  () are constant in
the nonbankruptcy set at some level, denoted  . Also, a manager with a shock  in the
bankruptcy set must not have an incentive to misreport any ̂ in the nonbankruptcy set, so
that


(8)     () =   −  () ≥   −  for all  ∈   ̂ ∈  


where we have imposed that  (̂) is constant in nonbankruptcy sets. We will say that a
contract is incentive feasible if it is incentive compatible, in that it satisfies (7) and (8),
and feasible, in that it satisfies the resource constraints (4) and (5) and the nonnegativity
constraint (2).
        We also require that neither managers nor investors have an incentive to renegotiate
the contract. Before renegotiation begins, a particular contract  has been agreed to, eﬀort 
has been chosen, and a health shock  has been realized. We say that a contract  is immune
to renegotiation given  at  if it is incentive feasible and no alternative incentive feasible
contract exists that makes the managers and the investors strictly better oﬀ at . Specifically,
an alternative contract ̂ = {̂ () ˆ () ̂  ()} cannot exist that satisfies the resource and



                                                     10
incentive constraints (4)—(8) and makes both the manager and the investors better oﬀ:
       Z                        Z
(9)         ̂ () () ≥           () ()

       Z                         Z
(10)        ˆ () () ≥           () ()

with at least one of the two inequalities strict. Let  and  denote the values of the
right sides of (9) and (10), namely, the expected consumption values of the manager and the
expected payments to investors, and let  = (   )
       We now turn to the ex ante optimal contract in our economy. We think of managers
as oﬀering contracts  = { ()  ()   ()} and an intended level of eﬀort  to potential
investors.3 Such investors will accept the contract as long as the expected rate of return on
their investment is at least 1. Thus, any contract must satisfy the participation constraint

       X              Z
(11)          ()        () () ≥ 1
        


as well as the resource constraints (4) and (5). The contract must also give the manager
incentive to exert the intended level of eﬀort  and thus satisfy

                          X             Z
(12)  ∈ arg max                ()        () () − 
                      
                           


Since all contracts can be renegotiated after the manager has chosen eﬀort, when defining an
equilibrium it suﬃces to consider contracts that are immune to renegotiation.
       A competitive equilibrium in this static economy consists of a contract  and an eﬀort
level  such that ( ) maximize the manager’s utility (1) subject to the restrictions that
the contract satisfies both the participation constraint, (11), and the manager’s incentive
constraint, (12), and is immune to renegotiation. Note that in this definition, the requirement
that contracts be immune to renegotiation incorporates incentive feasibility, so we do not need
to have incentive feasibility as a separate constraint.

   3
   Here, we abstract from contracts with randomized eﬀort. For analysis of such contracts, see the work of
Fudenberg and Tirole (1990).


                                                            11
       Here, we have defined a competitive equilibrium by having managers oﬀer contracts
to investors. An alternative way of setting up the equilibrium is to have investors oﬀer
contracts to managers–contracts that maximize expected profits subject to the incentive
constraints, feasibility constraints, and participation constraints on managers. By duality,
the two definitions are equivalent.
       We now turn to the eﬃciency of a competitive equilibrium. A contract  and an
eﬀort level  are eﬃcient if the contract is immune to renegotiation, the incentive constraint
on the manager’s eﬀort is satisfied, and no alternative pair (0  0 ) exists that is immune to
renegotiation, satisfies the manager’s eﬀort incentive constraint, and has higher utility levels
for the manager and the investor, with at least one being strictly higher. The following
proposition is immediate.
       Proposition 1. The competitive equilibrium is eﬃcient.
       We now turn to characterizing the competitive equilibrium. Consider a contract with
 = (   ) defined by the right sides of (9) and (10). We begin by showing that a contract
is immune to renegotiation if and only if it has a simple form, which we refer to as a debt
contract. This form has two key features. First, the contract specifies a cutoﬀ level ∗ that
depends on  such that the firm continues for   ∗ and declares bankruptcy for  ≤ ∗ .
Second, the payments to investors are constant in the nonbankruptcy set, bankruptcy occurs
when the firm is unable to make this constant payment, and investors receive all the profits
of the firm in bankruptcy.
       Specifically, if the expected payment  to the investors is suﬃciently small, in that
 ≤  , then the contract has no bankruptcy. Payments to the investors are then given by


(13)  () =  for all 


where  ≤  , and the manager’s consumption is given by  () =  − . If this expected
payment to investors is suﬃciently large, in that    , then a cutoﬀ ∗ exists such that




                                              12
the contract has bankruptcy for  ≤ ∗ and the payments to the investors are given by
              ⎧                       ⎫
              ⎨  =  ∗ for   ∗  ⎬
                               
(14)  () =                           
              ⎩   for  ≤ ∗ ⎭
                                                            


and the consumption of the manager is given by  () =   −  for   ∗ and  () = 0
for  ≤ ∗ .
        Proposition 2. A contract is immune to renegotiation if and only if it is a debt
contract, in that it has the form given in (13) and (14), where ∗ = ∗ ( ) is the cutoﬀ for
bankruptcy.
        The proof of this proposition is in the Appendix and is similar to that of Townsend
(1979). For such debt contracts, we refer to  as the face value of the debt, which is the
constant amount that investors are paid outside of bankruptcy.
        Under the assumption that the first-order approach is valid, the contracting problem
in this economy is given by

                                     X                  ∙Z   ̄                     ¸
         
(15)           =      max                      ()             (  −  ) () − 
                    ∗ ∗                        ∗
                                     


subject to
                "Z                                                     Z                          #
                       ̄                                                    ̄
(16) 0 ()                (  −  ) () −                                  (  −  ) () = 1
                     ∗                                                    ∗


       X          ∙    Z                 ∗                       Z   ̄           ¸
(17)         ()                           () +                     () ≥ 1
                                                                  ∗

(18)  ≤  ∗

(19) ∗ ≥ 

We have written the constraint (18) as an inequality so that the same contracting problem
covers the cases of  ≤  ∗ with ∗ =  and  =  ∗ with ∗   The reason (18)
covers the latter case is that, as one can show in the solution to this problem, when there
is bankruptcy, ∗  , and thus  =  ∗ . Let the associated contract and eﬀort levels be


                                                                                     13
denoted   and   .
        Clearly, for some economies, the solution to the contracting problem has no bank-
ruptcy. The analysis of this case is trivial. Hereafter, we focus on the interesting case in
which the optimal contract has bankruptcy. Note that this assumption implies that the
manager’s incentive constraint is binding.
        Next, we show that firms that are distressed have higher levels of bankruptcy than
when they are healthy, as long as the distribution of idiosyncratic shocks  satisfies a monotonic-
ity condition:

         ()
(20)            is increasing in 
       1 − ()

        Proposition 3. Under the monotonicity condition (20), the competitive equilibrium
has ∗  ∗ .
        Proof. Suppose first that ∗  . The first-order conditions of (15) are then given by


  −[ ()+0 ()] [1−(∗ )]+ () [( − 1) ∗ ] (∗ )+ () [1−(∗ )] = 0


 −[ ()−0 ()] [1−(∗ )]+ () [( − 1) ∗ ] (∗ )+ () [1−(∗ )]+  = 0

where   and   are the multipliers on (16), (17), and (19). We can manipulate these
first-order conditions to imply that

        ∗ (∗ )    ∗ (∗ )
                                  
       1 − (∗ )    1 − (∗ )

which by our monotonicity condition (20) implies that ∗  ∗ 
        Suppose next that ∗ = . We have assumed that the solution to the contracting
problem always has some bankruptcy. Thus, since ∗ = , we must have ∗  . So ∗  ∗ .

        In what follows, we focus on economies in which there is no bankruptcy when the
idiosyncratic state  = . It will be clear that all our results continue to hold in the more
general case in which bankruptcy occurs with both  =  and  = .



                                               14
2. Adding a Bailout Authority
       Here, we introduce a benevolent government in the form of a bailout authority. The
bailout authority can intervene by buying debt from investors and then renegotiating the
terms of the outstanding debt with the managers. It can finance these purchases by levy-
ing taxes on payments to all investors. The bailout authority is confronted with the same
informational constraints as the private agents.
       Suppose first that the bailout authority chooses its policies at the beginning of the
period and can commit to them. As we have shown in Proposition 1, since the competitive
equilibrium is eﬃcient, it follows that a bailout authority with commitment will choose not
to intervene.
       Suppose next that the bailout authority cannot commit to its policies. We model this
lack of commitment by having the bailout authority choose its policies after the manager’s
eﬀort choice has been made and all the shocks have been realized. We will show that the
bailout authority intervenes so as to stop all bankruptcy. The intervention lowers welfare
relative to the economy without such an authority. In this sense, the equilibrium here is inef-
ficient. The diﬀerence between the bailout authority’s policy with and without commitment
implies that the bailout authority faces a time-inconsistency problem.
       Formally, the timing in the period is that in the first stage, each firm chooses a contract
 Next, each manager chooses an eﬀort level  Then the health shock  for each firm is
realized. After that, the private agents renegotiate the contract. The bailout authority
observes the contracts and the health state of each firm and uses the optimal decision rules
of managers to infer their eﬀort level. The bailout authority then chooses its policy  which
has three parts: a debt purchase policy, a renegotiation policy, and a tax policy. Finally, the
idiosyncratic shocks  are realized.
       In what follows, we focus on symmetric equilibria in which all agents have the same
decision rules. In order to ensure that the contracting problem is well defined, we need to
describe how the debt purchase policy depends on the individual levels of debt at firms, both
at the equilibrium values and for any deviations by individual firms.
       Since there is no bankruptcy in the healthy state, the bailout authority will intervene,
if at all, only in the distressed state. To develop the bailout authority’s debt purchase policy


                                               15
in the distressed state, consider a firm with a face value of debt given by  =  ∗ . Without
intervention by the bailout authority, the firm will declare bankruptcy for   ∗  so this debt
has market value
                      Z        
(21) ( ) =                        () +  [1 − (  )].
                          


Here, ( ) the market value function, is given by the right side of (21), where we have used
 =  ∗ . Given the face value of debt  of an individual contract, the bailout authority
oﬀers to buy either all of this debt or none of it. We denote the decision to buy the debt by
( ) = 1 and a decision not to buy the debt by ( ) = 0 If the bailout authority decides
to buy the debt, it oﬀers investors a payment of ( ) The investors will accept this oﬀer
as long as the payment exceeds the market value of the debt, in that ( ) ≥ ( ). For
convenience, we assume that the bailout authority pays the minimum amount to investors
that induces them to accept the oﬀer, so that ( ) = ( ).
       Consider, next, the bailout authority’s renegotiation policy. If the bailout authority
buys the outstanding debt, it then renegotiates the terms of the debt contract with managers.
Given the information assumptions and our earlier results, we can restrict attention to new
debt contracts of the form (13) and (14), with a bankruptcy cutoﬀ  and a face value  =
   where the superscript  distinguishes these government-chosen cutoﬀs and face values
from the privately chosen ones. The manager will accept the bailout authority’s renegotiated
oﬀer if and only if the new oﬀer has a lower face value than the old contract, which from (21)
implies that  ≤  .
       So far we have described the bailout authority’s decisions with respect to each indi-
vidual contract. These are summarized by a schedule for buying debt (·) and new debt
contracts with face value  (·) and associated cutoﬀs  (·) =  (·) that depend on the
level of debt of the individual contract. Here, the manager and investors associated with an
individual contract confront a schedule that depends on their individual choices.
       Consider, finally, the bailout authority’s tax policy. Let (   ) denote the repre-
sentative levels of debt of a representative firm and  the level of eﬀort of a representative
manager. Let  = ( ) and  =  ( ) be the associated purchase and renegotiation


                                                       16
policies. The bailout authority finances its expenditures with a uniform tax  on all payments
by firms to investors, so that the revenues that the bailout authority collects are


      [ () +  () [ ( ) + (1 −  )( )] ]


which, using ( ) = ( ), we can simplify to  [ () +  ()( )]. Hence, we
can write the bailout authority’s budget constraint for such a history as
               "      Z                              µ      µ  ¶¶#
                               
                                                             
(22)  ()                         () +  1 −          +  [ () +  ()( )]
                                                            

     =   ()( )

The left side of (22) is the revenues of the bailout authority, which come from the payments
on the renegotiated debt contracts plus the taxes collected from investors. The right side of
(22) is the expenditures of the bailout authority to purchase the debt of distressed firms.
       The objective function of the bailout authority is the sum of the utilities of the manager
and the investors from the contract (which, of course, equals the aggregate output from the
contract minus the disutility of eﬀort of the manager) and is given by
                                   ∙      µ ¶               µ    ¶¸
                                                             
(23) (  ) =  () +  ()        + (1 −  )         − 
                                                             

                      R ̃                      R ̄
where  (̃) =        
                               () +        ̃
                                                        () denotes output in the distressed state for
any cutoﬀ level of bankruptcy ̃
       Next we develop the strategy of the bailout authority. In order to solve their con-
tracting problem, managers need to forecast the bailout authority’s policy both when these
managers choose the representative contract and when they deviate from this choice. Thus,
the purchase and renegotiation policies of the bailout authority must be specified for each
possible level of debt implied by a contract. These considerations lead us to specify a strategy
for the bailout authority as a collection () =((·|)  (·|)  ()) for each representa-
tive contract that the bailout authority may face. Here, (·|) and  (·|) are functions of
individual debt levels.


                                                          17
        Consider, next, the problem of a manager confronting such policies. The manager
chooses individual eﬀort  given the individual contract  = (   ), taking as given the
representative contract  and the associated policies of the bailout authority (), where,
suppressing the dependence on , we write  = (( )  ( )  ) to solve


(24)  ∈ arg max  () +  () − 
                      



where  =  −  and


(25)
                  "            Z        ∙             ¸                      Z ̄    µ      ¶      #
                                   ̄
                                             ( )                                    
        =       ( )               −             () + [1 − ( )]          −      () 
                            ( )                                           

We denote the solution as ( ).
        Consider, finally, the contracting problem. In terms of the debt levels, if the contract
specifies a debt level  such that ( ) = 1, then the bailout authority will buy the firm’s debt
from investors at a price of ( ) and then renegotiate the contract with managers so that
the firms end up having debt with the bailout authority with face value  ( ) =   ( ).
If the contract specifies a debt level  such that ( ) = 0, then the bailout authority will
not buy the debt, and the original contract will be implemented. The bailout authority also
taxes all the payments made to investors by any firm at rate  . The private contracting
problem thus reduces to a simple problem that we refer to as the static contracting problem.
This problem is given by


(26)         max              () +  () − 
       {    }


subject to (24) and the participation constraint of investors


(27) (  ) = (1 −  )( () +  ()[( )( ) + [1 − ( )]( )]) ≥ 1


where (  ) is the expected investment income of the investor.
        A bailout equilibrium consists of a contract  an eﬀort function ( ) and a bailout

                                                       18
strategy (), such that () given the policy, the contract  solves (26); () for every
individual contract  the eﬀort of the manager solves the manager’s problem (24); and
() for every representative contract  and inferred eﬀort level ( ()), the policy 
maximizes the bailout authority’s objective (23) subject to its budget constraint (22).
         We now turn to characterizing the outcomes of a bailout equilibrium. Consider the
bailout authority’s problem given that some contract  and some eﬀort level  have already
been chosen. The bailout authority’s objective function is maximized by buying all the debt in
the distressed state by setting  = 1, then renegotiating with the managers so as to eliminate
all bankruptcies by setting  = , and setting the tax rate  to satisfy the budget constraint
(22).
         We have shown that in the representative contract, the bailout authority will purchase
all the debt. Technically, the bailout authority is indiﬀerent to whether or not it purchases the
debt of a set of measure zero firms that deviate from the representative contract. If, because
of trembles, a positive measure (no matter how small) of firms have debt levels diﬀerent from
the representative level, then it is strictly optimal for the bailout authority to buy the debt
of such firms as well and eliminate all bankruptcy. Given these observations, we make the
natural assumption that the bailout authority buys the debt of all firms regardless of their
debt levels. Let   ( ) denote the associated policy function and


(28)   ( ) =  (    ( ))


denote the associated payoﬀ for the bailout authority. We refer to   ( ) as a full bailout
strategy and   ( ) as the full bailout payoﬀ. (Note for later that in the dynamic version
of the model, the payoﬀ from the best one-shot deviation of the bailout authority is given by
(28).)
         In the static model, the investors and managers will choose their individual contract
 and eﬀort level  anticipating that the bailout authority will set the policy   ( )
Let (        ) denote the resulting equilibrium outcomes, which we refer to as the static
outcomes. We have already established that part of the bailout authority’s policy is given
by ( ) = 1, ( ) = ( ),  = . Given this policy, the debt level in the distressed


                                               19
state  appears only in the participation constraint (27) in the private contracting problem
and does so by aﬀecting ( ) = ( ) From the participation constraint, we know that
choosing debt in the distressed state  to maximize the receipts ( ) from the bailout
authority allows the payments in the healthy state  to be minimized. Doing so increases
the payments to the manager in the healthy state  =  − and hence provides incentives
for greater eﬀort , thereby raising utility. Hence, the equilibrium level of debt  in the
distressed state solves max = arg max ( ) and the eﬀort level  and the payment 
in the healthy state solve


(29) max  ()( −  ) +  () (1 − ) − 
      { }


subject to


(30) 0 () [( −  ) −  (1 − )] = 1


(31) (1 −  ) [ () +  ()max ] ≥ 1

Let   denote the sum of the manager’s payoﬀ and the investor’s payoﬀ from the static
contract.
       Now we can formally state our result for this static economy with a bailout authority
that has no ability to commit to a policy.
       Proposition 4. The full bailout equilibrium (      ) has the form described above
and is ineﬃcient.
       Proof. We have already established the first part of the proposition. Ineﬃciency
follows because the bailout equilibrium outcomes diﬀer from the competitive equilibrium,
which is eﬃcient from Proposition 1. 
       Thus far we have considered bailout policies in which the bailout authority directly
buys all the debt of distressed firms and renegotiates contracts with managers. These policies
can be interpreted as ones in which the bailout authority provides funds to distressed banks
under the implicit or explicit condition that these funds be used to renegotiate the terms
of bank loans. To do so, consider a slight variant of our model in which households invest


                                              20
their endowments with banks, which then provide funds to firms. Suppose that banks do not
hold a completely diversified portfolio. Some banks will then be confronted with situations
in which a large fraction of their funds have been lent to distressed firms. Such banks may
well be threatened with the possibility of default. The bailout authority will then find it
optimal to bail out such banks under the condition that the banks renegotiate the terms of
their loans with the distressed firms. In this sense, our model is consistent with bailouts, in
practice, being primarily directed at banks and similar financial institutions.

3. The Dynamic Model
       Now consider extending the static model above to a dynamic infinite horizon model
with a bailout authority. In the one-period model without commitment, the equilibrium has
no bankruptcy because bailouts have no ex post costs. Here, we develop a dynamic contracting
model without commitment by the bailout authority in which these costs do arise because of
reputational considerations, which make the nature of future contracts depend on whether
bailouts have occurred in the past.
       Our dynamic model is an infinite repetition of a modified version of our static model.
The infinite repetition allows for trigger strategies in which contracts depend on the history of
past bailouts and, in this sense, allows for reputational considerations. We start by showing
that bailouts occur in equilibrium if the bailout authority is not too patient. We show that
for intermediate levels of patience by the bailout authority, outcomes better than the full
bailout equilibrium but worse than the eﬃcient outcome can be sustained in each period
using reputational considerations.
       We then add a regulatory authority to the economy that can limit the amount of
debt that each firm takes on. We show that by setting these limits suﬃciently low, the
regulatory authority can eliminate the incentives of the bailout authority to bail out firms.
Here, the optimal regulation mitigates the time-inconsistency problem but does not eliminate
it: when the bailout authority is suﬃciently impatient, this regulation raises welfare relative
to any bailout equilibrium, but does not raise it all the way to the optimal outcome with
commitment.




                                               21
A. Bailouts
       Each period of the dynamic model is identical to the one period in the static model.
Recall that the timing within each period  is that the managers and the investors agree to
a contract, the managers choose eﬀort, shocks are realized, and then the bailout authority
chooses its policies. Since the dynamic model is an infinite repetition of the static model, no
physical state variables link the periods. The only links between periods are strategic ones
in which the bailout authority forecasts the responses of private agents in the future to its
current actions. To capture these strategic links, we specify the histories faced by agents
when they choose actions.
       Setup and Definition of Bailout Equilibrium. Specifically, in the first stage of the
period, investors choose a contract   The representative contract is   Next the manager
chooses eﬀort   and then the idiosyncratic shocks (   ) for each firm are realized. Finally,
the bailout authority chooses its policy   
       We make an anonymity assumption that prevents long-term contracts between man-
agers and investors so that we can focus attention on the dynamic incentive problem of the
bailout authority. To do so, we assume that managers are anonymous in the sense that their
identities cannot be recorded from period to period. Hence, current contracts cannot be con-
ditioned on the past track record of individual managers. We assume that past aggregates,
including the policies of the bailout authority, are observable. These assumptions imply that
the only intertemporal link is the behavior of the bailout authority.
       Given these informational assumptions, we now recursively describe how histories rel-
evant for actions evolve in our dynamic model. (Technically, we focus attention on perfect,
public equilibria.) Let  be the history at the beginning of period  Let  = (   )
denote the history faced by the bailout authority, and let +1 = (    )
       We now describe the strategies of all the agents. The strategy for the contract is
denoted by  ( ); the strategy for the eﬀort level of an individual manager, by  (   );
and the strategy for the bailout authority, by   ( ) The eﬀort level of the representative
manager is then given by  (   )
       The payoﬀs of the bailout authority given a history  are the sum of its period



                                                 22
payoﬀs and continuation values and are given by


(32) (     ) + +1 (+1 )


where the period payoﬀ  (      ) is given by (23) and the continuation payoﬀ +1 (+1 )
is given by the present expected value of period payoﬀs for the bailout authority starting
from period  + 1 induced by the strategies, and   1 is the discount factor.
                                                                                  
        The payoﬀs of individual investors in period  are (      ) + +1 (+1 ), where
the period payoﬀ (      ) is given by (27), and the payoﬀs of the manager are

                                         
(33)  ( ) +  ( ) −  + +1 (+1 )

                                                                           
where  =  −  ,  is given by (25), and the continuation payoﬀs +1 (+1 ) and
  
+1 (+1 ) are given by the present expected value of period payoﬀs starting from period
 + 1 induced by the strategies.
        Given a history −1  we say that a contract  and associated eﬀort level  solve the
dynamic contracting problem if they maximize the payoﬀ of the manager (33) subject to the
incentive constraint

                                                     
(34)  ∈ arg max  ( ) +  ( ) −  + +1 (+1 )
                  



and the participation constraint for the investor, namely,


(35) (      ) ≥ 1


where  =  −  and  is given by (25). Given a history −1 and an arbitrary
contract, the manager’s problem is to maximize (34), where  =  −  and  is given
by (25).
        Here, a bailout equilibrium is a collection of strategies { ( )  (   )   ( )} for
private agents and the bailout authority such that () given the history  , the contract
 ( ) solves the dynamic contracting problem; () for every contract   the eﬀort  (   )


                                                    23
maximizes the manager’s payoﬀs; and () given the strategies of the private agents, the
policy   ( ) maximizes the payoﬀ for the bailout authority (32) subject to its budget
constraint.
        The outcomes associated with a bailout equilibrium, then, are sequences {      }
and associated continuation utilities for the bailout authority { }, where


(36)  =  (      ) + +1 


        Characterization and Implementation of Bailout Equilibrium. We characterize the
bailout outcomes in this dynamic model in two steps. We first show that in any bailout
equilibrium, given the policies of the bailout authority, the private outcomes are part of a
bailout equilibrium if and only if they solve the static contracting problem in each period given
the policies of the bailout authority. Second, we show that the policies of the bailout authority
are part of a bailout equilibrium if and only if they satisfy a sustainability constraint.
        Consider the private outcomes. Given our anonymity assumption, the continuation
payoﬀs for the manager and investors are independent of current actions. Therefore, the
dynamic version of the private contracting problem coincides with the static version (26).
        In our infinite horizon model, we focus attention on equilibria that can be supported
by trigger-type strategies that specify reversion to outcomes that are no worse than the static
outcomes. This set of equilibrium outcomes is analogous to the set of equilibrium outcomes
in repeated games that are supported by the one-shot Nash equilibria. (Of course, following
the work of Abreu (1988), we could use more sophisticated strategies that support a larger
set of equilibria. The results are similar, but the analysis is more cumbersome.) Specifically,
we focus on equilibria in which for every history, even those after deviations by the bailout
authority from a given policy plan, the continuation values of the bailout authority satisfy

                        
(37) +1 (+1 ) ≥        
                       1−

This condition restricts the severity of the trigger strategies to be no worse than that of the
strategies implicit in the infinite reversion to the static equilibrium.
        To set up our sustainability constraint in this model, we need to define the best one-

                                               24
shot deviation for the bailout authority when it is faced with some arbitrary history. To that
end, consider a period  in which a contract  and eﬀort level  have been chosen. The
statically best policy for the bailout authority is to buy all the debt in the distressed state
and then renegotiate with the managers so as to eliminate all bankruptcies by setting  = .
That is, the statically best policy is the full bailout policy defined earlier. The sustainability
constraint of the bailout authority is then given by

                                                    
(38) (     ) + +1 ≥   (   ) +        
                                                   1−

where +1 is given by (36).
       Proposition 5. Under (37), a set of outcomes (      ) are the outcomes of a
bailout equilibrium in a dynamic model if and only if () the outcomes solve the one-period
contracting problem (26) and () the outcomes satisfy (38).
       Proof. Suppose first that the outcomes (     ) are the outcomes of a bailout
equilibrium. Since the contracting problem is static, these outcomes must solve the one-period
contracting problem. Next, we show that under (37), they must satisfy the sustainability
constraint. To see why, suppose by way of contradiction that in equilibrium these outcomes
violate (38). Then the authority, by setting the bankruptcy set to be empty in the current
period, obtains current payoﬀs equal to the first term on the right side of (38), and under
(37), its continuation payoﬀ is at least as large as the last term. Thus, outcomes that violate
(38) contradict optimality by the bailout authority.
       Suppose, next, that a set of candidate equilibrium outcomes (̂  ̂  ̂  ) with associ-
ated histories ̂ and ̂ satisfy () and () of Proposition 5. We will construct revert-to-
static strategies that support these outcomes as an equilibrium. For private agents, these
strategies specify that if the history  = ̂  then the contract  equals the desired one
̂ ; otherwise, the contract  equals the static contract    For the bailout authority, these
strategies specify that if  = ̂  then the policies equal the desired ones ̂  ; otherwise,
they equal the full bailout policy   (   ).
       Now consider the bailout authority. If there has been no deviation from these specified
outcomes in or before period  in that  = ̂  then the payoﬀs associated with choosing


                                                     25
the desired policy ̂ are given by the left side of (38). The payoﬀs associated with any
deviation are smaller than the right side of (38) because the first term on the right side
represents the best one-shot deviation. The inequality in (38) guarantees that the desired
policies are indeed optimal. If there has been a deviation in or before  so that  6= ̂ 
then the continuation payoﬀs of the bailout authority are independent of the current policy.
Hence, the bailout authority’s optimal choice is the statically optimal full bailout policy.
        Clearly, the private agent’s strategies are optimal by construction. 
        We now show that if the bailout authority is suﬃciently impatient, the equilibrium
has bailouts. To do so, we show that if the discount factor is above a critical level, then
the eﬃcient outcome is sustainable, and if the discount factor is below this critical level,
then, under a suﬃcient condition, the equilibrium necessarily has bailouts. That is, at the
equilibrium, the tax rate  is positive, the bailout authority buys debt in the distressed state,
and it renegotiates the terms of the contract of the manager in order to have less bankruptcy.
The critical level of the discount factor ̄ is defined as the discount factor such that the
sustainability constraint holds with equality at the competitive equilibrium outcome; that is,

                                 
(39)        =   (     ) +      
       1−                         1−

Clearly, ̄  1 since   (     )       .
        We now turn to developing a condition on the relationship between eﬀort and the
probability of a healthy state that we will use in the next proposition. For convenience, we
will change variables by letting ( ) be defined as the eﬀort level  that leads to a probability
of the healthy state of  ; that is, () = −1
                                               (). Consider the following condition on the

cost of eﬀort () namely, that

       2  00 ()
(40)               1
        1−

for all  ≥   where  denotes the probability of the healthy state in the full bailout
equilibrium. We then have the following proposition, which is proved in the Appendix.
        Proposition 6. If  ≥ ̄, then the eﬃcient outcome is sustainable; and if   ̄,
with (40), then any equilibrium allocation has bailouts, so that   0, and at the equilibrium

                                                  26
level of debt   ( ) = 1 and  ( )   .
       We briefly discuss some intuition for the contradiction argument used to prove this
proposition. When   ̄ how could it be that there are no bailouts in equilibrium, yet an
individual firm is not at the competitive outcome? It must be that if such a firm deviated
to, say, the competitive outcome, then the bailout authority would buy up all the debt,
renegotiate the contract to have fewer bankruptcies, and, in so doing, make this firm worse
oﬀ. Such a policy of the bailout authority has two eﬀects on the value of the firm. Bailing
out the firm by buying up all the debt at face value in a distressed state tends to raise
the value of the firm. Renegotiating the contract to have fewer bankruptcies worsens the
manager’s incentives to supply eﬀort and thereby tends to reduce the value of the firm. Our
condition (40) guarantees that the bailout eﬀect is larger than the incentive eﬀect, so that
such a deviation is always profitable. Hence, there must be bailouts in equilibrium.
       We now argue that the policies of the bailout authority create an externality. The
reason is that when some firms increase their debt levels, the bailout authority has stronger
incentives to intervene and levy higher taxes to support bailouts. These higher taxes impose
costs on all other firms. An individual firm does not internalize the costs that it imposes on
other firms from increasing its debt level. This externality creates a role for regulation.

B. Optimal Regulation
       We now consider adding a benevolent governmental regulatory authority that can
limit the amount of debt that each firm takes on. We will show that by setting these limits
appropriately low, the regulator can eliminate the incentives of the bailout authority to
bail out firms ex post. As discussed above, such optimal regulation mitigates the time-
inconsistency problem arising from the inability of the bailout authority to commit to not
bailing out firms but does not eliminate it.
       Specifically, the regulator can specify maximum debt levels ¯ and ¯ that no firm
can exceed. Let ¯ = (¯  ¯ ) denote the policy of the regulator. In terms of the timing,
in each period  the regulator moves first and chooses its policies at the beginning of the
period. Private agents then agree to contracts, and the rest of the timing is as before.
       A simple way to set up the regulatory equilibrium is to treat the regulator’s policies


                                               27
{¯ }∞
      =0 as an exogenously given sequence. Given this sequence and given the bailout policies,

the contracting problem is the same as in the definition of the bailout equilibrium, with the
additional constraint that


(41)  ≤ ¯ and  ≤ ¯ 


        Given the regulatory policies {¯ }∞
                                            =0  a regulatory equilibrium is a collection of strate-

gies { ( )  (   )   ( )} for private agents and the bailout authority such that ()
given the history   the contract  ( ) solves the contracting problem, and for every con-
tract   the eﬀort  (   ) maximizes the manager’s payoﬀs; and () given the strategies of
the private agents, the policy   ( ) maximizes the payoﬀs for the bailout authority (32).
        Next we show that the optimal regulatory outcome solves a simple programming prob-
lem. This problem is to solve
                                             Z   ̄
(42)    max  ()( −  ) +  ()                   (  −  ) () − 
                                         


subject to the manager’s incentive constraint
                                                      Z   ̄
(43)  ∈ arg max  ()( −  ) +  ()                       (  −  ) () − 
                                                        


the participation constraint
                      " Z                                 µ      µ ¶¶#
                                   
                                                                  
(44)  () +  ()                      () +  1 −        ≥ 1
                                                                 

and the sustainability constraint

                          
(45)       ≥   ( ) +      
       1−                1−
                                  R ̄
where  =  () +  ()         
                                              () − . Let   denote the sum of manager utility
and investor utility resulting from the solution to the regulatory problem, and let (¯   )
denote the associated allocations. We will show that these allocations are outcomes of a


                                                          28
regulatory equilibrium. Notice that if  ≥ ̄ then from Proposition 6, we know that the
regulatory outcome coincides with the eﬃcient outcome. If   ̄ then clearly ¯    
                                                                                    .

Notice that if  is suﬃciently small, then only the full bailout equilibrium solves the regulatory
problem.
       Next we show that the outcomes that solve the regulatory problem (42) can be de-
centralized as an equilibrium by the appropriate choice of debt limits. The basic idea is that
the sustainability constraint (45) can be replaced by debt limits. With such replacement, the
regulatory problem reduces to a private contracting problem with debt limits. Formally, we
now argue this:
       Proposition 7. The outcomes of the best regulatory equilibrium solve (42), and in
that equilibrium, the bailout authority does not intervene. Moreover, for   ̄ ex ante
regulations strictly improve welfare relative to any bailout equilibrium.
       Proof. Clearly the constraints on (42) are all necessary conditions for any regulatory
equilibrium. Hence,   is at least as large as the utility in any regulatory equilibrium.
       We now construct a regulatory equilibrium that achieves   . In this equilibrium, the
regulatory policy is to set debt limits equal to ¯ . For all histories  along the equilibrium
path, the bailout policy is to set   = 0 and to set ( ) = 0 for all  . For any histories
not on the equilibrium path, the bailout policy is the full bailout policy.
       Given these policies, the private contracting problem is identical to the regulatory
problem except that the sustainability constraint (45) is replaced by


       ≤ ¯          ¯
              and  ≤  .



Since ¯    
         ≤  –that is, the regulatory debt limits are below the debt levels in the compet-

itive equilibrium–the solution to the private contracting problem with such debt limits sets
the debt levels at the maximum possible levels. Thus, the eﬀort level of the manager in the
best regulatory equilibrium is given by  .
       Next, the bailout authority has no incentive to intervene in the best regulatory equi-
librium outcomes because its payoﬀ if it does not intervene is the left side of (45), and its
payoﬀ if it does intervene is the right side of (45), which is lower.


                                               29
       Finally, we show that for   ̄ the best regulatory equilibrium yields higher welfare
than any bailout equilibrium. We begin by noting that, trivially, any bailout outcome can
be implemented as a regulatory outcome in which the debt limits are set to be greater than
or equal to debt levels in the bailout equilibrium. Thus, welfare in the best regulatory
equilibrium is at least as high as that in any bailout equilibrium.
       We now show that for   ̄ regulatory equilibrium welfare is strictly higher. To see
this, notice that the best regulatory outcome has  = 0, whereas, from Proposition 6, we
know that any bailout equilibrium has   0. Thus, welfare is higher in the equilibrium with
regulation. 
       In all versions of our model, firms are all the same size, so optimal regulation takes
the form of a uniform cap on the debt of all such firms. In the data, of course, firms are of
diﬀerent sizes. It is straightforward to extend our model to allow for heterogeneity in firm
size. In our benchmark model, the technology required a fixed size of investment, 1 that was
the same for all firms, together with  units of managerial eﬀort. Suppose now that firms
diﬀer in the scale of required investment,  ∈ [ ̄]. Here, a firm’s type  is simply the scale of
the required investment. The technology for a firm of type  is that an investment of  units,
together with managerial eﬀort , produces   for  ∈ { } with probability  () in the
event of no bankruptcy and   in the event of bankruptcy. Notice that this technology
has constant returns to scale: producing twice as much output with a given probability, for
example, requires twice as much investment and twice as much eﬀort. In this variant, the
regulatory problem is identical to (42) up to the scale factor . The optimal regulation can
thus be interpreted as a cap on the amount of debt relative to the size of investment, which
can be thought of as a cap on the debt-to-value ratio of each firm.

4. Optimal Regulation with Aggregate Shocks
       So far we have considered an economy without aggregate shocks and have shown that
ex ante regulation in the form of debt limits can improve outcomes. An important policy
question is how such regulation should vary over the course of the business cycle. To answer
this question, we extend our model to have cyclical fluctuations by introducing aggregate
shocks. Our main result is that regulation should be tighter when, absent intervention, the


                                                30
lost resources arising from bankruptcy are larger. Translating this general result into specific
implications for the cyclicality of policy, however, depends on the detailed specification of
how the shocks aﬀect outcomes. To illustrate this dependence, we provide one specification in
which the lost resources are highest in recessions, so that countercyclical regulation is optimal;
that is, the optimal ex ante debt limits become tighter during recessions. We provide another
specification in which the lost resources are highest in booms, so that procyclical regulation
is optimal; that is, the optimal ex ante debt limits become tighter during booms.

A. Theory: Regulate Most When Bailout Incentives Greatest
        Consider extending our dynamic economy to incorporate aggregate shocks. The ag-
gregate shock  is i.i.d. over time and can take on a finite set of values, each with probability
() In each period, the aggregate shock is realized before all other decisions, and the rest
of the timing is then the same as before. This shock can aﬀect the probability of the healthy
idiosyncratic states, now given by  ( ) as well as the productivities in the healthy and
distressed states, now given by  () and  ()
        In this economy, regulatory equilibrium is defined analogously to that in the dynamic
economy without aggregate shocks. Given an aggregate shock  the regulatory problem is
                                                              Z    ̄
(46)    max  ( )( () −  ) +  ( )                               [ () −  ] () − 
                                                          ()


subject to the manager’s incentive constraint
                                                                        Z    ̄
(47)  ∈ arg max  ( )( () −  ) +  ( )                                      ( () −  ) () − 
                                                                             ()


the investor’s participation constraint
                            " Z                                              ∙      µ        ¶¸#
                                                ()
                                                                                       
(48)  ( ) +  ( )                               () () +  1 −               ≥ 1
                                                                                      ()

and the sustainability constraint
                       P                                                P
                      0   ( 0 )( 0 )                             0        ( 0 )  ( 0 )
(49) () +                                ≥   (  ) +                                        
                            1−                                                   1−


                                                              31
where  () denotes the sum of manager utility and investor utility in state  and   ()
denotes this same sum in the static contracting problem analogous to (26). Rearranging the
sustainability constraint and using the definitions of  () and   () we obtain that
           P                                                                     Z      ()
               0   ( 0 )[ ( 0 ) −   ( 0 )]
(50)                                                ≥  ( )(1 − ) ()                        ()
                            1−                                                   


The left side of (50) is a constant independent of  and the right side of (50) equals the lost
resources due to bankruptcy. Let  ∗ denote the value of the left side at this optimum. This
value is the dynamic gain from sticking with the prescribed policy.
       Now consider the competitive equilibrium without regulation or bailouts. The as-
sociated contracting problem here is to maximize (46) subject to the manager’s incentive
constraint (47) and the investor’s participation constraint (48). Let  (), 
                                                                                 () and


  () denote the solution to this problem. Let 
                                                 
                                                    () denote the static gain from elimi-
nating bankruptcy in state , namely,

                                                            Z    
                                                                   () ()
                             
(51)           () =  (         ()  )(1 − ) ()                         ()
                                                             


We then have this:
       Proposition 8. If  ()   ∗  so that the static gain from eliminating bankruptcy
exceeds the dynamic gain from sticking with the policy, it is then optimal to have ex ante
regulation in state . If the inequality is reversed, regulation in state  is not optimal.
       Proof. Notice that the contracting problem is a relaxed version of the regulatory
problem. If the solution to the relaxed problem violates the sustainability constraint, then
regulation is necessary in order to support the solution to the regulatory problem as a private
equilibrium. If instead the solution to this relaxed problem is feasible for the regulatory
problem, then it is also optimal for that problem; thus, no regulation is necessary to support
the solution to the regulatory problem as a private equilibrium. 
       The logic that underlies Proposition 8 is general: regulation is desirable in states for
which the bailout authority has the greatest incentive to intervene. These incentives are
largest in states for which the competitive equilibrium has the largest costs of bankruptcy.



                                                            32
B. Business Cycle Implications
       To relate this general result to the design of optimal regulation over the business cycle,
we need to impose more structure on how aggregate shocks aﬀect the probability of success
and productivity. In principle, optimal regulation could be pro- or countercyclical, depending
on how aggregate shocks aﬀect the competitive equilibrium.
       We illustrate this point with two specifications for the aggregate shocks: in one, opti-
mal regulation is countercyclical; in the other, it is procyclical.
       Countercyclical Regulation. In the first example, we generate booms and recessions
by changing only the probabilities of healthy and distressed states, with mean productivities
constant across states. In particular, in a boom a given level of eﬀort leads to a higher
probability of any firm becoming healthy and a correspondingly lower probability of becoming
distressed. Hence, for a given level of eﬀort, in booms a higher fraction of firms are healthy,
and in recessions a higher fraction of firms are distressed.
       Specifically, we suppose that


(52)  ( ) =  () + ()


where  () =  and  is an increasing function of  with the understanding that ()
and  () are such that for relevant levels of eﬀort,  ( ) lies in [0 1]. Note that with this
additive formulation, the marginal eﬀect of eﬀort on the healthy outcome is independent of the
aggregate state. We set  () =  and  () =  . We also assume that the idiosyncratic
shock  satisfies the monotonicity condition (20). In the Appendix, we show that there is a
cutoﬀ state  ∗ such that for    ∗ , no regulation is needed and for  ≤  ∗ , regulation is
needed. Since it is optimal to set limits on debt only for suﬃciently low realizations of 
which we interpret as suﬃciently severe recessions, this result implies that optimal regulation
is countercyclical. The proof of the following proposition is in the Appendix.
       Proposition 9. Under the monotonicity condition (20) and with  ( ) given by
(52), if  is suﬃciently high and  and  are suﬃciently small, then optimal regulation is
countercyclical.
       Procyclical Regulation. We now consider a specification in which a shock aﬀects the


                                                33
scale of investment. In booms the scale of investment is high, and in recessions it is small.
        Specifically, consider a variant of our model in which the technology is changed in
two ways. First, each project requires () units of investment rather than one unit at the
beginning of the period and delivers  () units in each idiosyncratic state . We assume
that () is increasing in the aggregate state . Second, for the project to succeed with
probability  () the required eﬀort cost of the manager is () units of utility. (In this
sense, managing larger projects takes more eﬀort.) With this specification, the contracting
problem in a competitive equilibrium becomes
                                                    Z   ̄
(53)    max  ()( () −  ) +  ()                              [ () −  ] () − ()
                                                ()


subject to the manager’s incentive constraint
                                                              Z    ̄
(54)  ∈ arg max  ()[ () −  ] +  ()                                 [ () −  ] () − ()
                                                                   ()


and the resource constraint
                      " Z                                        µ      µ                            ¶¶#
                                  ()
                                                                                             
(55)  () +  ()                        () () +  1 −                                     ≥ 1
                                                                                           ()


This problem is homogeneous of degree 1 in () in the sense that if ̃ ˜  ˜ solve the
problem for () = 1, then ̃ ˜ () ˜ () solve it for any value of (). Thus, the static
gains from eliminating bankruptcy are simply proportional to the scale of investment:
                       "                       Z                           #
                                                    ˜ 
(56)  () = ()  (̃)(1 − )                           () .
                                                


In this model, booms correspond to high  states in which the scale of investment is high;
recessions, to low  states in which this scale is low. Since  () is increasing in  optimal
regulation is now procyclical; limits on debt are needed in boom states and not in recession
states. We then have the following proposition:
        Proposition 10. In the model with a variable scale of investment, optimal regulation
is procyclical.

                                                             34
5. Conclusion
      We have shown that if governments alter private contracts during crises, then the
prospect of bailouts reduces ex ante welfare. But the prescription that governments not bail
out distressed firms is unrealistic. Benevolent governments simply do not have the power
to commit themselves to such a prescription. A pragmatic approach to policy dictates that
we take as given the incentives of governments to undertake bailouts and so design ex ante
regulation to minimize the ex ante costs of these ex post bailouts. We have shown here that
such ex ante regulation can, in fact, eliminate the incentives of governments to undertake
costly bailouts and so improve welfare. We have also shown that regulation should be tightest
when the resources lost to bankruptcy without bailouts would be largest.




                                             35
References
      Abreu, Dilip. 1988. On the theory of infinitely repeated games with discounting.
Econometrica 56 (2): 383—396.
      Acharya, Viral V., and Tanju Yorulmazer. 2007. Too many to fail–An analysis of
time-inconsistency in bank closure policies. Journal of Financial Intermediation 16 (1): 1—31.
      Bianchi, Javier. 2011. Overborrowing and systemic externalities in the business cycle.
American Economic Review 101 (7): 3400—3426.
      Bianchi, Javier, and Enrique G. Mendoza. 2010. Overborrowing, financial crises and
“macro-prudential” taxes. NBER Working Paper 16091.
      Calvo, Guillermo A. 1988. Servicing the public debt: The role of expectations. Amer-
ican Economic Review 78 (4): 647—661.
      Diamond, Douglas W., and Philip H. Dybvig. 1983. Bank runs, deposit insurance,
and liquidity. Journal of Political Economy 91 (3): 401—419.
      Ennis, Huberto M., and Todd Keister. 2009. Bank runs and institutions: The perils
of intervention. American Economic Review 99 (4): 1588—1607.
      Farhi, Emmanuel, Mikhail Golosov, and Aleh Tsyvinski. 2009. A theory of liquidity
and regulation of financial intermediation. Review of Economic Studies 76 (3): 973—992.
      Farhi, Emmanuel, and Jean Tirole. 2012. Collective moral hazard, maturity mismatch,
and systemic bailouts. American Economic Review 102 (1): 60—93.
      Fudenberg, Drew, and Jean Tirole. 1990. Moral hazard and renegotiation in agency
contracts. Econometrica 58 (6): 1279—1319.
      Gertler, Mark, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, and Albert Queralto. 2012. Financial crises, bank
risk exposure, and government financial policy. Journal of Monetary Economics 59 (Supple-
ment): 517—534.
      Keister, Todd. 2012. Bailouts and financial fragility. Federal Reserve Bank of New
York Staﬀ Report 473.
      Lorenzoni, Guido. 2008. Ineﬃcient credit booms. Review of Economic Studies 75 (3):
809—833.
      Mailath, George J., and Loretta J. Mester. 1994. A positive analysis of bank closure.
Journal of Financial Intermediation 3 (3): 272—299.


                                             36
       Mookherjee, Dilip, and Ivan P. L. Png. 1989. Optimal auditing, insurance, and
redistribution. Quarterly Journal of Economics 104 (2): 399—415.
       Rogerson, William P. 1985. The first-order approach to principal-agent problems.
Econometrica 53 (6): 1357—1367.
       Schneider, Martin, and Aaron Tornell. 2004. Balance sheet eﬀects, bailout guarantees,
and financial crises. Review of Economic Studies 71 (3): 883—913.
       Stern, Gary H., and Ron J. Feldman. 2004. Too Big to Fail: The Hazards of Bank
Bailouts. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
       Townsend, Robert M. 1979. Optimal contracts and competitive markets with costly
state verification. Journal of Economic Theory 21 (2): 265—293.

6. Appendix: Proofs of Some Propositions
       Here we provide the proofs for some of our propositions.

A. Proving Proposition 2
       We begin with a lemma that is helpful in proving Proposition 2.
       Lemma 1. There exist cutoﬀs ∗ ( ) such that the optimal contract has this form:
continue if   ∗ ( ) and declare bankruptcy otherwise.
       Proof. Suppose by way of contradiction that a contract that is immune to renegotia-
tion has this form: there is a nonbankruptcy region  = (1  2 ) and a bankruptcy region to
the right of it, namely,  = (2  3 ) where 1  2  3 .
       We first develop a simple inequality that will be useful in our argument. Note that
since  is part of the bankruptcy region from (8) and   1, it follows that


(57)  ()   for all  ∈ 


       Now consider an alternative contract, denoted by {̂ () ˆ () ̂  ()}. In terms of
bankruptcy, this contract is the same as the original contract except that it turns  from a
bankruptcy region to a nonbankruptcy region. In terms of payments to investors, it reduces
the payments everywhere except the region  by a constant amount  and raises payments in
region  so as to give the investors the same expected payments as in the original contract.


                                                37
Finally, the manager’s new consumption is defined residually from the resource constraint.
Of course, since this manager is paying the same expected amount to the investor but reaps
the benefit (1 − )  for all  ∈  this manager’s expected utility increases.
       More formally, let ̂  () = 1 for  ∈  and coincide with   () for all other realizations
of the idiosyncratic shocks. Let ˆ () =  − for  ∈  and for other , let ˆ () =  ()−
where the constant  is chosen so that the payment to the investors is the same as in the
original contract:
               Z                     Z
(58)  =                () +             () () =
                                       

       Z                             Z                                Z
             ( − ) () +             ( − ) () +                    [ () − ] ()
                                                                    
                                                                                                                R
Subtracting the left side from the right side of the second equality in (58) gives  =                           
                                                                                                                     [ −
 ()] () which we know from (57) is strictly positive. The consumption of the managers
in the original contract is given by
               Z                                   Z
        =          [  −  ] () +               [  −  ()] ()
                                                 


and in the alternative contract their consumption is given by
       Z                                       Z                                    Z
(59)         [  −  + ] () +                   [  −  + ] () +               [  −  () + ] ()
                                                                                   

                                                          R
which we know, from (58), equals  +                      
                                                               (1 − )  ().
       Under this alternative contract, the consumption of the managers satisfies the non-
negativity constraint. To see this, note that in all states but those in  we have simply
added a positive number  to the managers’ consumption. To argue that consumption is
positive for states in  we note that under our contradiction hypothesis, the set  is to the
left of . Since the consumption of the managers in the alternative contract   −  + 
satisfies nonnegativity for any  ∈  this same expression clearly satisfies nonnegativity for
the region  which has larger idiosyncratic shocks.
       This alternative contract is clearly incentive compatible. For all states besides those


                                                                 38
in  we have subtracted oﬀ a constant from the repayments of the managers so that the
incentive constraints are automatically satisfied. We have switched  to a nonbankruptcy
region, and the only incentive constraint that applies in this region is that the repayments
are constant, which is satisfied by construction. Thus, we have established a contradiction.

        We now characterize the payments in the optimal contract. We let ∗ be shorthand
for ∗ ( ) Any contract that is immune to renegotiation must maximize, say, the payoﬀs
to the manager subject to the constraint that investors receive at least  . Furthermore,
Lemma 1 implies that any contract that is immune to renegotiation must be of the form
 () =   −  for  ≥ ∗  Nonnegativity then implies that


(60)  ≤  ∗ for   ∗ 


Incentive compatibility requires that


(61)  () =   −  () ≥   −  for  ≤ ∗ 


and nonnegativity requires that


(62)  () ≤   for  ≤ ∗ 


Therefore, any contract that is immune to renegotiation must solve
                       Z    ∗                              Z   ̄

        ∗
          max                     [  −  ()] () +            (  −  ) ()
         ()                                        ∗


subject to (60), (61), (62), and

       Z     ∗
(63)                ()() +  [1 − (∗ )] ≥  
         


The solution to this problem depends on the size of the debt  owed to investors. If the debt
is low enough, then there is no default, and managers pay a constant amount less than  
whereas if the debt is higher, then there is default and payments are as we said. Finally, if 

                                                                  39
is too large, then this problem does not have a solution because there is a maximal amount
of expected payments  that can be raised by any contract that satisfies the constraints on
this problem.
       Proposition 2. A contract is immune to renegotiation if and only if it is a debt
contract.
       Proof. It is immediate that a debt contract is immune to renegotiation. We now show
that if a contract is immune to renegotiation, it must be a debt contract. Consider the case
that    . First, from (60) and (63), we know that in order to generate payments of 
to the investors, some bankruptcy is required, so that ∗   We now show that  =  ∗ 
The argument is by contradiction. Since  ≤  ∗  we need only show that    ∗ leads
to a contradiction. Recall from (57) that  ()   for  ≤ ∗ .
       We will construct an alternative contract that satisfies (60)—(63) and raises the payoﬀs
to the manager. This alternative contract has a bankruptcy region [ ̂] where  ̂ =   so
that ̂  ∗  In this contract, set ˆ () =  () −  where  is constructed so that it satisfies
(63). Hence,  satisfies

                  Z       ̂                    Z         ∗                         Z   ̄
(64)  =                       () () +                   () () +                  () =
                                                    ̂                              ∗

      Z    ̂                                Z       ∗                                  Z    ̄
                [ () − ] () +                       ( − ) () +                        ( − ) ()
                                               ̂                                        ∗
                   R ∗
Hence,  =            ̂
                               [ −  ()] () which (61) indicates is strictly positive. This alternative
contract also satisfies (60)—(62) because we have simply reduced  and  () by 
       We now show that in the alternative contract, the expected consumption of managers
is higher than in the original contract. The consumption of the managers in the original
contract is given by
                  Z       ̂                                       Z     ∗                                    Z     ̄
       =                     [  −  ()] () +                       [  −  ()] () +                    (  −  ) ()
                                                                   ̂                                           ∗




                                                                                40
and in the alternative contract it is given by
       Z   ̂                                  Z     ∗                             Z   ̄
(65)            [  −  () + ] () +              (  −  + ) () +            (  −  + ) ()
                                               ̂                                  ∗

                                      R ∗
which, using (64), equals  +         ̂
                                             (1 − )  (). Since   1 the managers’ expected
payoﬀ is strictly higher. Hence, we have proved the desired result for the case that    .
       Consider, next, the case that  ≤   Clearly, it is feasible to have no bankruptcy
and repay the investors   Since bankruptcy simply wastes resources, it is optimal to set
∗ =  and from (60),  ≤  
       We now show that the managers’ and the investors’ consumption has the desired
                                                                     R ∗
form in the bankruptcy region. Suppose, by way of contradiction, that   ()()  0
Consider an alternative contract that leaves the bankruptcy set as well as the expected
consumption of managers and investors unchanged. This contract reduces the managers’
consumption in the bankruptcy set to zero and raises the managers’ consumption in the
nonbankruptcy interval by an amount that leaves overall expected consumption the same.
Since the bankruptcy region is unchanged, this alternative contract gives the same expected
payoﬀs to the investors as the original contract but has the property that  ∗    From
the first step, however, we know that any such contract is strictly dominated by the optimal
contract. This gives us a contradiction. 

B. Proving Proposition 6
       Proposition 6. If  ≥ ̄ then the eﬃcient outcome is sustainable, and if   ̄,
with (40), then any equilibrium allocation has bailouts, so that   0, and at the equilibrium
level of debt   ( ) = 1 and  ( )   .
       Proof. If  ≥ ̄ then the result follows from Proposition 5.
       Consider   ̄. By way of contradiction, suppose that the equilibrium has no bailouts
along the equilibrium outcome path. Let  be the utility of a manager associated with such
an equilibrium. Since the eﬃcient outcome   is not sustainable, this purported equilibrium
has      We will construct a deviation for an individual firm that leads to utility ̂ with
̂ ≥     which will contradict that the original outcomes were equilibrium outcomes.



                                                             41
        The deviation is to choose the debt level in the distressed state ˆ equal to that
in the competitive equilibrium, namely, 
                                          . For this deviation, the bailout authority’s

policy is either to not alter the bankruptcy cutoﬀ or to alter it. Either way, we will show a
contradiction.
        Suppose first that the government’s strategy is to not alter the bankruptcy cutoﬀ
(either by not buying the debt or by buying it and then not renegotiating the terms of the
debt). The deviation contract implements the competitive equilibrium so that ̂ =   and
hence improves on that original allocation. We have established a contradiction.
        Suppose next that the government’s strategy is to buy this debt at its market value
                                                                         
(                                             
    ) and renegotiate the bankruptcy cutoﬀ from  to some lower level  . We will show

that under (40), the value of utility under the deviation satisfies ̂    . Since    
the purported equilibrium level of utility, we have a contradiction.
        We turn now to showing that ̂    . To see this, consider some arbitrary  . Let
the probability of the healthy state  and  associated with  be given by the solutions to
the participation constraint


(66)  + (1 − )  = 1


and the manager’s eﬀort incentive constraint
                         Z   ̄
(67)  −  −                  ( −  ) () −  0 () = 0,
                          


where   is the market value of debt in the competitive equilibrium. The manager’s utility
associated with the cutoﬀ  in the distressed state is given by
                                                   Z   ̄
(68)   ( )   =  [ −  ] + (1 − )                 ( −  ) () − ()
                                                    


We will show that for all                                    
                                  ,  ( )  ( ) which, since ( )   yields the

desired contradiction.
        To see this, totally diﬀerentiate the participation constraint (66) and the manager’s
incentive constraint (67) holding   fixed. Diﬀerentiating the participation constraint gives

                                                              42
that
              µ              ¶
                              
(69)      =                           
               
                   −          

Diﬀerentiating the manager’s incentive constraint and substituting for (69) gives that

              00 ()
(70)      =            00
                             [ (1 − ( )] 
           −  +  ()

Next, diﬀerentiating the utility function (68) and substituting for   from (70) and
using (66) to substitute for   −  gives that  has the same sign as
        ∙                    ¸
              3  00 ()
(71) − 2 00                    − (1 − )
         () − (1 −   )

Since    1 if we can show that     then inequality (40) implies that   0;
and since                                              
                   the utility of this deviation ( )  ( ) and we will have established

the desired contradiction.
       We now show that    . To see this, note that  solves the analogs of (66) and
(67) with   replaced by   and  replaced by . Since   is larger than   in
this deviation, the revenues in the distressed state are higher than those in the full bailout
equilibrium. Thus, it is possible to increase the manager’s consumption in the healthy state,
and since  ≥  the manager’s consumption in the distressed state in the deviation is lower
than in the full bailout equilibrium. Both of these forces lead the manager to exert eﬀort, so
that    . 

C. Proving Proposition 9
       Proposition 9. Under the monotonicity condition (20) and with  ( ) given by
(52), if  is suﬃciently high and  is suﬃciently small, then optimal regulation is counter-
cyclical.
       We establish Proposition 9 using a series of lemmas. Given our setup, establishing this
proposition amounts to conducting a comparative statics exercise on the optimal contract
when varying . We will show that the static gain from eliminating bankruptcy is higher



                                              43
when  is lower. Proposition 8 then implies that regulation is optimal if and only if  is low
enough.
       We conduct this comparative static exercise by comparing outcomes in two states: a
recession state with success probability of  (), so that  is normalized to zero, and a boom
state with probability ̂ () =  () + ̂ where ̂  0. Let      and ˆ  ˆ  ̂ denote the
solutions to the private contracting problem for the two economies, and let  and ̂ denote
the corresponding utilities of the manager. Throughout we will use the first-order conditions
for     and  in the competitive equilibrium, namely,


(72) − − 0 +  = 0
                                                 ∙                 ¸
                                                                
(73) −(1 −  )(1 − ) +      0 (1
                               − ) + (1 −  ) 1 −  − (1 − )  = 0
                                                                
           h           R ̄                    i
      00  −  −   (  −  ) ()
(74)         h      R                    ³      ³ ´´i
      +0  −       () −  1 −        = 0

where  is the multiplier on the manager’s incentive constraint and  is the multiplier on the
                                                                        R ̄
investor participation constraint. It will be convenient to let ( ) =   ( − ) (),
            R                     ³        ³ ´´
( ) =       () +  1 −   , and  =  −  − ( ) Note for later
that ( ) is increasing in  and ( ) is decreasing in  .
       Throughout we will make use of some simple results. The first is that


(75)  − ( )  0.


This result follows by rewriting the investor participation constraint


       () [ − ( )] + ( ) = 1


and noting that ( )  1 because   1
       We first show that under the solution to the optimal contract, the probability of a
healthy state is higher in the boom state than in the recession state.
       Lemma 2. Under the monotonicity condition (20), ̂ (̂)   ().


                                                   44
       Proof. We begin by proving that the multiplier on the participation constraint for
the boom state ̂ is less than the corresponding multiplier  for the recession state. We do
so by showing that the constraint set is more relaxed in the boom state than in the recession
state. To see this result, note that the contract in the boom state solves


(76) max ( () + ̂ ) + ( ) − 


subject to


      0 () = 1


      [ () + ̂]  + [1 −  () − ̂]( ) ≥ 1

with solution (ˆ  ˆ  ̂) The problem (76) can be rewritten as one of choosing     and 
to solve the following problem, taking as given ̂ ˆ  and ˆ :


(77) max  () + ( ) −  + ̂̂


subject to


      0 () = 1

                                        h             i
       () + [1 −  ()]( ) + ̂ ˆ − (ˆ ) ≥ 1

Since any solution to (76) is feasible for (77) and any solution to (77) is feasible for (76),
the solutions coincide. Note the similarity between (77) and the contracting problem in the
recession state. The diﬀerences are that the investor participation constraint is relaxed, which
follows from (75), and that a constant has been added to the maximand. Since the investor
participation constraint has been relaxed and the constant in the maximand does not aﬀect
the multiplier, we have that ̂  .




                                                 45
       Now we can combine (72) and (73) to obtain
      ∙                              ¸
                             
(78)  1 − (1 −  )(1 − )            = 1
                             1 − 

Since ̂   we know that
                  Ã         !Ã            !            µ       ¶µ         ¶
                      ˆ          ̂                              
(79) (1 − ̂ )                                (1 −  )                     
                               1 − ̂                           1−

Now assume by way of contradiction that ̂ (̂)   () Then, under (20), inequality (79)
implies that ˆ   .
       We next show that utility maximization implies that ˆ    which gives us a contra-
diction. Note, for later, that ̂ (̂) =  (̂) + ̂   () implies that ̂  . Next we define
an intermediate allocation ( ∗  ∗  ∗  ∗ ) from the contract in the recession state (    )
by letting ∗ =  but decreasing ∗ from   so that at the intermediate allocation, the
investor gets the same payment as in the recession state. That is,


      [ () + ̂] = ∗ + [1 −  () − ̂]( ) =  () + [1 −  ()]( )


Clearly, since ∗   ,


      ∗ =  − ∗ − ( )   =  −  − ( )


Then from the manager’s incentive constraint, 0 (∗ )∗ = 1 implies that ∗  .
       Since ̂ is the optimal allocation, it follows that


      ̂ ≥  ∗ ≥ 


In what follows, it is useful to decompose the utility of the manager into two parts. To
do so, let the utility of the manager under any contract be given by  () + ( ) where
 () =  () −  where  solves 0 () = 1. Note that  0 () =   0. Under the




                                                        46
contradiction hypothesis, ̂    ∗  so that  (̂)   ()   (∗ ) and


      ̂ =  (̂) + ̂̂ + (ˆ ) ≥  (∗ ) + ̂∗ + (∗ )


Since  (̂)   (∗ ) and ̂  ∗  it follows that (ˆ )  (∗ ) = ( ). Since  is an
increasing function of   this implies that ˆ    which is the desired contradiction. 
       With this lemma, we can now establish the following proposition:
       Proposition 9. Under (20) and (52), if  is suﬃciently high and  is suﬃciently
small, then optimal regulation is countercyclical.
       Proof. From Proposition 8 it suﬃces to prove that lost resources  in the recession
state are greater than lost resources ̂ in the boom state. Clearly, if ˆ    then from the
earlier lemma the proposition follows. Suppose by way of contradiction that ˆ   . We
first show that ̂   under this hypothesis. To see this, note from the investor participation
constraint that

              h           i
      ̂ (̂)  − ( ) + (ˆ ) =  () [ − ( )] + ( )
                ˆ     ˆ


Since ( ) is increasing in  under our contradiction hypothesis, (ˆ )  ( ) This fact,
together with the result from Lemma 2 that ̂ (̂)   () implies that


      ˆ − (ˆ )   − ( )


Simple algebra establishes that


      ̂ =  − ˆ − (ˆ )   −  − ( ) = 


From the manager’s incentive constraint, it then follows that ̂  
       Finally, we can manipulate (72)—(74) to obtain

                  µ     ¶2 µ          ¶
                             00             1 − ( )
(80) −(1 −  ) 0                         =                    
                             0            (1 − )  1−
                                                            




                                                          47
Note that if we use our functional form assumption, we can evaluate the left side of (80) at
̂ =  + ̂ and write it as
                                     µ          ¶2
                                       + ̂        1
      ( ̂) = (1 − )(1 −  − ̂)                  
                                        0          

It is easy to show that if   23 then  is increasing in ̂ and if   12 then  is
increasing in .
       Thus, the left side of (80) is greater in the boom state than in the recession state.
Note that since ( ) is increasing in  and we have assumed monotonicity, the right side
of (80) is decreasing in  . Under our contradiction hypothesis, the right side of (80) is less
in the boom state than in the recession state. This result contradicts that (80) holds as an
equality, which is a necessary condition for optimality. 




                                                48
