NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BOWLING FOR FASCISM:
SOCIAL CAPITAL AND THE RISE OF THE NAZI PARTY
Shanker Satyanath
Nico Voigtlaender
Hans-Joachim Voth
Working Paper 19201
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19201
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2013

We thank Daron Acemoglu, Laia Balcells, Eli Berman, Sheri Berman, Johannes Buggle, Davide Cantoni,
Nick Crafts, Joan Esteban, Ray Fisman, Nicola Gennaioli, Akos Lada, Stelios Michalopoulos, Massimo
Morelli, Torsten Persson, Giacomo Ponzetto, James Robinson, Yannay Spitzer, Enrico Spolaore, Ann
Swidler, Debraj Ray, Dominic Rohner, James Robinson, David Strömberg, Peter Temin, Mathias Thoenig,
Romain Wacziarg, David Yanagizawa-Drott, and Luigi Zingales for helpful comments. Seminar audiences
at the Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, CUNY, CREI, FGV Sao Paulo, Harvard Economics, the IGIER
workshop on conflict, IIES-Stockholm, PUC-Rio, SOFI-Stockholm, the University of Copenhagen,
and the Warsaw-Penn workshop offered useful criticisms. We are grateful to Hans-Christian Boy,
Casey Petroff, Inken Töwe, and Michaël Aklin for outstanding research assistance. We would also
like to thank Jürgen Falter for kindly sharing his data on Nazi Party entry. Voigtländer acknowledges
financial support from the Hellman Foundation. Voth thanks the European Research Council (AdG
FP-7-230515). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Shanker Satyanath, Nico Voigtlaender, and Hans-Joachim Voth. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bowling for Fascism: Social Capital and the Rise of the Nazi Party
Shanker Satyanath, Nico Voigtlaender, and Hans-Joachim Voth
NBER Working Paper No. 19201
July 2013, Revised June 2015
JEL No. N14,N44,P16,Z1,Z18
ABSTRACT
Social capital is often associated with desirable political and economic outcomes. This paper contributes
to the literature exploring the “dark side” of social capital, examining the downfall of democracy in
interwar Germany. We collect new data on the density of associations in 229 German towns and cities.
Denser networks of clubs and societies went hand-in-hand with a more rapid rise of the Nazi Party.
Towns with one standard deviation higher association density saw at least 15% faster Nazi Party entry.
All types of societies – from veteran associations to animal breeders, chess clubs and choirs – positively
predict NS Party entry. Party membership, in turn, is correlated with electoral success. These results
suggest that social capital aided the rise of the Nazi movement that ultimately destroyed Germany’s
first democracy. Crucially, we examine the question when a vibrant civic society can have corrosive
effects. We show that the effects of social capital depended on the political context – in federal states
with more stable governments, higher association density was not associated with faster Nazi Party
entry.
Shanker Satyanath
Department of Politics
New York University
19 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
ss284@nyu.edu
Nico Voigtlaender
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza
C513 Entrepreneurs Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
nico.v@anderson.ucla.edu

A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19201

Hans-Joachim Voth
University of Zurich
Department of Economics
Schönberggasse 1
CH-8001 Zurich
and CREI
voth@econ.uzh.ch

1
Hitler's seemingly mysterious mass appeal could
hardly have been so extensive without the
unplanned propaganda of daily social life ...
-Rudy Koshar (1986, p. 202)

1 Introduction
Social capital is typically associated with the emergence and persistence of good
institutions and favorable economic outcomes. 1 Tocqueville argued that American
democracy thrived because of a vibrant civic society; conversely, Putnam (2000)
concluded that a decline in social capital threatened it. On the other hand, social capital can
also be associated with negative outcomes such as organized crime (Durlauf and
Fafchamps 2005; Field 2003), and it can serve as a means of control, thereby entrenching
the power of autocratic rulers (Acemoglu, Reed, and Robinson 2014). What has not yet
been explored is whether a rich fabric of civic organizations can contribute to the
destruction of existing democratic structures, leading to the rise of autocracy.
In this paper, we study the role of social capital during one of the key discontinuities
of the 20th century – the Nazi Party’s rise to power. In 1933, Germany went from a
pluralistic, tolerant democracy to one of the most repressive dictatorships in history, with
major economic, political, and humanitarian consequences. A vast literature has sought to
explain the Nazi “seizure of power.” Answers currently range from a history of deep-rooted
anti-Semitism (Goldhagen 1996) to the social changes engendered by German
industrialization, hyperinflation, and the structural flaws of the Weimar constitution
interacting with weak political leadership before 1933 (Bracher 1978). We emphasize a
different channel – that Germany’s vibrant “civic society,” its dense network of social clubs
and associations, facilitated the rise of Hitler by bringing more people into contact with his
party’s message.
Mass membership was crucial for the Nazi rise to power. Long before it became a
force at the polls, the Nazi Party developed a mass following of often fanatically devoted
members. The electoral success of the NSDAP after 1930 would have been impossible
without massive organizational support by thousands of local chapters and hundreds of
thousands of dedicated members who campaigned for the party all over Germany, paid
dues, and influenced friends and family (Brustein 1998). The party’s vast size was also

1

Knack and Keefer (1997), Grootaert and Baselaer (2002), Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008).

2
essential in bargaining for power after 1930 – thanks to its mass appeal, the party controlled
a huge paramilitary force of storm troopers (SA). By 1932, it had grown so strong that,
according to a war game conducted by the German Army, the SA had a good chance of
defeating the regular armed forces in the case of civil war (Winkler 1987). 2 Our results
suggest that social capital was one important contributing factor why the Party gained
control of such a powerful force.
Our empirical analysis focuses on one aspect of social capital – dense networks of
clubs and associations. We combine individual-level records of Nazi Party membership
from Falter and Brustein (2015) with newly collected information on civic associations
from a cross-section of 229 towns and cities from all over Germany in the 1920s. We
demonstrate that the Nazi Party grew more quickly where association density was higher.
Figure 1 summarizes the basic pattern in the data: in towns and cities with above-median
association density, Germans were substantially more likely to enter the Nazi Party than in
towns with below-median club density. 3 The effect is quantitatively important,
corresponding to a 27% difference in Nazi Party entry rates over the period January 1925January 1933. 4 All types of associations – civic and military clubs, “bridging” and
“bonding” associations – positively predict NS Party entry. The historical record suggests
that associations facilitated Nazi recruitment by helping to spread the party’s message, and
by increasing trust in its intentions and officials. Party membership, in turn, predicts
electoral success.
Our results are robust to a wide range of alternative specifications and group
definitions. In a panel analysis, we exploit membership growth over time and include city

2

The regular armed forces were limited to 100,000 as a result of the Versailles Treaty. Realization that the
NSDAP could not be repressed by violent means led the head of the army, General Streicher, to try to strike
a deal with the party’s moderates in December 1932. This was one of the first steps in a process of mutual
accommodation between right-wing parties and the Nazis Party that culminated in the latter’s entry into
government in 1933.
3
Note that we use the number of associations per capita as our measure of social capital; alternative measures
such as association membership are not possible to compile on a comprehensive basis. In Appendix A.4, we
show that where data is available, clubs per capita are a strong predictor of membership per capita.
4
For cities with below-median association density, the cumulative entry rate per 1,000 in our sample over
the period 1925-1/1933 was 0.55; for those above the median, it was 0.70 – 27 percent higher. Since the
Falter-Brustein sample comprises approximately 2% of all Nazi Party entries, the actual level effects are
substantial: On average over the period 1/1925-1/1933, the party had 27.7 vs. 35.2 entrants (per 1,000
inhabitants) in cities with below- vs. above-median association density. These figures correspond to the
original Falter-Brustein data on party entry, where every file card from earlier years was oversampled to
ensure broad cross-sectional coverage (see Appendix C.1). When adjusting the original data for aggregate
party entry changes over time (as in Figure 1), we obtain an overall boost of 17% (and 50% for early entry,
1925-29) in cities with above-median association density.

3
fixed effects to capture local unobservables that may be related to both association density
and Nazi Party entry. We show that the marginal effect of existing party members on
subsequent membership growth was significantly larger in cities with higher association
density. This is in line with historical evidence that existing Nazi Party members
successfully exploited local associations to proselytize.
Historical drivers of association formation are unlikely to be related to factors that
favored the rise of the Nazi Party – associational life was partly defined in the run-up and
aftermath of 1848, and its vigor in the interwar period still reflected this earlier period’s
opportunities and restrictions. All German states heavily restricted the formation of clubs
and societies prior to 1848. These restrictions were dismantled as a result of citizens
demanding the right of free assembly during the 1848 revolution. The way restrictions were
abolished varied by location, depending on local conditions and individual officials.
Despite the revolution’s ultimate failure, the freedom of assembly was never again
curtailed on the same scale; as a result, early clubs and associations persisted. Crucially,
the revolutionaries of 1848 – Germany’s only attempt at a democratic, “bourgeois”
revolution – shared none of the Nazis’ racist, militaristic, expansionist ideology. We show
that these democratic associations predict the density of local associations, both in the
1860s and in the 1920s. Based on this fact, we use 1860s associations in an IV exercise
that shows a strong link between historical club density and Nazi Party entry.
We also examine when local club density was particularly strongly associated with
Nazi Party entry, and thereby shed light on the conditions under which social capital can
become corrosive. To this end, we exploit variation in the stability of government across
Germany’s federal states. Unstable governance and higher association density combined
were particularly conducive to Nazi Party entry – the “dark side” of social capital mainly
prevailed where governance was weak. Our results also indicate that only the Nazi Party
benefitted from social capital in Weimar Germany, and it did so to a greater extent during
early stages of its development – local contact through social networks counted the most
when the Nazi Party itself still had few members.
Our findings complement and extend the results by Acemoglu, Reed, and Robinson
(2014), who conclude that powerful chiefs in Sierra Leone “build social capital as a way
to control and monitor society” [p.363]. In addition to entrenching autocratic rulers, social
capital may also contribute to the rise of autocratic regimes in the first place, by providing

4
a pathway for radical parties to spread and garner support. 5 These findings modify our
understanding of the relationship between the rise of dictatorships and social capital.
Theories of “mass society” and the origins of totalitarianism in the spirit of Ortega y Gasset
(1993), Arendt (1973), and Bendix (1952) argued that economic modernization uprooted
individuals and dissolved traditional social ties. Confronted with a major economic crisis,
the faceless masses could then be easily swayed by demagogic agitators like Hitler, or by
dreams of a Communist utopia. In line with the predictions of mass society theory, Shirer
(1960) saw marginal loners as the core group of party supporters; Stern (1972) claimed that
interwar German civic society was weaker than in other European countries, and that the
country lacked “the kind of voluntary, civic activity that attracted their English and
American counterparts” [p.xxix]. In other words, an important strand of the literature on
the rise of totalitarianism has argued that the weakness of German civic society facilitated
the rise of the Nazis. Our results demonstrate that the opposite is closer to the truth. In this
way, we reinforce evidence by Riley (2005) for Italy (discussed in more detail in Section
2.2). 6 We also corroborate the conjecture by Berman (1997), who had argued that Weimar
Germany as a whole actually had comparatively dense networks of clubs and associations,
and that the NSDAP successfully exploited these structures. In contrast to our study, neither
Riley nor Berman used detailed quantitative data to test for a systematic link between
association density and the rise of fascism. 7
We connect with work on social dynamics and network effects in politics.
Zuckerman (2005) highlights the “social logic of politics” – how group interactions among
citizens spread new political ideas. Acemoglu and Jackson (2015) show theoretically how
influential individuals can shape beliefs in networks. Lohmann (1993) emphasizes
information revelation through political activism, which provides insight into the
advantages and disadvantages of participation in a new movement. Madestam et al. (2013)
examine these competing theories empirically, analyzing the rise of the Tea Party in the
US. They find evidence for a “social multiplier,” with many more people favoring a radical

5

In this sense, adverse political consequences need to be added to the list of negative aspects of high social
capital in social settings, such as social exclusion and its enabling role for organized crime (Durlauf and
Fafchamps 2005; Portes and Landolt 1996; Field 2003).
6
Note that there is also an ongoing re-evaluation of the Italian evidence in Putnam’s work (Tarrow 1996,
Goldberg 1996).
7
Since she did not collect cross-sectional data, Berman could not exclude the opposite: that without
associations, Weimar might have collapsed even earlier. Our empirical investigation of patterns in a crosssection of German cities allows us to make progress.

5
movement if they see support in large numbers.
Relative to the existing literature, we make the following contributions: Our paper is
the first to show – on the basis of detailed cross-sectional data – that social capital can
undermine and help to destroy a democratic system. This adds a new dimension to the
“dark side” of social capital. Second, we demonstrate that the positive relationship between
social capital and the rate of joining an extreme party is not simply a reflection of preexisting differences in ideological outlook. Our results are equally strong for bowling,
singing, and animal breeding clubs, etc. This implies that even civic associations without
a militaristic agenda can have negative effects. Third, we find that association density did
not only boost Nazi Party membership, but also helped the party win more votes. Finally,
we find an important interaction with political stability – the Nazi Party was particularly
successful at exploiting social capital in federal states with weak governance.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the historical context. Section 3
presents our data and shows that overall, cities with high and low association density are
balanced with respect to other socio-economic characteristics. Section 4 presents our main
empirical results. Section 5 asks under what conditions social capital was more beneficial
for the Nazi Party’s rise, and Section 6 offers robustness checks and demonstrates the
plausibility of our findings. Section 7 concludes.

2 Historical Context and Data
In this section, we first argue why, for historical reasons, variation in association density is
arguably exogenous to the rise of the Nazi Party. We then describe our key dependent
variable – Nazi Party entry – and discuss the party’s social origins. We also summarize
related research on the link between association membership and Nazi Party entry.

2.1 Associations in Germany after 1815 and the Source of Identifying Variation
What are the origins of associations in Weimar Germany – and thus of the spatial
differences that we exploit in our empirical analysis? A close reading of the historical
literature suggests that political and social conditions at a “critical juncture” played a key
role in determining the strength of associational life in any one location – and once clubs
and associations were established, they tended to last a long time. A confluence of largely
accidental factors allowed clubs and associations to form after the restoration of 1815 until
the early 1850s, with the 1848 revolution as a particular turning point.
After the end of the Napoleonic Wars, associations grew in number and scope all

6
over Germany, but were often repressed by the authorities; political associations were
banned altogether. Both associations and larger gatherings needed government approval,
which was routinely denied. For example, gymnast associations – inspired by Friedrich
Ludwig Jahn, and often a focal point for liberal nationalists – were outlawed from 1820
until 1848. Singers’ associations never suffered a blanket ban, but were closely watched
by the police. Student fraternities (Burschenschaften) also grew after 1815. They agitated
in favor of German unification. Following a political murder, most of the student
fraternities were suppressed. 8
As the revolution spread, restrictions on the formation of associations were repealed
or ignored in most German states, and many clubs and associations played a role in 1848
(Botzenhart 1977). The way restrictions were abolished varied by location, and partly
reflects differences in attitudes of local and state officials. We argue that the state- and citylevel factors driving variation in the repeal of restrictions are plausibly exogenous to
NSDAP entry in the 1920s and early 1930s. Germany’s early associations were often both
liberal and nationalist in character. They mostly favored the formation of a unified
fatherland and an end to the rule by princes over often tiny territories, as well as
parliamentary representation, a bill of rights, and freedom of assembly, speech, and
religion. Importantly, the liberal nationalist part of this agenda was neither militaristic nor
xenophobic; it differed substantially from the later nationalism under Bismarck in 1871,
and especially from the ideology of the Nazi Party (Eley 1980). Instead,
Vereinsnationalismus (nationalism of the associations) mainly emphasized the need to
unify all Germans in a nation state similar to France and England, where all could interact
as equals (Dunn 1979). 9
Despite the revolution’s ultimate failure, earlier prohibitions never returned with full
force. Once formed, clubs and associations were sticky – as reflected in the fact that many
integrated their date of founding into their name. A local culture of associational life
persisted, and it influenced the extent to which people continued to gather and pursue likeminded activities into the interwar period (Bösch 1984, Hardtwig 1984). One way to

8

The movement split into a political and a non-political branch, and never recovered its wider political
significance (Wentzcke 1965).
9
After the failure of the 1848 revolution, many associations became increasingly apolitical, focusing on
folklore and local traditions (Düding 1984). In addition to the original associations, new ones brought
together pigeon breeders, rabbit owners, stamp collectors, and supporters of a plethora of other causes.
Student associations, on the other hand, became increasingly nationalistic and militarist, and several of them
adopted xenophobic and anti-Semitic ideas in the late 19th century (Haupt 1925).

7
illustrate this argument is to show that involvement of democratic associations in the 1848
revolution is a strong predictor of association density in the 1920s. In 1848, associations in
part acted as precursors of modern parties in many German states, organizing the collective
expression of political beliefs for the first time (Langewiesche 1978). Good examples are
the Democratic Congresses in 1848, representing the left-wing of the revolution. Where
local associations had formed, their delegates participated in these gatherings, which
included the first promulgations of universal human rights in Germany. Sending local
delegates to the Congresses required three things – a sufficient number of people interested
in a distinctly left-wing agenda, the ability to organize locally, and the ability and right to
do so. We find that – for the limited subset of towns and cities with available data on
delegates – involvement with Democratic Congresses is strongly positively correlated with
both the vigor of associational life in 1860s Germany and in the 1920s (see Appendix F.1).
In other words, our main explanatory variable – association density in the 1920s – is
strongly predicted by clubs that represented the political left during the 1848 revolution.
This makes it unlikely that the historical origins of associational life in Germany reflect
local, unobserved Nazi-compatible ideology – few supporters of universal human rights
admired Adolf Hitler.
During the interwar period, membership in associations soared. The main singers’
association’s membership tripled, to 1.2 million; the German gymnasts’ association
registered a 50% rise in membership. Most associations saw themselves as apolitical, and
did not support particular parties. In the Catholic Rhineland, all ranks of societies often
joined Carnival associations, organizing revelry during the annual “silly season.” While
some organizations were explicitly Catholic or Protestant, almost every town and city also
had a large number of non-denominational associations (Reichardt 2004). Associations
reflected the views and biases of German civic society in general; where politics were not
deliberately kept out of the club, there was a society for every political grouping. Workers
gathered in workmen’s singing associations; Communists reminisced about their frontline
experiences together; and members of the nobility and rich industrialists conferred in
gentlemen’s and equestrian clubs (Zeiss-Horbach 2008; Koshar 1986). While many clubs
and societies catered to a particular social group, others transcended divisions of class and
education – such as the many sports and hiking clubs, chess clubs, and associations for the
preservation of local customs and culture. In our later analysis, we will explicitly
distinguish between “bonding” and “bridging” social capital (Putnam 2000).

8

2.2 The Rise of the Nazi Party and Fascism in Europe
There is a large literature analyzing the Nazi Party’s success at the polls and as a mass
movement. Initial theorizing focused on isolated members of the masses – marginal loners
for whom the party represented a group where they finally belonged (Shirer 1960). An
alternative literature interpreted the rise of the Nazi Party as a form of class conflict
(Winkler 1987). Recent research on voting behavior emphasizes “ordinary economic
voting” – with the working poor particularly susceptible to the NS message (King et al.
2008).
Our paper is closely related to research emphasizing group membership as a pathway
to NS involvement, which gained wider currency from the 1970s onwards (Linz 1976).
This strand of the literature assigns crucial importance to the “conquest of the bourgeois
infrastructure” (Mommsen 1978, p. 186), i.e., the infiltration of existing high-level national
and regional lobbying groups (Verbände) representing farmers and other special interests.
Berman (1997) points out that Weimar Germany as a whole had many civic associations.
She argues that “… had German civil society been weaker, the Nazis would never have
been able to capture so many citizens for their cause ...” (Berman 1997, p. 402), but she
offers no systematic evidence that the NSDAP spread faster where there were more
associations. Koshar (1987), in a detailed study of Marburg, demonstrates that NS members
were active in many local groups. Anheier (2003) shows how well-connected individuals
acted as political entrepreneurs. Using their social connections and professional standing,
they attracted new members for the party, leading to the founding of new local chapters. 10
Our work also follows earlier historical research on interwar politics in Europe. Riley
(2010; 2005) analyzes the role of civic associations and the rise of fascism in Italy and
Spain. Based on evidence from 20 Italian regions, he argues that associations fostered the
rise of fascism. In Spain, there is no clear-cut relationship with support for the Franco
regime. Riley contends that in countries without strong hegemonic organizations – i.e.,
well-established parties – social capital can undermine the development of democracy. In
a similar spirit, Wellhofer (2003) examines the rise of fascism in Italy, focusing on election

10

The vast literature on voting results for the Nazi Party cannot be surveyed here. Important contributions
include Childers (1983); Hamilton (1982); Falter (1991); and King et al. (2008).

9
results. In contrast to Riley, he finds that civic society blunted the rise of fascism, but only
in certain elections.

2.3 Nazi Party Membership
The Nazi Party deliberately competed with leftwing parties for mass support, replacing
their class-based ideology with nationalist and racist ideals (Shirer 1960). From the party’s
early days, Hitler and his associates viewed organization-building as crucial for the rise to
power. The party’s initial growth was slow. Eventually, membership grew to 850,000
members in January 1933 – on par with the Social Democratic Party (SPD), and nearly
three times higher than Communist membership (Childers 1983).
Local chapters (Ortsgruppen) served as the Nazi Party’s organizational foundation
in more than one thousand locations all over Germany. Local leaders were in charge of
coordinating member activities, recruiting new members, collecting dues, and organizing
social, cultural, and political activities. In towns without a local NS chapter, individual
members could also join. These “single members” often formed the nucleus of newly
founded local chapters.
Who joined the Nazi Party and for what reasons has been the subject of a major
research effort. Initial theories emphasized the party’s appeal for marginalized groups such
as unemployed workers; Marxists argued that the petty bourgeoisie – threatened by a
possible slide into the proletariat – gave overwhelming support to the Nazis (Heiden 1935;
Stephan 1931). From the 1970s onwards, when the NS membership files were partly
computerized, these predictions were tested with detailed micro-data (Falter 1991; Brustein
1998): in the early years, the party drew a disproportionate share of its members from the
upper ranks of the Mittelstand. 11 Blue-collar workers were substantially underrepresented
relative to the population (in 1919-23, for example, only 22.8% were laborers). This
compares with a proportion of 42% in the Reich as a whole (Madden and Mühlberger
2007). As the depression wore on, the share of workers among Nazi Party members
increased, reaching 31.5% in January 1933 (Mühlberger 2003). The over-representation of
white-collar workers was common to most parties; even in the Social Democratic Party
(SPD) and the Communists (KPD), the educated middle classes constituted a much higher
proportion than in the population at large. In terms of the class composition of its members,

11

University students were amongst the first groups to sign up. This contradicts the hypothesis of the petty
bourgeoisie being the first to be drawn to the party. Lower-middle class Germans did however join in
increasing numbers in later years (Kater 1983).

10
the Nazi Party was therefore similar to other large parties (Volksparteien - people’s parties)
such as the SPD.

2.4 Associations and Party Entry
Several regionally-based case studies have analyzed the relationship between the Nazi
Party and local clubs and associations. One thesis holds that Nazi activists deliberately
targeted clubs and associations to hollow them out (“Unterwanderung”). 12 A second,
related view is that local chairmen and other opinion leaders increasingly converted to the
Nazi creed, and induced other members to follow (Zofka 1979). Finally, some scholars
have argued that it was not the strength of Weimar’s civic society, but its increasing
weakness after 1930 that provided an opening for the Nazi Party’s message (Heilbronner
and Schmidt 1993). We examine empirically whether the Nazi Party had higher entry rates
in towns and cities with denser social networks. We expect this relationship partly because
the Nazi Party targeted its recruitment efforts at associations deliberately, and partly
because its folkloristic rituals and nationalist outlook was similar to everyday practice and
attitudes in many local clubs (Bösch 2005).
The historical record provides a plethora of cases illustrating a tight relationship
between associations and Nazi Party entry. For example, Koshar (1986) describes the case
of Emil Wissner, a salesman in Marburg. He was a member of a white-collar employee
association (from 1921), and active in two gymnastics clubs (from 1904). He joined the
Nazi Party in 1929, and actively used his position to proselytize for the party, winning
many new members. Koshar’s work shows that new Nazi Party members in Marburg had
on average more association and club memberships than non-joiners. Similarly, Anheier
(2003) analyzes single members – entrepreneurial NS Party members who did not join
through a local chapter, and often established a bridgehead for the movement. They
succeeded on a vastly greater scale in founding new party chapters where they had
numerous pre-existing affiliations. 13
Abel's (1938) classic analysis of NS member autobiographies underlines that
recruitment often succeeded in a context of pre-existing affiliations. A bank clerk was a
member of the youth movement that emphasized outdoor activities, music, and hiking
12
Noakes (1971). It is interesting that the NSDAP, once in power, used similar tactics when trying to garner
support amongst German immigrants to the US (Wilhelm 1998).
13
Single members with four or more civic society connections were 18 times more likely to successfully
establish a local branch of the Nazi Party than those with no connections at all – and still three times more
likely than party members with only one association membership (Anheier 2003b).

11
(Wandervogel); 14 he called it his “personal preparatory school for National Socialism”
(Abel 1938, p. 278). After drifting into an anti-Semitic association, he eventually joined
the NSDAP. A soldier recounts how after WWI, he joined a variety of associations,
including the Jungdo 15, an “Association of Nationally Minded Soldiers,” and the Stahlhelm
(Abel 1938, p. 256). 16 Eventually, he joined the Nazi Party. Personal interaction with Party
members often worked wonders in convincing skeptics. One member recounts how he
“…became acquainted with a colleague of my own age with whom I had frequent
conversations. He was a calm, quiet person whom I esteemed very highly. When I found
that he was one of the local leaders of the National Socialist party, my opinion of it as a
group of criminals changed completely…” (Abel 1938, p. 116)

Zofka (1979) describes how in small-town Bavaria, the NSDAP succeeded in recruiting
two local “opinion leaders” from the BVP (Bavarian People's Party) in 1931/32. They were
active in the local firefighting brigade, the gymnast association, and the theatre club – and
the local NSDAP received a major boost. Social interactions not only helped to spread the
party message; they also allowed the Nazis to get feedback on policy ideas in something
akin to a focus group setting (Berman 1997). As Koshar (1986, p. 202) argued, the “party
was attractive in part because of its positive image in conversations in the marketplace,
local stores, university classrooms, fraternity houses, meeting halls, soccer fields, and
homes.” Reflecting the importance of membership contacts and personal connections, the
NS Gauleiter (regional leader) for Hannover, Bernhard Rust, thought that
“personal canvassing is the movement's most effective weapon. Branch leaders must ...
examine the relationship of individual members to relations and colleagues ... and set
them suitable canvassing tasks.” (Noakes 1971, p. 206).

While not every party member was recruited via clubs, the Nazi Party successfully targeted
pre-existing social networks to spread its message. Where the strategy succeeded, the
importance of personal connections and trust is readily apparent.

The Wandervogel (German for migratory bird) had a strong romanticist and anti-authoritarian bend. While
nationalistic in some aspects, it is seen by some as a precursor of the hippie movement. It was outlawed after
1933 (Stachura 1981).
15
A national-liberal youth group, it was anti-monarchist and favored reconciliation with France. The
association was also anti-Semitic and elitist (Wolf 1972).
16
Literally, “steel helmet” – a veterans’ association with mostly nationalist aims (but not affiliated or allied
with the Nazi Party until the very end of the Weimar Republic).
14

12

3 Data
In this section, we describe our newly collected data on association density in Weimar
Germany as well as our main outcome variable, NSDAP membership, and various control
variables.

3.1 Associations
We hand-collected data on association density for 229 German towns and cities located on
the territory of modern-day Germany. 17 As our source, we use city directories – lists of
“useful contacts” from bank branches and doctors to local clubs and associations. Printed
and distributed in a small area, city directories often only survived in the local city library
or archive. We contacted all 547 towns and cities that had more than 10,000 inhabitants in
1925, as well as some smaller towns whose local archives were listed in central
directories. 18 We use any surviving directory from the 1920s; where several are available,
we take the directory nearest in time to 1925. In total, we collected data on 22,127
associations. Of these, more than 45 percent were sports clubs, choirs, animal breeding
associations, or gymnastics clubs. Military associations accounted for another 13.5 percent
of the total. We do not include political or religious associations in our dataset. All
associations and their frequencies are listed in Appendix B.2.
Measuring civic capital as association density is not perfect, and its use is driven by
data availability. Our measure is, however, common in the literature on social capital.
Where we happen to have detailed data on membership – such as in the case of sports clubs
for a subset of towns during the 1920s – we find a high correlation between the number
and members of clubs per capita (0.47, with a p-value of 0.002). Second, Putnam’s (2000)
data also show a tight relationship between association density in US states and individual
membership rates (correlation coefficient 0.66, p-value<0.001; see Appendix B.3 for detail
and scatterplots).
17

Towns and cities in the formerly German areas of Eastern Europe rarely preserved marginal library
holdings such as city directories. We therefore focus on the territory of modern-day Germany.
18
In order to contact local archives, we followed two steps. First, we contacted all archives from central
directories of city and county archives (see Appendix B.1 for further detail and the main sources). From these
archives, city directories listing associations in the 1920s were available for 110 towns and cities. Second,
we contacted local archives that were not listed in central directories: we called the local administration of
all remaining towns and cities within modern-day German borders that had more than 10,000 inhabitants in
1925 and inquired about the existence of city directories from the 1920s. This led to an additional 119 towns
and cities with available directories listing associations. For towns and cities without coverage, this
information was lost, destroyed during the war, or it did not exist in the first place. Appendix B.1 discusses
our data collection in more detail and lists all towns and cities in our sample.

13

3.2 Representativeness of the sample
Next, we examine the spatial distribution of cities and associations in our sample. The left
panel of Figure 2 shows that the sample covers all of modern-day Germany – cities as far
north as Kiel and as far south as Konstanz are included; the figure also shows that towns
and cities with high vs. low association density are relatively evenly distributed. The same
is true for Nazi Party entry rates – there are no regional clusters of high vs. low Nazi Party
entry rates (right panel of Figure 2).
To examine the representativeness of our sample, we use socio-economic controls
from the 1925 and 1933 censuses. These provide data on occupational composition,
religious affiliation, and (for 1933) unemployment rates. In addition, we draw on voting
results from King et al. (2008), and we control for a host of socio-economic data including
the number of welfare recipients, war veterans, average tax payments, and the number of
Hitler speeches in the early 1930s. 19 Table 1 compares our sample to the national averages
of all towns and cities with more than 5,000 inhabitants, and to Weimar Germany overall.
Since archives and directories are more likely to exist in larger cities, our sample is more
urban than the national average. Average population size in our sample is 72,356, as
compared to 32,063 in the country as a whole. The employment structure is broadly in line
with the aggregate: both the percentage of employees in blue-collar jobs and
unemployment (measured in 1933) in our sample are similar to the numbers for the Reich
overall. The same is true for religious composition: the proportion of Catholics and Jews
are about 33% and 0.8%, respectively, in both our sample and the Reich as a whole. Our
city sample is also broadly representative in terms of political preferences. NSDAP votes
in March ‘33 were 40% of the total in our sample; in the Reich as a whole, the number is
43.8%, and 41.6% in urban areas. The vote shares for social democrats (SPD),
conservatives (Zentrum), and communists (KPD) are very similar in our sample and the
Reich – especially when compared to the urban averages.

3.3 Nazi Party entry
To calculate rates of entry per location, we use the Falter-Brustein sample of Nazi Party
members (Falter and Brustein 2015). The universe of membership cards is 11.6 million

19

The extended socio-economic data are from Adena et al. (2013). We thank Maja Adena, Ruben
Enikolopov, Maria Petrova, Veronica Santarosa, and Katia Zhuravskaya for kindly sharing their digitization
of socioeconomic variables from the 1933 Statistik des Deutschen Reichs.

14
strong. 20 The Falter-Brustein sample contains information on 38,752 membership cards
drawn randomly in 1989. We matched our city-level association data to the city of
residence and administrative region (Gau) of each NS member, as recorded in the FalterBrustein sample. This identifies 9,169 Nazi Party members who joined between 1925 and
January 1933, or 23% of all digitized cards – a proportion that is similar to the population
share of cities in our sample, 25%. 21
Rates of Nazi Party entry varied over time. They were stable or declining between
1925 and 1927, before rebounding sharply and rising after 1928. After January 1933 –
when the Nazi Party entered into government – entry rates jumped. As the party feared it
would be overwhelmed by an influx of opportunistic members, it banned new entry from
April 1933. To avoid that unrepresentative entries confound our results, we only count new
members until January 1933. In the Falter-Brustein dataset, the sampling method changes
for entrants in 1930 (earlier entries were oversampled deliberately to raise the sample size
when the party was still small). We correct for this by first standardizing entry rates in each
year (with mean zero and unit standard deviation). 22 Then, we compute the average of these
standardized entry rates for each location over the period 1925-33. 23 The standardization
ensures that i) the change in sampling method in the Falter-Brustein- data does not affect
our results and ii) later (more frequent) entries do not dominate the average. In our
robustness checks, we also examine results for using the unadjusted Falter-Brustein data,
as well as adjusted entry rates that match membership growth in our sample to that in the
Nazi membership overall (see Appendix C. for a detailed description).

3.4 Balancedness of the sample
One important concern is balancedness: did association density vary systematically with
other city characteristics? In Table 2, we examine the correlation between a list of control
variables with association density (cols 1 and 2), and with NSDAP entry rates (cols 3 and

20

This includes party entries after 1933. The party kept two cards for every member – one for the central
register originally ordered by name, the other initially ordered by geographical area (but later organized
alphabetically, too, by the US authorities).
21
The 229 towns in our sample had about 16 million inhabitants in 1925, compared with a total population
in Weimar Germany of 62.4 million.
22
The change in sampling affects each location in the same way, and hence does not affect cross-sectional
differences within any given year.
23
Throughout, the cross-sectional dispersion is high, with many towns and cities showing almost no entry
into the Nazi Party, and others recording fairly high rates of entry. In addition, early and late party entry are
strongly correlated (see Figure A.2 in the appendix). Descriptive statistics for our explanatory variables and
outcomes are reported in Table A.1 in the appendix.

15
4). We begin with our three baseline controls: city population as well as the shares of
Catholics and of blue-collar workers. The latter two are included as baseline controls
because both groups were less inclined to support the Nazi Party (Childers 1983). Our
sample confirms this finding – the shares of blue-collar workers and Catholics are strongly
negatively correlated with Nazi Party entry. Both variables are also negatively correlated
with association density, so that not controlling for them may stack the odds in favor of
finding a link between social capital and NS entry. In the remainder of Table 2, we examine
the partial correlation coefficients for socio-economic and political controls with club
density and NS entry, conditional on our set of baseline controls. This allows us to identify
other potentially confounding variables that are associated with both our main explanatory
variable and our main outcome variable.
The share of Jews is negatively correlated with association density, and it is also
(insignificantly) correlated with Nazi entry. The share of unemployed exhibits a similar
pattern – unemployment was lower in places with higher association density – but there is
a mild positive correlation with membership entry. While the share of welfare recipients –
a measure of economic distress – is not correlated with associations, it exhibits a positive
and significant (but small) correlation with Nazi membership. Other socio-economic
controls show few clear-cut patterns. Neither the representation of war veterans nor of
social insurance recipients is strongly correlated with either association density or Nazi
Party entry. However, measures of income and wealth (based on tax assessments) show
positive correlations with Nazi Party entry. Turning to political controls, we find few
reasons for concern. Hitler speeches were actually less frequent in places with plentiful
associations, and not significantly associated with Nazi Party entry. Among the political
parties (from the DNVP at the right end of the political spectrum to the KPD at the left),
there are no significant correlations with association density, and Nazi entry shows the
expected pattern – areas with many DNVP voters saw higher party entry, while those with
DVP (German People’s Party) and KPD voters saw lower rates.
Overall, our sample is reasonably balanced but not perfectly so. To assess if this
might potentially skew our results in our favor, we perform an omnibus test. 24 We first use
the full set of controls from Table 2 to predict Nazi Party entry. Then, we regress this
variable, predicted Nazi Party entry, on actual association density. In this manner, we

24

We are grateful to the editor, Jesse Shapiro, for suggesting this exercise.

16
check if the variation in party entry that reflects differences in all controls jointly is
associated with club density. In other words, we check whether the pool of observables is
systematically related to both our main outcome variable and our explanatory variable.
This is not the case – predicted party entry based on the whole set of controls is not
significantly correlated with association density. This is true without controls (standardized
beta coefficient 0.088, p-value 0.20) and especially after including our set of baseline
controls (beta coefficient 0.011, p-value 0.80). We therefore conclude that – based on
observables, and conditional on our set of baseline controls – lack of balancedness is
unlikely to be a major concern. This confirms our discussion in Section 2.1, showing that
historical drivers of association formation are unlikely to be related to factors that favored
the rise of the Nazi Party.

4 Main Results
In this section, we present our main results. We show that higher association density spelled
more NSDAP entry. This result holds after controlling for a host of socio-economic
variables. Both military associations and civic clubs have high predictive power. In
addition, we show that association density predicts not only party entry, but also electoral
success. We argue that party entry was an important mediating variable, helping to translate
the effects of high association density into votes. Overall, there is powerful evidence that
associations played an important role in the rise of the Nazi Party.

4.1 Baseline Results
Table 3 presents our baseline results, examining the link between association density
(ASSOC) and Nazi Party entry. We begin with the simplest specification in column 1, using
the log of total NSDAP member entries from the Falter-Brustein sample for the period
1925-January 1933 as the dependent variable, and the log of total associations as the main
explanatory variable. We control for population size, the share of blue-collar workers, and
the share of Catholics. This yields a sizeable effect – a one-standard deviation (sd) increase
in the number of clubs is associated with a 15% increase in party entry. 25 Put differently,
lowering club density by one sd would have moved a city from the position of Guben (the

25

The average city in our sample saw 40 entries in 1925-33. Since the Falter-Brustein sample captured about
2% of overall entries, the total effect of a one-standard deviation increase in association density is
0.15×50×40=300 additional entries, relative to total entry of 2,000 in an average city with 70,000 inhabitants.

17
city with median Nazi entry in our sample, ranked 114th out of 229) down by 65 ranks to
the position of Göppingen (ranked 179th).
Next, we correct for changes in the Falter-Brustein sampling procedure after 1930
(see Section 3.3 and Appendix C.), ensuring that total annual membership growth in the
adjusted sample mirrors the trend in national Nazi membership. Again, we find strong and
significant results (col 2). In the remainder of Table 3, we use per-capita measures of both
club density and party entry. Here, and in the rest of our analysis, we use the average of
standardized NS entry rates as described in Section 3.3. To compare magnitude across
different specifications and definitions of club density, we also report standard beta
coefficients in square brackets. Column 3 shows the coefficient on association density
without controls; a one sd increase in club density is associated with 0.32 sd higher NSDAP
entry. Adding our baseline controls reduces this effect only slightly (col 4). In the
following, we use the specification from column 4 as our baseline. The corresponding
partial scatterplot in Figure 3 demonstrates that the strong positive link between association
density and Nazi Party entry is not driven by outliers.
To examine if this strong positive relationship merely reflects underlying affinities
with Nazi ideology, we define the subcategory of “civic clubs,” including only associations
with a clearly non-militaristic/nationalist outlook (see Appendix B.2). These include chess,
hiking, music, women’s, citizens’ and homeland clubs, as well as animal breeders and other
clubs (which largely comprise civic activities such as gardening, theater, or photography).
We find strong positive coefficients for civic clubs (col 5); these are of the same order of
magnitude as for our baseline measure that counts all clubs. 26 Finally, in column 6, we use
only military clubs and again find similar effects.
So far, we have only used our baseline controls – the share of population that is
Catholic, the proportion of blue-collar workers, and population size. In Panel B of Table 3
we add the further socio-economic and political controls discussed in Table 2. In addition,
we cluster standard errors at the Weimar state level to allow for potential spatial patterns
in Nazi Party entry. 27 These specifications (cols 1-3 in Panel B) confirm both magnitude

26

In terms of number of observations, among the 229 towns and cities in our sample, all baseline controls
are available for 227 cities (col 4). The number of observations falls to 226 in cols 5 and 6 because for one
city, Passau, only the total count of associations is available. The reason is that for Passau, the counting of
associations was performed by archival staff in-situ. Since we could not guarantee a consistent counting of
association types, we requested the total count only. None of our results depend on including Passau.
27
Comparing our baseline specification from column 4 in Panel A (with robust standard errors) to column 1
in Panel B (with clustered standard errors) shows that clustering only makes a very minor difference. In the

18
and significance of our main results. Socio-economic indicators are generally poor
predictors of party entry (see full results in Table A.9 in the appendix). 28 When including
state fixed effects (col 4), the coefficient on club density drops by about one-half but
remains statistically significant. While this specification captures regional unobservables,
it also absorbs important regional variation in club density. 29 Finally, results for civic and
military associations (cols 5 and 6) also remain highly significant, but somewhat smaller
in magnitude, when we include state fixed effects.

4.2 Election Results
So far, we have focused on Nazi Party membership. We now examine election results.
Thousands of membership cells aided the Nazi Party’s electoral success in the late Weimar
Republic (Anheier 2002). Overall, Nazi Party membership was strongly associated with
success at the polls: In the 1928, 1930, and 1933 parliamentary elections, the NSDAP won
more votes where association density was higher (cols 1-3 in Panel A, Table 4; see also the
scatterplots in Figure 4). 30 The coefficients on association density are all significant and
positive, and suggest an effect of 0.15-0.19 sd of voting results for every sd increase in
association density. For the 1928 election, for example, this means 0.88 percentage points
extra relative to a sample mean of 3.4%. 31 Columns 4-6 present a modified version of our
earlier analysis, regressing average (standardized) party entry rates up to each election year
(1928, 1930, and January 1933) on association density. We find a strong relationship
throughout.
In panel B of Table 4, we examine the extent to which association density affected
votes for the NSDAP via party entry. If an intervening variable (party entry) is an important
pathway for an explanatory variable’s (club density’s) influence, the former has to be both

following, we cluster standard errors at the Weimar state level as a part of robustness checks in specifications
that include the extended set of controls.
28
The individual coefficients on unemployment (reported in Table A.9) show that the depth of the economic
downturn in 1933 – which may reflect underlying economic vulnerabilities in the 1920s already – is not
significantly associated with party entry. The same is true for most of the other socioeconomic variables, for
the share of Jews, and for the political controls listed in Table 2.
29
As our historical discussion in Section 2.1 emphasized, there is important regional variation in association
density, driven by policy changes during and after the 1848 revolution. As such, we think of the results with
state fixed effects as a lower bound of the true effect.
30
We focus on the elections in 1928, 1930, and 1933 because these are the years for which NSDAP election
results are available at the city level.
31
For 1930, the gain is 1.4% relative to a mean of 18.4%; and for 1933, 1.4% relative to 40%. While the
relative contribution of associations to the party’s overall success declines over time, it made a sizeable
difference during the 1928 and 1930 elections. Note also that there may have been indirect consequences of
earlier voting through social multiplier effects (Zuckerman 2005).

19
strongly predicted by the latter, and including party entry should reduce the coefficient on
club density. This is the idea behind the Sobel-Goodman mediation test. 32 As a first step,
we show that the estimated effect of club density on voting indeed becomes weaker once
we control for Nazi Party entry (cols 1-3 in Panel B). Second, in columns 4-6 in Panel B,
we compute what proportion of the total effect of club density on voting results was
transmitted by party entry. The Sobel-Goodman test implies a large share: for the period
up to the 1928 election, the mediated part is 86%; it declines thereafter, but even by 1933,
the test still suggests a share of 46%.

5 When did social capital matter most?
When did social networks matter the most for the growth of the Nazi movement? In this
section, we first distinguish between early and late party entry, and show that associations
mattered more for the party’s early rise. Next, we exploit the time-series of entry in detail,
showing how entry in a location at one point in time triggered later entry. Our results
suggest that associations acted as a multiplier in the spirit of Madestam et al. (2013),
helping to expand membership by strengthening the word-of-mouth propaganda of early
members. Finally, we examine interactions with the political context. In politically unstable
federal states, the relationship between club density and Nazi Party entry is particularly
strong. In contrast, in more stable political environments, the effect of club density is
muted. This implies an important, novel interaction between political stability and social
capital.

5.1 Early vs. Late NSDAP Entry
We now examine the timing of party entry. Associations matter because they increase
interactions with the local population; this should have a greater effect during the early
phases of the party’s rise, when the membership itself was small and the chances of meeting
Nazi members was limited.
After the party’s ban was lifted in 1925, entry rates were initially high, but then
drifted downward. During the Great Depression, however, the trickle of entry became a
veritable torrent. In Table 5, we first use early entry rates (1/1925-12/1928) as the
dependent variable (cols 1 and 2). Results are large and highly significant, with beta
coefficients of 0.26-0.28. In columns 3 and 4, we use late entry (1/1929-1/1933) as the

32

Cf. Baron-Kennan (1986) for details of the Sobel-Goodman test.

20
dependent variable. This also yields significant but quantitatively smaller results – the beta
coefficient declines by more than one third. 33 In columns 5 and 6, we control for early entry
rates, which further reduces the coefficient on association density (the p-value for the
difference in the beta coefficients in cols 4 and 6 is 0.11). On the other hand, early party
entry is a strong predictor of later entry, with a beta coefficient of 0.25. According to the
Sobel-Goodman ratios reported in columns 5 and 6, about 40% of the relationship between
club density and late party entry is mediated by early entry. This suggests that in later
years, the existing (early) Nazi membership base played an important role in attracting new
members; dense local social capital affected late entry indirectly, having fostered early
party entry. These results suggest that association density mattered more in the early stages
of the party’s rise. Later, when the party became a mass movement, and many party
members were already in touch with friends and family who had joined, social networks
predict less of the variation in entry decisions.

5.2 Panel Estimation and Fixed Effects
Next, we analyze the evolution of party entry over time. Since we do not have annual data
on associations, we treat association density as a time-invariant feature of a location. 34 We
then examine how the growth of the party depends on the existing stock of members on the
one hand, and the density of clubs and associations on the other. One added benefit is that,
by using a panel structure, we can add city fixed effects. As a result, we can side-step
concerns about location-specific, unobserved variables driving both the rise of the Nazi
Party and association density. We estimate the following specification:
𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀ℎ𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 𝛽𝛽 ln�𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡−1 � × 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐶𝐶𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎,𝑖𝑖 + 𝛾𝛾 𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙�𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡−1 � + 𝜂𝜂𝑖𝑖 + 𝛿𝛿𝑡𝑡 + 𝜖𝜖𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡

where Mgrowthi,t is calculated as the (log) growth of NSDAP membership (𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖 ) between

year t and t-1 in city i; ASSOCall,i is association density; and 𝜂𝜂𝑖𝑖 and 𝛿𝛿𝑡𝑡 denote city and year

fixed effects, respectively. Our main interest is in the coefficient 𝛽𝛽, which reflects the
degree to which existing members and associations complement each other in fostering
subsequent party growth.

A test on whether the beta coefficients on ASSOCall in cols 2 and 4 are significantly different yields a pvalue of 0.18. Table A.11 in the appendix also shows that the results from Table 5 hold qualitatively in the
presence of state fixed effects.
34
The number of towns and cities with multiple directories is not high enough for a meaningful analysis.
33

21
The results in Table 6 show that as the membership stock grew, the rate of
membership growth typically declined (γ < 0), which suggests convergence of entry rates
across cities. Crucially, in all specifications there is a positive interaction between last
year’s stock of members and association density (β > 0). This suggests that existing
members were more successful at recruiting new members in locations with higher club
density. Results remain strong when we control for interactions of 𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙(𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖,𝑡𝑡−1 ) with the

extended set of control variables (col 2). 35 In the remaining columns, we examine early and
later party membership growth separately. The interaction effect between existing
members and association density is particularly strong during the early years 1925-28 (cols
3 and 4), where a one-sd increase in club density is associated with 18% faster membership
growth (relative to an average membership growth rate of 34.2%). During the later period

(cols 5 and 6), the interaction term is weaker, with a standardized effect of approximately
5.6% (relative to average entry growth of 63%). This is in line with our results above,
showing that associations played a particularly important role during the early rise of the
Nazi Party. In later years, with a broad membership base to build on in most locations, the
role of associations in promoting further entry became proportionately weaker. Note,
however, that this does not mean that associations were unimportant for the Nazi Party’s
eventual rise to power. To the contrary – promoting early entry laid the cornerstone for the
subsequent rise because early party entry is a strong predictor for later per-capita entry
levels (with a correlation coefficient of 0.51; see also Figure A.2 in the appendix).

5.3 Political Instability and Party Entry
Why was social capital a double-edged sword for Germany’s first democracy, when it is
mostly associated with positive outcomes elsewhere? In our view, the institutional context
is key. The Weimar Republic in general was highly unstable: governments changed with
alarming frequency; democracy was unable to defend itself against extremists because
democratic parties were often unwilling to shoulder responsibility (Bracher 1978).
At the level of individual states, however, the situation could be quite different. In
Prussia, for example, democratic institutions were more resilient. The so-called “Weimar
Coalition” – composed of the Social Democrat Party (SPD), the Center Party (Zentrum),
and the German Democratic Party (DDP) – ruled Prussia from 1919 to 1932. For almost

35

While the levels of these (time-invariant) control variables are captured by city fixed effects, including
interactions allows for potential complementarities with existing Nazi Party membership.

22
the entire time, Otto Braun served as Prime Minister. Prussia instituted several important
constitutional reforms, such as the need for a new government to be formed simultaneously
with the old one losing power. 36 This allowed the democratic coalition to rule despite losing
its parliamentary majority early on (in parallel with developments in the Reich). Also, the
Prussian Interior Ministry vigorously cracked down on paramilitary units of the right and
the left (the SA and the Red Front associations), regularly banned public demonstrations
and assemblies planned by both the Communists and the Nazis, forbid the use of uniforms
in public, and for extended periods stopped Hitler from speaking on Prussian territory. 37
For all these reasons – and despite Prussia’s traditional reputation for militarism – the
regional state was a stronghold of democracy (Orlow 1986). 38
Other federal states such as Hesse, Anhalt, and Lippe also had broadly stable
governments for extended periods. While upheaval at the federal level affected all citizens,
those living in more stable states had more reasons to trust the democratic process: strong
institutions ultimately require both pluralism and political centralization (Acemoglu 2013;
Acemoglu 2005), and effective leadership can help to align beliefs (Acemoglu and Jackson
2015). Weimar on the whole erred on the side of excessive pluralism, allowing the enemies
of an open society to abuse the rights of free assembly, free speech, and freedom of
association (Bracher 1978). A number of strong and stable federal states, however,
balanced the demands of pluralism and state capacity.
To examine if association density became corrosive under general conditions of
political chaos, we compile a proxy for government stability in Weimar Germany. We use
three indicators that capture political stability at the federal state level over the period 1918July 1932 (ending with the Prussian coup d’etat, which is often considered the beginning
of the end of the Weimar democracy – Bracher 1978): the percentage of time that i) the
longest-serving state government was in office, ii) the longest-serving party was in office
(possibly in different coalitions), and iii) a state was governed by at least one party from
the “Weimar coalition.” We then extract the first principal component of these measures.

36

Prussia pioneered this so-called “constructive vote of no confidence;” this feature was later adopted by the
Federal Republic of Germany (Skach 2005).
37
In one (in)famous episode, the SPD-appointed police chief of Berlin banned all assemblies for May Day
1929. When the Communist Party organized demonstrations regardless, violent clashes resulted in 19
workers being killed (Kurz 1988).
38
It is for the same reasons that the Prussian government under Prime Minister Otto Braun was eventually
removed in July 1932, when the increasingly right-wing national government under Chancellor von Papen
seized power in Prussia in a coup d’état (Preußenschlag).

23
As expected, Prussia scores highly on this indicator, in third position, with Anhalt and
Hesse leading the stability ranking. At the opposite end of the spectrum, Württemberg and
Mecklenburg-Schwerin showed low levels of stability (see Appendix D. for detail, sources,
and the full list of states). 39
Importantly, our stability measure does not simply reflect voter preferences – for
example, voting results for the Weimar coalition of middle-of-the-road democrats have no
predictive power for our stability measure (beta coefficient 0.026; p-value 0.86). The
reason is that features of state constitutions – such as Prussia’s rule on “constructive votes
of no confidence” – created stability in some states even where voter preferences were antidemocratic or unstable.
In Table 7, we investigate interactions between the effect of associations and state
stability systematically. Since Prussia accounts for roughly half of all observations in our
sample, it could easily dominate results. We therefore treat it separately. In column 1, we
show that within Prussia, there is only a small and insignificant link between association
density and Nazi Party entry; outside Prussia, the standardized coefficient is two times
larger, and significant. Next, we split the non-Prussian part of Weimar Germany into a
stable and an unstable half (with above- and below-median stability, respectively). Within
unstable states, we find a strong and highly significant relationship between club density
and Nazi Party entry (col 3); within stable states, there is a small, negative, and insignificant
effect (col 4). None of these findings in the subsamples are driven by outliers, as shown in
Figure 5. In columns 5 and 6 of Table 7, we investigate whether these differences are
statistically significant by pooling all observations and interacting association density with
a dummy for Prussia, as well as with a dummy for above-median stability for non-Prussian
states. Both interaction terms are negative and highly significant: in states with higher
political stability, denser networks of clubs and associations spelled markedly fewer Nazi
Party entrants than in the less stable Weimar states. This is true whether we control for
state fixed effects (col 6) or not (col 5). 40
39
Anhalt, which leads the ranking, was governed almost exclusively by the SPD (97% of the time between
Nov 1918 and June 1932), and almost continuously by Heinrich Deist as governor (92%). Since the SPD was
a member of the Weimar coalition, the third indicator for stability is also very high (97%). For Württemberg,
the state with lowest stability, the three indicators are 30%, 30%, and 39%, respectively.
40
In Figure A.7 in the appendix, we present an additional analysis to illustrate the magnitude of effects. We
pool all observations and estimate a version of the specification in Table 7, col 5, but using an interaction

24
Our findings suggest an important interaction effect between social capital and
political stability. In the presence of a functional, strong, and stable democratic regional
government, social capital’s “dark side” was much weaker – with functional institutions,
the potentially malign effects of a vibrant civic society can be kept in check. 41

6 Robustness and Plausibility
In this section, we examine the robustness of our findings, and we argue that they are
plausibly causal. We already showed that results are strong for both early and late entry,
and after controlling for a host of socio-economic and political characteristics as well. Here,
we present results for different types of associations, and we test the strength of the main
effect in different subsamples. Finally, we use an IV strategy that allows us to sidestep
potential concerns about omitted variable bias.

6.1 Subsamples
We begin by analyzing whether our results hold within a number of subsamples, defined
by our baseline controls – city population as well as the share of Catholics and blue-collar
workers, for which historical evidence has documented a lower inclination to support the
Nazi Party. Table 8 presents the results for these subsamples – in Panel A for association
density based on all clubs, and in Panel B, for civic clubs only. Columns 1 and 2 show that
the effect of associations on party entry is very similar in smaller and larger cities, and
highly significant. The same is true for predominantly Catholic or Protestant areas (cols 3
and 4). Finally, in columns 5 and 6, we find that localities with above-median blue-collar
shares saw a somewhat smaller effect of association density when we use all associations
(Panel A). However, when using only civic associations, the effect is again very similar for
both subsamples (Panel B).

between the continuous measure of state-level stability and association density (in this analysis, Prussia is
one of many Weimar states and is not controlled for with a separate dummy). Based on these estimates, we
can compute the net effect of association density on Nazi Party entry. We find a strong negative effect of
associations for low and medium levels of political stability, but for higher values, the effect becomes first
insignificant before becoming negative (in expectations).
41
Here, our conclusions are related to the findings by Acemoglu et al. (2014), who show that social capital
is associated with worse governance outcomes in Sierra Leone because it strengthens the position of local
chiefs who face fewer constraints on their power.

25

6.2 Different Association Types
Social capital comes in different types. Putnam distinguishes between “bonding” and
“bridging” social capital. The former cements pre-existing social cleavages; the latter
brings people from different backgrounds together. According to Putnam, bonding social
capital may have adverse effects; bridging social capital should always have benign
consequences. To analyze if this distinction can affect our results, we classify the
associations in our sample accordingly (see Appendix B.2). For example, a chess club is a
typical bridging club – only enthusiasm for chess is needed, and there were no monetary,
social, or gender barriers to entry. In contrast, Herrenclubs such as the Berlin Unionclub
were bonding associations – broadly similar to London gentlemen’s clubs, their principal
purpose was social exclusivity, serving the old land-owning elite and the new wealthy
upper class (c.f. Schoeps 1974).
Table 9 reports the results of regressing Nazi Party entry rates on the density of
bridging and bonding associations. Both are strongly associated with NS Party entry,
yielding positive, significant, and quantitatively meaningful coefficients that are similar in
magnitude (and somewhat larger for bonding clubs). These results hold when using our
baseline controls (cols 1-2) and extended controls (cols 3-4). This suggests that both types
of associations were important pathways for the spread of the Nazi Party. At the same time,
the standardized beta coefficients show a somewhat larger effect of bonding than of
bridging associations (the difference in standardized coefficients itself, however, is not
significant). When including both types simultaneously, none of them dominates but
bridging clubs are more robust (see Table A.19, which also shows that when including
civic and military associations simultaneously, the former dominate). 42 When including
state fixed effects (cols 5 and 6), the magnitude of both the bridging and bonding
coefficients decline, but both remain statistically significant.

6.3 Matching estimates
So far, we have estimated effects under OLS. Here, we use matching estimation instead,
forming comparison groups of towns and cities with above- or below-median association
density. In this way, we avoid many of the restrictive assumptions underlying OLS such as
the linearity of effects.

42

Appendix E.5 shows that different types of associations are highly correlated – this holds for civic and
military, bridging and bonding, as well as for worker associations and those not related to workers (see Figure
A.8).

26
Table 10 shows the results. We begin with the simplest specification, matching based
on city size alone and with only one nearest neighbor (col 1). The result is both statistically
and quantitatively significant, indicating that cities with above-median club density saw
entry rates that were about 0.45 standard deviations higher than in cities of similar size
with below-median club density. In columns 2-4 of the table, we use the three nearest
neighbors and gradually add additional controls (blue-collar, Catholic, and geographic
location). The effect of above-median club density falls somewhat in magnitude, but it
remains statistically significant throughout. Our most demanding specification in column
5 uses exact matching: it compares only cities within the same quintile of city size and
within the same federal state, using our baseline controls and each city’s geographic
location to find the three nearest neighbors under these constraints. This restrictive
approach yields very similar results. Finally, in column 6, we use entropy weighting instead
of propensity score matching to create a balanced sample, following Hainmueller (2012).
This method reweights the ‘control group’ data (cities with below-median club density) to
match the mean and variance of covariates in the ‘treatment group’ (above-median club
density). Again, we find a large and significant effect, suggesting an increase of the NS
entry rate by about 0.5 standard deviations when a city is above the median in terms of
association density.

6.4 Omitted Variable Bias – Altonji/Oster and IV
Could our regression results reflect omitted variable bias? It could be argued that Nazi
Party entry was frequent in locations where economic distress was high, and hence the
opportunity cost of time was low. This could also translate into more time spent in clubs
and associations and therefore result in a spurious correlation between association
membership and Nazi Party entry. To sidestep this issue, we do two things. First, we show
that our coefficient estimates are largely unaffected by the inclusion of existing explanatory
variables – and that adding other variables is not likely to change these results. Second, we
pursue an IV strategy, exploiting the history of association formation in Germany.
Altonji et al. (2005) – refined by Oster (2014) – suggest a method that examines how
much coefficient estimates change when observed controls are added. Under the
assumption that unobservables have similar characteristics, stable coefficients on the main
variable of interest suggest that unobservables are unlikely to confound results. The
refinement by Oster takes into account the explanatory power of the observable variables
used in the estimation. Appendix G (Table A.25) shows that under the Altonji approach,

27
we find mostly negative coefficients – adding controls increases the explanatory power of
association density, instead of reducing it. This is true of total associations, and of civic
ones; for military clubs, we find that the effect of selection on unobservables would have
to be between 9.8 and 23.6 times stronger than selection on observables for our main results
to be overturned – a ratio normally considered too high to be plausible. Similarly, using
the Oster approach, we obtain negative results for all specifications except for military
associations in one case – where the estimated coefficient of 1.3 suggests the possibility of
unobservables having an effect (for the specification that does not use baseline controls).
Once we include our baseline controls, this again flips to a negative value. These results
suggest that unobservables are unlikely to account for our main finding.
Next, we present our instrumental variable strategy. Association density reflects two
factors – incentives to join a club at any one point in time, and the cumulative history of
sociability, co-operation, and shared interests, which determines the set of available clubs
and associations in a given location. We exploit data on association membership and
activity level in the 1860s, combining the spatial variation from two types of clubs with
available information. First, detailed information on Turnverein (gymnast) members exists
for 1863, covering more than 150 cities in our sample. Second, we use participation of
town delegates in the 1861 Nuremberg Singers' Festival (Sängerfest). Some 283 singing
associations participated; the number of singers was between 6,000 and 20,000 (Klenke
1998). We normalize both variables by city population in 1863 and then extract their joint
variation by computing their first principal components. 43
The exclusion restriction is as follows: For 1860 association membership rates to be
valid instruments, we have to believe that towns with relatively higher values in the 1860s
only had higher entry rates to the Nazi Party because association density in the 1920s was
still higher there. In other words, there is no direct effect of gymnast membership and singer
festival participation on Nazi entry 60-70 years later, and both instruments must also be
uncorrelated with other factors that drove NSDAP membership.

43

Note that linear combinations of valid instruments remain valid instruments – c.f. Bai and Ng (2010);
Winkelried and Smith (2011). The correlation between the two variables is 0.59, and both have a strong
positive first component. We use the principal component to obtain the joint variation in the two variables
because a simple addition (like in the case of ASSOCall, which added all types of associations in a city) is not
feasible due to scale differences. In Table A.23 in the appendix we show that results are similar when we
instead use the two variables separately (although in this case, the below-mentioned Conley et al. (2012)
approach cannot be implemented).

28
One possible threat to the exclusion restriction is that participation in the singer
festival or in gymnast associations may potentially reflect aggressive nationalist
tendencies. However, 19th century nationalism was typically liberal, not militarist nor
aggressive: “Germany and other modernizing nations became real to people because many
thousands traveled around … meeting their fellow countrymen and singing together”
(Applegate 2013, p. 82). The liberal, folk-based nationalism of the 19th century is not to be
confused with the political agitation and xenophobia that the Nazis and other right-wing
parties represented in Weimar Germany. We provide evidence for this argument in
Appendix F.3, where we show that our instrument is not correlated with votes for
nationalist or xenophobic parties in elections in Imperial Germany (1890-1912). In sum,
while our IV strategy has to be interpreted with caution, we are confident that the exclusion
restriction is broadly plausible.
Table 11 presents our IV results, with the first stage in panel A, and the second stage
in panel B. Our instrument – association membership in the 1860s – is a strong and
significant predictor of association density in the 1920s. In the second stage, we obtain
large and statistically significant coefficients on association density. While the F-test for
excluded instruments is above the rule-of-thumb threshold of 10 in most specifications, it
falls short of the more stringent criterion of 16.38 for maximal 10% bias (Stock and Yogo
2005). We thus report p-values based on the Anderson-Rubin test of statistical significance
in square brackets, which are robust to weak instruments (Andrews and Stock 2005). Our
second-stage results are statistically highly significant throughout, with the exception of
column 4, where state fixed effects absorb much of the meaningful regional variation in
historical club formation after 1848 (see the discussion in Section 2.1). Note that we also
obtain strong results when using only civic clubs in the 1920s in column 5 – the fact that
our sub-category of civic clubs excludes gymnasts and choirs (among others) is a further
indication that any potential nationalist sentiment is unlikely to confound our results.
The IV coefficients are between two and four times larger than their OLS
counterparts. Measurement error is a likely explanation for the difference: In the main
analysis, we use association density per city, i.e., the number of associations per 1,000
inhabitants in the 1920s. The number of members – which would be a more precise measure
– is not available. Our instrumental variable, on the other hand, relies on the number of
members/participants. Thus, our instrument may capture both the intensive and extensive
margin of association participation. It is plausible that this reduces noise in the estimation,

29
yielding higher coefficients in the second stage. If taken at face value, the IV results imply
that a one standard deviation increase in association density is associated with an
approximately 0.7-1 standard deviation rise in Nazi Party entry rates. In Appendix F, we
provide further robustness checks of our IV results, report reduced-form results, and
perform the Conley et al. (2012) analysis of “plausible exogeneity.” The latter suggests
that the IV estimates are robust even to substantial deviations from strict exogeneity – to
render our IV results insignificant, more than two-thirds of the overall effect of our
instrument would have to come through some omitted third variable that is also captured
by 19th century associations. This magnitude seems implausible, given that our instrument
in part reflects historical associational life with a democratic (rather than xenophobic, antidemocratic) focus. Finally, in Appendix F.6, we also explore delegates to the Democratic
Congress as an alternative IV. We obtain results of the same magnitude as in our main IV
analysis, but with p-values of around 0.2 due to the small sample size with available data
on delegates in 1848.

6.5 Other Parties and Worker Associations
Were people in towns and cities with more civic associations simply more social, joining
all manners of clubs, societies and parties to a greater extent? Ideally, we would like to test
if entry rates for all parties (including, at the opposite end of the political spectrum, the
Communist party), were higher in places with more associations. Unfortunately,
membership records for other parties are not readily available for the period. Instead, we
examine two aspects. First, we test if the reduced-form relationship of association density
and electoral results that we found for the Nazi Party also held for other parties. Second,
we examine the effects of worker associations. Here, our prior should be that these have
only limited effects because workers in general were not enthusiastic joiners and supporters
of the Nazi Party (Falter 1991).
In Table A.20, we examine the link between association density and election
outcomes at both ends of the political spectrum, using vote shares for the Communist Party
(KPD), as well as for the DNVP, a far-right, bourgeois party that shared many of the
NSDAP’s extremist views. Both parties won about 10% of the votes in 1928. For the
communists, we find negative coefficients on association density – the higher social capital
in any one location, the lower on average the vote share that went to the KPD. For the
DNVP, we obtain both positive and negative coefficients; all are insignificant.
Results for worker associations are small and insignificant (Table A.19). When

30
including worker clubs jointly with non-worker associations, the latter show much larger
standardized coefficients. These findings increase the plausibility of our findings since
workers were an unlikely recruiting ground for the NSDAP. These results suggest that
denser networks of associations did not increase support for all parties at the extreme ends
of the political spectrum. Instead, among the more radical, small parties, the interaction
between civic associations and support at the polls was unique to the NSDAP – the Nazis
were highly successful in exploiting networks of associations and pre-existing contacts to
grow and to spread their message. This finding offers support for the hypothesis that the
NSDAP successfully penetrated clubs and associations, and co-opted local opinion leaders
(see Section 2) – a path not open to other radical parties like the Communists because of
basic ideological incompatibilities between its main message and the bourgeois
associations (Anheier 2003a; Bösch 2005; Noakes 1971). 44

7 Conclusion
When is social capital beneficial? Tocqueville pioneered the argument that social capital is
crucial for democracy. At the same time, he already pointed out that “the liberty of
association is only a source of advantage and prosperity to some nations, it may be
perverted …and … changed into a cause of destruction” (Tocqueville 1835, Vol. I, Ch.
12). Using the case of interwar Germany, we show that a vigorous civic society can indeed
help to undermine the existing democratic order. There, vibrant networks of clubs and
associations facilitated the rise of the Nazi Party. New data on associations and clubs in
229 German cities from the interwar period show that where there were more grass-root
social and civic organizations, the Nazi Party grew markedly faster. This is true both for
the party’s early years and during its final ascendancy to power, after the start of the Great
Depression. Association density also predicts the NSDAP’s electoral success – in part
because a strong organizational base with hundreds of thousands of members facilitated
canvassing during the elections. Our findings highlight the importance of personal, faceto-face interactions for the rise of a radical new movement. In this way, dense networks of
associations contributed directly to the eventual collapse of democracy, leading to one of
history’s most destructive regimes. 45

44

Zofka (1979, pp. 142-143) provides several examples for how the Nazis established themselves in
bourgeois circles by organizing local cultural events, such as symphony concerts.
45
Here, our results echo those of Zuckerman (2005) and Madestam et al. (2013).

31
Our main finding is in stark contrast to an earlier literature that blamed Germany’s
path to totalitarian rule on a “civic non-age” of low social capital (Stern 1972), and Nazi
entry on rootless, isolated individuals in a modernized society (Arendt 1973; Shirer
1960). 46 Our study also extends the important findings of Acemoglu et al. (2014) by
showing that social capital can not only be built by autocratic leaders to entrench their rule
– but that pre-existing social capital can foster the rise of undemocratic regimes.
Why is social capital associated with benign political outcomes in some contexts, but
not in others? We examine differences in political stability at the state level. Overall,
Weimar Germany’s institutions did not work well – governments were weak and shortlived, economic policy often failed, and extremist parties blossomed (Bracher 1978). At
the same time, some states (including Prussia) were bastions of well-functioning republican
institutions. We use an indicator of state-level government stability to show that where
governments changed rapidly, the link between association density and Nazi Party entry
was much stronger than in stable states. Where the same parties formed stable
governments, social capital’s corrosive influence disappears in our data. Therefore, the
effects of social capital depend crucially on the political and institutional context. Rather
than being an unambiguous force for good, our results suggest that social capital itself is
neutral – a tool that can be used for both good or ill.

46

We are not aware of any data that would allow a systematic comparison of association density across
countries in the interwar period. Nonetheless, it is clear that the range, variety and scope of associational life
in interwar Germany was high (Berman 1997).

32

Bibliographical references
Abel, Theodore Fred. 1938. Why Hitler Came into Power: An Answer Based on the
Original Life Stories of Six Hundred of His Followers. New York: Prentice-Hall.
Acemoglu. 2005. “Politics and Economics in Weak and Strong States.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 52 (7): 1199–1226.
Acemoglu, Daron. 2013. “State Building: A Political Economy Perspective.” Accessed
July 26, 2014. http://www.econ.northwestern.edu/seminars/nemmers.html.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Matthew Jackson. 2015. “History, Expectations, and Leadership in
the Evolution of Social Norms.” Review of Economic Studies 82 (2): 423-456.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A Robinson. 2001. “The Colonial Origins
of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic
Review 91 (5): 1369–1401.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A Robinson. 2005. “Institutions as a
Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth.” Handbook of Economic Growth 1A:
386-472.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A Robinson, and Pierre Yared. 2008. “Income
and Democracy.” American Economic Review 98 (3): 808–42.
Acemoglu, Daron, Tristan Reed, and James A. Robinson. 2014. “Chiefs: Economic
Development and Elite Control of Civil Society in Sierra Leone." Journal of
Political Economy 122(2): 319-368.
Adena, Maja, Ruben Enikolopov, Maria Petrova, Veronica Santarosa, and Ekaterina
Zhuravskaya. 2013. “Radio and the Rise of the Nazis in Interwar Germany.” SSRN
wp.
Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber. 2005. “Selection on Observed
and Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools.”
Journal of Political Economy 113 (1): 151–84.
Andrews, Donald W. K., and James H. Stock. 2005. “Inference with Weak Instruments”.
Working Paper 313. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Anheier, Helmut K. 2003. “Movement Development and Organizational Networks: The
Role of ‘Single Members’ in the German Nazi Party, 1925-1930.” In Social
Movements and Networks: Relational Approaches to Collective Action, edited by
Mario Diani and Doug McAdam, 49–78. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Applegate, Celia. 2013. “Chapter Two: Musical Itinerancy in a World of Nations:
Germany, Its Music, and Its Musicians.” In Cultures in Motion, edited by Daniel T.
Rogers, Bhavani Raman, and Helmut Reimitz, 60-86. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Arendt, Hannah. 1973. The Origins of Totalitarianism. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Bai, Jushan, and Serena Ng. 2010. “Instrumental Variable Estimation in a Data Rich
Environment.” Econometric Theory 26 (6): 1577.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator-mediator variable distinction in
social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical
considerations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1173-1182.
Bendix, Reinhard. 1952. “Social Stratification and Political Power.” American Political
Science Review 46 (2): 357–75.

33
Berman, Sheri. 1997. “Civil Society and the Collapse of the Weimar Republic.” World
Politics 49 (3): 401–29.
Bösch, Frank. 2005. “Militante Geselligkeit. Formierungsformen der Bürgerlichen
Vereinswelt zwischen Revolution und Nationalsozialismus.” Geschichte und
Gesellschaft. Sonderheft 21: 151–82.
Botzenhart, Manfred. Deutscher Parlamentarismus in der Revolutionszeit: 1848-1850.
Vol. 1. Droste-Verlag, 1977.
Bracher, KD. 1978. Die Auflösung der Weimarer Republik. Bonn: Athenäum-Verlag.
Brustein, Professor William. 1998. The Logic of Evil: The Social Origins of the Nazi Party,
1925-1933. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Childers, Thomas. 1983. The Nazi Voter: The Social Foundations of Fascism in Germany,
1919-1933. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Conley, Timothy G., Christian B. Hansen, and Peter E. Rossi. 2012. “Plausibly
Exogenous.” Review of Economics and Statistics 94 (1): 260–272.
Düding, Dieter. 1984. Organisierter Gesellschaftlicher Nationalismus in Deutschland
(1808-1847): Bedeutung und Funktion der Turner- und Sängervereine. Munich: R.
Oldenbourg.
Dunn, John. 1979. Western Political Theory in the Face of the Future. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Durlauf, Steven N., and Marcel Fafchamps. 2005. “Social Capital.” In Handbook of
Economic Growth, edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, Volume 1,
Part B:1639–99. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Eley, Geoff. 1980. Reshaping the German Right: Radical Nationalism and Political
Change after Bismarck : With a New Introduction. Ann Arbor, MI: University of
Michigan Press.
Falter, Jürgen W. 1991. Hitlers Wähler. Munich: Beck.
Falter, Jürgen W., and William Brustein. 2015. Die Mitglieder der NSDAP 1925-1945.
Arbeitsbereich Vergleichende Faschismusforschung, FU Berlin; Department of
Sociology, University of Minnesota; Forschungsprofessur des Instituts für
Politikwissenschaft, JGU Mainz. Datenfile Version 2.0 (unpublished data file).
Field, John. 2003. Social Capital. Houndsmills: Routledge.
Goldberg, Ellis. 1996. “Thinking About How Democracy Works.” Politics and Society
24(March): 7-18.
Goldhagen, Daniel. 1996. Hitler’s Willing Executioners: Ordinary Germans and the
Holocaust. New York: Knopf.
Grootaert, Christian, and Thierry van Bastelaer. 2002. Understanding and Measuring
Social Capital: A Multidisciplinary Tool for Practitioners. Washington: World
Bank Publications.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2008. “Long Term Persistence”. NBER
Working Paper 14278. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Hardtwig, Wolfgang. 1984. “Strukturmerkmale und Entwicklungstendenzen des
Vereinswesens in Deutschland 1789-1848.” Historische Zeitschrift. Beihefte, New
Series, Vol. 9, Vereinswesen und bürgerliche Gesellschaft in Deutschland: 11-50.
Hainmueller, Jens. 2012. Entropy Balancing: A Multivariate Reweighting Method to
Produce Balanced Samples in Observational Studies." Political Analysis 20
(1): 25-46.

34
Hamilton, Richard F. 1982. Who Voted for Hitler? Princeton University Press.
Haupt, Herman. 1925. Handbuch für den deutschen Burschenschafter. Munich: Verlag der
Burschenschaftlichen Blätter.
Heiden, Konrad. 1935. A History of National Socialism. New York: Knopf.
Heilbronner, Oded, and Matthias Schmidt. 1993. “Der verlassene Stammtisch. Vom
Verfall der bürgerlichen Infrastruktur und dem Aufstieg der NSDAP am Beispiel
der Region Schwarzwald.” Geschichte und Gesellschaft 19 (2): 178–201.
Kater, Michael H. 1983. The Nazi Party: A Social Profile of Members and Leaders, 19191945. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
King, Gary, Ori Rosen, Martin Tanner, and Alexander F. Wagner. 2008. “Ordinary
Economic Voting Behavior in the Extraordinary Election of Adolf Hitler.” Journal
of Economic History 68 (4): 951–96.
Klenke, Dietmar. 1998. Der singende „deutsche Mann“. Gesangvereine und deutsches
Nationalbewußtsein von Napoleon bis Hitler. Münster: Waxmann.
Knack, Stephen, and Philip Keefer. 1997. “Does Social Capital Have an Economic Payoff?
A Cross-Country Investigation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (4): 1251–
88.
Koshar, Rudy. 1986. Social Life, Local Politics, and Nazism: Marburg, 1880-1935. Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Kurz, Thomas. 1988. Blutmai. Berlin: Dietz.
Langewiesche, D. (1978). Die Anfänge der deutschen Parteien. Partei, Fraktion und Verein
in der Revolution von 1848/49. Geschichte und Gesellschaft, 324-361.
Linz, Juan José. 1976. “Some Notes Toward a Comparative Study of Fascism in
Sociological Historical Perspective.” In Fascism : A Readers’ Guide : Analysis,
Interpretations and Bibliography, ed. Walter Laqueur, 3–121. Berkeley :
University of California Press.
Lohmann, Susanne. 1993. “A Signaling Model of Informative and Manipulative Political
Action.” American Political Science Review 86(2), 319–33.
Madden, Paul, and Detlef Mühlberger. 2007. The Nazi Party: The Anatomy of a People’s
Party, 1919-1933. Frankfurt: Peter Lang.
Madestam, Andreas, Daniel Shoag, Stan Veuger, and David Yanagizawa-Drott. 2013. “Do
Political Protests Matter? Evidence from the Tea Party Movement.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 128(4): 1633-1685.
Mommsen, Hans. 1978. “National Socialism : Continuity and Change.” In Fascism : A
Readers’ Guide : Analysis, Interpretations and Bibliography, ed. Walter Laqueur
179–210. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Mühlberger, Detlef. 2003. The Social Bases of Nazism, 1919-1933. Cambridgde:
Cambridge University Press.
Noakes, Jeremy. 1971. The Nazi Party in Lower Saxony, 1921-1933. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Orlow, Dietrich. 1986. Weimar Prussia, 1918–1925: The Unlikely Rock of Democracy.
Philadelphia: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Ortega y Gasset, José. 1993. The Revolt of the Masses. New York: Norton.
Oster, Emily. 2014. “Unobservable Selection and Coefficient Stability: Theory and
Evidence.” http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/emily.oster/papers/selection.pdf

35
Portes, Alejandro, and Patricia Landolt. 1996. “The Downside of Social Capital.”
American Prospect 26: 18–23.
Putnam, Robert. 2000. Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community.
New York: Simon & Schuster.
Reichardt, Sven. 2004. “Selbstorganisation und Zivilgesellschaft : Soziale Assoziationen
und Politische Mobilisierung in der Deutschen Und Italienischen
Zwischenkriegszeit.” In Zivilgesellschaft als Geschichte : Studien zum 19. und 20.
Jahrhundert. Wiesbaden : VS Verl. für Sozialwissenschaften.
Riley, Dylan. 2005. “Civic Associations and Authoritarian Regimes in Interwar Europe:
Italy and Spain in Comparative Perspective.” American Sociological Review 70 (2):
288–310.
———. 2010. The Civic Foundations of Fascism in Europe: Italy, Spain, and Romania,
1870–1945. Baltimore: JHU Press.
Rodrik, Dani and Arvind Subramanian. 2004. "Institutions Rule: The Primacy of
Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development." Journal
of Economic Growth 9: 131-165.
Schneider-Haase, D.T. 1991. “Beschreibung der Stichprobenziehung zu den Mitgliedern
der NSDAP vom 27. März - 7.September 1989 im Berlin Document Center.”
Historical Social Research 16(3): 113-151.
Shirer, William L. 1960. The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich: A History of Nazi Germany.
New York: Simon & Schuster.
Schoeps, Manfred. Der Deutsche Herrenklub. Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte des
Jungkonservativismus in der Weimarer Republik, Diss. phil. Erlangen-Nürnberg
1974
Skach, Cindy. 2005. Borrowing Constitutional Designs: Constitutional Law in Weimar
Germany and the French Fifth Republic. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Stachura, Peter D. 1981. The German Youth Movement 1900 - 1945. St. Martin’s Press.
Stephan, Werner. 1931. “Zur Soziologie der Nationalsozialistischen Deutschen
Arbeiterpartei.” Zeitschrift für Politik XX (March): 794–95.
Stern, Fritz. 1972. The Failure of Illiberalism. George Allen & Unwin.
Stock, James H., and Motohiro Yogo. 2005. “Testing for weak instruments in linear IV
regression.” In Identification and inference for econometric models: Essays in
honor of Thomas Rothenberg, edited by Donald W. K. Andrews and James H.
Stock, 80-108. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tarrow, Sidney. 1996. “Making Social Science Work Across Space and Time: A Critical
Reflection on Robert Putnam's Making Democracy Work.” American Political
Science Review 90(2): 398-397.
Tocqueville, Alexis de. 1835. De La Démocratie En Amérique.
Wellhofer, E Spencer. 2003. “Democracy and Fascism: Class, Civil Society, and Rational
Choice in Italy.” American Political Science Review 97 (1): 91–106.
Wentzcke, Paul. 1965. Geschichte der Deutschen Burschenschaft. Carl Winter.
Wilhelm, Cornelia. 1998. Bewegung oder Verein? Nationalsozialistische Volkstumspolitik
in den USA. Franz Steiner Verlag.
Winkelried, Diego, and Richard J. Smith. 2011. “Principal Components Instrumental
Variable Estimation”. Faculty of Economics, University of Cambridge.

36
Winkler, Heinrich August. 1987. Der Weg in die Katastrophe: Arbeiter und
Arbeiterbewegung in der Weimarer Republik 1930 bis 1933. Berlin: J.H.W. Dietz.
Wolf, Heinrich. 1972. Der Jungdeutsche Orden in seinen mittleren Jahren.
Zeiss-Horbach, Auguste. 2008. Der Verein zur Abwehr des Antisemitismus: Zum
Verhältnis von Protestantismus und Judentum im Kaiserreich und in der Weimarer
Republik. Leipzig: Evangelische Verlagsanstalt.
Zofka, Zdenek. 1979. Die Ausbreitung des Nationalsozialismus auf dem Lande. Eine
Regionale Fallstudie zur Politischen Einstellung der Landbevölkerung in der Zeit
des Aufstiegs und der Machtergreifung der NSDAP 1928-1936. Berlin: R. Wölfe.
Zuckerman, Alan S. 2005. The Social Logic of Politics: Personal Networks as Contexts for
Political Behavior. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

37

FIGURES

Figure 1: Cumulative NSDAP membership, by association density
Note: Each data point reflects the cumulative NSDAP entry rate (per 1,000 inhabitants), starting in 1925 and averaged
across the cities with above- and below-median association density. The data are described in Section 3. NSDAP
entries are from the Berlin-Minneapolis sample (Schneider-Haase 1991); starting in 1930, we correct aggregate entry
rates for a change in sampling methodology, as described in Appendix C.

Association density

Nazi Party entry

Figure 2: Towns and cities in the sample, by association density and NSDAP entry
Note: Full dots = above median; empty dots = below median.

38

Figure 3: Conditional scatter, NSDAP entry rate and association density
Note: The figure shows the partial scatterplot corresponding to our baseline specification in Table 3, col 4. The y-axis
plots the variation in NSDAP entry rates (per 1,000 inhabitants), after controlling for the baseline controls listed in
Table 2.

39
1928

1930

1933

Figure 4: Nazi Party membership and election results, 1928-33
Note: Each dot indicates a city in our sample. The vertical axis in the three panels plots the residual variation of NSDAP votes in 1928 (left panel), 1930 (middle panel), and 1933
(right panel), after controlling for the baseline controls listed in Table 2.

Low stability, outside Prussia

Prussia

High stability, outside Prussia

Figure 5: Relationship between association density and Nazi Party entry, by political stability
Note: The figure shows the relationship between association density and Nazi Party entry for cities in federal states with low government stability (left panel), Prussia (which had
relatively high government stability, middle panel), and non-Prussian states with high stability (right panel). Government stability by state is reported in Table A.8 in the appendix.
The vertical axis in the three panels plots the residual variation of standardized average NSDAP entry rates (per 1,000 city inhabitant) between 1925 and 1/1933, after controlling
for the baseline controls listed in Table 2 in the paper.

40

TABLES
Table 1: Data representativeness: Sample vs. German Reich
Sample
Mean
sd

Reich - Urbana
Mean
sd

Variable
Socio-economic variables
population (1925)
72,356 140,211 32,063
blue collar (1925)
43.9% 10.7% 46.9%
Catholic (1925)
33.1% 32.2% 33.8%
Jewish (1925)
0.8%
0.7%
0.8%
unemployment (1933)
21.2%
20.6%
7.4%
Largest parties in elections of March 1933
NSDAP
40.0%
41.6%
9.8%
SPD (social democrats)
19.1%
19.2%
9.0%
Zentrum (conservative)
15.6% 16.6% 15.0%
KPD (communists)
12.8%
12.9%
6.7%

82,260
12.0%
34.4%
0.1%
7.9%
11.8%
10.1%
18.1%
8.2%

Reich - Allb
Mean
42.0%
31.9%
0.9%
18.8%
43.8%
18.4%
13.8%
12.5%

Notes: The construction of our sample is described in Section 2.
a) Excludes towns with less than 5,000 inhabitants.
b) Averages for German population overall – based on county-leve (Landkreis and Stadtkreis) data
from the 1925 census.

Table 2: Balancedness: Controls for high and low association density
Dependent variable:
year
Baseline controls
1925 ln(population)
1925 Share Catholics
1925 Share blue collar
Socio-economic controls#
1925 Share of Jews
1933 Share unemployed
1933 Welfare recipients per 1,000
1933 War participants per 1,000
1933 Social insurance pensioners per 1,000
1933 ln(Average income tax payment)
1933 ln(Average property tax payment)
Political controls#
1932
1920-28
1920-28
1920-28
1920-28

Hitler speeches per 1,000
Average DNVP votes
Average DVP votes
Average SPD votes
Average KPD votes

(1)
(2)
Clubs per 1,000
coeff
std error

(3)
(4)
NSDAP entry rate
coeff
Std error

-0.747***

(0.0638)

0.0157

(0.0546)

-0.487

(0.328)

-0.972***

(0.181)

-1.830**

(0.918)

-2.512***

(0.562)

-24.34**

(10.93)

-1.892

(9.172)

-3.747**

(1.815)

0.228

(1.213)

-0.00175

(0.00571)

0.00778**

(0.00337)

0.0127

(0.0345)

0.00269

(0.0126)

-0.00241

(0.0199)

0.0126

(0.0101)

0.146

(0.211)

0.226*

(0.120)

0.0827

(0.145)

0.134*

(0.0705)

-1.323***

(0.378)

-0.281

(0.465)

0.000637

(0.0147)

0.0211*

(0.0113)

-0.0102

(0.0185)

-0.0258*

(0.0137)

0.0131

(0.0104)

0.00571

(0.00641)

-0.0245

(0.0176)

-0.0121

(0.0151)

Notes: The table reports the results of regressing the dependent variable (clubs per 1,000 inhabitants in cols 1 and 2;
average (standardized) NSDAP entry rates in cols 3 and 4) on a number of control variables, one-by-one. Robust standard
errors in parentheses * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
# Regressions include baseline controls. The four political parties range from the right-wing (DNVP – German National
People's Party), to the center-right (DVP – German People’s Party), the center-left (SPD – Social Democratic Party), and
the left (KPD – Communist Party).

41
Table 3: Baseline results: Association density and Nazi Party entry (1925-Jan.’33)
Dependent variable: Nazi Party entry, 1925-Jan'33
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Dep. variable:
Falter sample
ASSOC measure

ln(ASSOCtotal)
[std coeff] #

0.156***
(0.0583)
[0.15]

0.140***
(0.0513)
[0.13]

[beta coeff] #

Share Catholics
Share Bluecollar
Observations
Adjusted R2

(6)

PANEL A: Baseline Results
ln(total NSDAP entry)
Average (standardized) NSDAP entry per capita
original
adjusted
based on original Brustein-Falter data
all
all
all
all
civic
military

ASSOC

ln(pop)

(5)

0.126**
(0.0507)

0.160***
(0.0538)

0.429***
(0.132)

0.829***
(0.268)

229
0.035

0.175***
(0.0542)
-0.934***
(0.164)
-2.774***
(0.466)
227
0.214

0.144***
(0.0503)
-1.006***
(0.172)
-2.923***
(0.464)
226
0.223

0.149***
(0.0493)
-0.839***
(0.163)
-2.533***
(0.455)
226
0.241

[0.20]

0.901***
(0.0483)
-0.830***
(0.121)
-2.475***
(0.355)
227
0.828

1.043***
(0.0446)
-1.157***
(0.153)
-1.881***
(0.463)
227
0.818

[0.25]

[0.24]

[0.29]

PANEL B: Baseline Results – Alternative specifications
Dep. variable: Average (standardized) NSDAP entry per capita (based on original Brustein-Falter data)
ASSOC measure
all
all
all
all
civic
military

ASSOC

[beta coeff] #

Controls:
Baseline
Socio-economic
Political
State FE
Observations
Adjusted R2

0.160**
(0.0605)

0.165***
(0.0548)

0.172***
(0.0469)

0.0869*
(0.0420)

0.284***
(0.0621)

0.613***
(0.135)

[0.25]

[0.26]

[0.28]

[0.14]

[0.16]

[0.22]

✓

✓
✓

✓
✓
✓

227
0.214

219
0.223

216
0.231

✓
✓
✓
✓

✓
✓
✓
✓

✓
✓
✓
✓

216
0.368

215
0.374

215
0.390

Notes: Standard errors in parenthesis (robust in Panel A; clustered at the Weimar state level in Panel B) * p < 0.10, ** p <
0.05, *** p < 0.01. ASSOCtotal is the total number of associations in the 1920s in each city. ASSOC is the number of associations
per 1,000 inhabitants, counting the types of associations indicated in the table header: all, civic, or military (see Table A.4
in the appendix for the type of associations included in these categories). Baseline, socio-economic, and political control
variables are listed in Table 2.
#
The standardized coefficient reports the change in the dependent variable due to a one-standard deviation (sd) increase in
the explanatory variable. The beta coefficient reports by how many standard deviations the dependent variables changes due
to a one-sd increase in the explanatory variable.

42
Table 4: Association density, Nazi Party entry, and election results
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

PANEL A: Regressions on association density
Dep. Variable:

ASSOCall
[beta coeff] #

Baseline
controls
Observations
Adjusted R2

NSDAP votes (%) in:
May 1928
Sep 1930
Mar 1933

Avg. (standardized) NSDAP entry rates in:
1925-28
1925-30
1925-1/33

0.562**
(0.268)
[0.19]

0.920**
(0.394)
[0.17]

0.915**
(0.367)
[0.15]

0.164***
(0.060)
[0.26]

0.172***
(0.057)
[0.27]

0.160***
(0.054)
[0.25]

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

227
0.112

227
0.278

227
0.546

227
0.116

227
0.168

227
0.228

PANEL B: Mediation
Dep. Variable:
Notes:

ASSOCall
[beta coeff] #

NSDAP entry
[beta coeff] #

Baseline
controls
Observations
Adjusted R2

NSDAP votes (%) in:

Sobel-Goodman mediation test

May 1928
Sep 1930
Mar 1933
NSDAP entry rates measured in:
1925-28
1925-30
1925-1/33

NSDAP election results in:
May 1928
Sep 1930
Mar 1933

0.079
(0.54)
[0.026]
2.944***
(7.59)

0.190
(0.55)
[0.034]
4.251***
(7.22)

0.492
(1.37)
[0.079]
2.639***
(4.97)

[0.621]

[0.490]

[0.269]

✓

✓

✓

227
0.452

227
0.478

227
0.602

Effect of ASSOCall on NSDAP
votes via party entry (std coeff):
0.160***
0.132***
0.068***
Prop. of total effect of ASSOCall that is
mediated by NSDAP entry
0.860
0.793
0.462

Notes: The table presents the individual steps of the Sobel-Goodman mediation test, which examines whether a mediator
(NSDAP entry) carries the influence of an explanatory variable (ASSOCall) to a dependent variable (NSDAP votes). ASSOCall
is the number of associations per 1,000 city inhabitants. Robust standard errors in parentheses * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p <
0.01. Baseline controls and additional (socio-economic and political) controls are listed in Table 2.
# Standardized beta coefficients report by how many standard deviations (sd) the outcome variable changes due to a one-sd
increase in the explanatory variable.

43
Table 5: Early and late Party entries

ASSOCall
[beta coeff] #

Dependent variable: Nazi Party entry rates
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Early Party entry (1925Late Nazi Party entry (1929-1/1933)
28)
0.164***
0.176**
0.0965**
0.104***
0.0609
0.0617*
(0.0600)
(0.0627)
(0.0448)
(0.0333)
(0.0413)
(0.0331)
[0.26]

[0.28]

[0.15]

[0.17]

Early NSDAP Entry

[0.10]

*

[beta coeff] #

Base controls
✓
Additional Controls
Sobel-Goodman mediation§
Observations
227
2
Adjusted R
0.101

✓
✓

✓

✓
✓

216
0.128

227
0.216

216
0.302

[0.10]

0.217
(0.117)

0.240**
(0.105)

0.37
227
0.256

0.41
216
0.354

[0.22]
✓

[0.25]
✓
✓

Notes: In cols 1 and 2, the dependent variable is the average (standardized) rate of Nazi Party entry (per 1,000 inhabitants)
in each city over the period 1925-28 (“early entries”); cols 3-6 use “late entries” between 1929-Jan’33. ASSOCall is the
number of associations per 1,000 city inhabitants. Standard errors (robust in odd columns; clustered at the state level in even
columns) in parentheses * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Baseline controls and additional (socio-economic and political)
controls are listed in Table 2.
§
The Sobel-Goodman mediation test computes the proportion of the total effect of ASSOCall on late Nazi Party entry that is
mediated by early party entry.
# Standardized beta coefficients report by how many standard deviations (sd) the outcome variable changes due to a one-sd
increase in the explanatory variable.

Table 6: Panel results: Growth of Nazi Party entry
Dependent variable: (log) Nazi Party entry growth per year
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Sample period:

Entries in 1925-32

Entries in 1925-28

(6)

Entries in 1929-32

lnNSmembers(t-1)

-0.611***
(0.0863)

-1.149**
(0.496)

-4.235***
(1.189)

4.878
(9.348)

-0.693***
(0.0989)

-0.897
(0.613)

lnNSmembers(t-1)
×ASSOCall

0.0355*
(0.0183)

0.0417*
(0.0226)

0.611***
(0.198)

0.613*
(0.324)

0.0511***
(0.0193)

0.0547**
(0.0266)

[std coeff] #
rel. to avg. growth

[0.029]
0.055

[0.035]
0.065

[0.179]
0.523

[0.180]
0.524

[0.056]
0.088

[0.060]
0.096

✓
✓

✓
✓

✓
✓

✓
✓

✓
✓

City FE
✓
Year FE
✓
Controls × lnNSmembers(t-1)
Observations
1,200
Adjusted R2
0.338

✓
1,146
0.354

404
0.206

✓
389
0.234

796
0.320

✓
757
0.347

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses (clustered at the city level) * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. ASSOCall is the number
of associations per 1,000 city inhabitants. Controls include all baseline, socio-economic, and political control variables that
are listed in Table 2.
#
The standardized coefficient reports the change in the growth rate of Nazi Party entry due to a one-standard deviation
increase in association density in cities with average lnNSmembers(t-1). The row below (“rel. to avg. growth”) shows the
ratio of these coefficients relative to average Nazi Party entry growth over the corresponding period.

44
Table 7: The role of institutions: Government stability and Nazi Party entry
Dep. var: Average (standardized) NSDAP entry per capita 1925-July’32
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Sample:
Prussia

ASSOCall
[beta coeff] #

IStable Govt

0.0792
(0.0770)
[0.14]

nonPrussia
*

0.180
(0.0996)
[0.27]

Non-Prussia, govt:
unstable
stable#
***

0.349
(0.0569)
[0.44]

-0.0116
(0.0348)
[-0.023]

§

Prussia
Prussia×ASSOCall
Baseline controls × IStable Govt
State FE
Observations
119
Adjusted R2
0.308

all states

all states

***

0.219***
(0.0495)

0.311
(0.0266)
[0.49]

-0.643
(1.367)
-0.322***
(0.0422)
0.160
(0.456)
-0.210***
(0.0532)

IStable Govt ×ASSOCall

✓

108
0.040

58
0.108

48
0.033

(6)

225
0.255

[0.34]

-0.217***
(0.0610)

-0.171**
(0.0633)
✓
✓

225
0.377

Notes: Dependent variable is the average (standardized) rate of Nazi Party entry (per 1,000 inhabitants) in each city over
the period 1925-July ’32 (when the Prussian government was replaced by a coup d’etat). Standard errors in parentheses
(robust in col 1, clustered at the state level in cols 2-6) * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. ASSOCall is the number of
associations per 1,000 city inhabitants. Baseline controls are listed in Table 2.
# Standardized beta coefficients report by how many standard deviations (sd) the outcome variable changes due to a one-sd
increase in the explanatory variable.
§
IStable Govt is a dummy variable for Weimar states with above-median government stability, measured by the first principal
component of a three indicators over the period 1918-July 32 (ending with the Prussian coup d’etat): i) the percentage of
time that the longest-serving government was in office, ii) the percentage of time that the longest-serving party was in office
(possibly in different coalitions), and iii) the percentage of time that a state was governed by the “Weimar coalition” of SPD,
DDP, and Zentrum. See Appendix D. for detail.

45
Table 8: Sample splits
Dep. var: Average (standardized) NSDAP entry per capita 1925-1/’33
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Pop 25 rel. to median
below
above

Share Catholics
<50%
>50%

PANEL A: Association density based on all clubs
0.175**
0.123**
0.161**
0.168**
0.243***
(0.0810)
(0.0553)
(0.0692)
(0.0753)
(0.0909)

ASSOCall
[std coeff]

[0.23]
✓

Base controls
Observations
Adjusted R2

114
0.224

[0.19]

[0.26]

✓

✓

113
0.239

157
0.150

[0.29]

[0.32]

✓

✓

70
0.201

114
0.197

PANEL B: Association density based on civic clubs only
0.511**
0.324**
0.492***
0.405*
0.573**
(0.198)
(0.138)
(0.155)
(0.222)
(0.224)

ASSOCcivic
[std coeff]

[0.25]
✓

Base controls
Observations
Adjusted R2

114
0.240

[0.20]

[0.28]

✓

✓

112
0.243

157
0.172

(6)

Blue-collar rel. to median
below
above

[0.27]

[0.25]

✓

✓

69
0.199

113
0.185

0.0972
(0.0655)
[0.19]
✓

113
0.174
0.361**
(0.165)
[0.26]
✓

113
0.208

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Baseline controls are listed in Table 2.
ASSOCall is the number of associations per 1,000 city inhabitants, counting all types of associations, and ASSOCcivic
counts only those with a civic agenda (see Table A.4 in the appendix for the type of associations included in this category).

Table 9: Bridging and bonding social capital
ASSOCbridging

Dep. var: Average (standardized) NSDAP entry per capita 1925-1/’33
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
0.141**
0.151**
0.0733**
(0.0655)
(0.0676)
(0.0320)

[beta coeff] #

[0.17]

ASSOCbonding
[beta coeff] #

Baseline controls
Additional controls
State FE
Observations
Adjusted R2

[0.18]
***

(6)

[0.09]
***

0.719
(0.226)

0.755
(0.144)

0.518*
(0.270)

[0.29]

[0.32]

[0.22]

✓

✓

✓
✓

✓
✓

226
0.193

226
0.247

215
0.205

215
0.270

✓
✓
✓

215
0.358

✓
✓
✓

215
0.392

Notes: The types of associations included in the “bridging” and “bonding” categories are listed in Table A.5 in the
appendix. Standard errors in parenthesis (robust in cols 1-2; clustered at the state level in cols 3-6) * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
*** p < 0.01. Baseline controls are listed in Table 2. Additional controls include the socio-economic and political controls
listed in Table 2.
# Standardized beta coefficients report by how many standard deviations (sd) the outcome variable changes due to a one-sd
increase in the explanatory variable.

46
Table 10: Matching estimation
Dep. var: Average (standardized) NSDAP entry per capita 1925-1/’33
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Notes:

only 1
neighbor

I(ASSOCall>median)

0.452***
(0.142)

0.339*
(0.199)

✓

✓

229

229

Matching variables
ln(pop 25)
All baseline controls
Latitude, longitude
Observations

Nearest 3 neighbors

(6)

Exact
#
matching

Entropy
reweighting§

0.288**
(0.141)

0.257**
(0.131)

0.275*
(0.164)

0.484**
(0.189)

✓

✓
✓
227

✓
✓
227

✓
✓
227

227

Notes: I(ASSOCall>median) is an indicator variable that takes on value one whenever ASSOCall is above the median. Cols
1-5 present average treatment effects on the treated (ATT), based on propensity score matching using one nearest neighbor
in col 1, and using the three nearest neighbors in cols 2-5.
#
Exact matching assigns the three nearest neighbors from the same Weimar state and from the same city population size
quintile.
§ Entropy weighting creates balanced samples by reweighting the control group data (below-median ASSOC ) to match
all
the first and second moment of covariates in the treatment group (above-median ASSOCall). See Hainmueller and Xu
(2013) for details.

Table 11: IV results
Dependent variable: Average (standardized) NSDAP entry per capita 1925-1/’33
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

ASSOC measure

all

all

PANEL A: Second Stage
0.419**
0.649**
0.565***

ASSOC
[beta coeff]

all

#

civic

0.421

1.479***

[0. 015]

[0. 023]

[0. 007]

[0. 164]

[0. 008]

[0.70]

[1.08]

[0. 98]

[0.73]

[0.88]

Baseline controls
Additional controls
State FE
Club members p.c.
in 1860s
Controls: See Panel A.
Kleibergen-Paap
First stage F-stat
N
adj. R2

all

✓

✓
✓

✓
✓
✓

PANEL B: First stage. Dep var: ASSOC
0.496***
0.313***
0.412***
0.263**
(0.116)
(0.101)
(0.107)
(0.110)

✓
✓

0.412***
(0.107)

18.4

9.7

14.7

5.7

12.6

156
0.088

155
0.379

147
0.405

147
0.453

146
0.405

Notes: Dependent variable in the second stage is the average rate of Nazi Party entry (per 1,000 inhabitants)
in each city over the period 1925-1/33. ASSOC is the number of associations per 1,000 inhabitants in each
city counting all in cols 1-4, and only civic associations in col 5. Second stage results report the p-values [in
square brackets] for the Anderson-Rubin (Chi-square) test of statistical significance (heteroskedasticityrobust); * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. This test is robust to weak instruments (see Andrews and Stock,
2005 for a detailed review). Baseline controls are listed in Table 2. Additional controls include the socioeconomic and political controls listed in Table 2. The instrument in the first stage (Club members p.c. in 1860)
is the first principal component of gymnast association members in 1863 (per 1,000 inhabitants), and
participants from each city in the 1861 Sängerfest (singer festival) in Nuremberg (per 1,000 inhabitants).
# Standardized beta coefficients report by how many standard deviations (sd) the outcome variable changes
due to a one-sd increase in the explanatory variable.

