NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPTIMAL ANNUITIZATION WITH STOCHASTIC MORTALITY PROBABILITIES
Felix Reichling
Kent Smetters
Working Paper 19211
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19211

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2013

This paper is based, in part, on Sven H. Sinclair and Kent Smetters, Health Shocks and the Demand
for Annuities, Technical Paper 2004-09 (Congressional Budget Office, July 2004). The authors have
benefited from discussions with Zvi Bodie, Michael Boskin, Jeffrey Brown, Daniel Gottlieb, Caroline
Hoxby, Laurence Kotlikoff, Robert Merton, Rick Miller, Joshua Rauh, Dan Sacks, Tom Sargent, Florian
Scheuer, Joseph Tomlinson, and seminar participants at the 2012 Brigham Young University Computational
Public Economics Conference, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), Boston University, and Stanford
University. This research was supported by the Social Security Administration (SSA) through grant
#5 RRC08098400-04-00 to the NBER as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research, CBO, SSA, or any other agency of the federal government.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Felix Reichling and Kent Smetters. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Optimal Annuitization with Stochastic Mortality Probabilities
Felix Reichling and Kent Smetters
NBER Working Paper No. 19211
July 2013
JEL No. D01,D14,H31
ABSTRACT
The conventional wisdom dating back to Yaari (1965) is that households without a bequest motive
should fully annuitize their investments. Numerous market frictions do not break this sharp result.
We modify the Yaari framework by allowing a household's mortality risk itself to be stochastic. Annuities
still help to hedge longevity risk, but they are now subject to valuation risk. Valuation risk is a powerful
gateway mechanism for numerous frictions to reduce annuity demand, even without ad hoc “liquidity
constraints.” We find that most households should not annuitize any wealth. The optimal level of aggregate
net annuity holdings is likely even negative.

Felix Reichling
Macroeconomic Analysis Division
Congressional Budget Office
United States Congress
Washington, DC 20515
felix.reichling@cbo.gov
Kent Smetters
University of Pennsylvania
SH-DH 1354
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
smetters@wharton.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

The classic paper of Yaari (1965) demonstrated that the demand for annuities should be so strong that
life cycle consumers without a bequest motive should invest all of their savings inside an annuity contract. Annuities are investment wrappers that should statewise dominate all non-annuitized investments
because annuities produce a mortality credit—derived from the pooled participants who die and forfeit
their assets—in addition to the return from the underlying principal. If an investor wants to invest in
bonds then a ﬁxed-return annuity invested in bonds will produce the bond yield plus a mortality credit.
If an investor wants to invest in stocks then a variable-return annuity invested in stocks would produce
the same realized yield plus a mortality credit.
Yaari’s paper has received considerable attention because lifetime annuities, paying a ﬁxed amount
each age until death, are fairly uncommon.1 Indeed, the apparent under-annuitization of households
is commonly referred to as “the annuity puzzle” (see, for example, Modigliani, 1986; Ameriks et al.,
2011). This puzzle is not just a theoretical curiosity. The value of the mortality credit can be very large
later in life, thereby signiﬁcantly increasing the return to saving. Furthermore, when an investor’s preferences exhibit prudence, annuities also reduce the need for precautionary savings, thereby improving
consumption smoothing across the life cycle in the Yaari model.
As is well known, Yaari’s model assumed costless and complete markets, and it ignored other types
of longevity-risk sharing arrangements. In practice, annuity premiums incorporate sales charges and adjustments for adverse selection (Finkelstein and Poterba, 2004). People might also face health costs (Sinclair and Smetters, 2004) and liquidity constraints after annuitization (Bodie, 2003; Davidoff, Brown
and Diamond, 2005; Turra and Mitchell, 2008). Other sources of longevity pooling also exist, including
Social Security and deﬁned-beneﬁt pensions (Townley and Boadway, 1988; Bernheim, 1991) and even
marriage (Kotlikoff and Spivak, 1981).
Still, the careful analysis of Davidoff, Brown and Diamond demonstrates that many of these additional frictions do not undermine Yaari’s full annuitization result. Brown et al. (2008, p. 304) conclude:
“As a whole, however, the literature has failed to ﬁnd a sufﬁciently general explanation of consumer
aversion to annuities.” Indeed, as we show, in this paper, if the deterministic survival probabilities of the
Yaari model are taken seriously, then Yaari’s case for 100% annuitization of wealth is even more robust
than commonly appreciated.
In the traditional Yaari model, an investor’s survival is uncertain, and his or her probability of death
naturally rises with age. But the mortality probability itself evolves deterministically over the life cycle for a given initial health status when young. The traditional model does not allow for a negative
[positive] health shock during the life cycle to suddenly decrease [increase] an investor’s likelihood of
survival.
In this paper, we largely adopt the Yaari framework but allow for the mortality probabilities themselves to be stochastic. This modiﬁcation is consistent with an investor’s health status evolving over
the life cycle with some randomness. Empirically, people accumulate precautionary savings to insure
against random health shocks (Palumbo, 1999; De Nardi, French and Jones, 2010). It is natural to investigate how such shocks also affect decisions to annuitize. We show that allowing for stochastic mortality
probabilities can have a material impact on the optimal level of annuitization.
In our model, annuities continue to hedge longevity risk, as in the Yaari model and the large subsequent literature. But the presence of stochastic mortality probabilities also introduces valuation risk
(or principal or resale risk), much like a long-term bond. Speciﬁcally, the present value of the annuity
1 Sales

of ﬁxed annuities in the United States totaled $54.1 billion during the ﬁrst three quarters of 2012, but only a
fraction will be held for lifetime. See LIMRA (2012a).

1

stream falls after a negative shock to health that reduces a household’s life expectancy. Some previous
theoretical research has shown that agents will want to pool even this source of risk—known as “reclassiﬁcation risk”—by purchasing the lifetime annuity early in the life cycle rather than later (see, for
example, the original work by Brugiavini, 1993). Hence, the presence of stochastic mortality probabilities alone would not appear to undermine the case for full annuitization. This result may explain why
the annuity literature has largely ignored the role of stochastic mortality probabilities.
However, the previous literature that discussed stochastic mortality probabilities implicitly made
two important assumptions: (a) negative health shocks that decrease the value of the annuity are not
correlated with any additional costs, and (b) agents are sufﬁciently patient—that is, they do not signiﬁcantly discount future utility. Empirically, however, negative health shocks often produce correlated
costs such as a loss in income and/or uninsured medical costs. Moreover, households are not necessarily
fully patient. The role of patience has been largely ignored in the annuity literature because, within the
standard model with deterministic mortality probabilities, the discount rate on future utility only affects
the level of saving and not the decision whether to actually annuitize that saving.
We show that relaxing either assumption can lead to imperfect annuitization. The introduction of
correlated costs reduces the optimal level of annuitization below 100% even if households do not face
any ad hoc “liquidity constraints.” Intuitively, even if agents can borrow against the present value of
their annuity stream, the value of the annuity falls after a negative health shock. That decline in value
happens precisely when the household needs resources to pay for the correlated-cost shocks in order to
avoid an increase in its marginal utility. We will call this effect the correlated-cost channel.
We further show that this channel also serves as an important gateway mechanism for other market
frictions to reduce annuitization even more. One such friction is adverse selection. Its presence has
no impact on the full annuitization result in the Yaari model (Davidoff, Brown and Diamond, 2005).
The presence of selection, however, can reduce annuitization in our model, consistent with the fact that
insurers adjust premiums for selection in practice.
We then demonstrate that even the presence of correlated costs can be dropped altogether if households are sufﬁciently impatient. In this case, the presence of valuation risk alone, even without correlated
costs, implies that the annuity will fail to smooth consumption across those states that are actually most
valued by investors. We will call this effect the impatience channel.
We then present simulation evidence using a multi-period life cycle model that demonstrates the
power of the correlated-cost channel itself in reducing annuity demand. (In our baseline simulations,
households are sufﬁciently patient, thereby shutting down the “impatience channel”.) Our model is
calibrated to the available data on household health and mortality risks, income loss, uninsured medical
costs, and macro-level variables. Whenever we face data limitations for calibration, we err on the side
of reducing the negative impact that the correlated-cost channel has on reducing annuity demand.
Our simulation results demonstrate that the correlated-cost channel is quite effective at reducing the
optimal level of annuitization. Annuitization is typically much less than full, non-monotonic with age,
and heavily inﬂuenced by the interactions of age-speciﬁc mortality and health uncertainty. We ﬁnd that
63% of households should not annuitize any wealth, even with no transaction costs, ad hoc “liquidity
constraints,” or bequest motives. In contrast, the Yaari model predicts 0%.
In fact, the net aggregate annuitization is actually negative under the most unconstrained version of
our simulation model, where households are also allowed to sell (short) annuities. As is well known, annuities and life insurance are opposite investments in one’s longevity (Yaari, 1965; Bernheim, 1991). A
short annuity position can be implemented by buying life insurance and reducing saving. Normally, the
demand for life insurance is only positive in the presence of a bequest motive. In our model, younger
households short annuities even with no bequests motive. Under plausible calibrations, the negative
2

demand for annuities by younger households outweighs the positive demand by older households, producing a net negative aggregate demand across the measure of households.
Why do young households want to short annuities even without a bequest motive? Because they
have little wealth, tend to be healthy, but still face a lot of uncertainty about their future health. If they
bought an annuity, they could earn only a small mortality credit but would be accepting a large amount
of correlated-cost channel risk. We ﬁnd that younger savers should instead do the opposite: actually pay
a small mortality credit by shorting annuities as a hedge against costly future negative realizations of
health. Then, after a future realization of negative health information, this short position can be reversed
by going long in an annuity that is cheaper than it would have been before the negative health shock.2
The difference in the value of these short-long offsetting trades produces a net proﬁt to the household
that can then be used to pay for any correlated income loss and/or uninsured expenses.
In sum, relative to the conventional 100% annuitization result, more detailed optimal life cycle annuitization patterns emerge from our model where: (a) most households do not annuitize any wealth; (b)
positive [negative] annuitization by non-wealthy households is largely concentrated in those households
that can earn a large [small] mortality credit relative to costly valuation risk; and (c) positive annuitization is more likely in wealthy households where the costs that are correlated with a decline in health are
small relative to their assets.
This paper does not intend to explain all of the stylized facts surrounding annuities, including the
design of annuity contracts (Gottlieb, 2012). Some recent interesting research has examined whether
households fully understand the annuity purchase decision (Brown et al., 2008; Beshears et al., 2012).
Rather, our results are mainly intended to fundamentally recast the optimal baseline when the assumption of deterministic mortality probabilities in the Yaari framework is relaxed. Of course, as with most
academic research, this paper is not intended by itself to change the practice of ﬁnancial advisory, but
rather to help lay the foundation for additional study.
Still, it is interesting to know whether the standard expected utility model could rationally produce
a low level of annuitization by using the gateway mechanism provided by the presence of stochastic
mortality probabilities. This question is interesting not because we necessarily believe that agents are as
highly rational as our model suggests. Rather, as in Milton Friedman’s classic billiard ball example, it
is interesting to know whether households on average are maybe not making big mistakes after all, even
if it is the result of some heuristics or even a bit of luck.3 To investigate this issue further, we introduce
some additional real-world factors into the model, including reasonable levels of asset management fees
and bequest motives. Our results show that almost nine out of ten households in our model do not positively annuitize any wealth. We further argue that the most plausible additional model extensions would,
if anything, reduce annuitization even more. In other words, although it is reasonable to argue that the
standard annuity puzzle remains, one also cannot rule out the ability of a rational expectations model
to produce a low positive demand for annuities. Moreover, the “true annuity puzzle” might actually be
why we do not see more negative annuitization, including among households with no dependents, rather
than the lack of positive annuitization.
Interestingly, the presence of stochastic mortality probabilities is also consistent with another puzzle
from the annuity literature. Both industry research and academic experimental evidence indicate that
households typically view annuities as increasing their risk rather than reducing it. Brown et al. (2008)
interpret this evidence as compatible with narrow framing. In our rational expectations model, however,
2 The

mechanics are discussed in more detail in subsection 2.2.3. In more recent times, life insurance policies can even
be directly resold in the secondary market, a small but rapidly growing market known as life settlements.
3 For example, Scholz, Seshadri and Khitatrakun (2006) demonstrates that many households appear to be saving close to
optimal levels despite the complexity associated with such a decision.

3

the presence of stochastic mortality probabilities implies that annuities deliver a larger expected return
(from the mortality credit) along with more risk (from valuation risk). A greater level of risk aversion,
therefore, typically reduces annuitization in our model.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops a three-period model with deterministic survival probabilities and argues that Yaari’s 100% annuitization result is even stronger than
previously understood. Section 3 then analyzes the role of stochastic survival probabilities in reducing
annuity demand. Section 4 presents a multiple-period life cycle model and Section 5 presents simulation
evidence that includes various frictions. Section 6 presents concludes.

2

Three-Period Model

Consider an individual age j in state h who can live at most three periods: j, j + 1, and j + 2. The chance
of surviving from age j to reach j + 1 is denoted as s j (h), which is conditional on state h at time j. State
h is drawn from a countable set H with a cardinality exceeding 1. We can interpret these elements as
“health states,” although, more generally, they can represent anything that affects survival probabilities.
The cardinality assumption ensures that there is more than one such state, and so we model the Markov
transitional probability between states as P (h |h), where h ∈ H is the current state and h ∈ H is the state
in the next period.
An annuity contract with a single premium π j at age j is available that pays 1 unit in each future
period j + 1 and j + 2, conditional on survival. We can think of each payment as a constant real amount,
much like the annuity originally considered by Yaari and most of the subsequent literature.
In a competitive environment (that is, with fair pricing) where insurers can perfectly pool idiosyncratic mortality risk, the premium paid at age j must equal the actuarial present value of the payment
of 1 received from the annuity in each of the future two periods:
s j (h) · 1 s j (h) · ∑h P (h |h) s j+1 (h ) · 1
+
(1 + r)
(1 + r)2


s j (h) · 1
∑h P (h |h) s j+1 (h ) · 1
· 1+
=
(1 + r)
(1 + r)


 
  
s j (h)
=
· 1 + ∑ P h |h π j+1 h
(1 + r)
h

π j (h) =

(1)

where h ∈ H is the health state realized in period j + 1. Notice that the premium paid at age j is
conditioned on the health status h at age j, which implies that insurers can observe the household’s
health status (we consider the impact of asymmetric information later). The term ∑h P (h |h) s j+1 (h )
on the right-hand side of equation (1) is equal to the expected chance of surviving to period j + 2, which
recognizes that health status can change between ages j and j + 1. The algebraic manipulation shown
in equation (1) then allows us to write the premium price recursively. At age j + 1:
s j+1 (h)
(2)
(1 + r)
where we use the fact that π j+2 (h) = 0 because j + 2 is the maximum lifetime.
The realized (ex post) gross annuity rate of return, denoted as 1 + ρ j (h), is derived similar to any
investment: the dividend yield (1, in this case) plus the new price (π j+1 (h )), all divided by the original
price (π j (h)). The net return for a survivor to age j + 1, therefore, is:
π j+1 (h) =

4


 1 + π j+1 (h )
− 1.
ρ j h |h =
π j (h)

2.1

(3)

Deterministic Survival Probabilities (The Yaari Model)

In the Yaari model, mortality is uncertain. But the mortality probabilities themselves are deterministic,
which can be viewed as a restriction on the stochastic survival probability process, as follows:

  
1, h = h
P h |h =
(4)
0, h = h
In other words, the off-diagonal elements of the corresponding Markov transition matrix [P (h |h)] are
zero, recognizing the absence of health reclassiﬁcation risk. But, survival probabilities are not restricted
to be constant across age. For a person with health status h we can allow for standard life cycle “aging”
effects:
s j+1 (h) < s j (h) < 1
In other words, the likelihood of survival can decrease with age in a manner that is fully predictable by
initial health status h and the current age alone. (The second inequality simply recognizes that some
people die.) However, the probabilities themselves are not stochastic because h is ﬁxed.
Inserting equation (4) into equation (1), the premium for a person of health status h at age j is:
π j (h) =


s j (h) 
· 1 + π j+1 (h)
(1 + r)

(5)

which implies:
(1 + r) 1 + π j+1 (h)
=
s j (h)
π j (h)
The realized net rate of return to an annuity, therefore, is equal to
1 + π j+1 (h)
−1
π j (h)
(1 + r)
=
− 1.
s j (h)

ρ j (h) =

(6)

Notice that the realized annuity return shown in equation (6) is identical to that of a single-period
annuity—that is, it is independent of the survival probability at age j + 1. Intuitively, the survival
probability at age j + 1 is already known at age j and is priced into the annuity premium π j (h) paid at
age j. It follows that a multiple-year annuity can be created with a sequence of single-period annuities,
a well-known result in the literature.
We say that annuities statewise dominate bonds if ρ j (h) > r for all values of h. In words, annuities
always produce a better return than bonds for any state of the world. The following result implies that
annuities should be held by all people for all wealth in the Yaari economy.
Proposition 1. With deterministic survival probabilities, annuities statewise dominate bonds for any
initial health state at age j.
5

Proof. By equation (6), ρ j (h) > r for all values of h provided that s j (h) < 1 (that is, people can die).
Statewise dominance is the strongest notion of stochastic ordering. Any person with preferences
exhibiting positive marginal utility (including even very non-standard preferences that place weight on
ex post realizations) prefers a statewise dominant security. Statewise dominance implies that annuities
are also ﬁrst-order dominant (hence, will be chosen by all expected utility maximizers) and second-order
dominant (hence, will be chosen by all risk-averse expected utility maximizers).

2.2

Robustness

It is well known that Yaari’s full annuitization result is strong and robust to many market frictions (see,
for example, Davidoff, Brown and Diamond, 2005). But the case for full annuitization is even stronger
than commonly appreciated. Understanding the strength of the Yaari result allows us to understand the
role that stochastic survival probabilities play in providing a gateway mechanism for many common
market frictions to reduce annuitization. Toward that end, we present some novel graphical analysis that
helps illuminate the robustness of annuities in the Yaari model.
Figure 1 gives some graphical insight into the statewise dominance in the Yaari model. Consider an
investor at age j who is deciding between investing in bonds or buying an annuity with a competitive
return that is conditional on her health h at age j. Her “Budget Constraint” between bonds and annuities
is simply a straight line with slope of -1: she can either invest $1 into bonds or $1 into annuities.
The linear “Insurance Line” in Figure 1 shows the tradeoff between bonds and fairly priced annuities
that would be offered by a competitive annuity provider. The slope of the insurance line is steeper than
the budget constraint and is equal to − s j 1(h) . In words, it takes s j$1
(h) > $1 invested into bonds at age
j toproduce
 the same level of assets at age j + 1 as $1 invested into an annuity. Mathematically,
$1 · 1 + ρ j = s j$1
(h) · (1 + r).
The Insurance Line is also the indifference curve between bonds and annuities for a risk-neutral
investor.4 Speciﬁcally, a risk-neutral investor would be willing to give up $1 in annuity investment if
she could trade it for s j$1
(h) > $1 worth of bonds, because both investments would have the same value at
age j + 1. Of course, the bond market would not allow for this trade, as indicated by the ﬂatter budget
constraint. The maximum indifference curve that can be achieved by a risk-neutral investor, therefore,
must intersect the budget constraint at the corner point of full annuitization, as shown in Figure 1.
For completeness, Figure 1 also shows the “Indifference Curve (risk-averse)” for a risk-averse agent.
Its slope must be at least as steep as the insurance line, because a risk-averse agent would require at
least s j$1
(h) worth of bonds to remain indifferent to a $1 reduction in annuity protection. Risk-averse
investors, therefore, also fully annuitize, as Yaari showed. Intuitively, a risk-averse investor values both
the mortality credit and the enhanced consumption smoothing that the annuity provides.5
4 Incidentally,

it is also the indifference curve for a risk loving investor since the maximum payoff to bonds is actually
lower than the guaranteed payoff to an annuity in the Yaari model, due to the statewise dominance of annuities.
5 At this point, we are being a little informal; we have not formally deﬁned risk aversion. Also, by focusing on the twodimensional asset choice, Figure 1 ignores the saving decision itself. The potential of annuities to inter-temporally smooth
consumption creates additional value for risk-averse agents in the Yaari model, whereas risk-neutral agents only value the
extra mortality credit. These details are more formally treated in Section 3.2.2 within a special case of our model. For our
purposes right now, it is sufﬁcient that the Insurance Line is the weak lower bound for any risk-averse agent’s Indifference
Curve, because we can demonstrate the robustness of the Yaari model using only the Insurance Lines.

6

Figure 1: Optimal Annuitization in the Yaari Model
Bonds
Insurance
Line

IndifferenceCurve
(riskͲaverse)

1
s ( h)
j

Ͳ1

Budget
Constraint

Annuities

2.2.1

Example: Adverse Selection

The “corner optimality” of the Yaari model is hard to break. Figure 2 illustrates how the corner optimality is robust to the presence of adverse selection. Suppose that health h at age j can take on two
states: Bad health, hB , and Good health, hG , where, naturally, the probability of survival is lower for
bad health: s j (hB ) < s j (hG ) . Without adverse selection, the insurer can separately identify people with
Bad health and Good health. With adverse selection, the insurer cannot distinguish. As shown in the
last subsection, the Insurance Lines represent the lower bound of an indifference curve of a risk-averse
agent. It follows that we can omit the indifference curves in order to reduce clutter and can work directly
with the Insurance Lines to demonstrate the robustness of the 100% annuity corner.
Let us ﬁrst consider the case without adverse selection, where insurers can identify an annuitant’s
health type. The Insurance Line in Figure 2 for Bad health shows the tradeoff between bonds and fairly
priced annuities that a competitive annuity provider would assign to people with Bad health. Similarly,
the Insurance Line for Good health shows the tradeoff for people with Good health. Naturally, the
Insurance Line for Bad health is steeper because people with Bad health face higher mortality risk and,
therefore, earn a competitively higher return. In other words, to give up $1’s worth of annuities, a person
with Bad health requires a larger amount of bonds than does a person with Good health.
Now suppose that annuity providers cannot distinguish between people with Bad and Good health,
seemingly creating the potential for adverse selection. Instead, a single annuity is offered at terms
representing the population-weighted average of both risk types, as indicated by the Pooled Insurance
Line in Figure 2.6 The effect of this pooling is that households with Bad health experience a loss in
annuity return, indicated by a downward rotation in their Insurance Line. Household with Good health
experience a gain in annuity return, indicated by a upward rotation in their Insurance Line. But notice
that full annuitization for both types still occurs, despite the cross-subsidy, because each Insurance
suppose that x% of people had Bad health and (1 − x) % had Good health. Then, the s j (hPOOLED ) =
x · s j (hGOOD ) + (1 − x) · s j (hBAD ). The pooled insurance line is also a competitive equilibrium, provided that there is no other
annuity provider that can better identify the individual risk types.
6 Mathematically,

7

Figure 2: Optimal Annuitization in the Yaari Model with Adverse Selection
Bonds
1
s (hPOOLED )
j

1
s (hBAD )
j

InsuranceLine,
BadHealth
Ͳ1

1
s (hGOOD )
j

Ͳ1

Ͳ1

InsuranceLine,
Pooled
InsuranceLine,
GoodHealth

Budget
Constraint

Annuities

Line still intersects the budget constraint at the point of full annuitization. Intuitively, although adverse
selection reduces the size of the mortality credit for some households, a smaller mortality credit is still
better than no mortality credit in the Yaari model.
2.2.2

Other Market Imperfections

A couple of other market frictions can also rotate the insurance line. The most obvious one is transaction costs. Figure 3 shows the impact from adding a proportional transaction cost τ that reduces the
mortality credit, rotating the insurance line downward. In fact, if the differential transaction cost of
annuities relative to bonds is so large that it actually exceeds the size of the mortality credit, then a
risk-neutral agent will hold only bonds, as shown in Figure 3, where the Insurance Line now intersects
the Budget Constraint at the 100% bond corner. In fact, annuitization is knife-edge (100% or 0%) in
the Yaari model. Moral hazard could also rotate the insurance line if agents invest in living longer after
annuitization. However, moral hazard cannot exist without annuitization; its corresponding insurance
line must still intersect the budget constraint at the 100% annuity corner.
In fact, most commonly cited market frictions do not rotate the insurance line at all, thereby having
no effect. Although social security crowds out some personal saving, the asset–annuity slope tradeoff
for the remaining saving is unchanged. Insurance within marriage can reduce the level of precautionary
saving, but it does not eliminate the statewise dominance of annuities for remaining saving. Uncertain income and uncertain expenses—whether correlated or not with deterministic changes in mortality
probabilities—also have no impact on optimal annuitization.
2.2.3

“Liquidity Constraints”

The presence of binding “liquidity constraints” has been commonly cited as another friction that would
undermine the case for full annuitization in a Yaari type model that is augmented with uninsured expense
shocks. Intuitively, if a household annuitizes its wealth, then the wealth can no longer be used to buffer
8

Figure 3: Optimal Annuitization in the Yaari Model with Transaction Costs
Bonds

InsuranceLine

Budget
Constraint

1
s j (h)(1  W )

Ͳ1

1
Ͳ1
Annuities

Explanation: Assumes that the transaction cost exceeds the value of the mortality credit.

shocks that would increase its marginal utility, because the annuity income is received slowly over the
life cycle. In contrast, the principle of short-term bonds should be more accessible.
As we now argue, however, the presence of binding liquidity constraints is challenging to reconcile
with the assumption of deterministic mortality probabilities, as in the Yaari model. Before getting to the
crux of the argument, it is important to be speciﬁc with terminology.
In particular, the “liquidity constraint” argument in the annuity literature is actually very different
from the standard borrowing constraint assumption found in most literature, where people cannot borrow against their future income. There is a well-established microeconomics foundation about why it
is hard for people to borrow against their future risky human capital.7 Incidentally, a borrowing constraint of this sort does not undermine the case for full annuitization: Any existing savings (even if
precautionary) should always be invested in a statewise dominant security.
Instead, the “liquidity constraint” argument, as used in the context of annuities, is actually imposing
a very different sort of requirement, namely a constraint on asset rebalancing. For incomplete annuitization to occur, households must be unable (or only at a high cost) to rebalance their existing assets
from annuities into bonds. This constraint has nothing to do with future income and is a much stronger
assumption than a standard borrowing constraint noted above. It is also very difﬁcult to rationalize in
the Yaari model. Consistently, Sheshinski (2007, p. 33) writes that “no apparent reason seems to justify
these constraints.”
Indeed, simple annuity-bond rebalancing would be competitively provided if there were no reclassiﬁcation risk to survival probabilities, as in the Yaari model.8 A household could simply rebalance at
age j + 1 by pledging the 1 unit of conditional annuity income received at ages j + 1 and j + 2 to a
7 Most of the literature has focused on the inability of the private sector to fully enforce two-sided contracts in the presence

of hidden information. See, for example, Zhang (1997) and Clementi and Hopenhayn (2006).
8 Even surrender fees that are intended to reduce rebalancing would inefﬁciently distort marginal utility in the presence
of non-reclassiﬁcation shocks and, therefore, could not survive competition.

9

life insurance contract, and then borrow the present value of the life insurance contract, π j+1 . This loan
has been fully collateralized against mortality default risk, and so it would be offered by a competitive
market. There is no role for subsequent hidden information to undermine this loan in the Yaari model: If
annuity providers could have estimated the initial survival probabilities (that is, health state h) necessary
for underwriting the original annuity for a person at age j, then they also know the mortality probabilities at age j + 1 with perfect certainty, because those probabilities change in a deterministic manner
with age in the Yaari model. Even the subsequent transaction costs would be trivial, because those costs
result mostly from medical underwriting, which would be unnecessary.
Empirically, rebalancing may not seem prevalent, but that is not altogether clear. Recall that the
standard annuity puzzle is the small size of the primary market. There actually is a direct secondary
market for retirement annuities, and it is not clear whether the available supply of buyers is small
relative to the small number of primary transactions.9 Moreover, as just noted above, a person can
reverse an annuity simply by purchasing life insurance. Because the life insurance policy has been fully
collateralized by the original annuity, the present value of the life insurance policy’s face can be easily
borrowed against in the Yaari model. Empirically, the secondary market for life insurance continues to
grow at a rapid pace, expanding the ability for such borrowing.10
Moreover, even if the ability to rebalance still seems a bit of a stretch, it is important not to mix the
underlying models. Problems with rebalancing could occur only in the presence of stochastic mortality
probabilities that eliminate the perfect predictability of the previous health underwriting information
found in the Yaari model. With stochastic mortality probabilities, medical underwriting would have to
be repeated when the household wants to rebalance its annuity–bond portfolio. Of course, in practice,
this would come at an additional cost to reduce adverse selection.
Nonetheless, in the theoretical derivations and simulation evidence presented below, we allow for
costless asset rebalancing in the presence of stochastic mortality probabilities. Our purpose is to demonstrate the power of stochastic mortality probabilities themselves in reducing annuity demand without an
additional rebalancing constraint—especially a constraint with unclear empirical support. We show that
the falling value of the annuity itself following a negative health shock can play a major role in reducing
the demand for annuities. Our results of imperfect annuitization would be even stronger if we included
additional underwriting costs when annuity assets were rebalanced.

3

Stochastic Survival Probabilities

We now introduce stochastic survival probabilities by allowing P (h |h) > 0 when h = h. In other words,
the off-diagonal elements of the Markov transition matrix [P (h |h)] are allowed to be positive.

3.1

Stochastic Rankings

The presence of stochastic survival probabilities can break the statewise dominance of annuities.
9 We

could not ﬁnd any aggregate industry information on the annuity secondary market. However, ﬁrms such as J.G.
Wentworth actively advertise to purchase retirement annuities, as do other ﬁrms, suggesting a strong supply. Moreover, many
life settlement ﬁrms, which normally buy life insurance policies, will also purchase annuities.
10 See Life Insurance Settlement Association (2013). Moreover, pricing in the secondary market does not seem to contain
large risk loads to compensate for systemic pricing mistakes. Most secondary transactions are medically underwritten, with
many secondary life insurers now estimating life expectancy with a surprisingly high degree of accuracy. For example,
Bauer and Russ (2012) used a database from a secondary life actuarial ﬁrm to construct a large panel of more than 50,000
individuals. They found very small differences between the originally estimated (curtate) life expectancies and the actual
death dates.

10

Proposition 2. With stochastic survival probabilities (p (h |h) > 0), annuities do not generically statewise dominate bonds.
Proof. Inserting equation (1) into equation (3) and rearranging:


ρ j h |h =
=

1 + π j+1 (h )

s j (h)
(1+r)


 −1
· 1 + ∑h P (h |h) π j+1 (h )

1 + π j+1 (h )

 − 1
s j (h) 
)
π
·
1
+
E
(h
H
j+1
(1+r)



Because |H| > 1 then π j+1 (inf (H)) < EH π j+1 (h) . It is easy, therefore, to construct examples where
ρ j (h |h) < r, thereby violating statewise dominance. Consider, for example, a set H with the elements
s j (h) → 1 and s j+1 (h ) → 0 (and, hence, π j+1 (h ) → 0). Then, we can further
reﬁne H
h and h , where


so that EH π j+1 (h ) is sufﬁciently large, producing ρ j (h |h) < r, because EH π j+1 (h ) → ∞ implies
ρ j (h |h) → −1.
Intuitively, the annuity premium at age j is set competitively by insurers equal to the present value
of the expected annuity payments received at ages j + 1 and j + 2, conditional on the health state h at
age j. But a sufﬁciently negative health realization h at age j + 1 reduces the expected payout at age
j + 2, producing a capital depreciation at age j + 1 that is larger than the mortality credit received. In
effect, when survival probabilities are stochastic, the annuity contract has valuation risk (or principal
risk) similar to a long-dated bond. If participants can directly sell their contracts in a secondary market,
then we can also interpret this valuation risk as “resale” risk.
The fact that annuities do not statewise dominate bonds in the presence of stochastic survival probabilities, however, only means that annuities will not necessarily be optimal across a wide range of
preferences with a positive marginal utility. It is still possible, however, that annuities could dominate
bonds for more speciﬁc types of preferences, including expected utility maximizers. Indeed, annuities
will be strictly preferred by one class of expected utility maximizers—namely, risk-neutral consumers.
Proposition 3. The expected return to annuities exceeds bonds if the chance of mortality is positive.
Proof. The expected annuity return for a survivor to age j + 1 is equal to




E ρ j h |h



1 + ∑h P (h |h) π j+1 (h )
−1
=
π j (h)
=

(1+r)π j (h)
s j (h)

−1
π j (h)
(1 + r)
=
−1
s j (h)
>r
if s j (h) < 1.
Intuitively, risk-neutral agents care only about the greater expected return derived from the mortality
credit and ignore valuation risk. Any expected change in an agent’s survival status has already been
11

priced by competitive insurers into the initial annuity premium. Any residual uncertainty that stems
from the future survival outlook taking a value different from the expected value today has no impact
on the expected return to the annuity.
However, annuities do not necessarily dominate bonds for the more restricted class of risk-averse
expected utility maximizers.11
Proposition 4. With stochastic survival probabilities, annuities do not generically second-order stochastically dominate (SOSD) bonds.
Proof. See the example given in next subsection, which contradicts a claim of generic second-order
stochastic dominance.

3.2

Examples

We now demonstrate Propositions 2 through 4 with a series of simple examples that build on each other.
We ﬁrst demonstrate how the statewise dominance of annuities fails before turning to the failure of
second-order stochastic dominance.
3.2.1

Failure of Statewise Dominance

Continuing with our three-period setting, consider an agent at age j with current health state h. As an
example, we make several simplifying assumptions.12 Speciﬁcally, set the bond net return r (and, hence,
discount rate) to 0, in order to simplify the present value calculations. Also, at each age:
• At age j, a person with health state h will live from age j to j + 1 with certainty (s j (h) = 1.0).
Hence, the agent always survive to collect the $1 annuity payment at age j + 1. This assumption
eliminates the potential to earn any positive mortality credit between ages j and j + 1, which is
not our focus.
• At age j + 1, an agent’s health status can take one of two states with equal probability: hG
(“Good”) and hB (“Bad”). If the Good health state hG is realized then the probability of surviving from age j + 1 to age j + 2 is one: s j+1 (hG ) = 1. Conversely, if the Bad health state hB
is realized then the probability of surviving from age j + 1 to age j + 2 is zero: s j+1 (hB ) = 0. In
words, a person who realizes Good health at age j + 1 will with certainty also live in period j + 2,
but a person realizing a Bad state will with certainty not live in period j + 2.
The payoffs for the annuity are summarized in Figure 4. By equation (1), the competitive premium paid
at age j for an annuity is equal to π j (h) = $1.0 + 0.5 · $1.0, or $1.5. This amount is simply equal to the
$1 annuity payment that is received with certainty at age j + 1 plus the expected value of the $1 annuity
payment made at age j + 2, which is paid 50% of the time to people who realize Good health at age
j + 1.
Suppose that an agent, therefore, is thinking about whether to invest $1.5 in the annuity or bond.
Consider two cases:
 Case 1 (“Good” health): The household realizes the Good health state hG at age j + 1. Then, by
2
equation (3), the realized net return ρ j (hG ) to the annuity is equal to 1.5
− 1 > 0, thereby beating bonds
gamble A second-order stochastically dominates gamble B if and only if EA u (x) ≥ EB u (x)for any nondecreasing, concave utility function u (x).
12 The main advantage of using simple examples is that we can isolate the key drivers of our results. However, none of the
key insights in this section hinge on the simpliﬁcations we made.
11 Speciﬁcally,

12

Figure 4: Annuity Payoff in Simple Example
j

j+1

j+2

hG
0.5

$1.0

0.5

$1.0
hB

Sj+1(hG)=1

πj

Sj+1(hB)=0

$1.0

$0.0

which, recall, yield a 0% net return. Speciﬁcally, the annuity (before any payouts) is worth $2 at age
j + 1, equal to the $1 that will be paid at j + 1 plus the present value (at a zero discount rate) of the $1
in annuity payment that will be paid (with certainty) at age j + 2. Had this household instead invested
$1.5 at age j into bonds, it would have had only $1.5 at age j + 1. So this household is better off ex post
with the annuity.
 Case 2 (“Bad” health): The household realizes the Bad health state hB at age j + 1. Then, the
1
realized net return to annuitization is equal to 1.5
− 1 < 0, thereby under-performing bonds. Speciﬁcally,
the annuity will pay only $1 in total at age j + 1, the last year of life. Had this household instead invested
$1.5 into bonds, then it would have had $1.5 at age j + 1. So, it is worse off ex post with the annuity.
It follows that annuities fail to statewise dominate bonds in the presence of valuation risk because
annuities fail to dominant bonds ex post across some states. Intuitively, the competitively priced annuity
contract at age j was calculated based on expected survival outcomes at age j. Survival realizations
below expectation at age j + 1 must, therefore, leave some buyers worse off ex post.
3.2.2

Failure of Second-Order Dominance

The violation of statewise dominance, however, is only a small blemish for the case of annuitization.
It simply means that annuities will no longer be optimal across a wide range of preferences that, for
example, place some weight on ex post realizations. Annuities, however, could still be the dominant
security for risk-averse expected utility maximizing agents whose preferences fully weigh risky gambles
from an ex ante position—that is, at age j. Indeed, having some ex post losers is the cost of providing
ex ante risk reduction.
Let’s now consider the demand for annuities by risk-averse investors who care about smoothing
consumption. Continuing with our example, we now explicitly introduce consumer preferences. We
focus on the standard expected utility setting, where Yaari’s full annuitization result is standard and
very robust. Suppose that our agent at age j with health h is endowed with $1.5 and consumes only
in ages j + 1 and j + 2.13 The agent has fairly standard time-separable conditional expected utility
preferences over consumption equal to



 

u c j+1 |h j+1 + β · s j+1 h j+1 u c j+2 |h j+1 ,
where the period felicity function u(c) =

c1−σ
1−σ

(7)

takes the constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) form, σ

13 This

timing is equivalent to a two-period model where the agent consumes in both periods and makes the investment
decision prior to the update of survival probabilities at age j + 1, thereby allowing us to capture the motive to pool reclassiﬁcation risk.

13

is the level of risk aversion, and β is the weight placed on future utility. As will be evident below, our
analysis holds for any risk-averse function. However, the CRRA assumption allows us to report a few
numerical examples as well.
The unconditional expected utility at age j is equal to





1
1 
EU = · u c j+1 |hG + β · u c j+2 |hG + · u c j+1 |hB ,
(8)
2
2




where recall that s j+1 h j+1 = hG = 1 (i.e., Good health people live until age j +2) and s j+1 h j+1 = hB =
0 (that is, Bad health people do not live to age j + 2).
As we now show, the agent’s subjective rate of time preference plays an important role in the choice
between annuities and bonds in the presence of valuation risk. So we consider two cases: with highly
patient agents and then with agents with low patience. Within the case of patient agents, we consider two
subcases: with and without correlated costs. These subcases produce different decisions to annuitize.
High Patience (β = 1). Suppose that agents are fully patient, weighting future utility equal to current
utility: β = 1. Consider two subcases, one without correlated costs and one with correlated costs.
I) No Correlated Costs. Continuing with our example, recall that an agent who buys an annuity
at age j for $1.50 and then realizes Good health at age j + 1 will receive $1 at age j + 1 plus another
$1 at age j + 2. But, an annuitant who realizes a Bad health state receives the $1 only at age j + 1. In
contrast, a bond investment simply returns the principle of $1.5 at age j + 1, because r = 0. Hence, with
β = 1, the conditional consumption streams associated with these competing investment choices are the
following:
 Bond: If Good health is realized at age j + 1, then c j+1 = 0.75 and c j+2 = 0.75; if Bad health is
realized, then c j+1 = 1.5.14
 Annuity: If Good health is realized at age j + 1, then c j+1 = 1.0 and c j+2 = 1.0; if Bad health is
realized, then c j+1 = 1.0.15
Notice that the bond investment creates very non-smooth consumption choices across the two health
states. In contrast, the annuity effectively shifts 0.5 units of consumption from the Bad health state to the
Good state, thereby creating perfectly smooth consumption across states and time. Annuities, therefore,
will be preferred by anyone with a reasonable felicity function u exhibiting risk aversion.
Moreover, notice that the agent will want to purchase the annuity at age j even though, by construction, the agent is guaranteed to survive from age j until j + 1; the only uncertainty faced at age j is
the health state the agent will realize at age j + 1. This result is consistent with the previous literature
demonstrating that households will want to pool reclassiﬁcation risk itself by contracting early in their
lifetimes. See, for example, the original application of this result to annuities by Brugiavini (1993) as
well as the excellent treatise by Sheshinski (2007, chapter 4).16
if the Good health state is realized, then the agent lives periods j + 1 and j + 2 with certainty. Since β = 1
and r = 0 the agent simply splits $1.5 between these two periods. If the Bad health state is realized then the agent lives only
period j + 1 with certainty, and so the agent simply consumes the $1.5 fully in that period.
15 Recall that the annuity in this example pays $1 in each period that an agent survives.
16 This literature, including the current paper, has focused on fairly priced contracts in the presence of household-level
idiosyncratic shocks to longevity. Maurer et al. (2013) simulate a model with aggregate shocks to longevity common across
households. Under a self-insure strategy, an insurer charges a load that reduces the probability that payments exhaust the
insurer’s reserves, undermining fair pricing. Their results demonstrate the potential inefﬁciencies if government reserve
regulation fails to properly weigh the insurer’s equity, reinsurance, and hedging contracts that would otherwise allow for a
full transfer of risk from risk-averse households to risk-neutral insurers.
14 Speciﬁcally,

14

II) With Correlated Costs. Now consider the introduction of uninsured shocks that are correlated
with a decrease in survival probabilities. For example, a negative health shock can lead to a reduction in
income (e.g., disability) and/or uninsured medical expenses (e.g., long-term care). Continuing with our
example, suppose that a Bad health state is now associated with an additional loss of $1 in the form of
lower income or medical expenses. (There are no additional costs associated with Good health.) Now
the consumption allocations for the bond and annuity investments are as follows:
 Bond: If Good health is realized at age j + 1, then c j+1 = 0.75 and c j+2 = 0.75; if Bad health is
realized, then c j+1 = 0.5.
 Annuity: If Good health is realized at age j + 1, then c j+1 = 1.0 and c j+2 = 1.0; if Bad health is
realized, then c j+1 = 0.0.
→ ∞), the bond investment
Under any felicity function satisfying the usual Inada condition ( ∂ u(c→0)
∂c
will be chosen to avoid the possible zero consumption state that exists with the annuity. Of course,
this example is intentionally extreme since correlated health costs fully absorb the annuity stream. With
smaller correlated costs, partial annuitization would emerge. Simulation analysis is presented later using
a more realistic calibration.
The presence of stochastic probabilities, therefore, opens up the possibility for other market frictions, such as uninsured costs, to materially reduce the demand for annuities. We now show that these
correlated costs have an impact on annuitization, which we are referring to as the correlated-cost channel.
Notice that lower annuitization is not driven by any restriction on asset rebalancing. It just happens
that once the Bad health state is revealed at age j + 1, the annuity produces no additional return at age
j + 2, because the agent does not survive beyond j + 1. Hence, there is no future annuity income to
borrow against at age j + 1. Of course, we can easily generalize this result by allowing for a small
but positive chance of survival after age j + 1 after the Bad health state is revealed. In this case, the
annuity has some continuation value at age j + 1, which could then be borrowed against. But it still
might not provide enough resources to avoid states with low consumption at age j + 1 if the household
fully annuitizes. Appendix A discusses how this imperfect annuitization result can extend to variations
in the design of the annuity contract.
In sum, additional costs that are correlated with a reduction in survival can lead to incomplete annuitization on their own. In contrast, with deterministic survival probabilities as in the Yaari model, the
correlated-cost channel is absent since the lack of a health update eliminates the channel for a correlated
reduction in the present value of the annuity.
Low Patience (β → 0). Now consider the opposite extreme, where agents are very impatient: β →
0.17 We now show that incomplete annuitization can emerge even without the presence of additional
correlated uninsured costs.
The conditional consumption streams (without correlated costs) are now as follows:
 Bond: If Good health is realized at age j + 1, then c j+1 → 1.5 and c j+2 → 0; if Bad health is
realized, then c j+1 = 1.5.
 Annuity: If Good health is realized at age j + 1, then c j+1 → 2.0 and c j+2 → 0; if Bad health is
realized, then c j+1 = 1.0.
For the bond investment, consumption at age j + 1 with Good health is 1.5, because a fully impatient
agent consumes everything at age j + 1. If Bad health manifests, the agent obviously still consumes 1.5
regardless of the level of patience, because age j + 1 is the last year of life. For the annuity investment,
17 Because

discounting is geometric, the results do not rely upon time inconsistency issues.

15

consumption at age j + 1 in the Good state is 2.0, because the impatient agent borrows against the
annuity payment of 1.0 that will be paid for sure at age j + 2. However, consumption at age j + 1 in the
Bad state is now just 1.0, because the annuity does not make any payment at age j + 2.
Notice that the annuity now actually increases consumption variation across the two health states at
age j + 1; in contrast, the bond investment perfectly smooths consumption across those allocations that
are actually valued by the agent. Intuitively, the traditional annuity fails to properly shift consumption
across health states in a way that is informed by the agent’s time preferences within each health state.
The fair (competitive) annuity premium is based on objective survival probabilities and the market
discount rate, which can result in a very different set of allocations across time within health states than
subjectively desired. In other words, a traditional life annuity is not an optimal contract design for very
impatient households. This impatience channel, therefore, reduces the optimal demand for annuities.
This channel does not exist in the Yaari model, because the health state is ﬁxed; the level of patience
affects only the desired level of saving and not how to invest the saving.
Of course, the choice of β = 0 is an extreme case and is made for purposes of illustration. Now
suppose that the value of β is small but still strictly positive. Hence, the marginal utility associated with
consumption at age j + 2 must also be considered. In general, the highest expected utility is obtained
when we equalize the weighted marginal utilities across different states, which is not equivalent to
equalizing consumption when β < 1. Given the analysis above, the Bond can still be more effective at
smoothing the weighted marginal utilities as well. As a speciﬁc example, suppose that β = 0.10.18 Also,
set the level of risk aversion σ equal to 2. Then the EU(bonds) = −0.91 and the EU(annuities) = −0.93.
Of course, if we were to change the value of σ then the curvature of the utility function becomes more
important and could tilt the balance back toward the annuity.

3.3

A Gateway Mechanism

As just shown, stochastic survival probabilities provide a mechanism for additional frictions to reduce
the optimal level of annuitization. Below, we provide simulation analysis using a richer setting. However, it is useful to see graphically how the presence of stochastic mortality probabilities can remove
the sharpness of 100% “corner optimality” found in the Yaari model. We focus on the case of patient
investors facing costs that are correlated with negative mortality shocks.
Figure 5 shows that the Indifference Curve between bonds and annuities can now take the more usual
“convex-toward-the-origin” property of a standard risk-averse investor. Recall that, in the Yaari model,
the Insurance Line represents the lower bound of the Indifference Curve. However, in the presence of
valuation risk with correlated costs, an interior point for bonds might be selected. It follows that the
Indifference Curve must contain at least one region that is ﬂatter than the Insurance Line.
Any reduction in the size of the mortality credit then further reduces the interior point demand for
annuities. For example, the presence of adverse selection that reduces the mortality credit would rotate
the Insurance Line downward, as shown with the dotted Insurance Line in Figure 5. The Indifference
Curve must then rotate along the budget constraint, also shown in Figure 5, in order to ensure that at
least one region of the Indifference Curve has a ﬂatter slope than the corresponding Indifference Curve.
The net effect is a higher demand for bonds.
18 If

we interpret each period in our simple model as 30 years, then this small value is equivalent to an annual rate of about

0.92.

16

Figure 5: Optimal Annuitization with Health Shocks
Bonds
1
s ( h)
j

InsuranceLine
Ͳ1

InsuranceLine
(withadverseselection)
IndifferenceCurve
(withadverseselection)

Budget
Constraint

Indifference
Curve
Annuities

4

Multi-Period Model

We now present a multiple-period model that provides the basis for simulation evidence presented in
Section 5.

4.1

Individuals

The economy is populated by overlapping generations of individuals who live to a maximum of J periods
(years) with one-period survival probabilities s( j, h j ) at age j that are dependent on the realized health
status h j . Individuals are followed from the beginning of their working lives, through retirement, until
death.
4.1.1

Health Transition Probabilities and Conditional Survival Probabilities

The health state h follows an M-state Markov process with an age-dependent transition matrix Pmn ( j);
m, n = 1, ..., M, where n is the previous health state and m is the next health state. For our purposes,
three states (M = 3) sufﬁce: healthy (h1 ), disabled (h2 ), and very sick (h3 ). Most workers are healthy
(state h1 ) and able to work. A disabled worker (state h2 ) is unable to work and receives disability
beneﬁts until retirement, as discussed in more detail below. This state, therefore, represents impaired
health with higher mortality risk, but without actually being institutionalized and suffering the associated
expenses. A very sick person (state h3 ) is unable to work and faces institutionalized expenses, but
receives disability payments until retirement and, potentially, additional transfers to cover long-term
care expenses.
Transition and survival probabilities are based on the actuarial model of Robinson (1996).19 Transi19 Robinson’s

model used eight health transition states, which we converted into three in order to increase the size of each
state bucket for mapping to survival probabilities. The use of three states also serves the key economic determinants of our
model. Our healthy state h1 corresponds to Robinson’s state 1, h2 corresponds to his states 2–4, and h3 corresponds to his

17

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

FromH1toH1

FromH1toH3

FromH1toH2
21
25
29
33
37
41
45
49
53
57
61
65
69
73
77
81
85
89
93
97
101
105
109
113
117

TTransitionprobability

Figure 6: Health Transition Probabilities

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

FromH2toH2

FromH2toH1

FromH2toH3

21
25
29
33
37
41
45
49
53
57
61
65
69
73
77
81
85
89
93
97
101
105
109
113
117

TTransitionprobability

Age

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

FromH3toH3
FromH3toH2

FromH3toH1
21
25
29
33
37
41
45
49
53
57
61
65
69
73
77
81
85
89
93
97
101
105
109
113
117

TTransitionprobability

Age

Age

Source: Authors’ calculations based on references cited in Section 4.1.1. Health state H1 corresponds to healthy, H2 to
disabled, and H3 to very sick.

18

Table 1: Disability Rates: Data vs. Model

AgeCohort
21Ͳ24
25Ͳ29
30Ͳ34
35Ͳ39
40Ͳ44
45Ͳ49
50Ͳ54
55Ͳ59
60Ͳ64
Total

U.S.Data
0.3%
0.9%
1.6%
2.2%
3.2%
4.8%
7.1%
10.3%
13.8%
5.0%

Model
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.2%
3.3%
5.1%
7.6%
10.6%
13.9%
4.2%

Source: Social Security Administration and authors’ calculations.

tion probabilities between health states are shown in Figure 6. Robinson’s estimates are widely regarded
as the industry standard for older workers and retirees, but he under samples younger workers. We used
smoothed interpolations of Social Security disability data to slightly adjusted his health state transition
estimates for the working-age population, thereby producing disability rates by age that are fairly close
to the empirical evidence (see Table 1).20 Overall, the share of the working-age population that is disabled (that is, either health state h2 or h3 ) in our baseline model equals about 4.2%, which is close to the
actual disability rate of 5.0% found in the Social Security Administration’s disability data.21
Survival probabilities by age and health state are shown in Figure 7. The model’s mean mortality
rate, averaged across health states at each age, matches the U.S. Social Security Administration tables
fairly closely.22
4.1.2

Investment Choices

Bonds. Households can invest in a non-contingent bond that pays a net return equal to r, which is
equal to the marginal product of capital, as discussed in more detail below. Bonds, therefore, constitute
a safe investment in our model because the aggregate capital stock is deterministic. However, in any
experiments that change the amount of capital, the value of the risk-free rate also changes, reﬂecting
changes to the marginal product of capital.
states 5–8, which he notes is consistent with additional medical expenditures. Future work could consider additional sick
states beyond long-term care, provided that these states could be mapped to a speciﬁc set of chronic conditions and their
associated uninsured costs. Currently, such data is not readily available.
20 Because SSA data do not indicate the exact health status of a disabled person, we conservatively made adjustments
only to the transition probabilities between health state h1 and health state h2 , thereby leaving the change in mortality to a
minimum.
21 See Social Security Administration (2012b) and Social Security Administration (2011).
22 We also did some comparisons of model assumptions against their empirical counterparts within each health state.
Because the very sick state h3 corresponds most closely with long-term disability during working years and with a need for
long-term care for retirees, the sources of mortality data comparisons included the RP-2000 disabled life mortality tables
(Society of Actuaries, 2000a,b) for ages 21 to 65, as estimated by the Social Security Administration (2005).

19

Figure 7: Survival Probabilities
H3 => H3

100%

Health State 1 (healthy)

90%

97

91

60%

Health State 2 (disabled)
85

73

70%

79

61
Survival probability
67

80%

50%

Health State 3 (very sick)

40%

30%
20%
10%
21
25
29
33
37
41
45
49
53
57
61
65
69
73
77
81
85
89
93
97
101
105
109
113
117

0%
Age

Source: Authors’ calculations based on references cited in Section 4.1.1.

Annuities. Households can also invest in an annuity that pays $1 per unit contingent on survival.
Figure 8 shows the realized single-period net annuity return ρ as a function of age and health-state
transition. This return includes two components: (a) for a given health state, the annuity earns the
standard mortality credit and (b) after a change in health state, the annuity incurs a valuation repricing:
either a depreciation if health worsens or an appreciation if health improves. The value of the mortality
credit increases monotonically with the death probability over the life cycle. As a result, the annuity
return increases over the life cycle within an unchanging health state (except for the last maximum
possible year of life, at age 120, where a value depreciation is guaranteed). The valuation risk, however,
creates level shifts in the return. Notice, for example, that movements from healthy state h1 to the
worsening health states h2 and h3 lead to large depreciations and often produce negative rates of return.
Health movements in the opposite direction can lead to appreciation, although the probability of those
shifts is less likely later in life, as indicated earlier in Figure 6.
4.1.3

Income and Expenses

An individual’s “cash on hand” X j at the beginning of age j is equal to
X j = ε j η j I(h = h1 )w(1 − T ) + B j − L j + Tr j ,

(9)

which includes after-tax wage income, bequests, uninsured long-term care costs, and government transfers. We consider each in order.
Wages and Disability. Wages are a product of four factors:
• a predictable age-related productivity ε j that is equal to the average productivity of a worker of
age j (zero for ages j ≥ 65, denoting retirement);
• an individual random productivity η modeled as a Markov process with a transition matrix Qkl ( j);
k, l = 1, ..., Ψ, where Ψ represents the highest productivity attainable in the economy;
20

Figure 8: Annuity Returns by Age and Health State Transition
80%
60%

20%

FromH1toH1

0%
Ͳ20%

21
25
29
33
37
41
45
49
53
57
61
65
69
73
77
81
85
89
93
97
101
1
105
1
109
1
113
1
117
1

Annuityreturn
A

40%

Ͳ40%
Ͳ60%

FromH1toH3
FromH1toH2
Age

140%
120%

Annuityreturn
A

100%
80%

FromH2toH1

60%
40%

FromH2toH2
FromH2toH3

20%

Ͳ20%

21
25
29
33
37
41
45
49
53
57
61
65
69
73
77
81
85
89
93
97
101
105
109
113
117

0%
Age

250%

Annuityreturn

200%
150%

FromH3toH1
100%

FromH3toH2
50%

FromH3toH3

21
25
29
33
37
41
45
49
53
57
61
65
69
73
77
81
85
89
93
97
101
105
109
113
117

0%
Age

Explanation: The panels show the annuity return ρ by age for different health-state transitions, calculated using equation (3).
The top panel shows the annuity returns for a healthy (h1 ) person, the middle panel shows the annuity returns for a disabled
person (h2 ), and the bottom panel shows the annuity returns for a very sick person (h3 ).

21

• an indicator of the health status I; and
• the general-equilibrium market wage rate per unit of labor w.
The processes for ε j and η are taken from Nishiyama and Smetters (2005), which allows for eight
different earnings groups. The indicator function I (h = h1 ) = 1 if the person is healthy and able to
work; otherwise, I (h = h1 ) = 0, if the person is disabled (h2 ) or very sick (h3 ) and cannot work. The
general-equilibrium wage w is produced using the technology description below.
Bequests. The variable B is the amount of bequests, positive in value for a bequest that is received
and negative in value for a bequest that is given. Bequests of bond holdings are given at death; they are
received earlier in life, typically by dividing up aggregate bequests evenly throughout the measure of
the surviving population. We consider alternative bequest distributions as part of sensitivity analysis.
Uninsured Medical Loss. The variable L j is the ﬁnancial loss in the sick state h3 . During working
years, its value is zero (L j = 0) , under the assumption that all workers are privately insured. After retirement, the value of L j is set to the value of nursing home costs that are not covered by Medicare, equal
to about 1.2 times the average wage, a value that is consistent with recent survey estimates conducted
by Genworth Financial (2012) and MetLife (2010). This calibration likely understates the true cost of
long-term care by assuming that, at most, only one of the household’s retirees will use long-term care.
To be sure, there is a limited market for long-term care insurance. Historically, however, longterm policies have tended to be expensive and offered only limited coverage (Brown and Finkelstein,
2011). Medicaid’s provision of long-term care also crowds out demand for coverage by less afﬂuent
households (Brown and Finkelstein, 2008). Moreover, a qualifying insurable event is more subjective for long-term care than for life insurance or annuities, further complicating the purchase decision
(Baldwin, 2013; Siegel Bernard, 2013).23 Accordingly, only one in ten U.S. households have long-term
care policies (Lockwood, 2013). This ratio is likely to further decrease as many of largest long-term
care insurers—including Genworth, CNA Financial, Manulife, Metlife and Prudential—have recently
stopped offering new coverage. The largest remaining provider, New York Life, has requested approval
from state insurance regulators to substantially increase premiums (Lieber, 2010).
Besides long-term care, there are additional post-retirement medical expenses that are not reimbursed by Medicare. In its latest annual survey, Fidelity Beneﬁts Consulting (2012) estimates that a
representative couple retiring in 2012 will face almost $230,000 in health care expenses that are not reimbursed by Medicare. These costs do not include nursing home care, dental, vision or over-the-counter
medications. To be sure, some of these expenses can be insured through private Medigap policies. However, Medigap premiums are typically marked up by 30% above costs, and less than one third of retirees
have such policies (Starc, 2012). Even retirees with long-term care policies still face large out-of-pocket
expenses. For example, even with the most comprehensive Medigap coverage allowed by law, a single retiree in poor health should expect to pay $10,000 in health care costs per year according to the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2013), not including long-term care, dental, vision, and
over-the-counter medications. Retired couples face larger expenses.
Conservatively, we ignore these additional costs unrelated to long-term care in the baseline calibration of our simulation model. The technical reason is that we don’t have a precise mapping between our
health state Markov transition matrix and health costs unrelated to long-term care. However, we will
consider different parameterizations of the ﬁnancial loss L j as part of our sensitivity analysis.
23 We

thank Caroline Hoxby for this point.

22

Government Transfers and Taxes. Public insurance at least partially offsets some of the disability
losses suffered by workers and the uninsured medical losses suffered by retirees.
Workers receive a Social Security Disability Insurance (DI) payment before retirement, calculated
using the legal and progressive “bend point” formula in the United States. We conservatively assume
that all disabled workers qualify for this income, and without a waiting period. In reality, the U.S. DI
program requires a signiﬁcant waiting period and has a high level of false rejections (Low and Pistaferri,
2010); a majority of claims are initially rejected; and only about 35 to 40 percent of all claims (new
and old) are approved (Ohlemacher, 2013). Hence, the only correlated costs faced by workers from a
negative health care shock in our model are from the portion of income that is not replaced by DI.
Retirees receive Social Security beneﬁts according the “bend point” calculations contained in the
law that allows for redistribution, in exchange for making proportional payroll contributions up until
the payroll tax ceiling.24 Following the law, future Social Security beneﬁts cannot be borrowed against.
However, following a medical loss (L > 0), if cash on hand falls enough then Medicaid will pay the
medical costs, thereby ensuring that the household never suffers from negative consumption. Hence, the
only correlated costs faced by retirees from a negative health care shock in our model is from the loss of
assets above the Medicaid qualiﬁcation threshold due to spending on long-term care.
Mathematically, the variable T R j is the sum of all government transfers received (DI, Medicaid,
and Social Security) and T is the total tax rate required to ﬁnance those transfers. The value of T is
calculated endogenously to ensure a balanced budget, as discussed below.
Overall, we view our modeling choices as likely conservative in the sense of avoiding states with
very large marginal utilities after a negative mortality shock.
4.1.4

Household Optimization Problem

Individuals have preferences for consumption and possibly for leaving bequests, which are time-separable,
with a constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) felicity. Most of our simulations assume pure life cycle
households with no bequest motives, and so any bequests are accidental and come from households that
die while holding bonds. But we will also allow for bequest motives as part of our robustness checks.
To avoid problems with tractability and uniqueness that arise in models with altruism, bequest motives
are modeled as “joy of giving,” meaning that households receive utility based on the size of the bequest
that they leave independent of the utility of the recipient:
U=

J

∑

j=21

j

β u(c j ) =

J

∑β

j=1

j

c1−σ
j
1−σ

+ ξ D j A j+1

(10)

where β is the rate of time preference, c j is consumption at age j, σ is the risk aversion, A j is bequeathable wealth at age j, D j is an indicator that equals 1 in the year of death and 0 otherwise, ξ is a parameter
that determines the strength of the bequest motive, and J = 120, the maximum age.
An individual’s optimization problem, therefore, is fully described by four state variables: age j,
health h, idiosyncratic productivity η, and wealth (assets) A. The household solves the following problem taking the prices w, r, ρ as given:
24 Hence,

a worker who remains in the high productivity state throughout his or her career will have higher beneﬁts, but
a smaller replacement rate on previous earnings. Ideally, we would track each person’s average wage throughout his or her
lifetime, but this would require an additional state variable that is computationally costly. Instead, consistent with some other
papers, we assign an individual who reaches the last working year the expected beneﬁt conditional on the income earned in
last year, whether for disability or retirement. However, to accommodate deterministic life cycle factors as well as reduce
noise, we run 100,000 simulations, track each person’s average wage and calculate the resulting beneﬁt. We then average
the beneﬁts within each of eight income groups in the ﬁnal working year.

23

V j (A j , η j , h j , j) =

max u(c j ) + β s(h j , j)
c j ,α j

ˆ

ˆ

h j+1 η j+1

[V j+1 (A j+1 , η j+1 , h j+1 , j + 1)]Q(η j , dη j+1 )Pj (h j , dh j+1 )

(11)

subject to:
A j+1 = R(α j , h j , h j+1 )(A j + X j − c j )
α ≤1
0 ≤ cj ≤ Aj + Xj
where: A j is beginning-of-period asset, after annuities and bonds are sold; the portfolio return is
R(α j , h j , h j+1 ) = αρ j (h j , h j+1 ) + (1 − α j )r, where ρ j (h j , h j+1 ) is the annuity return given current
health h j and future health h j+1 shown in equation (1), which allows for rebalancing; r is the return
to the riskless bonds; α j is the share of investments made into annuities at age j; X j is the value of cashon-hand shown earlier in equation (9). Here, A ∈ R+ , η ∈ D = {η1 , η2 , ..., ηn }, h ∈ H = {h1 , h2 , h3 },
j ∈ J = {21, 22, ..., J}, and the functions {V j , a j , b j , c j : S → R+ }120
j=21 are measurable with respect to F,
where S = R+ × D × H × J, F = B(R+ ) × P(D) × P(H) × P(J), and P(·) denote power sets and B(R+ )
is the Borel σ -algebra of R+ .
The budget constraints have the following interpretations. Bonds b must be non-negative (α ≤
1), thereby recognizing that a competitive market would never allow an individual, who might die
before the loan repayment, to borrow at the risk-free rate without also carrying life insurance in the
amount of the loan. However, annuities a can potentially be negative (α < 0), which is equivalent to
borrowing at the risk-free rate and purchasing life insurance to ensure repayment, although much of our
simulation analysis below will focus on the non-negative case. Moreover, an individual’s consumption
c must always remain non-negative. Without health shocks, this constraint would never bind under the
standard Inada utility conditions. However, with medical expense shocks, we must explicitly enforce
the constraint by calculating the required Medicaid payment accordingly.

4.2

Production

The production side of our economy is less central in our focus. Nonetheless, we want to ensure that
our utility preferences are consistent with a plausible capital–output ratio that is, in turn, derived from a
reasonable technology speciﬁcation. Moreover, having a ﬁrm production side of the economy allows us
to recalibrate to the same observable economy when performing sensitivity analysis.
Output Y of the economy is determined by the constant returns-to-scale technology with a CobbDouglas production function Y = θ K λ N 1−λ − δ K, where K denotes capital and N labor, in efﬁciency
units, and δ is the rate of capital depreciation. The economy is then described by the measure Φ(A, η, h, j)
of individuals by state, and by the values of market wage w, interest rate r, capital stock K, and labor
supply N. Macroeconomic variables are also calibrated consistent with Nishiyama and Smetters (2005):
The capital share of output is λ = 0.32, the depreciation rate of physical capital is δ = 0.046, and the
capital-to-output ratio is 2.8. The rate of population growth is assumed to be a constant 1 percent,
24

roughly the value in the United States. The rate of productivity increase is also not critical and, for the
sake of simplicity, is assumed to be unchanging. The capital-output ratio is set at 2.8 by varying the
subjective discount rate β , producing a marginal product of capital of 6.8%.

4.3

Payroll taxes

We model Social Security income as a pay-as-you-go transfer from workers to retirees in each period.
The Social Security tax rate is determined endogenously under the balanced-budget constraint from the
distribution of households in the economy. DI and Medicaid transfers are also ﬁnanced through a labor
income tax. The total tax rate on labor T is calculated to ensure a balanced budget of all three programs.

4.4

General Equilibrium

A general equilibrium is fairly standard, and so a formal deﬁnition will be skipped. In particular:
(i)

Household Optimization: Households optimize program (11), taking as given the set of
factor prices and policy parameters;

(ii)

Asset Market Clearing: The factor prices are derived from the production technology, with
the aggregate levels of saving and labor properly integrated across the measure of households (by Walras’ Law, the goods market is redundant and also clears);

(iii)

Policy Balance: The policy parameters are consistent with balanced budget constraints (i.e.,
tax revenue equals spending); and

(iv)

Bequest Clearing: Bequests given equal bequests received.

The entire recursive household partial equilibrium dynamic program (11), therefore, is solved many
times, inside of a Gauss-Seidel like iteration, until general equilibrium is reached, deﬁned as having
small Euler equation errors away from any boundaries (Judd, 1998); see Appendices B and C for more
details. Achieving small Euler errors required using optimization routines that were slower but have
good global properties. Still, using FORTRAN 90, a machine compiled language that generally executes
50 to 500 times faster than MATLAB, the ﬁxed point can usually be reached within two days on a fast
desktop computer, although some of our experiments below took several days.

4.5

The Implied Population, Income, and Wealth Distributions

In our baseline model, annuities are required to be non-negative (no shorting), an assumption that we
will relax as part of our sensitivity analysis. Moreover, all bequests (if any) are accidental (ξ = 0)
and are distributed evenly to surviving households, an assumption that we also relax. We also initially
assume there are no differential management fees on annuities relative to bonds. We now examine how
the model calibrates to some observable aggregate distributions.
Population Distribution. The role of population demographics is less important in our model because
we report our results mainly at the household level (age and health status). However, our claim below
that the net aggregate annuity holding is negative depends, in part, on our model’s relative population
weights. The age structure of our model is fairly similar to 2010 Census data, as shown in Table 2.

25

Table 2: Age Structure of the Population, Data vs. Model

Age Cohort
21-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
65+

2010 Census
17%
18%
20%
19%
18%

Model
21%
21%
19%
16%
17%

Source: U.S. Census Bureau (2011) and authors’ calculations. Percentages are based on the population 21 years and older.

Income Distribution. Our baseline model seems to calibrate fairly well to the observable data on
income inequality. The income Gini coefﬁcient (inclusive of wage income, Social Security, DI, and
other beneﬁts) is 0.45 in our model, compared with 0.47 in the data (U.S. Census Bureau, 2012a).
Moreover, about 5.0% of workers in our model are above the payroll tax ceiling, compared with 5.4%
in the data Social Security Administration, 2012a.
Wealth Distribution.
The amount of wealth inequality (inclusive of bonds and annuities) in our
model is below the empirical evidence. The model’s wealth Gini coefﬁcient is 0.61, in contrast to the
empirical estimate reported by Nishiyama (2002) of 0.75. Table 3 shows the share of wealth held by
different wealth percentile groups for both the model and the corresponding empirical evidence from
the Census. Notice that almost all of the difference between the model and the data is due to the model’s
inability to capture the high concentration of wealth held by the top 1%, a gap equal to 19.6% of wealth
(10.9% vs. 30.5%), which, in turn, persists throughout the “Top 40%” of the wealth distribution. We
narrow the gap somewhat in our sensitivity analysis when we turn on intentional and unequal bequests,
but we never eliminate it.
The Rich. Life cycle models similar to the model in our study are notorious for under-predicting
the amount of wealth held by the top 1%, likely because they ignore the “entrepreneurial spirit” of the top
wealth holders (Cagetti and De Nardi, 2006). We believe that any reasonable model of “entrepreneurial
spirit,” however, would only strengthen our key conclusion regarding low optimal annuitization. As
shown later, a majority of households do not hold annuities. Instead, almost all annuities are held
by wealthier households, which are mostly insulated from large shocks to their marginal utilities after
negative changes in their mortality risk outlook. Because the rich in our model have no entrepreneurial
motives, they are attracted mainly to the larger returns offered by the lifetime annuity wrapper. With
a realistic entrepreneurial motive, however, they likely would not hold nearly as many annuities. For
example, it would be quite challenging to design an annuity wrapper around an individual founder’s
privately held equity.
The Poor. The total poverty rate among all workers between the ages of 18 to 64 in our model is
4.2%, which is a bit below the Census value of 7.2% (U.S. Census Bureau, 2012b). Our underestimate
is likely because the U.S. Census has a broader deﬁnition of “working” than our model’s wage data
have. However—and more important for our purposes—the poverty rate among all disabled people
between the ages of 18 to 64 is 33.5% in our model, which is pretty close to the empirical counterpart
of 28.8%, estimated by U.S. Census Bureau (2012b), although lower than the value of 50% estimated
26

Table 3: Wealth Distribution, Data vs. Model

U.S. Data(1)
Gini Coefficients
Income(2)
Wealth
Share of Wealth (%)
Top 1%
Top 5%
Top 10%
Top 20%
Top 40%
Top 60%

Model

0.47
0.75

0.45
0.61

30.5
53.9
64.9
77.2
90.4
96.9

10.9
29.2
42.2
60.3
85.7
96.5

Sources: (1) Nishiyama (2002), (2) U.S. Census Bureau (2012a).

by Congressional Budget Ofﬁce (2012). This number is important because disability during working
years produces a correlated shock—comprising lost wages and a reduction in the annuity value—and is
one of the drivers for incomplete annuitization. It appears, therefore, that we are not overestimating its
impact and, if anything, our calibration is on the conservative side.

5

Simulation Results

We now present simulation evidence from the multi-period model, starting ﬁrst with our baseline calibration discussed above, followed by some sensitivity analysis. At key points in the analysis, we
compare our results with a similarly calibrated Yaari model where health shocks are turned off and the
mortality rate by age is set equal to the average mortality rate, weighted by the share of households in
each health state at that age.

5.1

Baseline Model

In our baseline model, recall that annuities are required to be non-negative. We ﬁrst examine the level
of annuitization at age 65, the ﬁrst year of retirement, followed by the level of annuitization across the
life cycle.
5.1.1

Annuitization at Age 65

The darker lines in Figure 9 show the optimal amount of assets annuitized at the retirement age 65 by a
healthy person (h = 1) at different levels of wealth achieved by that age. Wealth is reported as a fraction
of the average wage in the economy. Notice that the level of annuitization varies signiﬁcantly by the
level of risk aversion σ and wealth. For households with σ = 2, a relatively low level of risk aversion, annuities are not purchased at levels of wealth below around 6 times the national average annual
earnings. For households with a higher level of risk aversion of σ = 5, annuities are not purchased at
levels of wealth below 8 times average annual earnings. Notice, therefore, that a larger risk aversion
27

Figure 9: Annuitized Fraction of Wealth at Age 65 for a Healthy Person

Annuitized fraction of wealth

1
0.9

CRRA = 2.0

0.8
0.7

CRRA = 5.0

0.6
0.5

0.4
0.3

0.2
0.1

0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

Wealth

Explanation: The black lines show the optimal fraction of wealth held in life annuity form by a healthy person (h = 1) age
65 with different coefﬁcients of risk aversion, plotted as a function of beginning of period wealth. The unit of wealth is the
average annual earnings. The gray lines with matching plot patterns represent the distribution of households with constant
relative risk aversion (CRRA) of σ =2 [σ =5].
Assumptions: Annuities are required to be non-negative. Social Security exists. Long-term care costs are equal to 1.2 times
average annual earnings. Asset management fees and bequest motives are absent. The capital–output ratio is set to 2.8 by
varying the subjective discount rate.

σ decreases the demand for annuities, contrary to the standard Yaari model. This pattern is driven by
the valuation risk in our model that produces the correlated-cost channel, which is absent in the Yaari
model. To investigate, we ran the Yaari version of our model without health shocks and found that all
age-65 households annuitized 100% of their assets at all levels of wealth for both σ = 2 and σ = 5.
Moreover, when we ran our model with health transitions but assumed that long-term care costs were
fully insured, all wealth at retirement was also fully annuitized, suggesting that the impatience channel
is not driving these results.
For retirees, annuitization becomes more desirable at larger values of wealth. After a negative survival shock, a wealthy retiree has enough assets to pay for any potentially correlated long-term care cost
from the annuity stream itself. (Unlike workers, a retiree does not have to worry about any reduction
in earnings from becoming disabled or very sick.) Hence, a wealthy retiree can “hold to maturity,” in
much the same way that a long-term bond holder is less concerned with duration risk.
However, most retirees do not have a sufﬁcient level of wealth that allows them to hold to maturity.
The gray lines in Figure 9 show the percentage of age-65 households with the indicated level of wealth.
Much of this distribution falls to left of the point of any positive levels of annuitization and very far
to the left of the points of full annuitization. In fact, with σ = 3.0, a value between our low and high
levels of risk aversion (not plotted, to reduce clutter), 53% of retirees (across all health states) at age 65
hold no annuities at all and only 11% fully annuitize. Recall that these results are not driven by ad hoc
liquidity constraints; agents can fully rebalance their asset portfolio. Rather, these results are produced
by the correlated-cost channel, where the increase in the uninsured health costs coincides with the fall
in the remaining value of the annuity.

28

Annuitized fraction of wealth

Figure 10: Intensive Margin: Annuitized Fraction of All Wealth, by Age
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

CRRA = 2

CRRA = 3

CRRA = 5

Age Group
Explanation: Amount of total wealth that is annuitized by age and coefﬁcient of constant relative risk aversion, weighted
across all health states. The gray shadow represents the population density.
Assumptions: Annuities are required to be non-negative. Social Security exists. Long-term care costs are equal to 1.2 times
average annual earnings. Asset management fees and bequest motives are absent. The capital-output ratio is set to 2.8 by
varying the subjective discount rate.

5.1.2

Annuitization across the Life cycle

Figure 10 shows the fraction of all wealth that is annuitized (the intensive margin) across the life cycle.
Figure 11 shows the fraction of households that annuitize any assets (the extensive margin). The values
presented in both ﬁgures are weighted across all health states. The population density is shown as a gray
shadow and is independent of the level of risk aversion.
Across all ages, almost 57% of wealth is annuitized at σ = 3.0. However, only 37% of all households
in the economy hold any positive level of annuities; the other 63% hold none. Moreover, only 24% of
households fully annuitize. How can the majority of wealth be annuitized when most households do not
annuitize at all? The answer lies in the skewness of the wealth distribution. Wealthier households hold
a larger fraction of aggregate wealth, and they can more “afford to” annuitize because they can pay for
the costs associated with negative mortality shocks out of the annuity income stream itself.
Figures 10 and 11 show that annuitization, though, is not monotonic in age. Figure 8, which shows
the realized annuity return ρ as a function of age and health-state transition, provides the intuition for
this pattern. Recall that the annuity return includes two components: (a) the standard mortality credit,
which monotonically increases over the life cycle as the probability of death increases for a ﬁxed health
state, and (b) the valuation risk associated with changes in the health state that alter the remaining value
of the annuity. Consider ﬁrst the younger cohorts, which tend to be healthy (h1 ). The risk of mortality
for a healthy younger person is low, and so is the corresponding mortality credit that could be earned
from annuitizing. The chance of moving from good health to worse health may not be large in absolute
terms, but it is relative larger than the value of the small mortality credit. Most younger households
choose, therefore, not to annuitize, mostly out of fear that the value of the annuity might fall at the same
time that they might suffer correlated costs (mainly lost wages). Now consider persons above age 95.
They earn a large mortality credit even if they happen to be healthy (h1 ); the credit is even larger if they
29

Fraction of households
with annuities

Figure 11: Extensive Margin: Share of Households with Any Positive Amount of Annuities, by Age
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

CRRA = 2
CRRA = 3

CRRA = 5

Age Group
Explanation: Fraction of households with any annuities by age and coefﬁcient of constant relative risk aversion, weighted
across all health states. The gray shadow represents the population density.
Assumptions: Annuities are required to be non-negative. Social Security exists. Long-term care costs are equal to 1.2 times
average annual earnings. Asset management fees and bequest motives are absent. The capital-output ratio is set to 2.8 by
varying the subjective discount rate.

are not currently healthy (h2 or h3 ). A larger fraction of older people are also unhealthy initially, and
so the valuation risk is even smaller. Older people, therefore, typically choose to annuitize their entire
wealth.

5.2

Sensitivity Analysis

We now consider several changes to the baseline model that allow us to investigate the importance of
our long-term care cost assumptions, the presence of Social Security, and the impact of allowing for a
short position in annuities. In each case, full annuitization would still exist in the Yaari model.
5.2.1

Long-Term Care Costs

Table 4 investigates the importance of changing uninsured long-term care costs away from our baseline value of 1.2 times average annual earnings. Smaller values are consistent with some households
(about one in ten) having long-term care insurance. Larger values are consistent with the fact that our
baseline analysis ignored other forms of non-insured health care costs that are likely correlated with
the health state; our baseline analysis also assumed that, at most, only one member of the household
would use long-term care. Recall that, for working agents, we conservatively assume that all long-term
care costs are paid for by private insurance. Hence, changes in long-term care costs mainly impact the
annuitization decisions of retirees.
Not surprisingly, retirees annuitize a larger fraction of their wealth as uninsured long-term care costs
are reduced, and they annuitize less as long-term care costs are increased. However, because working
households are in the majority and face disability risk, only 44% of households in the economy still want
a positive level of annuitization even with no long-term care costs. In contrast, in the corresponding
30

Table 4: Changing Long-Term Care Costs
2
Long-Term
Care Cost
1.80
1.50
1.20
0.60
0.00
1.80
1.50
1.20
0.60
0.00

3

Relative Risk Aversion
5
2

Annuitized Percentage of
Total Wealth

3

5

Percentage of Households
with Annuities

55%
61%
67%
75%
75%

All Households
45%
37%
51%
41%
57%
45%
71%
61%
73%
69%

34%
36%
39%
43%
44%

31%
34%
37%
42%
44%

30%
32%
33%
40%
44%

47%
56%
69%
95%
100%

Retirees Only
32%
21%
40%
25%
51%
33%
88%
71%
100%
100%

56%
64%
74%
91%
91%

38%
48%
61%
86%
91%

27%
31%
39%
74%
89%

Explanation: Fraction of wealth annuitized and fraction of households with any annuities, for the entire population and for
only retirees, at different levels of long-term care expenses.
Assumptions: Annuities are required to be non-negative. Social Security exists. Long-term care costs are a varied fraction
of average annual earnings, as indicated. Asset management fees and bequest motives are absent. The capital–output ratio is
set to 2.8 by varying the subjective discount rate.

Yaari model (not shown), all households fully annuitize in the presence of uninsured expenses because
there are no ad hoc constraints on asset rebalancing.
5.2.2

Social Security

In the Yaari model with deterministic survival probabilities, Social Security crowds out household saving, but it does not change the investment allocation toward annuities.
In our model with stochastic mortality probabilities, however, Social Security has more of a material
impact. On one hand, Social Security is not perfectly substitutable for private annuities because Social
Security cannot be rebalanced (it is illegal to borrow against future beneﬁts). The more that a household
is required to save into Social Security, the less after-tax income that is available for precautionary
savings against correlated cost shocks. On the other hand, Social Security provides a valuable annuity
that implicitly incorporates the population average mortality credit (through the payroll tax rate).
For the most part, these two effects offset each other in our model, although the ﬁrst effect is larger.
In particular, upon removing both the Social Security payroll tax and beneﬁt at current factor prices, the
amount of wealth annuitized at σ = 3.0 declines from 57% in our baseline model to 46%. The fraction
of households with any annuity remains almost unchanged at 36%. The fraction of households that fully
annuitize, however, drops from 24% to just 11%. Interestingly, these results suggest that Social Security
has the potential to crowd in private annuitization, contrary to the conventional view.

31

Figure 12: Short Sales: Annuitized Fraction of All Wealth, by Age (Intensive Margin)
Annuitized fraction of wealth

1
0

CRRA = 2
CRRA = 5

-1

CRRA = 3

-2
-3

-4
-5

Age Group
Explanation: Amount of total wealth that is annuitized by age, weighted across all health states. The gray shadow represents
the population density.
Assumptions: Negative annuity holdings are allowed. Social Security exists. Long-term care costs are equal to 1.2 times
average annual earnings. Asset management fees and bequest motives are absent. The capital–output ratio is set to 2.8 by
varying the subjective discount rate. The value of σ = 3.0.

5.2.3

Allowing for Short Selling

Thus far, our simulation analysis has restricted annuity allocations to be non-negative. This assumption
is not strictly necessary. Although a private market would not lend bonds at the risk-free rate because
agents can die, annuities could go negative. As discussed earlier, a negative annuity is equivalent to
borrowing at the risk-free rate and purchasing life insurance to ensure repayment.
Figure 12 shows the amount of total wealth annuitized by age group, with no intentional bequest
motives (ξ = 0) and no management fees. Notice that younger households, which tend to be healthy,
hold a negative (short) position in annuities. On one hand, a negative position is costly to younger
households because they must now pay for the mortality credit. But the mortality credit is also inexpensive when young. On the other hand, the negative annuity position provides a valuable hedge against
future negative health shocks that could reduce their income before retirement and/or produce long-term
care expenses after retirement. Speciﬁcally, after a future realization of negative health information, this
short position can be reversed by going long in an annuity that is now less expensive than before the
negative health shock.25 The difference in the value of these short-long trades produces a net proﬁt to
the household that can be used to pay for any correlated income loss and/or uninsured expenses.
In fact, in our model the demand for negative annuities is so strong, the aggregate demand for
annuitization across the measure of all households is actually negative. This result is in sharp contrast
to the Yaari model, which predicts 100% positive annuitization of all wealth.
Figure 13 shows in more detail the fraction of households with positive or negative annuities. Notice
that, within the same age group, some households might hold a positive level of annuities and others
25 The

mechanics are discussed in more detail in subsection 2.2.3. In more recent times, life insurance policies can even
be directly resold in the secondary market, a small but rapidly growing market known as “life settlements.”

32

Fraction of households
with annuities

Figure 13: Short Sales: Share of Households with Any (Positive or Negative) Amount of Annuities, by
Age (Extensive Margin)
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

0

With positive0
annuities 0
0
0

With negative
annuities

With no
wealth

0
0
0

Age Group
Explanation: Fraction of households with any (positive or negative) annuities by age, weighted across all health states. The
gray shadow represents the population density.
Assumptions: Negative annuity holdings are allowed. Social Security exists. Long-term care costs are equal to 1.2 times
average annual earnings. Asset management fees and bequest motives are absent. The capital–output ratio is set to 2.8 by
varying the subjective discount rate. The value of σ = 3.0.

might have negative holdings.26 This fairly striking pattern is due to the heterogeneity in our model.
Households of the same age can vary in health status, income realization, and the amount of inherited
assets relative to their permanent income.
Of course, a short position appears to be contrary to conventional wisdom and practice. On one hand,
younger households do hold substantial amounts of life insurance. On the other hand, only about 17%
of individuals between ages 18 and 24 hold individual life insurance policies, increasing to about 26%
between ages 25 and 34 (LIMRA, 2011).27 Moreover, the apparent primary motivation for buying life
insurance is to protect dependents rather than to hedge future health risks (LIMRA, 2012b). In contrast,
in our model, it is optimal for most younger households to short annuities (purchase life insurance),
even if they have no dependents or bequest motives. Hence, in practice, households might be making illinformed choices or narrowly framing their decisions, consistent with Brown et al. (2008) and Beshears
et al. (2012). Or, the conventional guidance given to households could simply be suboptimal. We leave
that reconciliation to future research. Still, we modestly suggest that the “true annuity puzzle” might
actually be why we do not see more negative annuitization (life insurance) by younger households.
26 Naturally,

the shares add up to one, unless the age group has some households with no wealth. Some very poor households have no wealth and borrow against the lower bound of their future labor income produced by our model’s wage
process.
27 These numbers increase to 36% for ages 18 to 24 and 54% for ages 25 to 34, respectively, if employer-based group life
insurance policies are included.

33

5.3

Additional Factors That Reduce Annuity Demand

Thus far, our analysis has considered the role of uninsured expenses that substantially reduce the level
of annuitization in our model with stochastic mortality probabilities but leave the level of annuitization
at 100% in the Yaari model. We now consider additional factors that can reduce annuitization in both
frameworks. Our intent is to see how far a rational model can be pushed to produce a low level of
annuitization rather than to examine the differences between our model and the Yaari model. Still, in
key places, we also report the effects of these factors on the Yaari model, for comparison.
5.3.1

Management Fees

Yearly management fees for a typical annuity range from 0.80% to 2.0% of underlying assets, not
including any initial commission charges (up to 10% of the base) or surrender fees (around 7% in the
ﬁrst year, declining by 1% per year thereafter).28 In contrast, bond funds typically cost between 0.10%
of assets (for an index of large ﬁrms) and 0.90% (for more specialized bonds, such as emerging markets).
A differential management fee effectively reduces the mortality credit received from annuitization. We
assume a differential management fee of 1% and ignore commissions and surrender fees.
We ﬁrst consider the Yaari calibration of our model and a risk aversion σ of 3.0. Along the intensive
margin, 73% of all wealth remains annuitized. That consists of 100% of retiree wealth that is annuitized
and 65% of non-retiree wealth. Along the extensive margin, 90% of retirees hold a positive level of
annuities; about 10% of retirees have no wealth to annuitize and consume only their Social Security
income. In contrast, only 33% of non-retirees hold any annuities.
However, the presence of a management fee in the Yaari model tends to reduce annuitization in a
fairly knife-edge manner, as discussed earlier in Section 2. For younger households, the management
fee often exceeds the value of the small mortality credit that they can earn. For them, annuitization
can fall from 100% to 0%, unless they are very risk-averse and highly value consumption smoothing.
In contrast, many older households earn a mortality credit that is larger than the management fee. For
them, annuitization remains at 100% because the annuity return net of fees still exceeds that of bonds.
Indeed, our simulation results indicate a fairly strong knife-edge effect: the fraction households that
hold any annuities is also equal to the fraction of households that fully annuitized (both at 43%).
In contrast, in our baseline model with stochastic health and mortality probabilities, the level of
annuitization is much smaller. Along the intensive margin, only 22% of wealth is annuitized. Of that,
41% of retiree wealth is annuitized and 14% of non-retiree wealth. Along the extensive margin, 48%
of retirees hold a positive level of annuities but only 13% of non-retirees hold any annuities. Moreover,
the knife-edge effect is not present: Although 19% of all households hold annuities, only 7% fully
annuitize. These results are summarized in Table 5.
5.3.2

Bequest Motives

Without Management Fees. Without an intentional bequest motive (ξ = 0), all bequests are accidental and equal about 1.3% of GDP in our baseline model with no management fees. Bequests are,
of course, zero in our Yaari calibration. Empirically, however, a ratio of aggregate bequests to GDP in
the range from 2.0% to 4.0% per year is certainly reasonable (Gale and Scholz, 1994; Auerbach et al.,
1995; Hendricks, 2002). We therefore consider the introduction of intentional bequests (ξ > 0) and
target a 2.5% bequest–GDP ratio. For the Yaari calibration of our model, about 67% of wealth is annuitized (versus 100% without bequests). About 90% of households hold a positive level of annuities. In
28 See

The Motley Fool (2013) and CNN Money (2013).

34

Table 5: Changing Management Fees and Bequest Motives
Annuitized fraction of wealth
Retirees
Nononly
retirees only
Total

Fraction of households with annuities
Retirees
NonFully
only
retirees only Annuitized
Total

Management
fees

Bequest /
GDP ratio

0.00%
0.25%
0.75%
1.00%
1.20%

1.3%
1.5%
1.9%
2.5%
2.6%

57%
54%
40%
22%
18%

Without Intentional Bequests
51%
60%
37%
49%
56%
35%
44%
38%
30%
41%
14%
19%
40%
9%
14%

61%
57%
51%
48%
46%

32%
31%
26%
13%
7%

24%
21%
12%
7%
7%

0.00%
1.00%
1.00%

2.5%
3.6%
4.7%

38%
11%
8%

With Intentional Bequests
34%
40%
35%
23%
6%
14%
15%
4%
10%

57%
40%
27%

30%
9%
7%

21%
6%
5%

Explanation: Fraction of wealth annuitized and fraction of households with any annuities, for the entire population, retirees,
and non-retirees at different levels of management fees and bequest motives.
Assumptions: Annuities are required to be non-negative. Social Security exists. Long-term care costs are 1.2 times average
annual earnings. The capital–output ratio is set to 2.8 by varying the subjective discount rate.

contrast, in our baseline model with stochastic mortality probabilities, only 38% of wealth is annuitized
(a decrease from the 57% shown in Section 5.1.2) and only 35% of households hold a positive level of
annuities.
With Management Fees. We also ran simulations that combined the same level of altruism ξ that
produced a 2.5% bequest–income ratio with a 1.0% management fee. That combination increases the
bequest–income ratio to 3.6%, which is consistent with the estimate by Auerbach et al. (1995). In our
baseline model, the amount of wealth annuitized in the economy dropped to 11%, with only 14% of
households holding any annuities.
With Management Fees and Uneven Bequests. Empirically, only about 40% of the incidence of
bequests are actually received as inheritances (Hendricks, 2002; Gale and Scholz, 1994). Some of
the previous estimates of the bequest–income ratio do not clearly distinguish between bequests and
inheritances. Therefore, we also ran simulations where only the bequests of the top 40% of income
earners (as indicated by their wage at retirement) are received by younger higher-income earners. The
other 60% is simply “thrown away” (for example, burial expenses). We target an inheritance–GDP
ratio of about 2.7%, which produces an implied bequest–GDP ratio of 4.7%. To be sure, this bequest–
GDP ratio might be viewed on the high side. However, this value actually matches the “lower bound”
estimated by Gale and Scholz (1994) for households in the Survey of Consumer Finances. Summing
intended transfers, college expenses paid by parents, and accidental bequests, they estimate a ratio of
annual ﬂow of transfers to capital equal to 1.7%, which implies an annual ﬂow to income ratio of about
4.7% (assuming a capital–output ratio of 2.8). Along with a 1.0% differential management fee, only 8%
of wealth is now annuitized in our model and only 10% of households hold any annuities.

35

5.3.3

Potential Future Extensions

We now consider three possible extensions that would likely decrease the demand for annuities even
more. We tried to implement each of them but faced computational challenges or limited access to
the household level of data that would allow for a clear model calibration. Therefore, we leave these
extensions up to future research.
Differential Transaction Costs. Another possible extension would incorporate differential product
transaction costs above the management fees considered earlier. Actual transaction fees for investing
in bond funds are quite low, ranging from zero at vertically integrated broker—dealers such as Vanguard to small ticket charges at independent broker—dealers such as Schwab and Fidelity. In contrast,
transaction costs for buying an insurance product such as an annuity are much larger. In addition to
the initial underwriting charge for determining a client’s risk proﬁle, the presence of health shocks in
our model means that rebalancing would require additional underwriting in order to reduce adverse
selection. These factors should further reduce the level of annuitization. Incorporating such one-sided
transaction costs into our model would be computationally very challenging and is left to future research.
More Worker Risk. Recall that workers in our model were assumed to always qualify for disability
insurance to partly cover their lost wages as well as private insurance to fully cover their medical costs.
As a result, the only risk that workers face from health shocks in our model is from the portion of their
wages that is not covered by disability. In reality, workers face risk in the form of negative health shocks
that reduce future wages without becoming disabled. Workers also face uninsured medical costs in the
form of low coverage or copayments. We could not ﬁnd the micro-level data that would allow us to
map these additional risks along the key dimensions of our model; the available data appears to be too
aggregated.
Asymmetric Information. Finally, recall that our simulations assume that policyholders do not hold
superior information relative to insurers. As we showed earlier, while adverse selection reduces the
mortality credit, it does not undermine the case for full annuitization in the Yaari model. Even an
annuity with a smaller mortality credit statewise dominates bonds in the Yaari model, producing a corner
solution at 100% annuitization. However, in the model herein with stochastic mortality probabilities
and correlated costs, most households face an interior condition in their choice between annuities and
bonds. As a result, any reduction in the mortality credit from asymmetric information would tend to
reduce positive annuitization even more. That could result, for example, if the insurer does not want
to incur the costs associated with medical underwriting. If short sales are allowed, then shorting by
younger households could also be undermined if their subsequent opportunity to take a positive position
is limited.

6

Conclusions

This paper shows that the original Yaari prediction of 100% annuitization of wealth is very hard to
break with various market frictions when survival probabilities are assumed to be deterministic, as is
standard. Allowing for the survival probabilities themselves to be stochastic, however, can break the
full annuitization result and become a gateway mechanism for various market frictions to matter. Our
simulation evidence suggests that, even under conservative assumptions, it is indeed not optimal for
most households to annuitize any wealth; many younger households should actually short annuities.
36

Future work can extend our analysis in several directions as discussed in Section 5.3.3. We believe
that most extensions would only decrease the optimal level of annuitization even more. Future work
could also examine how the results impact the optimal construction of tax and social insurance policies
(Netzer and Scheuer, 2007).

37

Appendix A: Robustness of Section 3
Although allowing for stochastic survival probabilities breaks the standard full annuitization result,
allowing for a richer set of contracts could increase annuitization rates. We now consider a few.

Shorter Contracts
In the three-period model, the annuity contract purchased at age j lasts until death or age j +2, whichever
occurs ﬁrst. Suppose, however, that we replace the two-period annuity contract with a sequence of oneperiod contracts, the ﬁrst one issued at age j and the second issued at age j + 1. There is no valuation
risk with a one-period contract (formally, π j+1 = 0 in equation (1)), and so the annuity return is simply
equal to the bond yield plus any mortality credit, as in the original Yaari model. Annuities would again
statewise dominate bonds.
Of course, from a welfare perspective, the value of the annuity can diminish with a shorter contract
in the presence of reclassiﬁcation risk. In the extreme case, with very short contracts approaching zero
holding length, annuities provide no value because agents would simply rebalance right before they die.
A mortality credit could not then be offered in a competitive equilibrium.
But we are more focused on annuity demand. If agents also receive updates about their survival
probabilities (and can die) at even a higher frequency, then annuities might still not dominate. Indeed,
one can interpret our three periods as representing an interval of length κ in total time, with each period
representing time length κ3 . Annuities will not dominate even as κ → 0 if information innovations occur
at even higher frequency.

A Richer Space of Mortality-Linked Contracts
Suppose now that households could also purchase additional mortality-linked contracts that make positive or negative payments based on changes in their individual health. Naturally, we will not consider an
entire set of Arrow–Debreu securities; more rigid contracts like annuities exist precisely because a full
set of Arrow–Debreu securities are not available. (In other words, a security that has any resemblance to
a traditional-looking annuity would be spanned by existing securities in a full Arrow–Debreu economy.)
Instead, we ask, what is the minimum type of mortality-linked contract that, when combined with an
annuity, would restore annuities to their statewise (or even second-order) position of dominance?
For patient households, full insurance against all other shocks would restore full annuitization. Full
insurance not only includes protection from medical costs and lost wages, but even protection against
shocks uncorrelated with survival, because they could still happen at the same time as a negative shock
to survival probabilities, thereby producing large marginal utility. The model therefore would predict increased annuitization if such insurance markets were developed.29 For impatient households, additional
payments would also need to be made based on non-observable costs in order to directly undo changes
in the annuity resale value. Such a security would need to be fairly rich in design and be a function of
characteristics of previous and current health states and age (in order to capture duration).
29 For

example, Warshawsky, Spillman and Murtaugh (2002) consider a contract that integrates annuities with long-term
care costs, but they also raise questions about regulatory hurdles and whether such a contract fully addresses the reasons we
do not have a robust long-term care market.

38

Hybrid and “Designer” Annuities
Thus far, we have considered a “life annuity” in the traditional sense, as a contract that pays a constant
amount in each state contingent on survival, as in the original Yaari model.30 Most of the annuity literature has focused on such a contract, which is our focus as well. It is straightforward, however, to construct a “hybrid annuity” with bond-like features—speciﬁcally, one that includes some non-contingent
payments—that will at least weakly dominate a simple bond. By subsuming both annuity and bond
types of contracts, this hybrid annuity can never do worse than either a bond or a standard annuity,
purely by construction.31 Moreover, for impatient households facing no other risks, one could also create a “designer annuity” that makes contingent payments that decrease in real value with age, based on
the agent’s own rate of time preference.32 Finally, the demand for annuities could be altered if people
could purchase an option contract that gave them the right to buy an annuity at a future date.33

Appendix B: Discretization of State Space
Total wealth at age j, A j , is represented as one of 101 points of the wealth grid, A jk , k = 0, 1, ..., 100.
We ﬁx point A j0 = 0; A j100 equals the assumed maximum wealth, and the value of A jk increases with
k. For best interpolation during optimization and evaluation, the spacing between adjacent grid points is
tighter at the low end of the wealth distribution, geometrically increasing values at intermediate to high
wealth. Because most people’s wealth increases during the early part of life, the maximum wealth A j100
does not have to be the same for all ages; we also allow the grid to be expanded during the computation
if the maximum wealth is actually reached by a positive measure of agents.
When the optimal policy (consumption, bond saving, and annuity saving) is computed for an agent
at the node (A, η, h, j), where the indices represent wealth, productivity, health, and age, respectively,
the wealth A j+1 in the next period (age j + 1) is allowed to take any positive value, rather than be
limited to the values of the grid points. The value function V j+1 (A j+1 , η j+1 , h j+1 , j + 1) corresponding
to that wealth is determined by interpolation between the two grid points bracketing it, for the given
ﬁnal productivity and health state (ηt+1 , h j+1 ) and age j + 1. We thus use interpolation by Schumaker’s
shape-preserving quadratic splines (Judd, 1998, pp. 231–234), which preserve local concavity/convexity
of V as a function of wealth, thereby avoiding artiﬁcial kinks at grid points. To reduce the potential for
30 Because

we have no inﬂation in our model, we could also interpret our annuity payments as being indexed.
for example, the case “Low Patience” (β → 0) considered earlier. A “hybrid annuity” that paid 0.75 at ages
j + 1 and j + 2, not contingent on actual survival, would allow the agent to consume 1.5 in both Good and Bad health states
at age j + 1. The non-contingency of the payments allows even an agent in the Bad state to borrow at the zero risk-free rate
against the payment that will be made at age j + 2, even though he or she does not survive until then. (If payments were
contingent on survival, then the agent could never borrow in the Bad health state because the mortality-adjusted interest rate
would be inﬁnite.) The “hybrid annuity” would perfectly smooth consumption, as a bond does, by providing a non-contingent
stream of payments. More generally, a “hybrid annuity” could reproduce any combination of bonds and traditional annuities
when 0 < β < 1.
32 In the example considered earlier (β → 0), an annuity that paid a decreasing amount equal to 1.5 at age j + 1 and 0 at
age j + 2 would again tie with a bond return. This decreasing-pay annuity, however, is different from a nominal annuity that
makes decreasing real payments over time. Still, in practice, because a hybrid annuity is challenging to design, annuities
paying a ﬁxed nominal account could be preferred over inﬂation-indexed annuities.
33 See, for example, Sheshinski (2007), who nicely demonstrates a welfare improvement from the introduction of this
unspanned contract when annuity contracts can’t be easily rebalanced. Aside from welfare changes, the impact on the
actual demand for annuities in the model herein with rebalancing is ambiguous because of the trade-off between pooling
reclassiﬁcation risk early in life versus the value of obtaining more information about future mortality risk that has correlated
costs in our setting. Regardless, annuitization must necessarily be less than full in equilibrium in our setting.
31 Consider,

39

non-convexities induced by limited liability (i.e., Medicaid payments that ensure positive consumption),
we set the minimum level of consumption sufﬁciently small to produce a monotone value function in
wealth, thereby avoiding the artiﬁcial incentive to take on additional risk as wealth approaches zero.
Still, to be extra careful, at each state within the household’s recursive problem, we execute a globally
stable direct search optimization method numerous times across a wide range of different starting tuples
along an appropriate mesh.
The number of nodes in the full dynamic-programming tree is (J − 20) × m × n × (kmax + 1), where
(J − 20) is the age span between the minimum and maximum ages, m is the number of health states, n
the number of productivity states, and kmax is the highest index of the wealth grid. We use ages from 21
to 120, so (J − 20) = 100; as deﬁned above, kmax = 100, and ,as discussed in the paper, m = 3 and n = 8.
Therefore, we have about (J − 20) × m × n × (kmax + 1) = 100 × 3 × 8 × 101 = 242, 400 optimization
problems for a single “partial equilibrium pass” of the household problem within the Gauss-Seidel
routine, with each optimization problem computed 10 to 20 times with different starting values along a
mesh. Obtaining a general equilibrium solution then typically requires 20 to 30 passes at the household
problem. When the measure of agents is computed for the purposes of calculating aggregate quantities
of capital and labor, a value from the continuum must be apportioned to the nearest two grid points. To
preserve expected utility and the total measure, the weights given to the two points are chosen inversely
proportional to the distance to them.

Appendix C: Euler Equation Errors
Equation (11) can be rewritten more compactly as


V j (A j , η j , h j , j) = max u(c j ) + β s(h j , j)E j [V j+1 (A j+1 , η j+1 , h j+1 , j + 1)]
c j ,α j

subject to the same budget constraints shown in the text. Assuming an interior solution the ﬁrst order
condition for consumption and ignoring intentional bequests (ξ = 0) to simplify the exposition, implies
that


∂V j+1 (A j+1 , η j+1 , h j+1 , j + 1)
∂ u(c j )
= β s(h j , j)E
R(α j , h j , h j+1 ) ,
(12)
∂cj
∂ A j+1
According to the Envelope Theorem the partial derivative with respect to A j is


∂V j+1 (A j+1 , η j+1 , h j+1 , j + 1)
∂V j (A j , η j , h j , j) ∂ u(c j )
,
=
+ β s(h j , j)E
∂Aj
∂Aj
∂Aj


V j+1 (A j+1 , η j+1 , h j+1 , j + 1) ∂ A j+1
∂V j (A j , η j , h j , j)
= β s(h j , j)E
,
∂Aj
∂ A j+1
∂Aj


∂V j+1 (A j+1 , η j+1 , h j+1 , j + 1)
∂V j (A j , η j , h j , j)
= β s(h j , j)E
R(α j , h j , h j+1 ) ,
∂Aj
∂ A j+1
Noting that the right hand side of equations (12) and (13) are the same, we can rewrite
∂ u(c j ) ∂V j (A j , η j , h j , j)
=
∂cj
∂Aj
This allows us to rewrite equation (13) as

40

(13)



∂ u(c j+1 )
∂ u(c j )
= β s(h j , j)E
R(α j , h j , h j+1 ) ,
∂cj
∂ c j+1
or
uc j = β s(h j , j)E uc j+1 (c j+1 )R(α j , h j , h j+1 ) .
Solving for consumption, we get


c j = u−1
c j β s(h j , j)E uc j+1 (c j+1 )R(α j , h j , h j+1 )
We now deﬁne the Euler Equation Error ε as


β
s(h
,
j)E
u
(c
)R(α
,
h
,
h
)
c j (1 + ε) = u−1
j
c
j
j
j+1
j+1
cj
j+1
or
ε=



u−1
−cj
c j β s(h j , j)E uc j+1 (c j+1 )Rt (α j , h j , h j+1 )
cj

Generally, the acceptable range of errors is log10 (ε) < −3. The Euler equation errors for people that
are constrained—either because they live hand-to-mouth, or because they can annuitize only a positive
fraction of their wealth—is typically larger than −3. The errors for unconstrained people typically range
from around −3 to less than−7.

41

References
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, Steven Laufer, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. 2011. “The Joy of Giving or Assisted Living? Using Strategic Surveys to Separate Public Care Aversion from Bequest
Motives.” Journal of Finance, 66(2): 519–561.
Auerbach, Alan J., Jagadeesh Gokhale, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, John Sabelhaus, and David N. Weil. 1995.
“The Annuitization of Americans’ Resources: A Cohort Analysis.” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 5089.
Baldwin, William. 2013. “Dodge the Long-Term Care Insurance Mess.” Forbes, http://goo.gl/Xv2Dl.
Bauer, Daniel, and Jochen Russ. 2012. “A New Methodology for Measuring Actual to Expected Performance.” Georgia State University and Institut für Finanz- und Aktuarwissenschaften Working Paper.
Bernheim, B. Douglas. 1991. “How Strong Are Bequest Motives? Evidence Based on Estimates of the
Demand for Life Insurance and Annuities.” Journal of Political Economy, 99(5): 899–927.
Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Stephen P. Zeldes. 2012. “What
Makes Annuitization More Appealing?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
18575.
Bodie, Zvi. 2003. “Thoughts on the Future: Life-Cycle Investing in Theory and Practice.” Financial
Analysts Journal, January/February: 24–29.
Brown, Jeffrey R., and Amy Finkelstein. 2008. “The Interaction of Public and Private Insurance: Medicaid and the Long-Term Care Insurance Market.” American Economic Review, 98(3): 1083–1102.
Brown, Jeffrey R., and Amy Finkelstein. 2011. “Insuring Long-Term Care in the United States.” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 25(4): 119–42.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey R. Kling, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Marian V. Wrobel. 2008. “Why Don’t
People Insure Late-Life Consumption? A Framing Explanation of the Under-Annuitization Puzzle.”
American Economic Review, 98(2): 304–09.
Brugiavini, Agar. 1993. “Uncertainty Resolution and the Timing of Annuity Purchases.” Journal of
Public Economics, 50(1): 31–62.
Cagetti, Marco, and Mariacristina De Nardi. 2006. “Entrepreneurship, Frictions, and Wealth.” Journal
of Political Economy, 114(5): 835–870.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. 2013. “Medigap Policy Search.” http://goo.gl/xKL5q.
Clementi, Gian Luca, and Hugo A. Hopenhayn. 2006. “A Theory of Financing Constraints and Firm
Dynamics.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(1): 229–265.
CNN Money. 2013. “Annuities–What are the disadvantages?”
http://goo.gl/j2uG7.

Ultimate Guide to Retirement,

Congressional Budget Ofﬁce. 2012. “Policy Options for the Social Security Disability Insurance Program.” http://goo.gl/22wNo.
42

Davidoff, Thomas, Jeffrey R. Brown, and Peter A. Diamond. 2005. “Annuities and Individual Welfare.”
American Economic Review, 95(5): 1573–1590.
De Nardi, Mariacristina, Eric French, and John B. Jones. 2010. “Why Do the Elderly Save? The Role
of Medical Expenses.” Journal of Political Economy, 118(1): 39–75.
Fidelity Beneﬁts Consulting. 2012. “Fidelity Estimates Couples Retiring In 2012 Will Need $240,000
To Pay Medical Expenses Throughout Retirement.” Inside Fidelity, http://goo.gl/J40XT.
Finkelstein, Amy, and James Poterba. 2004. “Adverse Selection in Insurance Markets: Policyholder
Evidence from the U.K. Annuity Market.” Journal of Political Economy, 112(1): 183–208.
Gale, William G., and John Karl Scholz. 1994. “Intergenerational Transfers and the Accumulation of
Wealth.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8(4): 145–160.
Genworth Financial. 2012. “Genworth 2012 Cost of Care Survey—Executive Summary.”
Gottlieb, Daniel. 2012. “Prospect Theory, Life Insurance, and Annuities.” The Wharton School Working
Paper.
Hendricks, Lutz. 2002. “Intended and Accidental Bequests in a Life-Cycle Economy.” Department of
Economics, Arizona State University Working Paper.
Judd, Kenneth L. 1998. Numerical Methods in Economics. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., and Avia Spivak. 1981. “The Family as an Incomplete Annuities Market.” Journal of Political Economy, 89(2): 372–91.
Lieber, Ron. 2010. “Ignore Long-Term Care Planning at Your Peril.” New York Times,
http://goo.gl/2dOP8.
Life Insurance Settlement Association. 2013. “Life Settlement History.” http://goo.gl/bb30r.
LIMRA. 2011. “Person-Level Trends in U.S. Life Insurance Ownership.” report, Windsor, Connecticut.
LIMRA. 2012a. “Annuity Sales Struggle under Weight of Low Interest Rates.” article.
LIMRA. 2012b. “Facts from LIMRA: Life Insurance Awareness Month, September 2012.” brochure.
Lockwood, Lee M. 2013. “Incidental Bequests: Bequest Motives and the Choice to Self-Insure LateLife Risks.” Northwestern University Working Paper.
Low, Hamish, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2010. “Disability Risk, Disability Insurance and Life Cycle Behavior.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 15962.
Maurer, Raimond, Olivia S. Mitchell, Ralph Rogalla, and Vasily Kartashov. 2013. “Lifecycle Portfolio
Choice with Systematic Longevity Risk and Variable Investment-Linked Deferred Annuities.” Journal of Risk and Insurance.
MetLife. 2010. “The 2010 MetLife Market Survey of Nursing Home, Assisted Living, Adult Day Services, and Home Care Costs.” Waltham, Massachusetts.

43

Modigliani, Franco. 1986. “Life Cycle, Individual Thrift, and the Wealth of Nations.” American Economic Review, 76(3): 297–313.
Netzer, Nick, and Florian Scheuer. 2007. “Taxation, Insurance, and Precautionary Labor.” Journal of
Public Economics, 91(7-8): 1519–1531.
Nishiyama, Shinichi. 2002. “Bequests, Inter Vivos Transfers, and Wealth Distribution.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 5(4): 892–931.
Nishiyama, Shinichi, and Kent Smetters. 2005. “Consumption Taxes and Economic Efﬁciency with
Idiosyncratic Wage Shocks.” Journal of Political Economy, 113(5): 1088–1115.
Ohlemacher, Stephen. 2013. “Social Security Chief: Program Hurt by Neglect.” Associated Press,
http://goo.gl/qJn2x.
Palumbo, Michael G. 1999. “Uncertain Medical Expenses and Precautionary Saving near the End of the
Life Cycle.” Review of Economic Studies, 66(2): 395–421.
Robinson, Jim. 1996. “A Long-Term Care Status Transition Model.” In The Old-Age Crisis—Actuarial
Opportunities: The 1996 Bowles SymposiumChapter 8, 72–79. Georgia State University, Atlanta.
Scholz, John Karl, Ananth Seshadri, and Surachai Khitatrakun. 2006. “Are Americans Saving "Optimally" for Retirement?” Journal of Political Economy, 114(4): 607–643.
Sheshinski, Eytan. 2007. The Economic Theory of Annuities. Princeton, New Jersey:Princeton University Press.
Siegel Bernard, Tara. 2013. “Fine Print and Red Tape in Some Long-Term Care Policies.” New York
Times, http://goo.gl/NhRiX.
Sinclair, Sven, and Kent Smetters. 2004. “Health Shocks and the Demand for Annuities.” Congressional
Budget Ofﬁce Technical Paper 2004-09.
Social Security Administration. 2005. “Social Security Disability Inurance Program Worker Experience.” Actuarial Study No. 118, Washington, D.C.
Social Security Administration. 2011. “Population in the Social Security Area.” Actuarial Publications,
http://goo.gl/0Sb3t.
Social Security Administration. 2012a. “Annual Statistical Supplement to the Social Security Bulletin,
2011.” Washington, DC.
Social Security Administration. 2012b. “Disabled Worker Beneﬁciaries.” http://goo.gl/YcM70.
Society of Actuaries. 2000a. “RP-2000 Female Disabled Retiree Table.” http://goo.gl/oo5F7.
Society of Actuaries. 2000b. “RP-2000 Male Disabled Retiree Table.” http://goo.gl/TepQI.
Starc, Amanda. 2012. “Insurer Pricing and Consumer Welfare: Evidence from Medigap.” The Wharton
School Working Paper.
The Motley Fool. 2013. “Annuity Fees and Expenses.” http://goo.gl/F9xvK.
44

Townley, Peter G. C., and Robin W. Boadway. 1988. “Social Security and the Failure of Annuity Markets.” Journal of Public Economics, 35(1): 75–96.
Turra, Cassio M., and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2008. “The Impact of Health Status and Out-of-Pocket Medical
Expenditures on Annuity Valuation.” In Recalibrating Retirement Spending and Saving, ed. John
Ameriks and Olivia S. Mitchell, Chapter 10, 227–250. Oxford University Press.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2011. “Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2012.” Washington, D.C.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2012a. “Household Income Inequality within U.S. Counties: 2006–2010.” Washington, D.C.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2012b. “Income, Poverty, and Health Insurance Coverage in the United States:
2011.” Washington, D.C.
Warshawsky, Mark, Brenda Spillman, and Christopher Murtaugh. 2002. “Integrating Life Annuities and
Long-Term Care Insurance: Theory, Evidence, Practice, and Policy.” In Innovations in Retirement
Financing, ed. Zvi Bodie, Brett Hammond and Olivia Mitchell, 198–221. University of Pennsylvania
Press, Philadelphia, PA.
Yaari, Menahem E. 1965. “Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the Consumer.” Review
of Economic Studies, 32(2): 137–150.
Zhang, Harold H. 1997. “Endogenous Borrowing Constraints with Incomplete Markets.” Journal of
Finance, 52(5): 2187–2209.

45

