NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RAILROADS AND AMERICAN ECONOMIC GROWTH:
A “MARKET ACCESS” APPROACH
Dave Donaldson
Richard Hornbeck
Working Paper 19213
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19213
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2013

For helpful comments and suggestions, we thank many colleagues and seminar participants at Chicago,
Colorado, EHA, George Washington, Harvard, NBER, Santa Clara, Stanford, Stanford GSB, UC-Berkeley,
UC-Davis, UC-Irvine, UC-Merced, and UC-San Diego. We are grateful to Jeremy Atack and coauthors
for sharing their data. Georgios Angelis, Irene Chen, Andrew Das Sarma, Manning Ding, Jan Kozak,
Meredith McPhail, Rui Wang, Sophie Wang, and Kevin Wu provided excellent research assistance.
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
1156239. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Dave Donaldson and Richard Hornbeck. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Railroads and American Economic Growth: A “Market Access” Approach
Dave Donaldson and Richard Hornbeck
NBER Working Paper No. 19213
July 2013
JEL No. F1,N01,N51,N71,O1,R1
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the historical impact of railroads on the American economy. Expansion of the
railroad network may have affected all counties directly or indirectly – an econometric challenge that
arises in many empirical settings. However, the total impact on each county is captured by changes
in that county's “market access,” a reduced-form expression derived from general equilibrium trade
theory. We measure counties' market access by constructing a network database of railroads and waterways
and calculating lowest-cost county-to-county freight routes. As the railroad network expanded from
1870 to 1890, changes in market access were capitalized into county agricultural land values with
an estimated elasticity of 1.1. County-level declines in market access associated with removing all
railroads in 1890 are estimated to decrease the total value of US agricultural land by 64%. Feasible
extensions to internal waterways or improvements in country roads would have mitigated 13% or 20%
of the losses from removing railroads.
Dave Donaldson
MIT Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive, E52-243G
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
ddonald@mit.edu
Richard Hornbeck
Department of Economics
Harvard University
232 Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
hornbeck@fas.harvard.edu

During the 19th century, railroads spread throughout a growing United States as the
economy rose to global prominence. Railroads became the dominant form of freight transportation and areas around railroad lines prospered. The early historical literature often
presumed that railroads were indispensable to the United States’ economy or, at least, very
influential for economic growth. Our understanding of the development of the American
economy is shaped by an understanding of the impact of railroads and, more generally, the
impact of market integration.
In Railroads and American Economic Growth, Fogel (1964) transformed the academic
literature by using a “social saving” methodology to focus attention on counterfactuals: in
the absence of railroads, freight transportation by rivers and canals would have been only
moderately more expensive along most common routes. Fogel argued that small differences in
freight rates caused some areas to thrive relative to others, but that the aggregate economic
impact of railroads was small. This social saving methodology has been widely applied
to transportation improvements and other technological innovations, though many scholars
have discussed both practical and theoretical limitations of the approach (see, e.g., Lebergott,
1966; Nerlove, 1966; McClelland, 1968; David, 1969; White, 1976; Fogel, 1979; Leunig, 2010).1
There is an appeal to a methodology that estimates directly the impacts of railroads,
using increasingly available county-level data and digitized railroad maps. Recent work
has compared counties that received railroads to counties that did not (Haines and Margo,
2008; Atack and Margo, 2010; Atack et al., 2010; Atack, Haines and Margo, 2011), and
similar methods have been used to estimate impacts of railroads in modern China (Banerjee,
Duflo and Qian, 2012) or highways in the United States (Baum-Snow, 2007; Michaels, 2008).
These studies estimate relative impacts of transportation improvements; for example, due
to displacement and complementarities, areas without railroads and areas with previous
railroads are also affected when railroads are extended to new areas.
This paper develops a methodology for estimating aggregate impacts of railroads on the
American economy, maintaining Fogel’s focus on the agricultural sector. We argue that it
is natural to measure how expansion of the railroad network affects each county’s “market
access,” a reduced-form expression derived from general equilibrium trade theory, and then
to estimate how enhanced market access is capitalized into each county’s value of agricultural
land. A county’s market access increases when it becomes cheaper to trade with another
county, particularly when that other county has a larger population and higher trade costs
with other counties. In a wide class of multiple-region models, changes in market access
1

One alternative approach is to create a computational general equilibrium model, with the explicit
inclusion of multiple regions separated by a transportation technology (e.g., Williamson, 1974; Herrendorf,
Schmitz and Teixeira, 2009). Cervantes (2013) presents estimates from a calibrated trade model.

1

summarize the total direct and indirect impacts on each county from changes in the national
railroad network. We measure counties’ market access by constructing a network database
of railroads and waterways and calculating lowest-cost county-to-county freight routes.
As the railroad network expanded from 1870 to 1890, changes in market access were
capitalized into agricultural land values with an estimated elasticity of 1.1. This estimate
would not reject the coefficient implied by the model (at plausible parameter values), though
the empirical analysis does not depend on calibrating the model.
An empirical advantage to estimating the impact of market access, rather than estimating
the impact of local railroad density, is that counties’ market access is influenced by changes
elsewhere in the railroad network. Despite concerns about exacerbating attenuation bias
from measurement error, the estimated impact of market access is largely robust to using
only variation in access to more-distant markets or to controlling for changes in counties’ own
railroad track. Another identification approach uses the fact that counties close to navigable
waterways are naturally less dependent on expansion of the railroad network to obtain access
to markets. The estimated impact of market access is larger when instrumenting for changes
in market access with counties’ initial market access through waterways only.
The paper then estimates the aggregate impact of railroads on the agricultural sector in
1890, based on the calculated decline in counties’ market access without railroads and the
estimated impact of market access on agricultural land values. Removing all railroads in
1890 is estimated to lower the total value of US agricultural land by 63.5%. This reduction
in agricultural land value generates annual economic losses equal to 3.40% of GNP, which is
moderately larger than comparable social saving estimates by Fogel (1964) that are presumed
to reflect an upper bound impact. Railroads were critical to the agricultural sector, though
the total loss of all agricultural land value would only generate annual economic losses
equal to 5.35% of GNP. Reviving the idea that railroads were “indispensable” to American
economic growth would require extending our analysis to other economic sectors and/or
impacts on technological growth.
The paper then considers whether railroads were “irreplaceable” to the agricultural sector, or whether alternative transportation improvements had the potential to substitute for
the absence of railroads. First, in the absence of railroads, additional canals might have
been constructed to bring many areas closer to low-cost waterways (Fogel, 1964). However,
we measure substantial declines in counties’ market access when replacing railroads with
the extended canal network proposed by Fogel. The proposed canals mitigate only 13% of
the losses from removing the railroad network, though the implied annual economic benefits
would have exceeded the estimated annual capital costs. Second, in the absence of railroads,
country roads might have been improved to reduce the costs of long-distance wagon trans2

portation (Fogel, 1964). Replacing railroads with lower wagon transportation costs would
have mitigated roughly 20% of the losses from removing the railroad network. Most of this
benefit to improved country roads would have continued in the presence of railroads, however, which suggests that railroads did not substantially discourage improvements in country
roads or perhaps even the introduction of motor trucks. The absence of railroads might also
have increased waterway shipping rates (Holmes and Schmitz, 2001), which is estimated to
exacerbate by 22% the economic losses from removing railroads.
Revisiting the historical impact of railroads on the American economy suggests a larger
role for railroads and market integration in economic development. Fogel (1964) calculates
the impact of railroads based on willingness to pay for the transportation of agricultural
goods, and our methodology is based on a similar willingness to pay for agricultural land.
Whereas Fogel adds up the impact of railroads partly by assuming the complete loss of
agricultural land more than 40 miles from a natural waterway, we directly estimate the impact
of railroads on all counties’ agricultural land values.2 While Fogel frames his social saving
estimate as an upper bound due to the potential for adaptation to the absence of railroads,
our best estimates neglect potential gains to consumers, other sectors, and/or technological
innovation. We hope that the ability to measure and analyze impacts of “market access” will
spur a new wave of research on the aggregate impacts of railroads throughout the American
economy.3
More broadly, this paper takes on the general methodological challenge of estimating
aggregate treatment effects in empirical settings with substantial treatment spillover effects.
Railroads affect all areas to some degree through interlinked trade networks. If railroads’
impacts were locally confined, then the unit of analysis might be aggregated (e.g., Miguel and
2

We see our methodology as a natural extension of Fogel’s intuition, drawing on recent advances in trade
theory, county-level data, and spatial computational tools.
3
In related work using a similar model, Redding and Sturm (2007) estimate the impact on population
from changes in market access following the division and reunification of Germany, Hanson (2005) studies the
correlation between US county-level wages and county-level market access from 1970 to 1990, and Redding
and Venables (2004) and Head and Mayer (2011) study the relationship between national GDP and country
market access. Donaldson (forthcoming) estimates the income benefits from India’s railroads and shows
that these are consistent with an Eaton and Kortum (2002) model similar to that used here. In contrast to
Donaldson (forthcoming), this paper measures the impact of railroads on market access (as derived from an
Eaton-Kortum model extended to allow for labor mobility) to estimate the aggregate impact of railroads and
to evaluate the impact of counterfactual scenarios. This paper’s methodological approach is more suited to
settings with high mobility of labor, which appears to reflect the historical US economy more than the Indian
economy. The concept of “market access” has been useful for empirical work (surveyed by Redding (2010)),
though this paper is the first to leverage the concept of “market access” to estimate aggregate effects of placebased treatments (such as transportation infrastructure) from spatial comparisons using micro-geographical
data. Redding (2010) highlights the surprising absence of research in this field that uses the price of an
immobile factor, such as our use of land values, to estimate the benefits to each location in the presence of
mobile factors.

3

Kremer, 2004). As in many empirical settings, however, sufficient aggregation is empirically
intractable. Our proposed solution uses economic theory to characterize how much railroads
change each area’s market access; once the intensity of treatment is defined to reflect both
direct and indirect impacts, relative empirical comparisons estimate the aggregate treatment
effect of railroads.4 Using economic theory as a guide, but without relying on calibration, it
is possible to estimate aggregate treatment effects in a reduced-form manner using relative
variation. Empirical research is increasingly estimating relative magnitudes by comparing
areas more affected or less affected by some plausibly exogenous treatment; we hope to
encourage an extension of this research agenda to address the many important questions
that are more aggregate in nature.
I

American Railroads and “Social Saving” Estimates

By 1890, expansion of the railroad network had enabled a dramatic shift westward in the
geographic pattern of agricultural production. Large regional trade surpluses and deficits in
agricultural goods reflected the exploitation of comparative advantage. Fogel (1964) develops a “social saving” methodology for calculating the aggregate impact of railroads on the
agricultural sector. We develop a different “market access” methodology for estimating the
aggregate impact of railroads on the agricultural sector, though some aspects of our approach
are rooted in Fogel’s analysis. It is therefore useful to begin with a summary of Fogel’s social
saving analysis. We also take the opportunity to extend some of Fogel’s calculations in minor
respects, using modern spatial analysis tools and digitized county-level data.
Fogel (1964) estimates that the social saving from railroads in the agricultural sector
in 1890 was no more than 2.7% of GNP. He divides this impact into that coming from
interregional trade (0.6%) and intraregional trade (2.1%). For interregional trade, defined
as occurring from 9 primary markets in the Midwest to 90 secondary markets in the East
and South, freight costs were only moderately cheaper with the availability of railroads than
when using only natural waterways and canals. Multiplying the difference in freight costs
(with and without railroads) by the quantity of transported agricultural goods (in 1890),
Fogel calculates the annual interregional social saving from railroads to be no more than
$73 million or 0.6% of GNP. This number is proposed as an upper bound estimate because
the approach assumes perfectly inelastic demand for transport, whereas the quantity of
transported goods should be expected to decline with increased transportation costs.5
4

In the absence of an economic model, the spatial econometrics literature provides estimators for when
treatment spillovers are a known function of geographic or economic distance Anselin (1988). Estimation
of aggregate treatment effects requires a cardinal ranking of how much areas (or people) are exposed to the
treatment, whereas an ordinal ranking is insufficient.
5
Indeed, the total cost of agricultural interregional shipments would have nearly doubled in the absence
of railroads.

4

For intraregional trade, defined as the trade from farms to primary markets, the impact of
railroads was mainly to reduce distances of expensive wagon transportation. In the absence
of railroads, farms would have incurred substantially higher costs in transporting goods by
wagon to the nearest waterway to be shipped to the nearest primary market. In areas
more than 40 miles from a waterway, wagon transportation may have become prohibitively
expensive; indeed, Fogel refers to all land more than 40 miles from a navigable waterway as
the “infeasible region” because it may have become infeasible for agricultural production if
railroads were removed. Figure 1, panel A, largely reproduces Fogel’s map of areas within
40 miles of a navigable waterway (shaded black), with the addition of areas within 40 miles
of a railroad in 1890 (shaded light gray). Fogel bounds the economic loss in the “infeasible
region” by the value of agricultural land in areas more than 40 miles from a waterway,
which he calculates to generate approximately $154 million in annual rent. Adding the
additional increase in transportation costs within the feasible region, which is bounded by
$94 million using a similar approach to the interregional analysis, Fogel calculates the total
annual intraregional impact to be no more than $248 million or 2.1% of GNP.
Fogel’s total social saving estimate of $321 million or 2.7% of GNP is generally interpreted
as indicating a limited impact of the railroads, though the total loss of all agricultural land
could only generate annual losses of $642 million or 5.35% of GNP. Fogel’s methodology
is typically associated with the interregional social saving calculation and the analogous
approach for the intraregional impact in the feasible region, though the annual rents from
land in the infeasible region is the largest component of the total estimate. Fogel emphasizes
that losses in the infeasible region may well be overstated, as the railroad network could
have been replaced with an extended canal network to bring most of the infeasible region
(by value) within 40 miles of a waterway. Figure 1, panel B, shows that much of the area
beyond 40 miles from a navigable waterway would be within 40 miles of canals that might
plausibly have been built if railroads did not exist (shaded dark gray). Fogel estimates that
these canals would mitigate 30% of the intragional impact from removing railroads.
Fogel faced a number of challenges in calculating the intraregional impact of railroads,
some of which can be partly overcome by using modern computer software and digitized
county-level data. One challenge was in measuring the area of the infeasible region, which is
much more accurate with the benefit of modern computer software. Using digitized maps of
Fogel’s waterways and county-level data on agricultural land values (as opposed to state-level
averages), we calculate a $181 million annual return on agricultural land in the infeasible
region that is only moderately larger than Fogel’s approximation of $154 million.6 It was
6

Throughout the paper we use Fogel’s preferred mortgage interest rate (7.91%) to convert agricultural
land values to an annual economic value. We also express annual impacts as a percent of GNP, using Fogel’s

5

impractical for Fogel to calculate the area within 40 miles of a railroad in 1890, but, consistent
with 40 miles being a reasonable cutoff distance for the infeasible region, we calculate an
annual return of only $4 million on agricultural land more than 40 miles from a waterway
or railroad in 1890.
Fogel faced another challenge in calculating the intraregional social saving in the feasible
region. Data limitations require a number of practical approximations and there are theoretical concerns about whether an upper bound estimate is meaningful given the potentially
large declines in transported goods without railroads. An alternative approach, extending
Fogel’s treatment of the infeasible region, is to assume that agricultural land declines in value
the further it is from the nearest waterway or railroad. A simple implementation of this idea,
though computationally infeasible in Fogel’s era, is to assume that land value decays linearly
as it lies between 0 miles and 40 miles from the nearest waterway or railroad. Using modern computer software, we can calculate the fraction of each county within arbitrarily small
distance buffers of waterways and/or railroads.7 Implementing this approach, we calculate
the annual intraregional impact of removing railroads to be $319 million or 2.7% of GNP.
Figure 1, panel C, shows smaller geographic buffers around waterways and railroads.
In contrast to the 40-mile buffers in panel A, panel C shows 10-mile buffers that reflect the
average wagon haul from a farm to a rail shipping point in 1890. The comparative advantage
of railroads’ high density is more apparent at smaller distance buffers. Panel D adds 10-mile
buffers around the proposed canals, which mainly run through sections of the Midwest and
Eastern Plains. Replicating the above analysis of distance buffers, we calculate an annual
loss of $221 million or 1.8% of GNP when replacing railroads with the proposed canals. This
preliminary exercise finds that the proposed canals mitigate 31% of the intraregional impact
from removing railroads, which is very close to Fogel’s original estimate of 30%.
The waterway network, particularly with extended canals, is moderately effective in
bringing areas near some form of low-cost transportation. Construction of railroads was
hardly limited to providing a similarly sparse network, however, and our main estimates will
preferred measure of GNP in 1890 ($12 billion).
7
In practice, we take a discrete approximation to this linear decay function and assume that agricultural
land loses 100% of its value beyond 40 miles, 93.75% of its value between 40 and 35 miles, 81.25% of its value
between 35 and 30 miles, and so forth until losing 6.25% of its value between 5 and 0 miles. We calculate
the share of each county that lies within each of these buffer zones (e.g., between 40 miles and 35 miles
from a waterway or railroad). In addition, to avoid overstating the impact of railroads, we modify Fogel’s
calculation of the infeasible region to also reflect counties’ imperfect access to railroads: since no county has
all of its land within 0 miles of a waterway or railroad, all 1890 county land values already capitalize some
degree of imperfect access. To calculate percent declines off the correct base, we adjust observed county
agricultural land values to reflect their implied value if not for distance to a waterway or railroad. In the
end, we calculate the implied decline in land value based on each county’s land share within each 5-mile
distance buffer of a waterway and subtracting the county’s land share within that buffer of a waterway or
railroad.

6

show that high density railroad construction was particularly effective in providing nearby
low-cost routes to markets.
Our main empirical analysis will extend much of Fogel’s intuition for evaluating the aggregate impact of railroads in 1890.8 We maintain Fogel’s focus on the agricultural sector,
as non-agricultural freight was geographically concentrated in areas with low transportation
costs along waterways. We build on Fogel’s intuition that the value of agricultural land,
as an immobile factor, should reflect the cost of getting agricultural goods to market. We
choose transportation cost parameters to be comparable to Fogel’s chosen values (discussed
in Section II.A), but explore robustness to these parameter choices in Section V.B. Rather
than follow Fogel in assuming a relationship between agricultural land values and the transportation network, we estimate this relationship. Rather than follow Fogel in assuming where
goods are transported, we use qualitative insights from a general equilibrium trade model
to help measure how counties value the transportation network. In particular, we measure
how expansion of the railroad network affects counties’ market access and then estimate the
impact of market access on agricultural land values. We then calculate the implied economic
impact of decreased market access if railroads were eliminated, if railroads were replaced
with the proposed canals, or under other counterfactual scenarios.
II

Data Construction

This paper uses a new dataset on predicted county-to-county freight transportation costs,
calculated using a newly-constructed geographic information system (GIS) network database
that we describe in this section. This network database shares some similarities to a hypothetical historical version of Google Maps—a digital depiction of all journeys that were
possible in 1870 and 1890 using available railroads, canals, natural waterways, and wagons.
Our goal is not to obtain the best possible measure of actual freight costs, which might draw
on published freight costs, but rather an econometrically useful proxy for changes in freight
costs due to expansion of the railroad network.
Our measurement of market access relies on three components: (1) transportation cost
parameters that apply to a given unit length of each transportation mode (railroad, waterway,
and wagon); (2) a transportation network database that maps where freight could move
along each transportation mode; and (3) the computation of lowest-cost freight routes along
the network for given parameters. In this section, we describe the construction of these
components and some data limitations.
8

There has been extensive debate—surveyed by Fogel (1979)—regarding the social saving methodology
and its application to evaluating the aggregate impact of railroads. We do not relitigate these issues, as most
do not relate directly to our alternative methodological approach. Where relevant, we address some of the
associated issues.

7

II.A

Transportation Cost Parameters

Our guiding principle in choosing transportation cost parameters has been to follow Fogel’s
choice of these same parameters. We therefore set railroad rates equal to 0.63 cents per
ton-mile and waterway rates equal to 0.49 cents per ton-mile.9 Transshipment costs 50 cents
per ton, incurred whenever transferring goods to/from a railroad car, river boat, canal barge,
or ocean liner.10 Wagon transportation costs 23.1 cents per ton-mile, defined as the straight
line distance between two points.11 The empirical analysis explores the results’ robustness
to alternative transportation cost parameters.
Because wagon transportation is much more expensive than railroad or waterway transportation, the most important aspects of network database construction concern the required
distances of wagon transportation. Indeed, Fogel (1964) and Fishlow (1965) both emphasize
that railroads mainly lowered transportation costs by decreasing expensive wagon transportation through the interior of the United States.
II.B

Transportation Network Database

Creation of the network database begins with digitized maps of constructed railroads around
1870 and 1890. We are grateful to Jeremy Atack and co-authors for providing these initial
GIS railroad files (Atack, 2013).12 These railroad files were originally created to define
mileage of railroad track by county and year; by contrast, for our purposes, railroad lines are
modified to ensure that GIS software recognizes that travel is possible through the railroad
network.13
The second step adds the time-invariant locations of canals, navigable rivers, and other
9
Rates reflect an output-weighted average of rates for transporting grain and meat. Waterway rates
include insurance charges for lost cargo (0.025 cents), inventory and storage costs for slower transport and
non-navigable winter months (0.194 cents), and the social cost of public waterway investment (0.073 cents).
10
Fogel considers transshipment charges as a sub-category of water rates, but our modeling of transshipment points allows for a unified treatment of Fogel’s interregional and intraregional scenarios. Fogel’s sources
record higher railroad freight costs per ton-mile for shorter routes, but we approximate these higher costs
with a 100 cent fixed fee and a 0.63 cent fee per mile.
11
This rate reflects a cost of 16.5 cents per mile traveled and Fogel’s adjustment factor of 1.4 between the
shortest straight line distance and miles traveled.
12
First, year-specific maps of railroads are “georeferenced” to US county borders. Second, railroad lines are
hand-traced in GIS software to create a digital map of railroad line locations. The best practical approach
has been to trace railroad lines from excellent maps in 1911 (Whitney and Smith, 1911), and then remove
lines that do not appear in maps from 1887 (Cram, 1887) and 1870 (Colton, 1870).
13
We use GIS topology tools to ensure exact connections between all railroad line segments. Hand-traced
railroad lines often contain small internal gaps that we have “snapped” together, though we have tried to
maintain these gaps when appropriate (e.g., across the Mississippi river in the absence of a railroad bridge).
The default option in GIS is for intersecting lines to reflect an overpass without a connection, but we have
broken the network into segments that permit turns at each intersection. These modifications to the railroad
network have little effect on total railroad track mileage by county and year. To minimize measurement
error in changes, we created a final 1890 railroad file and modified that file to create a version for 1870 that
omits lines constructed between 1870 and 1890.

8

natural waterways. We use Fogel’s definition of navigable rivers, which are enhanced to
follow natural river bends.14 For lakes and oceans, we saturate their area with “rivers” that
allow for a large number of possible routes.15 Transshipment costs are incurred whenever
freight is transferred to/from one of the four transportation methods: railroad, canal, river,
and lake or ocean.16
The third step connects individual counties to the network of railroads and waterways.
We measure average travel costs between counties by calculating the travel cost between
the geographical center (or centroid) of each pair of counties. County centroids must be
connected to the network of railroads and waterways; otherwise, lowest-cost travel calculations assume that freight travels freely to the closest railroad or waterway. We create wagon
routes from each county centroid to each nearby type of transportation route in each relevant
direction.17 Because the network database only recognizes lines, we also create direct wagon
routes from every county centroid to every other county centroid within 300km.18
The fourth step refines centroid-to-network connections due to the importance of wagon
distances to overall freight costs. For example, when a railroad runs through a county, the
centroid’s nearest distance to a railroad does not reflect the average distance from county
points to a railroad.19 We create 200 random points within each county, calculate the distance
from each point to the nearest railroad, and take the average of these nearest distances. We
then adjust the cost of travel along each centroid connection to within-county railroads
to reflect that county’s average travel cost to a railroad. We then repeat this procedure for
centroid connections to navigable rivers and canals. This refinement to the network database
allows the empirical analysis to exploit precise variation on the intensive margin of county
access to railroads and waterways as the density of the railroad network increases from 1870
14

Fogel’s classification of “navigable” rivers may be overly generous in some cases (Atack, 2013).
We do not permit direct access to lakes and oceans at all points along the coast; rather, we restrict
access to “harbors” where the coast intersects interior waterways. We create additional “harbors” where the
railroad network in 1911 approaches the coastline, which also permits direct “wagon” access to the coast at
these points.
16
Overlapping railroads and waterways do not connect by default; instead, we create connections among
railroads and waterways to allow for fixed transshipment costs. The need to include transshipment costs is
the main reason why it is not possible to model the network using a raster, assigning travel costs to each
map pixel.
17
Many such connections were created by hand, which raises the potential for errors, but we have used
GIS topology tools to ensure that these connections are exactly “snapped” and classified correctly by type
(centroid-to-railroad, centroid-to-river, etc.).
18
The direct wagon routes are restricted to be over land, but there is no adjustment for mountains or
other terrain; in practice, the long-distance wagon routes are already very costly.
19
Fogel recognized the importance of measuring this within-county distance and his ideal solution was to
break each county into small grids and take the average of nearest distances from each grid to a railroad.
However, due to technical limitations, Fogel approximated this average distance using one-third of the
distance from the farthest point in a county to a railroad.
15

9

to 1890.
Figure 2 shows part of the created network database. Panel A shows natural waterways,
including the navigable rivers and routes within lakes and oceans. Panel B adds the canal
network, which is highly complementary with natural waterways. Panel C adds railroads
constructed in 1870, and then Panel D adds railroads constructed between 1870 and 1890.
Early railroads were complementary with the waterway network; by 1870 and especially by
1890, however, the railroad network is more of a substitute for the waterway network.
II.C

Limitations of the Network Database

There are several limitations of the constructed network database. First, the constructed
network database is mainly restricted to transportation linkages within the United States.20
The data only include US counties’ access to other US counties. As a robustness check,
however, we proxy for the impact of international markets by assigning additional product
demand and supply to US counties with major international ports.
Second, freight rates are held constant throughout the network database. Freight rates
may vary with local demand and market power in the transportation sector, and may also
vary by direction due to back-haul trade relationships. Local variation in freight rates is
partly endogenous to local economic outcomes, however, so there are advantages to using
Fogel’s average national rates for estimation purposes. We hold rates fixed in 1890 and 1870,
such that measured changes in trade costs and market access are determined by variation
in the location of transportation routes rather than prices. In extensions to the baseline
analysis, we examine whether particular regions are driving the results by allowing the
impact of market access to vary by region.
Third, there are no congestion effects or economies of scale in transporting goods. We do
not restrict locations where trains can turn or switch tracks, so actual railroad transportation
routes may be less direct. We also do not measure differences in railroad gauges, which
required some additional costs in modifying railroad cars and tracks. In robustness checks,
we allow for higher railroad costs that reflect less-direct routes or periodic transshipment
within the railroad network.
Overall, we should expect that measurement of transportation costs will be robust to even
large percent differences in the chosen railroad and waterway rates. Recall that 10 miles of
wagon transportation are roughly equivalent to 375 – 475 miles of railroad or waterway transportation. Thus, estimated transportation costs are dominated by the order-of-magnitude
20

There are two exceptions. First, the network database includes a Canadian railroad line between New
York and Michigan. Second, the database includes a waterway route from the Pacific Ocean to the Atlantic
Ocean (i.e., around Cape Horn or through Panama by railroad), and the empirical analysis explores the
results’ robustness to varying the cost of this waterway connection.

10

difference between wagons and railroads or waterways. In robustness checks, we allow for
lower transportation costs by wagon and waterway.
II.D

Transportation Route Cost Calculations

We use the complete network database to calculate the lowest-cost route between each pair
of counties, i.e., 5 million calculations.21 Initially, we calculate the lowest-cost routes under
two scenarios: (1) the wagon, waterway, and railroad network in 1870, and (2) the wagon,
waterway, and railroad network in 1890.22 These transportation costs are used to calculate
counties’ market access in 1870 and 1890, so that we can estimate the impact of changing
market access on changes in land values. The created data are not our best predictions of
actual freight routes and costs, but an econometrically useful proxy for differences over space
and time due to differences in the location of railroads and waterways.
II.E

County-level Census Data

County-level data are drawn from the US Censuses of Agriculture and Population (Haines,
2005). The two main variables of interest are: (1) total value of agricultural land, and
(2) total population. Census data include only the combined value of agricultural land,
buildings, fences, and other land improvements, but we follow Fogel in adjusting these data
to reflect the “pure” value of agricultural land (Fogel, 1964, pp. 82-83).23 We also adjust
data from 1870 to reflect 1890 county boundaries (Hornbeck, 2010).
III

A “Market Access” Approach to Valuing Railroads

The empirical analysis is guided by a model of trade among US counties that specifies
how each county is affected by changes in the national matrix of county-to-county trade
costs. The model contains thousands of counties, each with interacting goods markets and
factor markets, that generate positive and negative spillovers on other counties. Under a
set of assumptions that are standard among modern trade models, all direct and indirect
impacts of changing trade costs are reflected, in equilibrium, in changes to a county’s “market
21

In principle, it is a daunting task to find the optimal route between two points on such a dense network;
in practice, the computation is improved dramatically by applying Dijkstra’s algorithm (see, e.g., Ahuja,
Magnanti and Orlin, 1993, for a textbook treatment).
22
For the later analysis, we calculate the lowest-cost routes under counterfactual scenarios: removing the
1890 railroad network; replacing the 1890 railroad network with an extended canal network; replacing the
1890 railroad network with improved country roads (decreased wagon freight rates); and removing the 1890
railroad network and increasing water freight rates (due to decreased competition).
23
Fogel reports the “pure” value of agricultural land by state, after subtracting estimates for the value of
agricultural buildings, fences, and other land improvements. We multiply counties’ reported Census data by
Fogel’s estimated “pure” value of agricultural land (in their state) divided by the Census’s reported value of
agricultural land, buildings, fences, and other land improvements (in their state). This adjustment reduces
the total value of agricultural land in our sample by 39%, which is the main factor decreasing the magnitude
of the estimated dollar impact of railroads in this paper as compared to preliminary versions of our analysis.

11

access.”24
The model implies a simple log-linear relationship between county agricultural land values and county market access, appropriately defined. While the model requires particular
assumptions to arrive at this parsimonious solution to the challenges posed by general equilibrium spatial spillovers, the predicted relationship also has an atheoretical appeal in capturing
the impact of railroads. County market access increases when it becomes cheaper to trade
with another county, particularly when that other county has a larger population. Guided
by the model, we regress county agricultural land value on county market access and a set
of control variables.
III.A

A Model of Trade Among US Counties

The economy consists of many trading counties, each indexed by o if the origin of a trade and
by d if the destination. People consume a continuum of differentiated goods varieties (indexed
by j), and tastes over these varieties take a CES form (with elasticity σ).25 A consumer living
in county o, who faces a vector of prices Po and receives income Yo , experiences indirect
utility:
(1)

V (Po , Yo ) =

Yo
,
Po

where Po is a standard CES price index.26
Counties use a Cobb-Douglas technology to produce varieties from labor, capital, and
land. The marginal cost of producing goods of variety j in county o is:
(2)

M Co (j) =

qoα woγ ro1−α−γ
,
zo (j)

where qo is the agricultural land rental rate, wo is the wage rate, ro is the capital rental rate,
and zo (j) is a Hicks-neutral productivity shifter that is exogenous and local to county o. We
follow Eaton and Kortum (2002) in modeling these productivity shifters by assuming that
each county draws its productivity level, for any given variety j, from a Fréchet (or Type II
24

These modeling assumptions are used extensively in the fields of international trade and economic
geography, and reflect recent best practice to gain traction in general equilibrium spatial settings with many
regions that trade subject to trade costs.
25
Note that the elasticity of substitution is not restricted; that is, σ could be high if varieties are similar.
Anderson, de Palma and Thisse (1992) provide an attractive microfoundation for aggregate-level CES preferences: if individual agents desire only one variety of the good (their “ideal variety”) and agents’ utilities from
their ideal varieties are distributed in a Logit fashion, then aggregate consumption data from a population
of many such agents behaves as though all agents have CES preferences over all varieties (where, in such an
interpretation, σ indexes the inverse of the dispersion of agents’ utilities from their ideal varieties).
R n
1/(1−σ)
26
That is, Po = 0 (po (j))1−σ dj
, where n denotes the (exogenous) measure, of varieties available
to consumers.

12

extreme value) distribution with CDF given by: Fo (z) = 1 − exp(−To z −θ ), with θ > 1.27,28
This distribution captures how productivity differences across counties give incentives to
specialize and trade, where these incentives are inversely related to θ.29 We assume perfect
competition among producers.30
Trading goods is costly. Remote locations pay high prices for imported goods and receive
low prices for goods they produce, as this is the only way locations can be competitive in
distant markets. We model trade costs using a simple and standard “iceberg” formulation.
When a variety is made in county o and sold locally in county o, its price is poo (j); but
when this same variety is made in county o and shipped to county d, it will sell for pod (j) =
τod poo (j). A proportional trade cost τod is applied to each unit of the variety shipped.31
k
Trade is potentially costly, so τod
≥ 1.
Land is fixed by county, but capital is assumed to be perfectly mobile such that ro = r
for all counties o.32 We also assume that workers are perfectly mobile across counties, at
least over a period of many years. As a result of workers’ endogenous option to work in
other counties, workers’ utility levels are equalized across counties in equilibrium and wages
satisfy:
(3)

wo = Ū × Po ,

where Ū is the endogenous level of utility obtained by workers in each county. People in
particular counties will not benefit disproportionately when expansion of the railroad network
decreases transport costs; rather, in equilibrium, everyone benefits by the same amount.
27
Following Eaton and Kortum (2002), an intuitive rationale for this particular functional form for the
distribution of productivities is that it reflects the limiting distribution when producers receive technologies
from any distribution and discard all but the best.
28
An additional parameter restriction, θ > σ − 1, is required for the integral in Po to be finite. However,
Eaton, Kortum and Sotelo (2012) demonstrate how this restriction is no longer required when there are a
finite number of varieties, as in reality. Our continuum of varieties assumption can be thought of as an
analytically convenient approximation to the true finite number of varieties.
29
More specifically, the parameter To captures county-specific (log) mean productivity, which corresponds
to each county’s level of absolute advantage. The parameter θ captures, inversely, the (log) standard deviation of productivity, which corresponds to the scope for comparative advantage. A low θ means county
productivity draws are dispersed, creating large incentives to trade on the basis of productivity differences.
30
An alternative (and observationally equivalent) formulation, following Melitz (2003), would assume that
firms compete monopolistically with free entry such that all firms’ expected profits are zero and draw their
productivity levels z, following Chaney (2008) and others, from a Pareto distribution Go (z) = 1 − (z/To )−θ ,
as seen in many firm-level datasets (e.g., Axtell, 2001).
31
For simplicity, we assume that all goods are tradable at the cost τod . A version of the model with some
non-tradable goods would simply reduce the predicted elasticity with which market access affects land values,
which is a parameter that we estimate anyway.
32
Landowners are not restricted to own land in their county of residence. Because we do not observe land
ownership by county, we assume that land is owned in proportion to county populations.

13

III.B

Solving the Model

Prices and trade flows: First, we solve for goods’ trade flows from each origin county o to
each other destination county d. Due to perfect competition, the marginal cost of producing
each variety is equal to its price. Substituting marginal costs from each supply location o
(equation 2) into the demand for agricultural varieties in county d, and allowing consumers to
buy goods, in equilibrium, from their cheapest source of supply, Eaton and Kortum (2002)
derive two important results for our application. The first is that the consumer price in
destination location d is given by:33
(4)

Pd−θ = κ1

X

−θ
To (qoα woγ )−θ τod
≡ CM Ad .

o

We follow Redding and Venables (2004) in referring to this price index as CM Ad or “consumer market access.” Consumer market access in county d represents its access to cheap
products: it is a weighted sum of productivity-adjusted costs of production in each origin
market o that could supply market d, with weights declining in the cost of trading from o to
d (i.e., τod ).
A second important result from Eaton and Kortum (2002) describes Xod , the value of
total exports from o to d, as:
(5)

−θ
Xod = κ1 To (qoα woγ )−θ τod
CM A−1
d Yd .

From equation (5), county o sends more goods to county d if county o is relatively productive
(high To ) or relatively low cost (low wo or low qo ). County o also sends more goods to county
d if county d has high total income (high Yd ) or low overall consumer market access (low
CM Ad ), meaning that county o faces less competition when selling to market d.
Equation (5) is known as a gravity equation, which governs trade flows in this model. The
gravity equation is appealing because it dramatically simplifies a complex general equilibrium
problem of spatial competition. In addition, an empirical appeal of the gravity equation is
that it appears to provide a strong fit for trade-flow data in many contexts (e.g., Anderson and
van Wincoop, 2003, 2004; Combes, Mayer and Thisse, 2008; Head and Mayer, forthcoming).
Land rental rate: While trade flows between 19th century US counties are unobserved,
the gravity equation implies tractable and empirically useful expressions for the land rental
rate (qo ). Under the assumption of Cobb-Douglas technology, land is paid a fixed share of
total output Yo , so qo Lo = αYo where Lo is the fixed quantity of land in county o. Goods
P
markets clear, so all produced goods are bought (Yo = d Xod ). Thus, using equations (3)
33


Here, κ1 is a constant defined by κ1 = Γ

θ+1−σ
θ

−θ/(1−σ)

14

r−(1−α−γ)θ , where Γ(·) is the Γ function.

and (4) and taking logs, equation (5) implies:34

(6)

(1 + αθ) ln qo = ln κ2 + ln

To
Lo


− γθ ln Ū + γ ln CM Ao + ln F M Ao ,

where F M Ao refers to “firm market access” for goods from origin o and is defined as:
(7)

F M Ao ≡

X

−θ
τod
CM A−1
d Yd .

d

Firm market access (F M Ao ) is a sum of terms over all destination counties d to which county
o tries to sell its goods. These terms include the size of the destination market (given by
total income, Yd ) and the competitiveness of the destination market (given by its CM Ad
term). All terms are inversely weighted by the cost of trading with each distant market (i.e.,
−θ
by τod
).
Firm market access is conceptually similar to consumer market access, as both are increasing in cheap access to large markets with few trade partners. To see this similarity
explicitly, note that it is possible to write CM Ad as:35
(8)

CM Ad =

X

−θ
τod
F M A−1
o Yo .

o

Under the additional restriction that trade costs are symmetric (i.e., τod = τdo for all counties
d and o), which holds in our empirical application, it can be shown that any solution to
equations (7) and (8) must satisfy F M Ao = CM Ao , such that F M A and CM A are equal to
one another.36 Therefore, we simply refer to “market access” (M A) to reflect both concepts
of market access. Formally, we let M Ao = F M Ao = CM Ao for all counties o. Using the fact
that γYd = wd Nd , where Nd refers to the (endogenous) number of residents in each county
d, as well as equation (3), equation (7) implies that:37
(9)

M Ao = κ3

X

−(1+θ)
θ

−θ
τod
M Ad

Nd .

d
34

Here, κ2 = κ1 α.
This result can be obtained by summing equation (5) over all destinations d and substituting To (qoα woγ )−θ
into equation (4).
36
This simplification would no longer be true in extended versions of the model, such as allowing for
agricultural production in rural counties and manufacturing production in urban counties. These extended
models generate sector-specific market access terms (e.g., F M AA and CM AA for the agricultural sector, or
F M AM and CM AM for the manufacturing sector) but empirical approximations of these terms are highly
correlated with each other, so the empirical analysis would anyway condense these terms into one notion of
“market access.”
37
Here, κ3 = Ūγ .
35

15

In words, a county’s market access can be expressed as the sum over the cost of trading with
each other county, that other county’s population, and that other county’s access to other
markets.
Given the above simplifications, equation (6) becomes:38

(10)

ln qo = κ4 +

1
1 + αθ




ln

To
Lo




+

1+γ
1 + αθ


ln(M Ao ).

Equation (10) provides a useful guide for the empirical analysis. Equilibrium land rental
rates (qo ) are log-linear in just one endogenous county-specific economic variable: market
access. This notion of market access captures firms’ desire to sell goods elsewhere for a high
price and consumers’ desire to buy goods from elsewhere at a low price. Immobile land in
county o will be more valuable if county o has cheap access to large uncompetitive markets
and/or cheap access to labor (by having cheap access to goods that workers value).
III.C

Using the Model to Inform Empirical Work

Equation (10) has two key implications for estimating the aggregate economic impact of
railroads. First, all economic forces that make goods markets and factor markets interdependent across counties are represented by one concept of “market access.” Thus, all direct
and indirect impacts of railroads are captured by analyzing changes in market access. For
example, county A receiving a railroad line would affect other counties: those that can now
trade with county A, those that had been trading with county A, those that had traded
with county A’s previous trade partners, those that had traded with county A’s new trade
partners, and so on. Even if access to railroads is randomly assigned, “control” counties are
affected and a regression of land rents on railroad access will produce biased estimates of
railroads’ aggregate impact. A regression of land rents on market access will be free of this
bias, in the context of our model, because all counties’ market access will adjust to changes
in the railroad network. In addition, the aggregate effect of counterfactual changes to the
transportation network (such as the removal of railroad lines or their replacement with a
proposed canal network) can be calculated easily by substituting the counterfactual values
of τod into M Ao and then substituting the resulting counterfactual M Ao into equation (10).39
The second key implication of equation (10) is that a county’s market access can increase
or decrease due to changes in the railroad network far beyond that county’s borders. Thus,
ln(Ū )
Here, κ4 = ln(κ2 )−γθ
.
1+θα
39
An additional effect is that of the counterfactual transportation network on Ū . We ignore this effect
(along with the direct increase in worker welfare from an increase in Ū ) because its magnitude cannot
be estimated using our empirical design and depends on the integration of American labor markets with
international labor markets.
38

16

the empirical estimation is not identified only from particular counties gaining railroad access,
which might otherwise be correlated with land rental rates. This prediction of the model
suggests some robustness checks, control variables, and instrumental variable approaches
that might purge the empirical estimates of endogeneity bias arising from local railroad
placement decisions.
III.D

From Theory to an Empirical Specification

While equation (10) provides a useful guide for the empirical analysis, six issues complicate
its direct empirical implementation.
First, the Census of Agriculture does not report land rental rates. Instead, the Census
reports the value of agricultural land.40 We use the value of agricultural land as a proxy for
agricultural land rental rates.41 While land values may reflect expected changes in market
access, this should attenuate the estimated elasticity.
Second, county productivity (To ) is not directly observed. We assume that changes
in county productivity (from 1870 to 1890) are orthogonal to changes in market access.
In practice, we allow for changes in county productivity to vary by state and by cubic
polynomials in county latitude and longitude.42
Third, the construction of market access via equation (9) requires the observation of all
trade costs (τod ). We measure trade costs using the calculated county-to-county lowest-cost
freight transportation routes described in Section II.D above.43 The baseline results use
trade costs calculated using freight rates comparable to those used by Fogel (1964), though
we explore the sensitivity of our results to the particular freight rates that enter τod in M Ao .
Fourth, the market access term (M Ao ) is not directly observed because some destination
characteristics are unobserved.44 Based on equation (9), however, it is possible to use data
on each county’s population (No ) to express each county’s market access M Ao as an implicit
function of the market access of all other counties. We can solve this implicit function
numerically and report empirical estimates that use counties’ calculated market access in
40
In Section II.E, we discuss modifying reported Census data to obtain a measure of the value of agricultural
land (only).
41
In particular, we assume that Vo = qo /r, where Vo is the land value and r is a fixed interest rate. In
practice, our results would be unaffected if the interest rate varied by county, state-year, or with any of the
control variables in the empirical specification.
42
Because county productivity (To ) enters log-linearly in equation (10), we control for this term using
county fixed effects, state-by-year fixed effects, and year-interacted cubic polynomials in county latitude
and longitude. Some robustness checks include additional controls for region-specific or subregion-specific
changes in productivity.
43
We express the calculated trade costs in proportional terms using Fogel’s average value of transported
agricultural goods.
44
From equation (4), the wage wd and the destination technologies Td are unobserved.

17

1870 and 1890.45 This approach accords exactly with equation (9), but the calculation of
these terms depends on running the data through the particular structure of the model. A
simpler approach, which is also less model dependent, uses the following expression that
provides a first-order approximation to counties’ market access:46
(11)

M Ao ≈

X

−θ
τod
Nd .

d

Our estimation results are insensitive to our use of the M A approximation in equation
(11), as we document below, because this approximated term is highly correlated with the
theoretically exact M A term derived from solving equation (9).
Fifth, the population Nd in each county d is endogenously co-determined with the land
rental rate qo in county o, which would generate endogeneity bias in a regression based
on equation (10). A particular instance of this concern arises because No is included in
the definition of M Ao in equation (11). For this reason, we exclude each county’s own
population from its measure of market access,47 though our results are insensitive to this
decision because the contribution of No to M Ao is small for most counties. An additional
related concern is that a county’s land value is affected by local shocks that affect nearby
counties’ population. In robustness checks, we calculate each county’s market access when
omitting other counties within particular distance buffers around that county. In further
robustness checks, we calculate each county’s market access in 1870 and 1890 when holding
all counties’ population fixed at 1870 levels.
Sixth, and finally, the expression for market access in equation (11) requires an estimate
of θ. The parameter θ is known as the “trade elasticity.”48 In the absence of county-tocounty trade data from our time period, we cannot estimate θ via traditional means. Our
baseline estimates assume a value of θ equal to 3.8, as in Donaldson (forthcoming), though we
45

With C counties, equation (9) becomes a system of C equations in C unknowns. An important limitation
of this procedure is that it allows M Ao to be identified only up to a multiplicative scalar; intuitively, the
endogenous distribution of population across counties speaks to relative market access but not the absolute
level of market access. This is not problematic for the regression analysis, in which only relative market
access is relevant, but it precludes us from applying this numerical estimation of M Ao in our counterfactual calculations. It is reassuring, though, that this numerically estimated M Ao term is highly correlated
with our simplified M Ao term. While we have been unable to prove analytically that equation (9) has a
unique solution, our numerical solutions converge to the same solution from all of the hundreds of dispersed,
randomly chosen starting points that we have tried.
−θ
46
Formally, this approximation is taken around a point at which τod
= 0, which corresponds to the case
−θ
of prohibitive trade costs (but with θ = 3.8, as in our baseline estimates, even realistic trade costs bring τod
close to zero).
P
−θ
47
Throughout the empirical analysis, we work with the variable M Ao ≈ d6=o τod
Nd .
48
As per equation (5), trade costs affect trade flows with this elasticity (in partial equilibrium, holding
fixed: exporter factor prices, importer income, and the importer’s total price index).

18

explore the results’ robustness to alternative θ parameters.49 We note that our final empirical
measure of “market access” is similar to an older concept of “market potential,” based on
the number and size of markets available at low trade costs (Harris 1954). Harris’s market
P
potential term effectively equals d6=o (τod )−1 Nd , so the difference is that we allow trade costs
to diminish market sizes with a power of −θ rather than minus one. Typical estimates of θ
are substantially greater than one, though we also report robustness to assuming a value of
θ equal to one.
Summarizing the above discussion, we regress agricultural land values in county o and
year t on log market access (M Aot ), a county fixed effect (δo ), state-by-year fixed effects
(δst ), and a cubic polynomial in county latitude and longitude interacted with year effects
(f (xo , yo )δt ):
(12)

ln Vot = β ln(M Aot ) + δo + δst + f (xo , yo )δt + εot .

Based on the strict assumptions of the model outlined above, the regression coefficient β is
predicted to equal a particular combination of the model parameters: (1 + γ)/(1 + θα). We
compare our estimates of β to this calibrated value, but we prefer to leverage the model for
its qualitative insights that railroads affect land values through market access.
The sample is a balanced panel of 2,327 counties with land value data in 1870 and
1890.50 The regression is weighted by counties’ land value in 1870, both to minimize the
influence of outliers and to estimate the appropriate average effect for the counterfactual
analysis.51 Standard errors are clustered at the state level to adjust for heteroskedasticity
and within-state correlation over time.52 In practice, equivalently, we estimate equation (12)
in differences and generally find it convenient to discuss relating changes in log land value
to changes in log market access.
Figure 3 shows the sample counties, which are shaded to reflect their change in market
49

Donaldson’s estimate of θ was obtained in an agricultural context (in India) for a similar time period as
this paper. Other estimates of θ, of which we are aware, are based on modern trade of manufactured goods.
50
Note that our measure of county market access includes the cost of trading with each other county that
has population data, even if that county is not in the regression sample.
51
We use the estimated β to calculate the percent decline in each county’s land value associated with the
counterfactual decline in each county’s market access, and multiply this percent decline in land value by
each county’s land value in 1890. The aggregate counterfactual loss gives greater weight to counties with
greater land value so, if the impact of market access varies across sample counties, it is natural to estimate
β weighting by county land value.
52
The estimated standard errors are similar when allowing for spatial correlation among sample counties
(Conley, 1999), assuming that spatial correlation declines linearly up to a distance of 300 miles and is zero
thereafter (e.g., approximately the distance across Iowa). Compared to unweighted standard errors clustered
by state, the spatial standard error on the baseline estimate is lower by 8% or 25% with distance cutoffs of
200 miles or 100 miles. The spatial standard error is higher by 10% or 18% with distance cutoffs of 400 or
500 miles, and higher by 25–31% for distance cutoffs between 600 and 1000 miles.

19

access from 1870 to 1890.53 Darker shades correspond to larger increases in market access
and, naturally, these areas often receive new low-cost transportation routes between 1870 and
1890 (Figure 2, panels C and D). There is a good deal of variation within broad geographic
regions, though Figure 3 is unable to illustrate the full degree of within-region variation. The
baseline specification (in differences) controls for state fixed effects and flexible polynomials
in a county’s latitude and longitude, while subsequent robustness checks also control for 20
region fixed effects or 145 subregion fixed effects.
IV

Estimation Results

We now turn to a presentation of the estimation results. In the first subsection, we report
the baseline estimated impact of county market access on county land value. We present
some robustness checks to help motivate the baseline specification choices, but reserve most
of the robustness checks to a later section in which we also present robustness of the main
counterfactual estimates. In the second subsection, we explore some empirical approaches
to addressing the potential endogeneity of new railroad construction.
IV.A

Estimated Impact of Market Access on Land Values

Table 1 reports our baseline result from estimating equation (12). Market access is estimated
to have a large and statistically significant impact on land values: a 1% increase in market
access increases land values by approximately 1.1% (column 1). Column 2 reports a similar
elasticity for our calibrated measure of market access, discussed above, which reflects a close
correlation between log changes in the two measures of market access. Interestingly, these
empirical estimates would not reject the coefficient predicted by the model (0.93).54
In our baseline specification, county market access increases due to expansion of the
railroad network and growth in other counties’ population. The baseline estimate is robust,
however, to calculating counties’ market access in 1870 and 1890 while holding all counties’
population levels fixed at 1870 levels (column 3). This suggests that the estimated impact
of market access is not driven by population growth among trade partners, which could be
correlated with other shocks to a county’s land value.
In a related robustness check, we calculate county o’s market access based only on those
counties d that are located beyond some distance buffer from county o.55 For a distance
buffer of 100 miles, column 4 reports a similar impact of market access on land values. A
53

Counties are separated into seven equal-sized groups.
The model predicts a coefficient on the market access term equal to (1 + γ)/(1 + αθ), where θ represents
the trade elasticity (3.8 in Donaldson (forthcoming)) and γ and α represent the labor share and land share
in agricultural production (0.60 and 0.19 in Caselli and Coleman (2001)). A slightly larger labor share and
smaller land share would make the coefficients very similar.
55
We measure which counties’ borders fall within a distance buffer of each county, and calculate that
county’s market access when setting nearby counties’ market size to zero.
54

20

county’s market access mainly reflects trade with more distant counties, which reduces the
potential for bias from local shocks increasing both land values and access to local markets.
Column 5 reports an unweighted estimate, which is of the same magnitude but lower
statistical precision than the baseline estimate. Weighting by 1870 land value reduces the
influence of outlier values.56 In a later section, we explore the results’ robustness to alternative empirical specifications and transportation cost assumptions.
IV.B

Endogeneity of Railroad Construction

Perhaps the main empirical concern is that expansion of the railroad network is endogenous,
which may create spurious correlation between increases in county market access and agricultural land value. In particular, railroad construction may occur in counties that would
otherwise have experienced relative increases in agricultural land values.57 Some variation
in local railroad construction may be exogenous, perhaps affected by politics or companies’
desire to connect particular large cities, but it is difficult to isolate this variation amidst the
high-density railroad network of 1890.
An important feature of our theoretical definition of market access is that much variation
in a county’s market access is not determined solely by that county’s own railroad track.
Thus, we can examine changes in counties’ market access that are orthogonal to changes in
counties’ own railroads.
Column 1 of Table 2 reports estimates from a modified version of equation (12), which now
controls for whether a county has any railroad track. Column 2 controls for whether a county
has any railroad track and the county’s mileage of railroad track. The estimated impact of
market access declines somewhat, but remains substantial and statistically significant. The
estimated impact of market access is also similar when controlling for quadratic or cubic
functions of county railroad track: 0.94 (0.16) or 0.93 (0.18), respectively.58 While local
railroads increase county market access, the estimated impact of market access is robust
to exploiting variation in market access that is independent of that county’s own railroad
construction.59
56

In particular, weighting by 1870 land value removes the arbitrary distinction between omitting counties
with missing (or zero) land value in 1870 and including counties with nearly zero land value in 1870.
57
In practice, this concern may remain after controlling for changes by state and counties’ longitude and
latitude.
58
The estimated impact of market access declines, but remains substantial, when controlling flexibly for
railroad presence and railroad track in distance buffers around a county: the coefficient on market access
declines to 0.76 (0.12), then 0.68 (0.13), then 0.65 (0.13), and settles at 0.62 (0.14) when progressively
controlling for both the presence of any railroad and the mileage of railroad track within 5 miles of the
county, and within 10 miles of the county, and within 15 miles of the county, ..., and within 40 miles of the
county.
59
The coefficients in columns 1 and 2 imply that market access and railroads are positively correlated;
indeed, regressing log market access on the presence of railroad track and mileage of railroad track generates

21

It is tempting to interpret the estimated coefficients on railroad measures, holding market access fixed, as indicating the magnitude of selection bias in railroad construction. In
theory, railroads should have no causal impact on land values after conditioning on market
access. In practice, however, there may be measurement error in market access such that
railroad measures pick up variation in counties’ true market access. Measurement error in
market access may also be exacerbated when controlling for county railroads, contributing
to attenuation in the estimated impact.
When omitting the market access term, column 3 of Table 2 reports that county land
value increases by 0.290 log points or 34% when a county receives any railroad track. Column
4 reports that county land values increase by 0.268 log points when receiving any railroad
track and by an additional 0.143 log points for every 100 miles of railroad track. These
estimates may reflect a causal impact of railroads on county land values, but may also reflect
selection bias in which areas receive railroads. Comparing the estimates in columns 1 and 2
to those in columns 3 and 4 indicates that much of the impact of railroad track is absorbed
by controlling for county market access. These estimates are consistent with our definition of
market access being a particular functional form through which the railroad network affects
counties.
As an alternative identification strategy, we exploit the historical substitutability between
railroads and waterways. In particular, expansion of the national railroad network should
have a larger impact on counties with worse market access through waterways only. Regardless of how the railroad network actually changes from 1870 to 1890, counties with better
market access through waterways in 1870 are likely to have a smaller increase in market
access from 1870 to 1890. Using a restricted GIS network database with no railroads, we
calculate county-to-county lowest-cost freight routes and measure counties’ access to markets
in 1870 through waterways only.
In the first-stage specification, Table 3 reports that counties with better “water market
access” in 1870 experience a relative decline in market access from 1870 to 1890 (column
1).60 In the reduced-form specification, counties with better “water market access” in 1870
also experience a relative decline in agricultural land values (column 2). Instrumenting for
the change in market access with counties’ initial “water market access,” market access is
estimated to increase land values with an elasticity of 2.46 (0.64). This 2SLS estimate is
robust to controlling for changes in county railroad track (column 4), where county railroads
no longer increase land values when holding fixed county market access. Using this instrupositive coefficients: 0.18 (0.02) and 0.065 (0.010), respectively.
60
We discuss these results in changes, which is equivalent to estimating a two-period model with county
fixed effects.

22

mental variables approach, the estimated impact of market access is substantially larger
(and marginally statistically larger) than the baseline OLS estimates in column 1 of Table
1. The increase in the estimated coefficient is consistent with measurement error in market
access, though these estimates may also reflect a violation of this alternative identification
assumption (i.e., that areas with good market access through waterways would have changed
similarly to areas with worse market access through waterways).
V

Counterfactual Estimates

The estimated impact of market access is interesting in its own right, and as an exercise in
empirical general equilibrium economics, but our main aim is to use this estimate to explore
the aggregate economic impact of railroads in 1890. First, we estimate the economic impact
of removing all railroads in 1890 and the robustness of these estimates to various choices
in the empirical analysis (from network construction to estimation). Second, we consider
the economic impact of alternative counterfactual scenarios that might have occurred in the
absence of railroads.
V.A

Economic Impact of Removing Railroads in 1890

Using our transportation network database, we calculate county-to-county lowest-cost freight
routes in the absence of any railroads. Counties’ market access in 1890 declines by 61%, on
average, when all railroads are eliminated. The standard deviation of this decline is 18.5%,
while the 5th and 95th percentiles are 36% and 94% declines. Projecting the impact of large
counterfactual changes in market access is more credible when two conditions hold: (1) the
original regressions are estimated using large changes in market access, and (2) the impact
of market access is (log-)linear.
In support of the first condition, the measured changes in market access between 1870
and 1890 have a similar range as that in our counterfactual scenarios. The average percent
decline in market access from 1890 to 1870 is 51%, with a standard deviation of 12.1%, a 5th
percentile decline of 41%, and a 95th percentile decline of 80%. Log changes in market access
from 1870 to 1890 remain large when controlling for state fixed effects and counties’ longitude
and latitude: the residual standard deviation is 0.09 log points (weighted) and 0.25 log points
(unweighted), whereas the unconditional standard deviation is 0.13 log points (weighted) and
0.42 log points (unweighted).
In support of the second condition, the estimated impact of market access on land value
does appear to be (log-)linear. We calculate residual changes in log land value and log
market access, after conditioning on the control variables in equation (12). Limiting the
sample to residual changes in market access within one standard deviation (plus or minus),

23

Figure 4 shows a kernel-weighted local polynomial and its 95% confidence interval.61 There
does appear to be a roughly linear functional relationship between changes in log land value
and changes in log market access. The theoretical model also predicts that this relationship
is log-linear, which gives some additional confidence in predicting counterfactual impacts
based on this functional form.
Removing all railroads in 1890 is predicted to decrease the total value of US agricultural
land by 63.5% or $5.15 billion, based on the calculated decline in market access and the estimated impact of market access on agricultural land value.62 Using Fogel’s preferred mortgage
rate of interest, the implied annual economic loss (and standard error) is $408 million ($27
million) or 3.40% (0.23%) of GNP in 1890. The largest possible annual economic impact of
railroads is only 5.35% of GNP, which would reflect the complete loss of all agricultural land
value in the sample region.63
Decreases in agricultural land value are largest in the Midwest, but are substantial in all
regions of the United States. As a fraction of national GNP, the implied annual economic
impact by region is: 1.74% in the midwest, 0.59% in the plains, 0.40% in the northeast, 0.34%
in the south, and 0.33% in the far west. When allowing the impact of market access to vary by
region, the impact of railroads declines somewhat in the northeast.64 The estimated impact
of market access is lowest in the northeast and the far west, where we expect congestion and
market power to create greater measurement error in counties’ market access.65
The baseline counterfactual estimates hold population fixed by county in 1890, though
population might be expected to relocate in response to the absence of railroads. It is
challenging to estimate this relocation directly, though we consider counterfactual scenarios
that shift the geographic distribution of population to that in earlier decades (1870, 1850,
1830).66 For these three cases, the counterfactual loss from removing the railroad network
61

The local polynomial represents the (default) Epanechnikov kernel with (default) bandwidth 0.04.
County agricultural land value is predicted to fall by 1.11 log points for every log point decline in market
access (Table 1, column 1), and the implied percent decline in each county’s land value is multiplied by each
county’s land value in 1890. We include all counties from 1890 in these counterfactual estimates, though
455 counties are omitted from the regression sample due to missing data in 1870 (e.g., the counties did not
exist in 1870). Losses in these non-sample counties make up 7.6% of the total counterfactual loss. In the
absence of railroads, these non-sample counties experience larger average declines in market access than the
regression sample counties (79% vs. 57%), but their average land value is much lower ($1 million vs. $3.3
million).
63
Fogel also reports state-level mortgage interest rates: using these rates, the implied annual economic
loss is 3.17% of GNP and the largest possible loss is 4.92% of GNP.
64
Allowing for differential impacts of market access by region, the implied annual economic impact by
region is: 1.76% in the midwest, 0.62% in the plains, 0.27% in the northeast, 0.35% in the south, and 0.32%
in the far west.
65
When allowing the impact of market access to vary by region, the estimated impacts of market access
(and standard error) are: 1.25 (0.52) in the plains, 1.13 (0.16) in the midwest, 1.19 (0.27) in the south, 1.00
(0.36) in the far west, and 0.67 (0.14) in the northeast.
66
In particular, we assign each county a population in 1890 based on the total population in 1890 and
62

24

declines in magnitude by only 3.5% to 4.5%. The counterfactual loss would increase if
national population declined in the absence of the railroads.
V.B

Robustness to Alternative Specifications and Cost Parameters

Table 4 presents the sensitivity of the empirical results to modifications in the construction of the network database (panel A), the definition of market access (panel B), and the
empirical specification (panel C). Column 1 reports the estimated impact of market access,
column 2 reports the estimated percent decline in national agricultural land value without
the railroads, and column 3 reports the implied annual economic impact as a percent of
GNP.67
It is useful to verify the robustness of the empirical results to plausible alternative parameter choices for freight transportation costs (panel A), particularly as much academic debate
has centered on Fogel’s choice of these cost parameters. Water transportation is always low
cost, but the estimated impact of market access is not sensitive to further lowering the cost
of sea routes or all water routes (rows 1 and 2).68 The annual impact of railroads declines
somewhat with lower water costs, as a counterfactual without railroads becomes more manageable. Our empirical estimates are less sensitive than social saving estimates, however,
which change proportionally with the difference in point-to-point costs by rail and water.
One advantage to railroads was in reducing transshipment charges, incurred whenever
transferring goods to/from a railroad car, river boat, canal barge, or ocean liner. The estimates are not sensitive, however, to eliminating transshipment charges within the waterway
network (row 3). In addition, transportation through the railroad network was not entirely
seamless: congestion, fragmented track ownership, or differences in gauges may have required
periodic transshipment; and scheduled freight routes would be less direct than those calculated on the GIS network. We consider a moderately higher railroad rate (0.735 cents) that
reflects a need for two transshipment points within an average length railroad route, and a
higher railroad rate (0.878 cents) that makes railroad routes as indirect as wagon routes.69
The estimated impact of market access is not sensitive to higher railroad rates (rows 4 and
5), whereas the annual impact of railroads declines slightly with a decrease in the relative
that county’s share of national population in the earlier decade. We then calculate counties’ counterfactual
market access based on the counterfactual cost of trading with each other county and the counterfactual
population in each other county.
67
The standard errors for the estimates in columns 2 and 3 are calculated using the delta method, which
transform the standard errors in column 1.
68
The lower waterway rate (0.198 cents per ton-mile) reflects Fogel’s preliminary rate for waterway transportation, prior to his adjustments for supplemental costs associated with waterway transportation.
69
In the first case, we consider an average length railroad route of 926 miles (Fogel, 1964) and assign an
additional dollar over this distance (which becomes 0.108 cents per mile). In the second case, we increase
the baseline railroad rate by the same factor (1.4) used to adjust for indirect wagon routes (Fogel, 1964).

25

advantage of railroads.
Wagon transportation costs are likely to be an important feature of the database. Fogel
emphasized that the baseline wagon rate may be too high and his social saving estimates
are substantially lower for decreased wagon costs of 14 cents per mile.70 By contrast, this
lower wagon rate increases the estimated impact of market access such that the annual
impact of railroads is moderately higher (row 6). In further analysis below, we consider a
counterfactual scenario in which improvements to country roads reduce wagon costs in the
absence of railroads.
The estimated impact of market access is affected little by the inclusion of a waterway
route between the Pacific Ocean and the Atlantic Ocean (rows 7-9).71 This waterway route
has little impact on the calculation of market access because the transcontinental railroad
was available in 1870 and 1890. By contrast, this waterway route has more influence on the
estimated annual impact of railroads because it provides the only link between Western and
Eastern markets in the absence of the railroads (aside from wagons). The costs of waterway
shipping may have been driven down by competition with railway shipping, however, which
we explore in later analysis.
Aside from changes in the network database, we also consider the estimates’ robustness to
changes in the definition of market access (panel B). We only directly measure US counties’
access to other US counties, but the results are similar when adjusting for the influence of
international markets (row 10). As a simple adjustment, we assign additional population
to counties with major international ports, based on the value of merchandise traded and
nominal GDP per capita.72
One technical issue is that a county’s market access should theoretically include access
to its own population, though our baseline measure omits this term due to simultaneity
70

To clarify, the cost of 14 cents per mile reflects Fogel’s considered lower cost (10 cents per mile) and
Fogel’s adjustment factor for indirect wagon routes (1.4). It is more convenient for us to scale up the price
of routes, rather than equivalently scale up the distance required.
71
The network database includes a waterway route from the Pacific (near San Diego) to the Atlantic (near
Florida), which reflects the potential to transport goods around Cape Horn or through Panama (by railroad).
The transcontinental railroad was generally preferred after its construction, but waterway routes were used
for some goods and the baseline estimates assume a Pacific-to-Atlantic waterway cost of $8 such that the
overall GIS-calculated cost of transporting goods from San Francisco to New York City was similar by rail
and water. Robustness checks assign this waterway cost such that the GIS-calculated costs by rail and water
were similar between Seattle and New York City (a $5 connection) or between San Diego and New York
City (a $11 connection).
72
For 11 major international ports, which cover 90% to 93% of international trade in 1870 and 1890,
we assign additional county population in 1870 and 1890 based on the ports’ average value of exports and
imports divided by nominal GDP per capita in 1870 and 1890 (Bureau of Statistics, 2003; Carter et al.,
2006). This adjustment mainly increases the “effective population” in New York City, New Orleans, Boston,
Baltimore, Philadelphia, and San Francisco. There are also large percent increases in Galveston, Savannah,
and Charleston, and smaller percent increases in Norfolk and Portland.

26

concerns (as discussed in Section III.D). A county’s own population forms a small share of
its total market access, however, so including its own market has little impact on the results
(row 11). In a similar trade-off between simultaneity concerns and the model’s suggested
measure, we omit counties’ access to nearby counties and the results are similar (rows 12-14).
Our baseline measure of market access includes counties’ access to all other counties,
based on a model of trade among all US counties. Alternatively, agricultural counties may
only benefit from selling/buying goods to/from cities. The estimated impact of market access
is similar when only measuring counties’ access to urban areas or cities (rows 15 and 16),
which reflects the large influence of urban areas and cities in determining counties’ overall
market access.73 The implied economic impact of railroads is somewhat smaller in these
specifications, which could reflect railroads’ comparative advantage in linking rural areas
with each other.74
Calculating our measure of market access requires assuming a value of θ (the “trade
elasticity”), for which our baseline measure assumes a value of 3.8 (Donaldson, forthcoming).
We now consider assuming a value of 1, which reduces our measure of market access to an
older notion of “market potential” (Harris, 1954). The estimated impact of market access
is much larger when θ = 1 (row 17), but this is mainly a mechanical re-scaling of “market
access” and the implied impact of railroads is only moderately larger.75 Rows 18 and 19
report estimates when assuming larger values of θ: 4.12 is from Simonovska and Waugh
(2011), and 12.86 is the largest estimate from Eaton and Kortum (2002).76 These alternative
choices (mechanically) reduce the estimated impact of market access but have less effect on
the implied impact of railroads.
The above changes in the network database or measurement of market access affect
both the estimated impact of market access and the counterfactual decline in market access
without railroads. Panel C considers alternative empirical specifications that affect the
estimated impact of market access but do not change the counterfactual decline in market
access without railroads. In this case, changes in the estimated coefficient (column 1) directly
map into changes in the implied impact of railroads (column 2), though by less in percent
73

The Census defines urban areas as places with population greater than 2,500, and defines cities as areas
with population greater than 25,000.
74
Note that the “distance buffer” (rows 12-14) and “city access” (rows 15 and 16) estimates would suffer
from omitted variables bias if counties value access to non-included areas, so we emphasize these results
mainly as a sensitivity check on our baseline estimates. These estimates do not strictly decompose the
benefits of market access to cities, to urban areas, and to rural areas.
75
Note that this is a non-linear re-scaling; otherwise, there would be no impact on estimating the impact
of market access in logs.
76
Our preferred estimate of θ is from an historical agricultural context (though in India), whereas larger
estimates are from modern trade of manufactured goods. For modern trade of manufactured goods, estimates
of θ are generally within the range of 4 to 9 (Anderson and van Wincoop, 2004).

27

terms due to the log functional form.
First, we control for region-specific changes in addition to the baseline controls for changes
by state and latitude/longitude. In rows 20 and 21 we include year-specific controls for the
fraction of each county in 20 “resource regions” or 145 “resource subregions” (Hornbeck,
2010), though these regions were mapped in 1966 and may be endogenous to the availability
of railroads. Comparing counties within local regions may also exacerbate measurement
error in county market access, due to simplifications in our network database and calculated
county-to-county freight transportation costs. The estimated magnitudes are attenuated
somewhat in these specifications, though the impacts remain substantively and statistically
significant.
Second, we exclude outlier values for changes in market access and changes in land value.
When excluding the largest and smallest 1% or 5% of changes in market access (rows 22 and
23), the estimated impact of market access is similar or slightly larger. These coefficients
mechanically imply a similar or slightly larger impact of railroads, as we include all counties
when calculating the implied decline in agricultural land value. When excluding the largest
and smallest 1% or 5% of changes in land value (rows 24 and 25), the estimated impact of
market access (and railroads) is similar or slightly smaller. Increasingly excluding outlier
values in the outcome variable is known to attenuate estimates, but it is useful to verify
that the estimates are not driven by large percent changes in a small number of sample
counties. Indeed, part of the rationale for weighting the regressions is to reduce the influence
of sparsely settled counties experiencing large increases in land value.
V.C

Additional Counterfactual Scenarios

In evaluating whether railroads were “indispensable” to the US economy, it is reasonable to
consider whether other technological solutions might have been available. Prior to the railroads, many resources were devoted toward building a canal network in the Eastern United
States; in the absence of the railroads, a system of canals might have been built through
portions of the Midwest and Eastern Plains. As described in Section I, Fogel (1964) proposes
a feasible system of canals that would have brought 70% of the “infeasible region” within 40
miles of a navigable waterway. In Fogel’s estimates, and in our preliminary extension of Fogel’s analysis in Section I, this system of canals mitigates 30% of the intraregional losses from
removing railroads. These estimates require assuming how much land values are affected by
distance to a waterway, however, and counties’ distance to a waterway is an imperfect proxy
for what they actually value: access to markets.
To measure the impact of Fogel’s proposed canals, we calculate county-to-county lowest
cost transportation routes for a counterfactual network database that replaces all railroads

28

with Fogel’s proposed extension to the canal network. Using these costs to re-calculate
counties’ reduction in market access in 1890 without railroads, and multiplying this decline by
the estimated impact of market access, we estimate that agricultural land values would still
decline by 55.3% with a standard error of 4.4%. The proposed canals are a poor substitute for
the railroad network, mitigating only 13% of the losses from removing railroads. While canals
reach within 40 miles of many Midwestern areas, the railroad network provides substantially
better access to markets. This result is foreshadowed by the remarkably dense railroad
network in 1890 seen in Figure 2.
Fogel’s proposed canals would have generated annual gains of $53 million in the absence
of the railroads, which does exceed their estimated annual capital cost of $34 million. Fogel’s
proposed canals were not actually built, presumably because they were made unnecessary by
the presence of the railroads. Indeed, using a network database that includes both railroads
and the canal extensions, we estimate that the proposed canals generate an annual economic
benefit of just $0.23 million.
As an alternative technological solution, in the absence of railroads, there may have
been substantial improvements in road-based transportation. Fogel speculates that motor
trucks might have been introduced earlier, but a more immediate response could have been
the improvement of country roads. For a counterfactual network database that excludes
railroads and reduces the cost of wagon transportation to the cost along improved roads (10
cents per mile traveled, 14 cents for a straight route; down from 16.5 and 23.1 respectively in
our baseline procedure), agricultural land values still decline by 50.9% (4.1%). Adaptation
through improved country roads therefore mitigates only 20% of the loss from removing
railroads. We do not find that improving country roads is particularly complementary with
extending the canal network: doing both together mitigates 32.4% of the loss from removing
railroads, compared to their summed impact of mitigating 32.9%.77
This alternative technological solution is predicated on the notion that the absence of
railroads would heighten incentives to improve country roads. In a world without railroads,
we estimate a $81 million annual benefit from decreased wagon costs; in a world with railroads, we estimate a $51 million annual benefit from decreased wagon costs. Railroads indeed
reduce the gains from decreasing wagon transportation costs, but there remain large gains
from improving country roads in a world with railroads.
It is difficult to quantify whether the absence of railroads might have encouraged the
earlier introduction of motorized trucking, but we can measure how much wagon costs would
need to decline to compensate for the absence of railroads. We calculate counterfactual
77

For this exercise, we calculate market access for a counterfactual scenario that both includes proposed
canals and reduces the cost of wagon transportation.

29

scenarios without railroads, decreasing the wagon cost to 5 cents, 2.5 cents, and 1 cent per
ton mile.78 When replacing the railroads with a lower wagon cost of 5 cents or 2.5 cents,
agricultural land values fall by 33.9% (3.3%) and 18.4% (2.0%), respectively. Agricultural
land values increase by 4.4% (0.71%) when replacing railroads with a lower wagon cost of 1
cent, at which point the wagon rate is nearing the railroad rate of 0.63 cents.
Other economic changes might exacerbate the absence of railroads, whereas Fogel focuses
on compensatory responses that mitigate the impact on transportation costs from removing railroads. In particular, competition from railroads may have dramatically lowered the
costs of shipping by waterway. Holmes and Schmitz (2001) discuss how waterway shipping
rates may have roughly doubled in the absence of the railroads, due to increased holdup at
transshipment points and adoption of inefficient technologies. For a counterfactual network
database that excludes railroads and doubles the cost of water transportation, we estimate
that agricultural land values would decline by 77.3% (4.0%). This decline would generate an
annual economic loss of $496 million ($26 million) or 4.14% of GNP (0.21%), roughly 22%
higher than the baseline estimated economic impact from removing railroads.
VI

Concluding Remarks

This paper develops a new method for evaluating the aggregate economic impact of railroads,
drawing on a new database of county-to-county transport costs and recent trade research.
Our approach exploits county-level variation in the railroad network over time, while dealing with the general empirical challenge that railroads in one county may well affect other
counties. Dealing with this empirical challenge has required some theoretical guidance, but
the empirical analysis has been able to proceed in a fairly reduced-form manner without
calibrating a general equilibrium trade model. The general equilibrium impacts of railroads
are captured, in wide class of trade models, by measuring the changes induced in counties’ “market access.” Our approach captures a simple economic logic: the benefits to each
location are capitalized into the price of an immobile factor (land); and locations benefit
from increased access to markets through railroad network expansion, rather than access to
railroads per se.
Our estimates imply that railroads were critical to the agricultural sector in 1890: the absence of railroads would have decreased agricultural land values by 63.5%, generating annual
losses of $407 million or 3.40% of GNP. Further, railroads’ contributions to the agricultural
sector were largely irreplaceable. We estimate that feasible extensions to the canal network
would have mitigated only 13% of the losses from removing railroads. Improvements to
country roads would have mitigated 20% of the losses from removing railroads, though the
78

Note that, after adjusting for straight routes, the assumed wagon costs are 7.5 cents, 3.5 cents, and 1.4
cents per ton mile.

30

majority of gains from improved country roads would also have accrued in the presence of
railroads. It is difficult to imagine how the impact of railroads within the agricultural sector
could ever be “indispensable” to the US economy, a notion disputed by Fogel, as the total
loss of all agricultural land value would only generate annual losses equal to 5.35% of GNP.
Our estimates do imply, however, that railroads were both critical and irreplaceable to the
agricultural sector.
Our “market access” estimates indicate a moderately larger impact of railroads than
Fogel’s “social saving” estimates, as well as less ability for alternative transportation improvements to substitute for the loss of railroads. When comparing our results with those
from Fogel’s social saving approach, we note that Fogel focused deliberately on obtaining
an upper bound on the railroads’ impact. By contrast, our approach strives at an unbiased point estimate. Whereas social saving estimates depend in large part on assuming the
impact on land values from changes in transportation distances, our empirical analysis ultimately lets the data estimate how new railroads improve market access and how market
access raises land values. The data indicate that county land values are affected strongly by
market access, and that railroads had a critical and irreplaceable role in increasing counties’
market access. Much of the difference between our results and Fogel’s results appears to
reflect our modern ability to construct a GIS network database and measure more precisely
the impact of transportation methods on counties’ access to markets. Using these data to
estimate the aggregate impact of railroads has required exploiting recent advances in general
equilibrium trade theory, but the model maintains the neoclassical framework underlying
the social saving approach.
Our empirical analysis follows Fogel’s in focusing on gains within the agricultural sector,
which neglects many other potential benefits from the railroads. For example, in the context
of our model, there are gains to consumers throughout the country (and the world) from
cheaper agricultural goods. Outside of our model, there would be gains to consumers in
the form of decreased passenger rates (e.g., Fishlow, 1965; Boyd and Walton, 1971; Leunig,
2006). We have also neglected gains in other sectors, such as the manufacturing sector, for
which railroads may increase access to inputs and to consumers. Finally, our analysis only
measures static gains from specialization and exploitation of comparative advantage, but the
largest gains may be dynamic due to increases in technological innovation.
We see significant potential for future research to quantify channels through which the
railroads impacted the development of the American economy. This paper provides a framework to think about general equilibrium impacts of the railroads through changes in “market
access,” which we hope will enable future research to estimate the aggregate impacts of railroads in addition to relative impacts on particular areas or sectors.
31

Finally, as a broader methodological exercise, this paper demonstrates a tractable approach to estimating aggregate treatment effects in the presence of spillover effects. For
general settings in which spillover effects are at a national or global scale, some amount of
theoretical structure is needed to move beyond estimating relative impacts in more-affected
areas. Using theory as a guide, it is possible to estimate aggregate effects in a reducedform manner. Empirical research in all fields of economics is increasingly estimating relative
magnitudes by comparing areas that are relatively more or less affected by some plausibly
exogenous treatment, but we hope our efforts might encourage similar attempts to exploit
relative variation in addressing questions that are more aggregate in nature.

32

References
Ahuja, Ravindra K., Thomas L. Magnanti, and James B. Orlin. 1993. Network
Flows: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications. New York: Prentice Hall.
Anderson, James E., and Eric van Wincoop. 2003. “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution
to the Border Puzzle.” American Economic Review, 93(1): 170–192.
Anderson, James E., and Eric van Wincoop. 2004. “Trade Costs.” Journal of Economic
Literature, 42(3): 691–751.
Anderson, Simon P., André de Palma, and Jacques F. Thisse. 1992. Discrete Choice
Theory of Product Differentiation. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Anselin, Luc. 1988. Spatial Econometrics: Methods and Models. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Atack, Jeremy. 2013. “On the Use of Geographic Information Systems in Economic History: The American Transportation Revolution Revisited.” Journal of Economic History,
73: 313–338.
Atack, Jeremy, and Robert A. Margo. 2010. “The Impact of Access to Rail Transportation on Agricultural Improvement: The American Midwest as a Test Case, 1850-1860.”
BU Mimeo.
Atack, Jeremy, Fred Bateman, Michael Haines, and Robert A. Margo. 2010. “Did
Railroads Induce or Follow Economic Growth? Urbanization and Population Growth in
the American Midwest, 1850-1860.” Social Science History, 34(2): 171–197.
Atack, Jeremy, Michael Haines, and Robert A. Margo. 2011. “Railroads and the
Rise of the Factory: Evidence for the United States, 1850-1870.” In Economic Evolution
and Revolutions in Historical Time. , ed. P. Rhode, J. Rosenbloom and D. Weiman. Palo
Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Axtell, Robert L. 2001. “Zipf Distribution of U.S. Firm Sizes.” Science, 293(5536): 1818–
1820.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, and Nancy Qian. 2012. “On the Road: Access to
Transportation Infrastructure and Economic Growth in China.” NBER WP 17897.
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel. 2007. “Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(2): 775–805.
33

Boyd, J. Hayden, and Gary M. Walton. 1971. “The social savings from nineteenthcentury rail passenger services.” Explorations in Economic History, 9(1): 233–254.
Bureau of Statistics. 2003. Statistical Abstract of the United States 1892. Ross Publishing
Incorporated. http://www2.census.gov/prod2/statcomp/documents/1892-02.pdf.
Carter, Susan B., Scott S. Gartner, Michael R. Haines, Alan L. Olmstead,
Richard Sutch, and Gavin Wright. 2006. Historical Statistics of the United States:
Millennial Edition. Cambridge UK:Cambridge University Press.
Caselli, Francesco, and Wilbur John Coleman. 2001. “Cross-Country Technology Diffusion: The Case of Computers.” American Economic Review, 91(2): 328–335.
Cervantes, Fernando Perez. 2013. “Railroads and Economic Growth: A Trade Policy
Approach.” University of Chicago Mimeo.
Chaney, Thomas. 2008. “Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of
International Trade.” American Economic Review, 98(4): 1707–1721.
Colton, G. W. 1870. Colton’s Railroad Map (Intermediate Size) of the United States Reduced from“Colton’s Railroad and Commercial Map of the United States”. New York: G,
W. & C. B. Colton & Co.
Combes, Pierre-Philippe., Thierry Mayer, and Jacques-François Thisse. 2008.
Economic Geography: the Integration of Regions and Nations. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Conley, Timothy G. 1999. “GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence.” Journal
of Econometrics, 92(1): 1–45.
Cram, George F. 1887. Standard American Atlas of the World. Chicago: G. F. Cram.
David, Paul A. 1969. “Transport Innovation and Economic Growth: Professor Fogel on
and off the Rails.” Economic History Review, 22(3): 506–524.
Donaldson, Dave. forthcoming. “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infrastructure.” American Economic Review.
Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum. 2002. “Technology, Geography and Trade.”
Econometrica, 70(5): 1741–1779.
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel S. Kortum, and Sebastian Sotelo. 2012. “International
Trade: Linking Micro and Macro.” NBER WP 17864.
34

Fishlow, Albert. 1965. American Railroads and the Transformation of the Antebellum
Economy. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Fogel, Robert W. 1964. Railroads and American Economic Growth: Essays in Econometric
History. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Fogel, Robert W. 1979. “Notes on the Social Saving Controversy.” Journal of Economic
History, 39: 1–54.
Haines, Michael, and Roberet A. Margo. 2008. “Railroads and Local Development:
The United States in the 1850s.” In Quantitative Economic History: The Good of Counting. , ed. J. Rosenbloom, 78–99. London: Routledge.
Haines, Michael R. 2005. Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: US, 17902000. ICPSR.
Hanson, Gordon H. 2005. “Market potential, increasing returns and geographic concentration.” Journal of International Economics, 67(1): 1–24.
Harris, Chauncy D. 1954. “The Market as a Factor in the Localization of Industry in the
United States.” Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 64: 315–348.
Head, Keith, and Thierry Mayer. 2011. “Gravity, market potential and economic development.” Journal of Economic Geography, 11(2): 281–294.
Head, Keith, and Thierry Mayer. forthcoming. “Gravity Equations: Workhorse,
Toolkit, Cookbook.” New York: Elsevier.
Herrendorf, Berthold, James A. Schmitz, and Arilton Teixeira. 2009. “Transportation and Development: Insights from the U.S., 1840—1860.” Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis Research Department Staff Report 425.
Holmes, Thomas J., and James A. Schmitz. 2001. “Competition at work: railroads vs.
monopoly in the U.S. shipping industry.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly
Review, 25(2): 3–29.
Hornbeck, Richard. 2010. “Barbed Wire: Property Rights and Agricultural Development.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125: 767–810.
Lebergott, Stanley. 1966. “United States Transportation Advance and Externalities.”
Journal of Economic History, 26(4): 437–461.

35

Leunig, Timothy. 2006. “Time is Money: A Re-Assessment of the Passenger Social Savings
from Victorian British Railways.” Journal of Economic History, 66(3): 635–673.
Leunig, Timothy. 2010. “Social Savings.” Journal of Economic Surveys, 24(5): 775–800.
McClelland, Peter D. 1968. “Railroads, American Growth, and the New Economic History: A Critique.” Journal of Economic History, 28(1): 102–123.
Melitz, Marc J. 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity.” Econometrica, 71: 1695–1725.
Michaels, Guy. 2008. “The Effect of Trade on the Demand for Skill: Evidence from the
Interstate Highway System.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(4): 683–701.
Miguel, Edward, and Michael Kremer. 2004. “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health in the Presence of Treatment Externalities.” Econometrica, 72(1): 159–217.
Nerlove, Marc. 1966. “Railroads and American Economic Growth.” Journal of Economic
History, 26(1): 107–115.
Redding, Stephen. 2010. “The Empirics of New Economic Geography.” Journal of Regional Science, 50(1): 297–311.
Redding, Stephen, and Anthony Venables. 2004. “Economic Geography and International Inequality.” Journal of International Economics, 62(10): 53–82.
Redding, Stephen, and Daniel M. Sturm. 2007. “The Cost of Remoteness: Evidence
from German Division and Reunification.” American Economic Review, 98(5): 1766–1797.
Simonovska, Ina, and Michael E. Waugh. 2011. “Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and
Evidence.” UC Davis Mimeo.
White, Colin M. 1976. “The Concept of Social Savings in Theory and Practice.” Economic
History Review, 24: 82–100.
Whitney, William D., and Benjamin E. Smith. 1911. The Century dictionary and
cyclopedia: with a new atlas of the world : a work of general reference in all departments
of knowledge. Century Co.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. 1974. Late Nineteenth-Century American Development: a General
Equilibrium History. New York: Cambridge Univeristy Press.

36

Figure 1. Distance Buffers in 1890 around Waterways, Railroads, and Proposed Canals
B. 40-Mile Buffers: Including Proposed Canals (Dark Gray)
A. 40-Mile Buffers: Waterways (Black) and Railroads (Gray)

D. 10-Mile Buffers: Including Proposed Canals (Dark Gray)

C. 10-Mile Buffers: Waterways (Black) and Railroads (Gray)

Notes: In Panel A, areas shaded light gray are within 40 miles of a railroad in 1890 but not within 40 miles of a waterway (shaded black). In Panel B, areas
shaded dark gray are further than 40 miles from a waterway but within 40 miles of Fogel's proposed canals. Panels C and D are equivalent for 10-mile buffers.

37

Figure 2. Constructed Network Database (Partial)
A. Natural Waterways

B. Natural Waterways and Canals

C. Natural Waterways, Canals, and 1870 Railroads

D. Natural Waterways, Canals, and 1890 Railroads

Notes: Panel A shows all natural waterways, including navigable rivers and routes across lakes and oceans. Panel B adds the canal network (as actually
constructed in 1890). Panel C adds railroads constructed in 1870, and then Panel D adds railroads constructed between 1870 and 1890.

38

Figure 3. Calculated Changes in Market Access from 1870 to 1890, by County

Notes: This map shows the 2,327 sample counties, shaded according to their calculated change in market access from 1870 to 1890. Counties are divided into
seven groups (with an equal number of counties per group) and darker shades denote larger changes in market access.

39

Residual Changes in Log Land Value
-.05
0
.05
-.1

.1

Figure 4. Local Polynomial Relationship Between Changes in Log Land Value and Log Market Access, 1870 to 1890

-.1

-.05
0
.05
Residual Changes in Log Market Access

.1

kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .04, pwidth = .06
Notes: Residual changes in sample counties are calculated by regressing changes in the indicated variable on state fixed effects and county longitude and
latitude, as in equation (12). This figure then plots the local polynomial relationship between changes in log land value and changes in log market access, based
on an Epanechnikov kernel function with bandwidth 0.04. The shaded region reflects the 95% confidence interval.

40

Table 1. Estimated Elasticity of Land Value to Market Access
Baseline
Specification
Log Market Access

(1)
1.11
(0.14)

Log Value of Agricultural Land
Calibrated
Fixed 1870
100-mile Buffer
Market Access
Population
Market Access
(2)
1.17
(0.15)

(3)
1.11
(0.14)

(4)
1.04
(0.14)

Unweighted
(5)
1.07
(0.27)

Number of Counties
2,327
2,327
2,327
2,327
2,327
R-squared
0.62
0.63
0.62
0.62
0.61
Notes: Column 1 reports estimates from equation (12) in the text: for a balanced panel 2,327 counties in 1870 and
1890, the Log Value of Agricultural Land is regressed on Log Market Access (as defined in equation 11), county
fixed effects, state-by-year fixed effects, and year-specific cubic polynomials in county latitude and longitude. The
regression is weighted by counties' 1870 value of agricultural land. Columns 2 through 5 report robustness
checks, as discussed in the text: column 2 uses a calibrated measure of market access (equation 9 in the text);
column 3 uses a measure of market access for 1890 that holds counties' population levels fixed at 1870 levels;
column 4 uses a measure of market access only to counties beyond 100 miles of a county; and column 5 reports
estimates from the baseline specification when not weighting by counties' 1870 land value. Robust standard errors
clustered by state are reported in parentheses.

41

Table 2. Market Access Elasticity: Robustness to Controls for Local Railroads

Log Market Access

Any Railroad

Railroad Length
(Units = 100 mi)

(1)
0.93
(0.14)
0.112
(0.052)

Log Value of Agricultural Land
(2)
(3)
0.83
(0.13)
0.117
(0.051)
0.089
(0.042)

0.290
(0.046)

(4)

0.268
(0.042)
0.143
(0.040)

Number of Counties
2,327
2,327
2,327
2,327
R-squared
0.63
0.63
0.61
0.62
Notes: Column 1 reports the baseline specification from Table 1 (column 1), but controlling for a
dummy variable for whether the county contains any railroad track. Column 2 also controls for county
railroad track mileage (in units of 100 miles). Columns 3 and 4 omit Log Market Access from the
specifications reported in columns 1 and 2. All regressions include county fixed effects, state-by-year
fixed effects, and year-specific cubic polynomials in county latitude and longitude. All regressions are
weighted by counties' 1870 value of agricultural land. Robust standard errors clustered by state are
reported in parentheses.

42

Table 3. Market Access Elasticity: Instrumenting with Water Market Access in 1870
Δ Log Value of
Agricultural Land

Δ Log
Market Access
First-stage
(1)

Reduced-Form
(2)

- 0.091
(0.030)

- 0.224
(0.052)

Δ Log Market Access

Log Water Market Access in 1870

2SLS
(3)
2.46
(0.64)

2SLS
(4)
2.58
(0.70)

Δ Any Railroad

- 0.200
(0.134)

Δ Railroad Length
(Units = 100 mi)

- 0.025
(0.050)

Number of Counties
2,327
2,327
2,327
2,327
R-squared
0.57
0.60
0.57
0.57
Notes: Columns 1 and 2 report the impact of Log Water Market Access in 1870 on changes in the indicated
outcome variable between 1870 and 1890. Column 3 reports the estimated impact of a change in Log Market
Access on the change in Log Value of Agricultural Land, instrumenting for the change in Log Market Access
with Log Water Market Access in 1870. Column 4 presents the same estimate as in column 3, but also controls
for changes in the presence of any railroad in the county and changes in the county's railroad track mileage. All
regressions include state fixed effects and cubic polynomials in county latitude and longitude, and are weighted
by counties' 1870 value of agricultural land. Robust standard errors clustered by state are reported in
parentheses.

43

Table 4. Robustness of Estimated Elasticity and Counterfactual Without Railroads
Impact of
Market Access

Percent Loss Without Railroads
In Land Value:
In GNP:
(2)
(3)
63.5 (4.2)
3.40 (0.23)

Baseline Specification

(1)
1.11 (0.14)

Panel A. Alternative Transportation Cost Parameters
1 .Reduce sea routes to 0.198 cents
2. Reduce water costs to 0.198 cents
3. Remove transshipment within waterways
4. Raise railroad cost to 0.735 cents
5. Raise railroad cost to 0.878 cents
6. Reduce wagon cost to 14 cents
7. Reduce Pacific-to-Atlantic cost to $5
8. Increase Pacific-to-Atlantic cost to $11
9. Exclude Pacific-to-Atlantic connection

1.10 (0.14)
1.09 (0.15)
1.11 (0.14)
1.14 (0.15)
1.16 (0.15)
1.70 (0.22)
1.10 (0.14)
1.11 (0.14)
1.12 (0.14)

60.2 (4.2)
54.1 (4.2)
62.3 (4.2)
61.7 (4.2)
59.3 (4.2)
68.6 (4.2)
62.9 (4.2)
64.2 (4.3)
67.4 (4.0)

3.22 (0.23)
2.90 (0.23)
3.33 (0.23)
3.30 (0.22)
3.17 (0.22)
3.67 (0.23)
3.37 (0.23)
3.44 (0.23)
3.61 (0.21)

Panel B. Changes in Definition of Market Access
10. Include access to international markets
11. Include access to own market
12. Limit access to counties beyond 5 miles
13. Limit access to counties beyond 50 miles
14. Limit access to counties beyond 200 miles
15. Limit access to only urban areas
16. Limit access to only cities
17. Set parameter "theta" equal to 1
18. Set parameter "theta" equal to 4.12
19. Set parameter "theta" equal to 12.86

1.12 (0.14)
1.12 (0.14)
1.09 (0.14)
1.06 (0.14)
1.05 (0.14)
1.10 (0.14)
1.10 (0.14)
4.19 (0.54)
1.02 (0.13)
0.33 (0.04)

63.2 (4.3)
63.8 (4.3)
63.3 (4.3)
62.5 (4.3)
62.8 (4.6)
59.4 (4.2)
56.7 (4.1)
66.5 (4.3)
63.2 (4.2)
57.3 (4.0)

3.38 (0.23)
3.41 (0.23)
3.39 (0.23)
3.34 (0.23)
3.36 (0.24)
3.18 (0.22)
3.03 (0.22)
3.56 (0.23)
3.38 (0.23)
3.07 (0.22)

Panel C. Regional Controls and Excluding Outliers
20. Fixed Effects for 20 "resource regions," by year
0.96 (0.14)
58.9 (4.8)
3.15 (0.25)
21. Fixed Effects for 145 "resource subregions," by year
0.88 (0.13)
55.8 (4.9)
2.99 (0.26)
22. Drop top/bottom centile of changes in market access
1.12 (0.15)
64.0 (4.3)
3.43 (0.23)
23. Drop top/bottom 5 centiles of changes in market access
1.19 (0.16)
66.0 (4.4)
3.53 (0.24)
24. Drop top/bottom centile of changes in land value
1.12 (0.15)
64.0 (4.3)
3.42 (0.23)
25. Drop top/bottom 5 centiles of changes in land value
1.02 (0.13)
60.9 (4.3)
3.26 (0.23)
Notes: Each row reports estimates from the indicated specification, as discussed in the text (section V.B). Column
1 reports the estimated impact of Log Market Access on Log Value of Agricultural Land; column 2 reports the
estimated percent decline in agricultural land value for an 1890 counterfactual scenario with no railroads; and
column 3 reports the implied annual percent loss in GNP for an 1890 counterfactual scenario with no railroads.
Robust standard errors clustered by state are reported in parentheses.

44

