                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          FROM GREEN USERS TO GREEN VOTERS

                                             Diego Comin
                                            Johannes Rode

                                        Working Paper 19219
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19219


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2013




Our sincere gratitude goes to Deutscher Wetterdienst, which provided us with data on solar radiation
across Germany. We greatly acknowledge the technical support of KEK, Birgit Groh, Martina Klärle
and Katharina Englbrecht. Diego Comin acknowledges the generous support of the Institute for New
Economic Thinking and the National Science Foundation. Johannes Rode acknowledges funding provided
by the Graduate School for Urban Studies (URBANgrad) at Technische Universität Darmstadt (kindly
supported by LOEWE-Schwerpunkt “Eigenlogik der Städte”) and the support of the Chair of International
Economics at Technische Universität Darmstadt. We highly appreciate helpful comments from Carsten
Helm, Oliver Falck, Erzo Luttmer, Bruce Sacerdote and seminar participants at Ca' Foscari University
of Venice, the Harvard Business School, ifo Dresden, ifo Munich, Istanbul Technical University and
ZEW Mannheim. An early version of this paper is part of Johannes Rode's doctoral thesis. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Diego Comin and Johannes Rode. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
From Green Users to Green Voters
Diego Comin and Johannes Rode
NBER Working Paper No. 19219
July 2013, Revised November 2015
JEL No. D72,O33

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the effect of the diffusion of photovoltaic (PV) systems on the fraction of votes obtained
by the German Green Party in federal elections. Using both regional and household survey data, we
show that households that adopted PV systems became more supportive of the Green Party. We estimate
that the adoption of domestic PV systems led to 25 percent of the increment in green votes between
1998 and 2009. Our results are robust to instrumentation using regional variation in solar radiation
and past experience adopting non-green technologies. We conjecture that these results are driven by
cognitive dissonance.


Diego Comin
Dartmouth College
Economics Department
6106 Rockefeller Hall, Room 327
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
diego.comin@dartmouth.edu

Johannes Rode
TU Darmstadt
Chair of International Economics
Marktplatz 15 - Residenzschloss
64283 Darmstadt
Germany
rode@vwl.tu-darmstadt.de
1 Introduction
Technology is a powerful driver of change in society. It is well documented that the invention

and adoption of new technologies is            a   (and maybe even      the )   key driver of a country's pro-

ductivity growth. It has also been documented that the adoption of a technology facilitates

the adoption of subsequent technologies in related elds (Comin and Hobijn, 2004; Comin

et al., 2010), and that information technologies foster technology adoption in general because

they facilitate the diusion of information (Dittmar, 2011).
                                                                           1    However, beyond productivity

and knowledge we have relatively little systematic evidence that technology directly impacts

other social variables.

       In this paper, we explore a new research question.                Namely, whether the diusion of

technologies aects political preferences and, ultimately, voting patterns.                       To study this

issue, we consider the diusion of photovoltaic (PV) systems in Germany. Between 1998 and

2009, the fraction of German roofs with photovoltaic installations increased from virtually

zero to 3.6 percent. Over the same period the fraction of valid votes for the Green Party in

federal elections increased from 6.5 to 10.5 percent. Is it possible that the diusion of green

energy technologies has caused some of the observed increase in Green Party votes?

       Identifying the eects of diusion on green votes presents well-known identication chal-

lenges. An increase in the political power of the Green Party may enable the approval of

subsidies to green energy that accelerate its diusion. Such reverse causality logic may result

in biased estimates of the eect from PV systems diusion on green votes.
                                                                                            2   Similarly, failing

to control for unobserved heterogeneity may result in biased estimates if omitted drivers of

Green Party votes are correlated with diusion patterns.

       We implement two distinct identication strategies that are not aected by these potential

biases.      Our rst strategy constructs an instrument for the adoption rate, i.e.                     the rst

dierence in the diusion level, of PV systems at the regional (NUTS-3) level based on the

variation in solar radiation.          Solar radiation is a valid instrument because it impacts the

return to adopting PV systems and does not aect directly the (regional) increment in green

votes, our dependent variable.             Our second identication strategy uses household survey

data from the German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP) to estimate the eect of adopting

   1
       Technology also aects many aspects of life indirectly by raising living standards, and directly by allowing
us to do things that were impossible before (for e.g., curing diseases).
   2
       The design of the German subsidy system renders this reverse causality argument as unlikely. By law,
feed-in taris are non-retro-active. That is, the feed-in tari for each PV system is pre-determined (for a
period of twenty years) based on the year of installation of the PV system. As a result, current adopters do
not benet from future increases in feed-in taris. Therefore they have no incentive to vote for the Green
Party to increase future feed-in taris.




                                                          2
a solar system on the likelihood of reporting a greater support for the Green Party.     The

survey data permits us to investigate whether the change in Green Party support occurs

after the household has adopted a solar system or vice-versa. Additionally, we use previous

household's experience adopting non-green technologies (i.e., computers and Internet) to

instrument for the adoption of solar systems.

   The ndings from our empirical exercises are very consistent. Our analysis of the regional-

level data shows that the diusion of PV systems is responsible for approximately 25 percent

of the increase in the votes for the Green Party. This result is robust to instrumenting PV

adoption by the lagged level of diusion induced by regional solar radiation. The estimate

is also robust to controlling for the endogenous dynamics of green support estimated during

the 1980s and early 90s, before PV systems started to diuse. Reassuringly, we nd that

the estimated eect of PV adoption on the increase in green votes comes entirely from the

small household PV systems (vs. industrial systems) and is orthogonal to the adoption of

other industrial green technologies such as eolic (wind) and biomass energy plants.

   The household survey data shows that the odds that a home owner who has installed a

solar energy system experiences an increase in her support for the Green Party is 1.6 times

higher than for a home owner who has not installed one. In contrast, we nd no evidence

that becoming green induces home owners to install solar systems. These ndings are robust

to instrumenting the adoption of solar systems with prior adoption of non-green technologies

such as computers or Internet. The use of two instruments permits us to run endogeneity

tests that fail to reject the null that the instruments are exogenous. From this evidence we

conclude that there is a causal eect of the adoption of solar energy systems by households

on their attitudes and voting behavior towards the Green Party.

   After establishing the main nding of the paper, a question that naturally emerges is

about the mechanism by which PV adoption increases the likelihood of voting for the Green

Party.   We present one hypothesis in Section 3 based on the assumption that agents are

cognitive dissonant (Festinger, 1957; Akerlof and Dickens, 1982). In our model, voters can

adopt a PV system and, beyond the economic return of this investment, they may derive

utility directly from their actions.   The magnitude of this intrinsic utility depends on the

intensity of their green values. In this context, agents have an incentive to embrace green

values after they have undertaken a signicant green action such as adopting a PV system.

   Demonstrating empirically that this is the mechanism by which PV adoption induces

Green Party votes is beyond the scope of this paper. However, we nd support for two

implications of our theory. In particular, a corollary of our theory is that agents that are

more directly involved in the decision to adopt PV systems will be more prone to vote for

the Green Party. Consistent with this prediction, we document that the association between



                                                3
solar adoption and increase in the likelihood to support the Green Party holds only when

the voter is the owner of the dwelling. It also holds mostly in rural areas, where there is a

greater prevalence of single and double family dwellings and of owner-occupied dwellings.

       We explore two alternative hypothesis for the eect of PV adoption on green votes: a

money for votes and a Bayesian learning explanation. We compute the economic gains for

PV adopters and nd that they are small. We also nd that the association between PV

adoption and green votes is robust to controlling for proxies of the change in protability

of PV systems.         Therefore, it seems unlikely that voters are rewarding the Green Party

from creating new income streams.             The Bayesian rationale is that PV adoption provides

households information about the Green Party values and policies.                    This Bayesian theory

seems inconsistent with the fact that it is precisely in the `Länder' where the Green Party

was in power, and therefore where households presumable knew more about the Green Party,

where PV adoption leads to larger increases in green votes.

       Our investigation is related to studies on the drivers of voting behavior.               Deacon and

Shapiro (1975) and Fischel (1979) use survey data from voters in referenda on environmental

issues to study which factors aect the probability of voting in support of the environment.

They nd that occupation, political aliation, education, income and location are important

drivers of green voting.
                              3   Schumacher (2014) considers similar factors and reaches similar

conclusions with respect to Green Party voting in Germany. Our analysis controls for these

drivers of voting behavior but focuses on the independent eect of adopting green energy

systems on Green Party voting.

       The literature on policy feedbacks (Schattschneider, 1935; Pierson, 1993; Soss and Schram,

2007) is also relevant for our empirical analysis. These authors argue that new policies can

create their own support through a range of mechanisms. However, the eects we identify

are orthogonal to potential policy feedbacks since (i) we control for policy changes (i.e.,

growth in feed-in taris) and (ii) we exploit exogenous variation in adoption rates which, by

denition, is not driven by new policies.
                                                  4

       With respect to the potential interpretation of our ndings, a number of studies have

explored the role of monetary incentives in voting both from the perspective of voters and of

politicians. The existing evidence suggests that monetary rewards are relatively ineective

   3
       A related literature (e.g., Tjernström and Tietenberg (2008), Torgler and García-Valiñas (2007), White-
head (1991), Nord et al. (1998) Zelezny et al. (2000)) uses survey data to explore drivers (mostly socio-
economic and demographic) of attitudes towards green issues.
   4
       Falck et al. (2014) is related to the general theme of the role of technology diusion on elections, but
very tangentially related to our paper. In particular, they reveal that the availability of Internet technology
impacts voter turnout negatively in Germany.




                                                        4
in driving votes both when trying to aect the position taken by elected representatives

(Ansolabehere et al., 2003) and the votes of the electorate (Cornelius (2004), Wang and

Kurzman (2007), Schaer and Schedler (2007)). There are not many studies on the role of

cognitive dissonance in political attitudes. A recent one by Mullainathan and Washington

(2009) nds that the act of voting for a candidate leads to a more favorable opinion of the

candidate in the future.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the relevant institutional

context of green energy in Germany and presents the aggregate trends in green technology

diusion and green voting. Section 3 develops a model of technology adoption, green values

and voting. The model allows us to explore the drivers of diusion and Green Party votes in a

setting where agents are cognitive dissonant. Our model also motivates the instrumentation

strategies.     Section 4 presents the empirical ndings, and discusses their robustness.                   The

interpretation of the results follows in 5. Section 6 concludes.




2 German institutional context and aggregate trends
The last fteen years have seen how green technologies have become wide-spread in Germany

while the support for the Green Party has increased signicantly. Next we describe these

trends as well as institutional settings in which they have taken place.

       In 1998, the Social Democratic-Green coalition won the federal elections. Two years later,

the government introduced a new law, the EEG, which raised the feed-in tari for electricity

produced from PV systems. For example, the feed-in tari for systems with a capacity of at

most 30 kWp was raised to 50 EURCent/kWh (from 8.84 EURCent/kWh).
                                                                                           5       The EEG stip-

ulated vintage-specic feed-in taris guaranteed for a twenty year period (Agnolucci, 2006;

Altrock et al., 2011; Maurer et al., 2012).
                                                  6   In this system, feed-in taris were determined (for

a period of twenty years) based on the year of installation of the PV system. Furthermore,

changes in the system only aected new installations (i.e. they were non-retro-active). Ad-

ditionally, between 1999 and 2003, the government provided low-interest loans for PV roof

installations through the 100,000 roofs program (Jacobsson and Lauber, 2006). By 2003, the

fraction of buildings with PV systems was 0.49 percent, almost 10 times larger than in 1999.

   5
                                                                                              
       The capacity (or nominal power) of a PV system is specied in kilowatts-peak    kWp , i.e. the system's
maximum power output under dened conditions. In contrast, produced electricity is measured in kilowatt-
hours [kWh].
   6
       However, starting in 2002, new installations received a feed-in tari 5 percent lower than installations
put in place the previous year. See Figure 1.




                                                         5
The 2004 Amendment to the EEG further raised the feed-in tari to 57 EURCent/kWh (see

Figure 1). By 2009, 3.6 percent of buildings had PV systems.
                                                                                                                                                 7




                                                            1.2%




                                                                                                                                                                                                        60
                                                                     ●    Fraction buildings with new PV system
                 Fraction of buildings with new PV system            ●    Level feed−in tariff                                  ●




                                                                                                                                                                  Level of feed−in tariff [EURCent/kWh]
                                                                                                                                     ●

                                                            1.0%
                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                     ●      ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                  50
                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                          ●                           ●
                                                            0.8%
                                                                                                                                                           ●




                                                                                                                                                                              for PV electricity
                                                                                                                                                                                             40
                                                            0.6%




                                                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                            0.4%




                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                            0.2%




                                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                                    ●      ●      ●     ●      ●
                                                            0%




                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                   1995        1997         1999         2001            2003       2005       2007       2009

                                                                                                                  Year
Figure 1: Fraction of buildings with a new PV system and the level of the feed-in tari for
                                                                                                                                                           
electricity from PV                                                for systems with a capacity of at most 30 kWp                                               in Germany from 1995
through 2009.



       Underneath this trend there were important geographic dierences.                                                                                                  Figure 2 presents

the evolution of the share of buildings with PV systems in rural and urban areas. While in

urban areas, it increased from 0.07 percent in 1998 to 1.47 percent in 2009, in rural areas it

increased from 0.03 to 4.2 percent. Therefore, the diusion of PV systems was predominantly

a rural phenomenon. Furthermore, since three quarter of the buildings are in rural areas,

93 percent of the overall increment of PV systems took place in rural areas.

       To further understand the geographic patterns of PV diusion Figure 3 displays maps

with the diusion levels in 1998, 2002 and 2009 on the NUTS-3 level in Germany.
                                                                                                                                                                                                             8   In 1998,

the diusion level of PV systems was low in all regions. By 2009, the highest adoption rates

can be observed in the south (where global solar radiation is higher), in the north of Hesse

and in the east and the north-west of North Rhine-Westphalia. In contrast, relatively few PV

   7
       In 1999, the total capacity installed in eolic plants was seven times larger than the capacity installed in
PV systems. The 2000 EEG also introduced new feed-in tari schemes for electricity from eolic and biomass
plants, though they rose comparatively less than for PV systems (to 9.1 EURCent/kWh for eolic and to
10.2 EURCent/kWh for biomass). See Figure 6 in Appendix A for eolic and Figure 8 in Appendix B for
biomass plants.
   8
       We do not show the map for 2005 for reasons of clarity. We use 2006's classication with 429 German
NUTS-3 regions. Due to the restructuring of districts, we lose the data for 2.3 percent of the NUTS-3 regions
for 1998 and for 6.9 percent for 2009.




                                                                                                                   6
                                                                   5%
                                                                           Rural




                            Fraction of buildings with PV system
                                                                           Urban
                                                                           All                                                         4.23




                                                                   4%
                                                                                                                                                     3.73




                                                                   3%
                                                                   2%
                                                                                                                                              1.47
                                                                                                                   1.3
                                                                                                                                1.17



                                                                   1%
                                                                                                                         0.55
                                                                                           0.39 0.28 0.37
                                                                   0%   0.03 0.07 0.04


                                                                            1998               2002                      2005                 2009

                                                                                                            Year

Figure 2: Evolution of the share of buildings with PV systems in rural and urban areas in
Germany in 1998, 2002, 2005 and 2009.



systems were installed in the middle of North Rhine-Westphalia, the east of Lower Saxony,

the south of Schleswig-Holstein and, in general, the eastern part of Germany.
                                                                                                                                                               9


                    1998                                                                         2002                                                       2009




                                                                                                                                                                   0         200 km
                                                                        Cumulative fraction of buildings with PV
          No data          <0.1%                                            0.1−0.5%              0.5−1%                        1−2%                    2−5%           >5%

        Figure 3: Fraction of buildings with PV at NUTS-3 level for 1998, 2002 and 2009.



       Coinciding with the diusion of green energies, the Green Party experienced a signicant

increase in votes.         (See white bar in Figure 4.)
                                                                                                             10      In the 1998 elections, the Green Party

received 6.5 percent of valid votes.                                                     This share increased to 8.2 percent in 2002, declined

   9
       See Figure 7 in Appendix A for a parallel analysis for the diusion of eolic systems and Figure 9 in
Appendix B for biomass plants.
  10
       Voting data comes from DESTATIS (2012). We consider second votes (`Zweitstimmen') and only the
regions for which data is available at the NUTS-3 level.



                                                                                                      7
to 7.7 percent in 2005 and reached 10.5 percent in 2009 (see Figure 4). The propensity to

vote for the Green Party increased in both rural and urban areas. In urban areas the share

of valid votes for the Green Party increased from 8.6 percent in 1998 to 13.3 percent in

2009, while in rural areas it increased from 5.8 to 9.6 percent. However, since rural areas

approximately concentrated 75 percent of the valid votes, they accounted for a majority of

the overall increase in green votes. There was signicant regional variation in the increase

of the support for the Green Party (see Figure 5).
                                                                                                            11     The largest increases in the share of

green votes between 1998 and 2009 took place in Lüneburg, Lower-Saxony, in Flensburg,

Schleswig-Holstein, and in Würzburg, Bavaria.
                                                       15%




                                                                   Rural
                                                                   Urban                                                            13.3
                                                                   All

                                                                                       11.3
                          Fraction of of green votes




                                                                                                                 10.5                      10.5
                                                       10%




                                                                                                                              9.6
                                                                     8.6                      8.2
                                                                                                                        7.7
                                                                                 7.3
                                                                                                           6.9
                                                                           6.5
                                                             5.8
                                                       5%
                                                       0%




                                                                    1998               2002                      2005               2009

                                                                                                    Year

Figure 4: Evolution of fraction of green votes in federal elections in rural and urban areas
and overall in Germany from 1998 through 2009.




3 A model of diusion, green preferences and voting
We develop a model to study the drivers of PV adoption, and how green attitudes may

change endogenously as agents adopt PV systems.                                                                  We start with the case where agents'

preferences towards green values are xed.                                                    After presenting this baseline case, we allow

agents to shift their intrinsic valuation of green actions, and explore the resulting dynamics

for PV adoption and voting. We conclude by deriving some testable predictions from the

model.



3.1 Diusion
Time is continuous. In each region (n), there is a continuum of agents that dier in the cost

of adopting a PV system. In particular, agent                                                       j   faces a sunk cost                   cjt   of adopting a system

  11
       Due to the restructuring of districts, we lack data for some 3 percent of the NUTS-3 regions for 1998
and 7.5 percent for 2009.

                                                                                              8
                    1998                                  2002                                  2009




                                                                                                       0     200 km
                                                  Fraction of green votes
                 No data     <3%               3−6%           6−9%          9−12%        12−15%      >15%

            Figure 5: Fraction of green votes at NUTS-3 level for 1998, 2002 and 2009.



at time     t   given by

                                                      cjt = cj e−αt ,

where     α     is the constant rate of decline of adoption costs.              Without loss of generality, we

index the potential adopters,             j,   so that   cj   is increasing.    Furthermore, we assume that,

in each region,       log(cj )   is distributed according to the following logistic cumulative density

function:


                                                                   1
                                                  Fn (x) =
                                                               1 + e−bn x
where bn is a region-specic parameter that determines how concentrated the density function

is.

       A PV system can produce           en    units of electricity. The sub-index       n   captures the fact that

electricity production depends on solar radiation and other factors that vary across regions.
                                                                                                                 12

The instant   t in which a PV system is installed denes its vintage. For simplicity, we assume
that    adopters of vintage-τ PV systems obtain a constant feed-in tari of Pτ forever.
                                                                                           13 P
                                                                                                t

evolves stochastically according to the following Poisson process:

                                           
                                           φP ,       with probability       λdt,
                                                  t
                                   dPt =                                                                        (1)
                                           0,         with probability       1 − λdt.
  12
       The dependency of   en    on solar radiation may be non-linear.
  13
       In Germany, it is for a 20 year period (EEG, 2000, 2004, 2011).



                                                              9
This formulation captures the possibility that the feed-in tari increases discretely, as oc-

curred in Germany in 2000.

      The revenues for agents that have adopted a PV system are                           Pt en .   In addition to this

monetary component, installing a PV system provides additional utility with an equivalent

monetary value of          g̃. That is,   the monetary value of the utility experienced by an agent that

has installed a PV system is              Pτ en + g̃.   For the time being, we assume               g̃   to be xed (and

small relative to         Pτ en   ).
                                     14

      Letr be the constant discount rate, and Vτ                 denote the value of an agent that has adopted

a PV    system of vintage τ. Vτ is dened by



                                                rVτ dt = (Pτ en + g̃)dt,                                             (2)


which yields
                                                              Pτ en + g̃
                                                   Vτ =                  .                                           (3)
                                                                  r
      For those that have not installed a PV system at time                     t,   the option value of installing a

PV system,        Wt ,    is dened by

                                                                                  
                                                      W (t + dt, Pt+dt )
                                  W (t, Pt ) = max Et                    , Vt − cjt ,                                (4)
                                                          1 + rdt
where       Et   is the expectation operator.              The following proposition characterizes both the

optimal adoption rule and the diusion of PV systems.


Proposition 1             (i) A potential producer j has adopted a PV system at time t if
                                                                      
                                                           1 − λ (φ−1)
                                                                   r
                                                                         Pt en + g̃
                                          cj 6 c̄t =                                  ,                              (5)
                                                               (r + α)e−αt

where Pt is the prevailing feed-in tari at time t. (ii) The fraction of potential adopters that
have installed a PV system at t when the prevailing feed-in tari is Pt is given by

                     Fn (log c̄t )                                                                                   (6)
                                                                                                            −1
                 = [1 + exp (−bn (log [(1 − λ(φ − 1)/r)Pt en + g̃] − log(r + α) + αt))]                          .

Proof:      See Appendix C.

      Equation (6) characterizes the diusion pattern of PV systems.                            Taking a rst order

Taylor expansion of (6), we can derive an expression for the adoption rate (i.e., the change

in diusion),      fn :
 14
      This is just a simplifying assumption. In section 4.2.2, we nd direct evidence that supports it.


                                                               10
                                                                                                      
                                                                 dPt (1 − λ(φ − 1)/r)Pt en
fnt      ≡ dFnt ' Fnt (log c̄t ) ∗ (1 − Fnt (log c̄t )) ∗ bn ∗                                 + α ∗ dt
                                                                 Pt (1 − λ(φ − 1)/r)Pt en + g̃
                                                               |                    {z                  }
                                                                            revision in return
                                                                      
                                                          dPt
         ' Fnt (log c̄t ) ∗ (1 − Fnt (log c̄t )) ∗ bn ∗       + α ∗ dt                                (7)
                                                          Pt

where we have used the assumption that                   g̃   is small relative to   P τ en .
       Equation (7) helps us understand the drivers of adoption. One factor that aects adoption

rates is the lagged diusion level,             Fn .15   One implication of this result is that factors that

aect lagged diusion also impact the adoption rate. In particular, solar radiation in the

region, through its impact on the level of electricity produced (en ), lowers the cuto adoption

cost in (5), leading to higher lagged diusion levels and to higher adoption rates. Since solar

radiation is, arguably, exogenous to changes in attitudes to green parties, we can use the

diusion levels of PV systems predicted by regional solar radiation to instrument for the

(actual) adoption rates. This is indeed the identication strategy we implement below.

       Beyond, past diusion levels, adoption rates are aected by changes in the determinants

of the cuto adoption cost,           cjt . In particular, adoption rates increase with the growth of feed-
in taris and with the rate of decline of the cost of installing PV systems. Expression (7)

also implies that past green attitudes only aect adoption rates to the extent that they

aect the lagged level of diusion.               Exogenous changes in green attitudes also impact the

cuto cost (5) and adoption rates in a way similar to changes in feed-in taris (Pt ). Note,

however, that exogenous revisions in green attitudes are orthogonal to lagged diusion levels.

Therefore, the presence of revisions in green attitudes should not aect the validity of our

instrumentation strategy.



3.2 Endogenous environmental values and voting
Our diusion model assumes a xed intrinsic valuation of adopting a PV system,                        g̃ .   Next,

we relax this assumption and allow agents to change their green attitudes in order to derive

greater (intrinsic) value for their actions.

       Setting . Let's suppose that the instantaneous intrinsic utility that an agent derives from
her actions is

                                                 δ ∗ [A ∗ g + B ∗ w] .                                         (8)

  15
       In general, the eect of lagged diusion on adoption is non-linear. However, in the initial diusion phase
(i.e.,   when   Fnt   is small), adoption is approximately linear in lagged diusion.




                                                               11
   In this formulation, A is a binary variable that measures whether the agent has adopted a
PV system,    g measures the agent's intrinsic value (in utils) of taking green actions; B repre-
sents the agent's actions related to other values orthogonal to the environment (for e.g., gifts

to charity), and   w    measures the agents intrinsic value of those actions (i.e., her preference

for the poors' well-being). The parameter               δ    is the monetary value of utility. Note that, in

this formulation, the intrinsic value of adopting a PV system in monetary terms is                        g̃ = δ ∗ g.
   Each period is divided in three moments. In the rst moment, agents have the option to

adopt a PV system. If they do adopt one, they incur in the installation cost                      cjt   and lock in

the prevailing feed-in tari,       Pt .   Second, agents learn their cost of changing green preferences

and have the opportunity to do so. Finally, agents vote. Next, we describe in more detail

these decisions.

   Agents' intrinsic utility from green actions,  g, can take two values, {gl , gh } , with gh > gl .
For simplicity, we assume that initially all agents have g = gl . Agents can incur in a cost cv

(in terms of utils) and increase g from gl to gh . They only learn their cost of changing green

attitudes in the second instant, after they have adopted a PV system. A fraction λ of agents

face a cv = cl , and the complementary fraction (1 − λ) have cv = ch , with ch > cl . We make

the following assumption about the relative size of g and cv .



                                                  ch > gh − gl > cl .                                              (9)


 Voting is a truthful revelation of the agent's preferences.                      In particular, agents have two

electoral options:     the Green Party and the alternative party.                     Their preferences for each

of these options are, respectively,           g   and   w,   where    w    is distributed according to     W (.)    in

population. We assume that            w    is independent of     cv   or   cj .
   Green votes .       Now we can characterize the evolution of the fraction of green votes in

our model.


Proposition 2      The change in green votes is given by

                                dG = (W (gh ) − W (gl )) ∗ λ ∗ dF log c̄ht
                                                                                     
                                                                                          ,                     (10)



where the cuto cost for adoption, c̄ht , is given by
                                            
                                 1 − λ (φ−1)
                                         r
                                               Pt en + δ [λ (gh − rcl ) + (1 − λ) ∗ gl ]
                       c̄ht =                                                                 .                 (11)
                                                        (r + α)e−αt

   Proof:    Agents that feel more strongly about environmental matters than for the alter-

native dimension will vote for the Green Party.                   Formally, these are the agents for which



                                                            12
g ≥ w.     The rest of the voters will vote for the       w   party. Given the independence of             g   and   w
in population, the fraction of green votes is given by



                                        G = γt W (gh ) + (1 − γt )W (gl ),

where  γt is the fraction of agents with g = gh in period t, and W (x)                      is the share of agents

with w ≤ x, for x ∈ {gl , gh } .

   Since w is xed, changes in green voting are driven by changes in                        the fraction of agents

with g = gh , γt . Formally,

                                 dG = dγt ∗ (W (gh ) − W (gl )) .                                               (12)


       To solve for the change in the fraction of agents with              g = gh , dγt ,   note that green values

only aect agent's intrinsic utility if she has taken green actions (i.e., when                A = 1).   Therefore,

a necessary condition to incur in the costs of increasing her green values is that the agent

has installed a PV system.            Condition (9) adds a second necessary condition.                   Increasing

the preference for green actions is only worthwhile for agents with a low cost of changing

preferences (i.e.,     cv = cl ).   These two conditions imply that             dγt   is equal to the fraction of

agents that adopt a PV system and that have a low cost of increasing their green value.

That is,

                                             dγt = dF log c̄ht
                                                                 
                                                                      ∗λ                                        (13)


where, following Proposition 1, the cuto cost for adoption,                c̄ht , is given by (11).16   Combining

(12) and (13), we obtain the expression for the change in                  green votes (10).

       Expression (10) illustrates the main result from our model.                     Once we endogenize the

attitudes of agents, the adoption of PV systems leads to an increase in Green Party votes.

This nding is an illustration of the cognitive dissonance phenomena (Festinger, 1957), by

which, agents change their preferences/values to derive greater utility from their previous

actions. In our context, the action is the decision to adopt a PV system and the change in

values is reected in an increase in Green Party votes.

       One corollary to this result is that the more involved voters are in the decision to adopt

(and maintain) a PV system, the stronger will be the connection between PV adoption

and increased support for the Green Party.                  There are three dimensions that aect the

voter's direct involvement in PV adoption decisions. The rst is whether the voter owns the

house with PV since renters do not decide whether to install PV systems in their dwellings.

In 2011, 25.3 percent of urban dwellings were owner occupied, while the share of owner

occupied dwellings in rural areas was 51.7 percent (DESTATIS, 2011).                            Therefore, voters

  16
       Note that the relevant intrinsic value for the PV adoption decision is the net expected green value at
time of adoption (λ (gh   − rcl ) + (1 − λ) ∗ gl ).


                                                       13
are more likely to be involved in PV adoption in rural areas.         The second dimension of

voter involvement in PV adoption is whether the building is occupied by a single or many

households.     The fewer households live in a building, the stronger the inuence of each

individual household in the adoption decision. In rural areas, 88.4 percent of dwellings were

single or double family houses in 2009 vs.      only 65.1 percent in urban areas (DESTATIS,

2013b; BBSR, 2015).       Therefore, this second dimension also implies that rural voters are

more involved with PV adoption decisions than urban voters. The third dimension of voter

involvement in PV adoption is the system capacity. Small capacity systems are adopted by

households, while large capacity systems are installed by corporations. Therefore, we should

only expect only the adoption of small PV systems to be associated with the evolution of

Green Party votes.

   In summary, Proposition 2 together with these considerations yield the following predic-

tions:


 #1 In regions where we observe greater increases in PV diusion (i.e. adoption rates) we

         should see larger increases in the share of votes for the Green Party.


 #2 We should observe a stronger association between PV adoption rates and increases in

         Green Party votes in rural than in urban regions.


 #3 We should observe no association between PV adoption rates and increases in Green

         Party votes in rented properties.


 #4 We should see no association between increases in the diusion of industrial green

         energy systems and changes in Green Party votes.




4 Empirical evaluation
Next, we evaluate empirically whether the diusion of PV systems has led to an increase in

the votes for the Green Party in Germany. We investigate this question using two distinct

data sets.     The rst is a panel at the NUTS-3 level that we have assembled.      The data

set includes both the diusion of PV systems and the fraction of green votes from 1998

until 2009. We complement our analysis using an individual-level data set that covers the

diusion of solar energy systems and individual attitudes towards the Green Party between

2007 and 2012.




                                                14
4.1 NUTS-3 level evidence
In our baseline specication, we consider the following reduced form for the fraction of votes

received by the Green Party in region       n in the federal elections that take place in year t (Vnt ) :

                              Vnt = αn + gn ∗ t + αt + βFnt−1 + ρXnt + nt .                           (14)



αn     is a region (NUTS-3) level eect,      gn   is a region-specic trend,   αt   is an aggregate time

dummy,        Fnt−1   is the stock of PV systems installed normalized by the number of potential

adopters in the region in year      t − 1,17 Xnt   is a vector of other potential drivers of green votes,

and    nt   is an error term. Taking dierences between consecutive election years (t and           t − k ),
(14) can be expressed as:



                               4Vnt = gn + δt + β4Fnt−1 + ρ4Xnt + unt                                  (15)



where 4Vnt ≡ Vnt − Vnt−k is the increment in the share of green votes, δt ≡ αt − αt−k is a
time dummy, unt ≡ nt − nt−k is an error term and 4Fnt−1 ≡ Fnt−1 − Fnt−1−k is the adoption

rate dened as the increase in the ratio of the stock of PV systems adopted over the number

of potential adopters.



4.1.1 Ordinary least squares estimates
Table 1 reports the ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates of equation (15).
                                                                                            18   The set of

controls,     ∆Xnt , includes the growth in per capita income in the region.         The rst four columns

report estimates from specications that dier according to whether time and NUTS-3 xed

eects are included. Time xed eects capture time-varying factors that have a symmetric

eect in voting patterns across regions. For example, nation-wide changes in green sentiment

or political changes in the Green Party and how these are perceived by voters. NUTS-3 xed

eects capture region-specic trends in attitudes towards the Green Party, education and

values, which may lead to regional trends in green votes. Column (5) additionally controls

for time dummies interacted with NUTS-1 (`Länder') regional dummies. This specication

controls for time varying factors that are common across the regions within a NUTS-1 region.

We take the specication with both time and NUTS-3 xed eects as our baseline and in what

follows we just report estimates that include NUTS-3 and time xed eects. Interestingly,

our ndings are robust across specications.

       Table 1 shows that increments in the share of green votes are positively associated with

adoption rates in the rst ve specications. These associations are statistically and econom-

  17
       German federal elections (between 1998 and 2009) took place in fall. PV diusion is measured at the
end of the year. By lagging PV diusion by one year, we ensure that the adoption of PV systems does not


                                                      15
 Table 1: OLS estimation of increase in PV diusion on increase in share of green votes.

                                                             Increase in share of green votes

                                                               All                                  Rural      Urban
                                     (1)         (2)             (3)          (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)
                                    ∆Vt          ∆Vt            ∆Vt          ∆Vt         ∆Vt         ∆Vt        ∆Vt
       PV adoption rate: ∆FPV,t−1      0.419∗∗∗   0.671∗∗∗ 0.122∗∗∗        0.242∗∗∗    0.234∗∗∗    0.235∗∗∗     0.138
                                        (14.27)    (19.15)   (4.84)         (5.86)      (4.90)       (5.35)    (0.70)
   ∆ ln(GDPcap,t )                    0.0250∗∗∗ 0.0572∗∗∗ -0.0155∗∗∗       0.00154     0.00392    -0.0000617   0.0158
                                         (4.03)     (6.26)   (-2.99)        (0.24)      (0.96)      (-0.01)    (1.21)
   α                                  0.00720∗∗∗           0.0235∗∗∗
                                        (12.39)             (25.36)
   NUTS-3 xed eects                      No         Yes      No             Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
   Time xed eects                        No         No       Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
   NUTS-1×Time xed eects                 No         No       No             No         Yes         No         No
   R2                                    0.135      0.258     0.568          0.642      0.823       0.666      0.646
   Adj. R2                               0.134      -0.117    0.567          0.459      0.724       0.495      0.458
   F                                     110.6       201.3    413.9          313.3      138.7       253.3      71.99
   N                                      1160       1160     1160           1160       1160         849        311
   t statistics in parentheses, built with Newey-West SE
   ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

             The point estimates for the PV adoption rate ∆FPV,t−1 in      columns (6) and (7) are robust to including
                                                                     
  Notes:
  NUTS-1×Time xed eects.


ically signicant. Based on our baseline specication (column 4), an increase in the adoption

rate by one standard deviation is associated with an increase in the fraction of green votes by

.24 standard deviations (see Table 13 in Appendix D for the relevant descriptive statistics).

Similarly, the diusion of PV systems between 1998 and 2009 is associated with an increase

in the fraction of green votes of 0.9 percent, which is approximately 25 percent of the actual

increase in the voting rate experienced by the Green Party between 1998 and 2009.

       In addition to controlling for the robustness of the estimates to regional and time dum-

mies, we also explore their robustness to allowing for spatially correlated error terms.                                 In

particular, we follow Yu et al. (2008) and consider a generalization of equation (15) where

the error term      unt   is modeled as


                                                       q
                                                       X
                                           unt = ψ ∗         wsn ust + nt .
                                                       s=1

wsn is a weighting matrix such that wsn = 1/Nn for the Nn regions that are neighbors of n and
zero otherwise, and where nt is an iid error term. Column (1) of Table 14 in Appendix D.1

shows that the estimate of ψ is positive and signicant suggesting that innovations in the

increase in Green Party votes are spatially correlated.                     However, allowing for spatial cor-

relation of the error term does not aect the signicance and has a minimal eect on the

occur after the elections have taken place.
  18
       Reported standard errors (SE) are (in our NUTS-3 level analyzes) always robust to both arbitrary
heteroscedasticity and arbitrary auto-correlation. They have a bandwidth of 2.




                                                        16
magnitude of the coecient        β   on lagged adoption.
                                                             19   Hence, we conclude that our estimates

of the association between increases in green votes and lagged PV adoption rates are robust

to allowing for the potential spatial correlation in error terms.

       The last two columns of Table 1 explore whether the relation between adoption rates and

green votes diers between rural and urban areas. We nd that the association between PV

adoption rates and the increase in Green votes is signicantly positive only for rural regions.

Furthermore, the point estimate is almost twice as large for rural than for urban regions. This

observation is consistent with the model's predictions. In our model, it is a consequence of

the more direct involvement that voters have in the adoption and maintenance of PV systems

in rural than in urban environments. Other hypotheses, instead, would have a harder time

rationalizing the rural-urban contrast in this association. Take for example the hypothesis

that there has been an exogenous variation in green sentiment. There is no a priori reason

why we would only see that in rural areas.

       Nevertheless, the regressions shown so far are not sucient to disprove the possibility

that the association between adoption rates and the increment in the fraction of green votes

is driven by some omitted variable. To condently argue that the estimates in Table 1 reect

a causal eect of PV adoption on green voting, we need some exogenous source of variation

in the adoption of PV systems. That is, variation in PV adoption that is driven by factors

that do not aect directly voting patterns or that are not correlated with factors that may

drive voting patterns, other than adoption.



4.1.2 Instrumenting with solar radiation
We construct our instrument for PV adoption rates by exploiting the eect of solar radiation

on PV diusion. Solar radiation may aect the diusion level because it impacts the amount

of electricity a PV system can produce (see equation (6)). Due to the non-linearities in the

diusion process, lagged diusion aects adoption rates (see equation (7)). Hence, we can

exploit regional variation in solar radiation to predict (lagged) diusion and use this variable

to instrument for PV adoption rates.

       Forecasts of adoption based on regional solar radiation are clearly exogenous to changes

in voting patterns. Even if solar radiation and green voting were associated (e.g., voters from

  19
       We have also observed that our ndings are robust for more general models with direct dynamic geo-
graphic interactions in voting patterns. Interestingly, these exercises validate our current specication since
we do not nd that the additional features of the econometric specication are signicant nor that they
increase the explanatory power (as indicated by likelihood ratio tests).




                                                      17
sunnier regions may be more prone to vote for the Green Party), changes in Green Party

votes are not directly aected by the intensity of solar radiation.
                                                                                            20

       To implement this strategy, we follow the diusion literature
                                                                                            21    and conjecture a logistic

process for PV system diusion:


                               i                 gi ( sun
                                                       103 )
                                                          n

                              FPV ,nt−k−1 =      −b   (t−k−1−c
                                                                  + ζnt ,   for   i ∈ {rural,   urban} ,                 (16)
                                              1+e i            i)



 where      gi ( sun
                  103
                     n
                       )   is the ceiling diusion level which we dene as a polynomial in solar radi-

ation.
       22    The parameters of function               gi (.),   the speed of diusion,          bi ,   and inexion point,   ci ,
are allowed to dier between rural and urban areas. This exibility intends to capture the

dierential constraints (both physical and institutional) to the diusion of PV systems that

exist in urban and rural settings.

       Estimates .         The rst two columns of Table 2 contain the estimates of the diusion

model in rural and urban areas. We have experimented with the degrees of the polynomials.

The highest adjusted              R2   are achieved with a third order polynomial for rural regions and a

second polynomial for urban. The                 R2   is higher in rural than in urban regions suggesting that

variation in solar radiation is a more important driver of PV diusion in rural environments.

However, in both samples the t of the logistic diusion models is good suggesting that solar

radiation is an important driver of cross-regional variation in PV adoption.
                                                                                                             23

       Column (3) reports the estimate of the rst stage regression of PV adoption on the lagged

PV diusion level predicted by solar radiation with the diusion models. The instrument is

very signicant in predicting adoption rates. Note that this is the case even though we have

introduced NUTS-3 regional xed eects.
                                                           24   This is the case because, due to the non-linearity

in diusion, radiation impacts the evolution of adoption rates, not just their level.

       Column (4) presents the estimates from the second stage regression. We nd that the

instrumented PV adoption rates have a positive and signicant eect on the increase in green

votes. The point estimate is in the ballpark of the OLS estimate from Table 1.

  20
       This claim is quite natural but it is (empirically) supported by the fact that support for the German
Green Party has oscillated over the last thirty years, but our measure of the average solar radiation in a
NUTS-3 region is, by construction, xed.
  21
       See Griliches (1957) and Manseld (1961).
  22
       In the context of the model,     gi (.) is related to the amount of electricity produced in a region for which sun
is a measure.     sunn      is constant over time. Specically, we use yearly solar radiation averaged for 1981-2000
from DWD (2010).
  23
       Both in rural and urban samples we nd that in places with very low solar radiation, the cross-sectional
relationship between PV diusion and solar radiation is quite at. This is reected by the negative linear
terms in the ceiling.          Quickly, the relationship becomes positive and steep as captured by the positive
quadratic terms.           In rural areas, the relationship attens again in regions with very high solar radiation
(hence the negative cubic term).
  24
       In columns (3) and (4) we additionally control for time dummies interacted with an urban dummy. This
specication controls for time varying factors that are common across urban/rural regions.




                                                                 18
Table 2: Instrument variable estimation of increase in PV diusion on increase in share of
green votes for rural and urban regions.

                      Diusion Model                                                          IV
                      Rural       Urban                                All                  Rural                 Urban
                      NLS         NLS                          1st stage 2nd stage 1st stage 2nd stage 1st stage 2nd stage
                      (1)         (2)                             (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)
                   FPV,t−k−1 FPV,t−k−1                         ∆FPV,t−1       ∆Vt      ∆FPV,t−1     ∆Vt      ∆FPV,t−1     ∆Vt
a0                 8.454∗∗∗     0.257∗∗∗           ∆F̂PV,t−1                 0.152∗∗               0.169∗∗              -0.276
                      (2.95)      (2.94)                                      (1.99)                (2.20)              (-0.63)
a1 (sun)           -23.70∗∗∗    -0.538∗∗∗         F̂PV,t−k−1 1.306∗∗∗                  1.295∗∗∗          1.490∗∗∗
                     (-2.84)      (-3.08)                     (11.06)                   (10.51)           (5.58)
a2 sun2             22.00∗∗∗     0.285∗∗∗    ∆ ln(GDPcap,t ) -0.00151        0.00366   -0.00220 -0.00104 0.000461       0.0143
          
                      (2.73)      (3.26)                      (-0.40)         (0.55)    (-0.42)  (-0.13)  (0.19)        (1.09)
a3 sun3            -6.754∗∗∗
          
                     (-2.61)
b (speed)           3.327∗∗∗     2.445∗∗∗
                     (26.47)       (8.69)
c (inexion point) 4.312∗∗∗      4.199∗∗∗
                    (105.45)      (29.22)
NUTS-3 FE               No           No         NUTS-3 FE         Yes        Yes         Yes      Yes         Yes       Yes
Time FE                 No           No           Time FE         Yes        Yes         Yes      Yes         Yes       Yes
Urban×Time FE           No           No     Urban×Time FE         Yes        Yes         No        No         No        No
R2                    0.785        0.708                    R2   0.766      0.657      0.768     0.665       0.739     0.641
Adj. R2               0.784        0.703               Adj. R2 0.646        0.481      0.649     0.493       0.601     0.450
                                                              F 234.5       207.1       274.4    242.6       82.25     71.02
 Fa1 ,a2 ,a3 =0          67.46       16.55      FF̂PV,t−k−1 =0 122.4                    110.6                31.18
 p-valuea1 ,a2 ,a3 =0 4.15e-39       1.5e-7 p-val.F̂PV,t−k−1 =0 1.69e-26              1.00e-23             7.50e-08
 N                        849         311                     N 1160        1160         849      849         311       311
 t statistics in parentheses, built with Newey-West-SE
 ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

 Notes: Column (1) shows the estimates of the Diusion Model (equation 16) with non-linear least squares for rural regions.
Column (2) the same for urban regions. a1 , a2 , a3 aect the diusion ceiling, b the diusion speed and c the inexion point.
Column (3) presents the rst stage (2SLS) estimates with the lagged, predicted instrument F̂PV,t−k−1 . Column (5) presents
the rst stage (2SLS) estimates with the lagged, predicted instrument for rural regions only, column (7) the same for urban
regions only. The lagged instrument is predicted according to the Diusion Model from column (1) for rural and according to
the Diusion Model     from column (2) for urban regions. Column (4) shows the second stage estimates (2SLS) of the adoption
rate ∆F̂PV,t−1 on the increase in green votes (∆Vt ) for all regions. Column (6) shows the same for rural regions only and
                   
column (8) for urban regions only.


     Table 2 also explores whether the eect of adoption on the increase in green votes comes

from rural or from urban regions. We nd that in rural regions there is a strong and signicant

eect of instrumented PV adoption on the increase in green votes (see column (6)).                                              In

contrast, we nd no eect in urban regions (see column (8)). This nding is consistent with

our model. The model rationalizes the nding by the larger involvement that voters in rural

areas have on the decisions to install PV systems.

     Interpretation .         At this point, it is worthwhile reecting about our instrumentation

strategy. Identication comes from systematic variation in adoption rates driven by cross-

regional variation in solar radiation. For an omitted variable to invalidate our identication,

it needs to drive changes in voting patterns and be correlated with variation in the lagged

PV diusion levels predicted by solar radiation levels.

     Finding such a variable seems a dicult task. As argued above, changes in green voting

are not directly aected by solar radiation. Even if there was a direct eect of solar radiation


                                                               19
on the change in green votes, it would be completely absorbed by the NUTS-3 xed eects

included in our specication. Therefore, the omission of (xed) drivers of green votes that

co-move with solar radiation will not bias our estimates.

       Some omitted drivers of green votes may vary over time. However, to bias our instru-

mental variable (IV) estimates, the omitted variables need to increase faster in regions with

higher solar radiation than in regions with lower solar radiation.
                                                                             25   Again, there is no a priori

rationale for why green sentiment or other drivers of green votes increase faster in regions

with solar radiation.         Furthermore, to fully account for our ndings this upward trend in

green sentiment in sunnier regions should only be present in rural regions.

       Let's ignore, for the time being, the diculty of nding a trigger for the increase in green

sentiment that is correlated with solar radiation.               It might be argued that the non-linear

dynamics in the instrument reects the endogenous dynamics of green sentiment rather than

the (non-linear) diusion of PV systems.
                                                    26   Under this alternative interpretation, exogenous

shocks to green sentiment endogenously diused in the population causing the observed

increase in green votes.

       To rule out this possibility, we explore the endogenous dynamics of green attitudes in

the absence of green technologies by focusing on the period 1980-1998 when the Green Party

participated in federal elections but PV systems had not diused.
                                                                                   27   Our proxy for green

sentiment is the fraction of votes for the Green Party. In column (1) of Table 3, we report

the coecient of the lagged level of the share of Green Party votes                (Vt−k )   on the increase in

the share of Green Party votes           (∆Vt )   for the period 1980 to 1998. We nd that the lagged

share of Green Party votes is negatively associated with the increase in Green Party votes.

       Next, we use the pre-1998 estimates from column (1) in Table 3 to lter from the increase

in green votes (after 1998) the endogenous dynamics of green votes. We then estimate the

eect of PV adoption on the increase in adjusted green votes.
                                                                              28    Column (2) in Table 3

reports the OLS estimates, and column (3) reports the IV estimates. In both cases, ltering

away the endogenous voting dynamics does not impact the eect of PV adoption on the

change in Green Party votes.

  25
       Note that the emphasis on the dierential rates of change comes from the inclusion of time xed eects
which capture variation in voting patterns that is common across NUTS-3 regions.
  26
       A counter-argument is that non-linear diusion patterns have been documented for a wide range of
technologies (from hybrid corn to cell-phones to industrial processes (Griliches, 1957; Davies, 1979)). Most
of these technologies are orthogonal to political attitudes, in general, and to green values, in particular.
Therefore, it is unlikely that variation in adoption rates forecast by our solar instrument is driven by changes
in attitudes towards the Green Party or by any other driver of changes in green votes.
  27
       This is similar to a dis-in-dis specication.
  28
       We obtain similar estimates when including lagged green votes as an additional control when estimating
equation (15).




                                                          20
       In contrast to PV systems, green votes diusion is reverting. This implies that shocks to

green sentiment monotonically die down. Therefore, it does not seem likely that the non-

linear evolution of PV systems after 1998 is driven by the endogenous dynamics of green

attitudes. To account for the increase in green votes, we need to rely on a persistent eect

that builds up over time and that is exogenous to green sentiment. The evidence presented

above provides strong support for one such force: the adoption of PV systems and the impact

that undertaking those investments had in the green attitudes of voters.


Table 3: Estimation of pre-1998 voting dynamics and of increase in PV diusion on adjusted
increase in share of green votes (pre-1998 voting dynamics ltered away).

                                                           OLS                   IV (2nd stage)
                                                 (1)              (2)                    (3)
                                                ∆Vt        ∆Vt − βVˆ  V
                                                                   t−k t−k
                                                                                ∆Vt − βVˆ  V
                                                                                        t−k t−k
                          ∆F̂PV,t                                                   0.317∗∗∗
                                                                                     (6.79)
                          ∆FPV,t                               0.196∗∗∗
                                                                (5.76)
                          ∆ ln(GDPcap,t )                      0.00224               0.00341
                                                                (0.46)                (0.71)
                          Vt−k                 -0.822∗∗∗
                                                (-15.89)
                           R2                     0.934            0.752              0.748
                           Adj. R2                0.918            0.626              0.620
                           F                     2946.5            530.1              465.1
                           N                      1621             1160                1160
                           t statistics in parentheses, built with Newey-West SE
                           NUTS-3 and time xed eects included
                           ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

                          Notes: Column (1) shows the OLS (with FE) estimates of the lagged level
                         of the share of green votes (Vt−k ) on the increase in the share of green
                         votes (∆Vt ) for 1980 to 1998. Column (2) reports the OLS estimates    of
                         PV adoption on the adjusted increase in green votes ∆Vt − βVˆt−k Vt−k .
                         The pre-1998 estimates from column (1) are used to lter from the increase
                         in green votes (after 1998). Column (3) shows the second stage estimates
                         (2SLS) of the adoption rate    ∆F̂PV,t−1 on the adjusted increase in green
                         votes ∆Vt − βVˆt−k Vt−k .
                                                     




       Robustness . We conduct various exercises to show the robustness of the estimates of the
eect of PV adoption on green voting. The rst one consists in lagging further the forecasts

of the diusion equation (16) to instrument for adoption rates.
                                                                                    29   The second exercise consists

in constructing a synthetic instrument for PV adoption rates based on the lagged diusion

  29
       In particular, we use   F̂PV,t−2∗k−1   instead of   F̂PV,t−k−1   to instrument for      ∆FPV,t−1 .   Table 15 in Ap-
pendix D.2 shows that lagging further the predicted diusion level does not diminish the magnitude or the
signicance of the estimated eect in rural areas.




                                                             21
in regions with similar solar radiation.
                                                  30   Finally, our IV estimates are also robust to allowing

for spatial correlation in the error terms.
                                                        31


4.1.3 The diusion of industrial vs. household systems
Testable prediction #4 from our model is that the diusion of industrial green energy systems

should not be associated with an increase in green votes. This implication follows from the

fact that corporations (instead of voters) decide whether to construct an industrial green

energy system. Next, we explore whether there is any association between the diusion of

industrial systems (PV, eolic and biomass) and the evolution of green votes.

       We focus rst on PV systems and consider two possible cutos for the maximum capacity

of household PV systems, 30 kWp and 100 kWp .                          In addition, we study the eects of the

diusion of large (100 kWp or more) and very large PV systems (1,000 kWp or more) which are

denitely industrial. Industrial systems are often installed on elds. We therefore normalize

their adoption rates by the agricultural area in square kilometers (instead of the number of

buildings).
               32   Table 4 presents the OLS estimates of the association between the adoption of

PV systems of a given capacity and the increment in green votes. For household systems, we

obtain an estimate very close to the full sample estimate (shown in Table 2). The estimated

eect is slightly higher for systems with a capacity of at most 30 kWp than for systems of at

most 100 kWp . In both cases, the association of PV adoption on green voting is signicant

with p-values smaller than one percent.
                                                       33    The estimates change dramatically for industrial

systems for which we nd an insignicant association between adoption rates and changes

in green votes.

       An alternative way to measure the diusion of PV systems consists in using a capacity-

weighted measure that takes into account the amount of electricity that a system can produce.

In particular, the capacity-weighted adoption rate is given by


                                                  4    Total PV capacity installednt
                           4FPVCapac.,nt =                                                    ,                     (17)
                                                Agricultural arean * Avg. capacity

  30
       Specically, we rank the NUTS-3 regions according to their solar radiation.                Then, we compute the
synthetic diusion level of a region,    FPV, synthetic,t−k−1 ,    by taking the average value of diusion,    FPV,t−k−1 ,
in the four regions that are closest in the solar radiation ranking.              We then use      FPV, synthetic,t−k−1 to
instrument for      ∆FPV,t−1 ,   and nally, we use the instrumented diusion levels to estimate the impact of
adoption on green votes. Table 16 (in Appendix D.3) shows that the synthetic instrument predicts diusion
levels well, and the estimate we obtain for the eect of PV adoption rates on the increase in green votes is
signicant and in line with the OLS and IV estimates.
  31
       See columns (2) and (3) of Table 14 in Appendix D.1. In section 4.3.1, we further show the robustness
of our estimates by controlling for changes in the protability of PV systems.
  32
       The particular scaling variable is not critical since they are xed and therefore captured by the NUTS-3
xed eects.
  33
       In Appendix D.4, we conrm that the eect of household PV adoption on green voting is robust to
instrumenting adoption rates by our solar radiation instrument.


                                                              22
Table 4:      OLS estimation of increase in PV diusion on increase in share of green votes
(industrial vs. household systems).

                                              Household installations        Industrial installations
                                                 (1)          (2)               (3)           (4)
                                                 ∆Vt          ∆Vt              ∆Vt           ∆Vt
                           ∆FPV≤30 kWp ,t     0.268∗∗∗
                                               (5.98)
                           ∆FPV≤100 kWp ,t                  0.250∗∗∗
                                                             (6.01)
                           ∆FPV>100 kWp ,t                                   -0.00891∗
                                                                               (-1.72)
                           ∆FPV>103 kWp ,t                                                 -0.00988
                                                                                            (-1.63)
                           ∆ ln(GDPcap,t )       0.00153       0.00161    -0.000757       -0.000366
                                                  (0.23)        (0.25)      (-0.11)         (-0.05)
                           R2                     0.642         0.642        0.631           0.631
                           Adj. R2                0.459         0.460        0.444           0.444
                           F                      317.9         313.2        272.5           272.6
                           N                       1160          1160        1160            1160
                           t statistics in parentheses, built with Newey-West SE
                           NUTS-3 and time xed eects included
                           ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




where Avg. capacity is the average capacity of all PV installations across all regions in all

periods.

       Columns (1)-(4) of Table 5 reproduce the regressions from Table 4 using the measure of

capacity-weighted adoption. The estimates show that the patterns are the same for standard

and capacity-weighted adoption rates. In particular, we nd a strong positive association

between the increment in green votes and capacity-weighted adoption for household PV

systems, but no relationship for industrial systems.

       We next turn to eolic and biomass installations.
                                                                        34    Unlike PV systems, only companies

can aord the magnitude of the sunk costs required to install eolic or biomass systems.

Column (5) reports the association between the increase in green votes and capacity-weighted

eolic system adoption.
                             35   Column (6) presents the equivalent results for biomass systems. As

predicted by our model, we nd that these two variables are not signicantly associated.

Therefore, we conclude that our identication strategy passes the placebo test.



4.2 Survey evidence
The evidence presented so far to study the eect of the diusion of PV systems on the

fraction of votes obtained by the German Green Party has been based on data aggregated

  34
       Table 11 in Appendix A shows the descriptive statistics for the eolics analysis and Table 12 in Appendix B
for biomass plants.
  35
       Because of the large dispersion in the capacity of eolic and biomass systems, we focus on the capacity-
weighted measures.



                                                            23
Table 5: OLS estimation of increase in PV, eolic or biomass diusion (capacity-weighted
measure) on increase in share of green votes.

                                            Household PV              Industrial PV           Eolic     Biomass
                                           (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)
                                          ∆Vt          ∆Vt          ∆Vt         ∆Vt           ∆Vt         ∆Vt
            ∆FPVCapac.≤30 kWp ,t−1      0.197∗∗∗
                                         (5.94)
            ∆FPVCapac.≤100 kWp ,t−1                  0.191∗∗∗
                                                      (5.75)
            ∆FPVCapac.>100 kWp ,t−1                                -0.00246
                                                                    (-0.43)
            ∆FPVCapac.>103 kWp ,t−1                                           -0.00244
                                                                               (-0.42)
            ∆FEolicCapac.,t−1                                                                -0.0102
                                                                                             (-1.39)
            ∆FBiomassCapac.,t−1                                                                          -0.00488
                                                                                                          (-1.31)
            ∆ ln(GDPcap,t )                 0.00133     0.00145   -0.00156    -0.00156       -0.00125   -0.000975
                                             (0.20)      (0.22)    (-0.24)     (-0.24)        (-0.19)     (-0.15)
            R2                                0.642      0.642      0.630       0.630          0.631       0.631
            Adj. R2                           0.460      0.461      0.442       0.442          0.443       0.444
            F                                 301.3      294.4      273.6       273.6          275.0       277.6
            N                                 1160        1160      1161        1161           1161        1161
            t statistics in parentheses, built with Newey-West SE
            NUTS-3 and time xed eects included
            ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




at the NUTS-3 level. Next, we continue our investigation by using individual survey data

from 2013's Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP). The SOEP is a representative longitudinal survey

that is administered to approximately 30,000 individuals from 11,000 German households. It

covers a wide range of socio-economic topics including the party supported by the individual

and the intensity of the support.                  Since 2007, the SOEP has included a question about

whether households live in dwellings with solar energy systems.
                                                                                       36   By combining the answers

on political preferences and the presence of solar energy systems, we can explore whether

the adoption of solar systems has impacted the political preferences of individuals in a way

that is consistent with the evidence we have uncovered at the regional level.

  36
       Solar energy includes both PV systems and solar thermal systems. The dierence between PV and solar
thermal systems is that while the latter produce energy that can only be used to heat water, the former
produce electricity that can be either used or sold to the electric grid. For the purposes of the mechanisms
explored in this paper, there is a priori no relevant dierence between these two types of solar energy systems.
Since 2007, a majority of the solar energy systems installed in Germany have been PV systems. According
to BSW-Solar (2014), in 2007 there were 1 million solar thermal systems installed in Germany while there
were only 360,000 PV systems. By 2012, the number of PV systems was 1.3 million while the number of
solar thermal systems was 1.8 million.




                                                              24
4.2.1 Baseline estimates
To measure the increase in support towards the Green Party, we construct a categorical

variable,    ∆Greent ,    which takes the value of one if the individual states a change in support

from another party to the Green Party or if she states an increase in the intensity of support

for the Green Party between years                 t−1   and   t,    and it is zero in all other cases.
                                                                                                         37   Our

independent variable        Solart−1 ,      measures whether the household had a solar energy system

installed in its dwelling in year           t − 1.38
       We estimate a logit model where, in addition to the adoption of solar systems, the

probability of a change in the support for the Green Party can be aected by (log) household

income, labor status, having a college degree, having graduated from vocational training

school, and other variables captured by a full set of year dummies interacted with a full set

of NUTS-1 regional dummies.
                                       39

       As suggested by our model, it may be relevant to account for whether households have

made a conscious decision to install a solar system or whether they live in a rented dwelling.

Accordingly, we split the sample between those households that own the dwelling (and pre-

sumably have decided to install the system) and those that do not own it.

       Columns (1), (3) and (5) in Table 6 present the odds that a person who has installed

a solar energy system becomes greener relative to one that has not installed a system, for

each of the three samples. For the full sample, column (1) shows that the odds ratio is 1.4.

The estimate is signicant at the 1 percent level.
                                                               40    Consistent with our theory, columns (3)

and (5) reveal a relevant dierence in the odds ratios for home-owners and non-home owners.

Column (3) shows a signicant association between having a solar system and becoming

greener for home owners with an odds ratio of 1.73 (signicant at the .1 percent).                            For

non-home owners the odds ratio is 0.52 (and statistically                  insignicant).
                                                                                          41

  37
       See footnote 41 for the results from considering separately these two margins. Table 19 in Appendix E
contains the descriptive statistics.
  38
       We only contemplate at respondents who do not claim to have removed their solar system.           There is
strong evidence that this group best illustrates the eect under study. Comparing the SOEP data set with
reported data from the German transmission system operators, shows that disproportionately many solar
systems were removed according to the SOEP data, see Figure 10 in Appendix E.1.
  39
       See Appendix E.2 for details.
  40
       T-statistics are computed using standard errors clustered at the household level (in our survey analyzes).
  41
       In Appendix E.3, we unpack the relationship between the adoption of solar energy systems and green
support by decomposing the dependent variable into two categorical variables that separately capture the
presence of support for the Green Party and the intensity of such a support. We nd that both of these
margins are important for the point estimates in columns (1), (3) and (5) of Table 6.




                                                         25
     Table 6: Odds ratio of solar level and solar change on change in green attitude.

                                                All                     Home owners        Non-home owners
                                       (1)              (2)            (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)
                                     ∆Greent          ∆Greent        ∆Greent    ∆Greent   ∆Greent    ∆Greent
           Solart−1                  1.438∗∗∗                        1.728∗∗∗               0.521
                                      (2.76)                          (3.84)               (-1.38)
           ∆Solart−3:t−1                               1.297                    1.563∗∗                0.438
                                                       (1.21)                    (2.01)               (-1.16)
           ln (Real   Incomet )       1.093                           1.167                1.169
                                      (1.31)                          (1.51)               (1.56)
           ∆ ln (Real   Incomet )                 0.959                   0.699∗∗                      1.263
                                                 (-0.31)                   (-2.04)                     (1.49)
           Observations                45455      42019        25062        22263      19268           18550
           DFM                           67         67          64           63          61              61
           Final log-likelihood L     -5144.0   -4744.4       -2853.3     -2420.4     -2240.9         -2275.4
           Exponentiated coecients; robust t statistics in parentheses clustered on households
           Time∗NUTS-1, college, vocational degree and labor status dummies included
           Columns (2), (4) and (6): only those who did not have a Solar system in 2007
           ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




4.2.2 Further checks on omitted variable bias
Omitted variables can bias the estimates if they are correlated with having installed a solar

system in the past and aect the likelihood that an individual                            becomes    a green supporter.

Note that the required lead-lag relationship between the omitted variable and our variables

of interest is very specic. In particular, the omitted variable needs to be correlated with

the adoption of solar systems at        t − 1 or earlier, and with the agent preferences towards the
Green Party at    t     but not at   t − 1. In our view, the stringency of this requirement makes
omitted variables an unlikely explanation for our estimates.

   To further explore the causal nature of our estimates, we conduct three exercises. First,

we restrict attention to households that had not adopted a solar energy system before 2007,

and study how adopting the system over the previous three years aects the odds of becoming

more green within the next year. Second, we directly explore the reverse relationship between

adoption and becoming green by studying if agents that became green were more likely to

adopt solar energy systems afterwards.                        Third, we instrument for the adoption of solar

systems by using information on prior adoption of other non-green technologies such as

computers or the Internet.

   Solar system adoption . As we have argued above, the likelihood that an omitted variable
drives our estimates diminishes as the temporal requirements (on the omitted variable)

become more stringent. To minimize the chances of omitted variable bias, we narrow the

period over which individuals have adopted the solar energy systems.                                  In particular, we

restrict attention to agents that had not installed a solar system before 2008, and consider




                                                                26
as independent variable         ∆Solar(t−3:t−1)      which measures whether the individual adopted a

solar system over the previous three years.
                                                          42

       Columns (2), (4) and (6) of Table 6 show the estimates for the odds of changing the

Green Party support for those that adopted a solar energy system during the previous three

years vs. those that did not. We nd that home owners that installed a solar energy system

over the previous one to three years are 56 percent more likely to increase their support for

the Green Party than those that did not install one. This estimate is statistically signicant

at the 5 percent level. As in column (5) of Table 6, we nd no signicant eect for non-home

owners.

       Reverse causation .     One possible explanation of the survey evidence presented so far is

that it results from reverse causation. That is, agents that experience exogenous increases

in support for the Green Party become more prone to adopt solar energy systems. Next, we

directly explore this hypothesis. Our dependent variable,                        ∆Solart ,   takes the value of 1 if

the individual lived in a dwelling where a solar system has been installed between year                        t−1
and     t.   As before we restrict attention to dwellings that did not have a system in 2007. We

consider two independent variables.             Greent−1            is 1 if the respondent claims to support the

Green Party in year        t − 1,   and zero otherwise.             ∆Green(t−3:t−1)   is a categorical variable that

is 1 if the individual moved to support the Green Party or if she increased the strength of

the support for the Green Party over the previous three years, and zero otherwise.
                                                                                                          43

       Table 7 reports odds ratios from the logit regression.                     In columns (1), (3) and (5) of

Table 7 we see that Green Party supporters are not more likely to adopt solar systems than

those who do not support the Green Party. Columns (2), (4) and (6) of Table 7 illustrate

that individuals who became greener also are not more likely to install solar energy systems

than those who did not become greener in a previous three-year period.                              These ndings

suggest that greater green support does not increase the likelihood of adopting solar energy

systems.        The relevance of this conclusion goes beyond the assurance it provides us that

reverse causation is not driving our estimates. Because many omitted variable bias operate

through variables that proxy for green sentiment, the fact that green sentiment itself (or at

least the best available measure) does not drive solar systems adoption renders implausible

most omitted variable concerns.

       Instrumenting for solar energy adoption .                   The nal exercise we conduct to assess the

causal interpretation of the relationship between solar system adoption and green support is

  42
       Conditioning on not having a system is relevant to prevent a downward bias in the estimates because
for those that initially had a system, the independent variable is always 0, and the dependent can be either
0 or 1, forcing either a negative association or no association at all. Since SOEP started to ask households
about solar energy systems only in 2007, we consider a 1-year adoption interval for 2008, a 2-year interval
for 2009 and a 3-year interval afterwards.
  43
       Our results are robust to lagging   Green,   and   4Green       by another period.



                                                               27
            Table 7: Odds ratio of level and change in green attitude on solar change.

                                                     All                     Home owners           Non-home owners
                                            (1)              (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)
                                          ∆Solart          ∆Solart        ∆Solart    ∆Solart      ∆Solart    ∆Solart
                 Greent−1                  0.757                           0.695                   0.903
                                          (-1.21)                         (-1.24)                 (-0.26)
                 ∆Greent−3:t−1                              0.745                     0.715                    0.870
                                                           (-1.40)                   (-1.25)                  (-0.40)
                 ln (Real   Incomet )     1.794∗∗∗                        1.515∗∗∗                1.695∗∗∗
                                           (4.94)                          (2.62)                  (2.69)
                 ∆ ln (Real   Incomet )                0.784                   0.830                  0.751
                                                      (-1.10)                 (-0.65)               (-0.81)
                 Observations               38979      38797       20557      20449       14252      14196
                 DFM                          53        53          47          47          42         42
                 Final log-likelihood L -2407.7       -2411.4     -1665.6    -1657.9      -674.0     -677.1
                 Exponentiated coecients; robust t statistics in parentheses clustered on households
                 Time∗NUTS-1, college, vocational degree and labor status dummies included
                 Only those who did not have a Solar system in 2007
                 ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




an IV estimation. Following the literature on technology adoption,
                                                                                                   44   we exploit the idea that

some agents have a higher propensity to adopt all sorts of technologies, probably because they

have lower adoption costs or derive a higher for novelties. This intrinsic propensity to adop-

tion produces a cross-technology correlation in adoption across technologies at the individual

level that may help us construct an instrument for solar system adoption. In particular, our

instrument will be based on whether an agent adopted other non-green technologies (e.g.,

PCs and Internet) in the past. Because these (prior) technologies are non-green in nature,

their adoption decision should be orthogonal to the agent's green sentiment, ensuring the

exogeneity of our instrument.              There are two further considerations that should increase

our condence in the exogeneity of the variation introduced by our instrument. First, by

using as dependent variable the increment in green sentiment (∆Greent ), our estimates only

reect changes in green attitudes that took place after the solar system was installed. Sec-

ond, our regressions control for other potential drivers of green attitudes such as education,

employment status and income.

       We use information in SOEP to determine whether individuals have an Internet connec-

tion in the dwelling           (Internett−1 )     and a personal computer                      (P Ct−1 ).    Table 8 reports the

probit (column (1)) and bi-probit (columns (2) and (3)) results for home owners. The rst

column shows that the probit estimates are consistent with the logit estimates in Table 6.

Column (2) shows that both adopting Internet and PC are strong predictors for solar system

adoption. Interestingly, both technologies are independently signicant in the rst stage re-

  44
       Comin et al. (2006) found strong cross-correlations across technologies in the patterns of diusion in a
large sample of countries. Skinner and Staiger (2007) found a similar cross-technology correlation in diusion
at the state level in the U.S.




                                                                     28
gression. A        χ2     test conrms that they are jointly signicant at any level (i.e., the                     χ2   statistic

is over 25).
                 45

         The rst row of column (3) in Table 8 shows the IV estimate of the eect of having

a solar system installed on the probability of increasing the support for the Green Party.

Consistently with our previous estimates, we nd that the instrumented adoption of solar

energy systems leads to a signicant increase in the probability of strengthening the support

for the Green Party.

         The bottom part of Table 8 contains various tests of the exogeneity of the instruments.

ρ   is the correlation between the error terms of the rst and the second stage regression

which we nd not to be signicantly dierent from zero. This indicates that, ex-post, our

instruments are not endogenous to changes in green voting.
                                                                                     46   A Wald test on            ρ=0    points

in the same direction as the p-value is greater than 0.05.
                                                                                47   As we have two instruments, we

can conduct an over-identication restriction test which, again, does not reject the validity

of our instruments.
                               48

          Table 8: Estimation of solar level on change in green attitude (for home owners).

                                             Probit             Bi-Probit                       IV (2SLS)
                                               (1)        (2)           (3)               (4)                 (5)
                                            ∆Greent     Solart−1     ∆Greent          Solart−1              ∆Greent
                 ˆ t−1
               Solar                                                  0.652∗∗                               0.271∗∗∗
                                                                       (2.10)                                (3.35)
               Solart−1                     0.241∗∗∗
                                             (3.71)
               Internett−1                              0.124∗∗                       0.0194∗∗
                                                         (2.54)                         (2.42)
               P Ct−1                                   0.236∗∗∗                      0.0293∗∗∗
                                                         (3.74)                         (3.17)
               ln (Real   Incomet )          0.0808∗    0.226∗∗∗      0.0630          0.0371∗∗∗             -0.00774
                                              (1.86)     (4.35)        (1.41)           (4.16)               (-1.44)
               ρ                                                -0.214
               χ2ρ=0 (p-value)                              1.855 (0.173)
               χ2Instruments=0 (p-value)                 25.87 (0.00000241)    11.47 (0.0000108)
               Hansen J statistic (p-value)                                                            1.375 (0.241)
               Observations                      25062             25706              25706                25706
               DFM                                64                135                69                   68
               Final log-likelihood L           -2851.0          -11009.2            -5811.2              8399.7
               Robust t statistics in parentheses clustered on households
               Time∗NUTS-1, college, vocational degree and labor status dummies included
               ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


    45
         This is well above the rule of thumb of 10 in Stock and Watson (2010).
    46
         For details see Wooldridge (2002, p. 477).
    47
         In columns (4) and (5) of Table 8 we report that a two-stage least squares estimation also indicates
that our instruments are, ex-post, not endogenous to changes in green voting. The p-value of the Hansen J
statistic is above 0.05.
    48
         In Appendix E.4, we show that for the full sample that includes home owners and non-home owners,
the eect is signicant for the probit and the two-stage least squares estimation (column (1), (2) and (3) in
Table 21) but not for bi-probit (column (4) and (5) in Table 21). There is no eect for non-home owners
(see Appendix E.4, Table 22 column (1) for the probit estimation and columns (2) and (3) for the two-stage
least squares estimation).




                                                              29
   In summary, the survey evidence has shown that individuals that adopted solar energy

systems were more likely to develop a stronger support for the Green Party. By validating

the details of the mechanism we have hypothesized above, the survey evidence reinforces a

causal interpretation of the regional evidence.




5 Interpretation
After showing that the adoption of PV systems has been a signicant driver of the increase

in Green Party votes observed in Germany between 1998 and 2009, it is natural to explore

what mechanisms drive this eect. An empirical demonstration of the mechanisms that are

responsible is beyond the scope of our paper. Our more modest goal is to speculate about

the plausibility of some candidate mechanisms in the light of our data.

   We consider three hypotheses. The rst is whether voters reward the Green Party for the

monetary transfers that may come with the installation of PV systems. The second possible

hypothesis is based on Bayesian learning about the Green Party. Specically, agents that

adopt a PV system may be more prone to discover that the Green Party proposals are not

unreasonable and this information may induce them to vote for the Green Party in the

federal elections. A third hypothesis, we have already discussed, is that agents are cognitive

dissonant and that, after adopting PV systems, they increase their appreciation for green

values/actions to maximize the utility from their past actions.



5.1 Votes for money
The Green Party was the key proponent of the feed-in tari scheme, EEG, implemented in

2000. The EEG was signicantly more generous than the previous scheme (see Figure 1).

Agents that adopted PV systems after 2000 may have voted for the Green Party in subsequent

elections to reward the party for the income they accrued by selling the electricity they

produced at the higher taris.

   If the eect of PV adoption on green votes is driven by the protability of PV systems,

controlling for changes in protability should render insignicant the coecient of lagged

PV diusion. Furthermore, if the variation in the instrument is contaminated by changes

in protability, we should see a signicant decline in the second stage coecient once we

control for changes in the protability of PV system adoption.

   We measure changes in protability by the growth rate of the feed-in tari interacted

with the average solar radiation of the NUTS-3 region.     Note that this measure captures

the asymmetric eect that feed-in taris have on the return to PV systems across regions.




                                             30
Table 23 (in Appendix F.1) presents the estimates.                         Changes in the protability of PV

systems do not have a signicant eect on the increase in Green Party votes. Furthermore,

controlling for changes in protability does not impact signicantly the estimates of the

eect of PV adoption on changes in green votes. This is the case both for the OLS and IV

regressions, implying that changes in electricity income for adopters is an irrelevant factor

in explaining the increase in green votes. Additionally, the eect of the instrument in the

rst stage remains unchanged when we include the protability measure as a control, which

suggests that the variation in PV adoption used to identify the eect of adoption on voting

patterns is orthogonal to changes in protability.

      We can also explore the votes for money hypothesis by directly computing the net income

from installing a PV system relative to household income. We report the calculations for
                 th
the median and 90   percentile of capacity installed and full load hours (i.e. solar radiation).

Given the time series variation in the feed-in tari and installation costs, we report the

ratios for four years over the period 2000-2009 (see Table 9).
                                                                                    49    The prot to income ratio

ranges from -2.7 percent to 0.8 percent with lower values for earlier years and for systems

with lower capacity and full-load hours. This exercise suggests that even for systems with

high capacity and installed in areas with high solar radiation, the net revenues from PV

electricity production are (at best) relatively small. Therefore, we do not consider plausible

that PV adopters are compensating to the Green Party with their votes                              in exchange for   the

net income they earn from PV systems.


Table 9: Yearly prots from investment in PV as share of yearly average household income
according to yearly full load hours and time of installation.


                      Year of installation    PV system with 4 kWp         PV system with 6.4 kWp
                                                Full load hours [h/a]         Full load hours [h/a]
                                                 900              1110         900              1110
                             2000            -1.7 percent   -1.0 percent   -2.7 percent    -1.6 percent
                             2004            -0.5 percent    0.2 percent   -0.9 percent     0.3 percent
                             2006            -0.3 percent    0.3 percent   -0.5 percent     0.5 percent
                             2009             0.0 percent    0.5 percent    0.0 percent     0.8 percent




5.2 Learning on Green Party policies
The second interpretation of our ndings is based on Bayesian learning. Suppose that agents

were Bayesian and in the process of adopting a PV system they obtained precise signals about

 49
      The calculations details are explained in Appendix F.2.




                                                            31
the plausibility of the Green Party proposals.           In that case, PV adopters would update

upwards their prior on the value of the Green Party vis-à-vis the rest of the parties, and they

would be more prone to vote for the Green Party in the next elections.             Note that under

this interpretation, adopters do not change their preferences. They just gather additional

information that reduces the uncertainty they have about the value of the Green Party and

of their policies.

   We explore the relevance of this hypothesis by studying how the eect of PV adoption

on green votes varies between federal states (`Länder') where the Green Party was in power

and those where it was not. One feature of Bayesian learning is that the marginal eect on

the posterior of a given signal diminishes with the information the agent has (i.e. with the

precision of the prior). It is reasonable to assume that voters in federal states that in 1998

had been ruled by the Green Party, had more precise priors about the Green Party than

those in federal states where the Green Party had not ruled. Therefore, if our ndings are

driven by Bayesian learning, we should expect a smaller eect of PV system adoption on

green voting in federal states where the Green Party had ruled.

   Table 10 evaluates this prediction by introducing an additional regressor in our baseline

specication which is an interaction between the adoption rate of PV systems and a dummy

that equals one if the Green Party had been in a governing coalition in the NUTS-1 regions

before 1998. The rst column reports the OLS estimates and the second the IV estimates.

In both cases, the dierential eect of adoption on green voting is not signicantly smaller

in regions where the Green Party was in power through 1998.

   We have conducted a similar exercise for the survey data in SOEP by introducing an

interaction of   Solart−1   or   4Solart−3:t−1   with the   GreenLaender   dummy. The coecient of

this interactions is insignicant, pointing in the same direction of the regional regressions

reported in Table 10. Therefore it does not seem likely that the eect that PV adoption has

on the propensity to vote for the Green Party is due to a Bayesian updating process.



5.3 Cognitive Dissonance
Finally, the third hypothesis is that agents are cognitive dissonant. To experience a greater

utility from past PV adoption decisions, they change their appreciation for green actions.

This change in green sentiment is also reected in an increased likelihood to vote for the

Green Party.

   In our empirical analysis, we have uncovered evidence that is consistent with this hy-

pothesis. In particular, the facts that the adoption of PV systems increases the likelihood

of voting for the Green Party votes only in rural areas, and in owner-occupied dwellings




                                                    32
Table 10: Estimation of increase in PV diusion on increase in share of green votes (Bayesian
learning).

                                                         OLS      IV (2nd stage)
                                                         (1)            (2)
                                                         ∆Vt           ∆Vt
                          ∆FPV,t−1                    0.242∗∗∗
                                                       (5.88)
                          ∆FPV,t−1 ∗ GreenLaender      0.161∗
                                                       (1.74)
                          ∆F̂PV,t−1                                     0.163∗∗
                                                                         (2.06)
                                         ˆ
                          ∆FPV,t−1 ∗ GreenLaender                      -0.00601
                                                                        (-0.04)
                          ∆ ln(GDPcap,t )                0.000876      0.000805
                                                           (0.13)        (0.12)
                          R2                               0.643         0.640
                          Adj. R2                          0.461         0.457
                          F                                257.9         245.0
                          N                                 1160          1160
                          t statistics in parentheses, built with Newey-West SE
                          NUTS-3 and time xed eects included
                          ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




are predictions of the cognitive dissonance model presented in Section 3. However, further

analysis is necessary to prove that the eects of PV adoption on voting patterns that we

have uncovered in this paper are indeed a consequence of cognitive dissonant behavior.




6 Conclusions
In this paper we have empirically explored a new hypothesis. Namely, whether the adoption

of technologies may change the political preferences and the voting behavior of citizens.

Focusing on the diusion of PV systems in Germany, we have found evidence of a causal

eect of PV system adoption on the increase in the share of valid votes for the Green

Party.   Our estimates indicate that this eect is signicant, accounting for approximately

25 percent of the increase in the share of votes experienced by the Green Party between the

federal elections of 1998 and 2009.

   Our study has not intended to demonstrate the mechanism that drives this eect. How-

ever, we have informally explored the plausibility of three possible hypotheses.    We have

found evidence against the votes for money and Bayesian learning hypotheses.        We have

found indirect evidence consistent with a cognitive dissonance interpretation, formalized by

our model.    Finding direct evidence that the adoption of PV systems induces agents to

strengthen their anity with green values would be an important step we leave for future

research.




                                                    33
   There are a number of relevant questions that our study motivates. Do we see similar

eects of the diusion of PV systems in other countries?         In Spain, for example, green

parties continued to be irrelevant despite the large diusion of PV systems. However, unlike

Germany, in Spain most of the PV systems installed were industrial, and households have

not yet adopted solar systems in a signicant way.       In addition to voting patterns, does

the diusion of technology aect other political phenomena such as campaign contributions,

party aliation, civic involvement in politics, etc. Finally, are there other technologies whose

adoption trigger other changes in values and actions?

   We consider that our ndings are relevant for various literatures. First, they contribute

to the literature on drivers of voting behavior. Traditionally, political scientists have focused

on socio-economic factors  such as race, income, occupation, education level, and civil

status  as well as on political campaign strategies  such as total spending, endorsements,

aggressiveness of the message, party position on key issues, etc.       Our ndings show the

relevance of another type of drivers that are related to signicant decisions/actions taken by

the voters in the past.

   Our ndings also suggest that the adoption of new technologies have broader implications

than those traditionally explored in the literature. Studies on the consequences on technology

diusion have tended to focus on variables such as productivity, wages, employment and

inequality.   Our analysis opens the possibility that the adoption of technology aects the

values and preferences of adopters. Changes in adopters values may have consequences for a

variety of settings. Here we have focused on voting behavior. But it may be possible to think

of impacts in education decisions, labor force participation, crime, health care expenditures,

disease prevention, group formation, or driving behavior to name a few.




References
Agnolucci, P. (2006).     Use of economic instruments in the German renewable electricity

  policy. Energy Policy 34(18), 35383548.


Akerlof, G. A. and W. T. Dickens (1982). The economic consequences of cognitive dissonance.

  The American Economic Review 72(3), 307319.


Altrock, M., V. Oschmann, and C. Theobald (2011). EEG: Erneuerbare-Energien-Gesetz;

  Kommentar (3rd ed.). Munich: Beck.


Ansolabehere, S., J. M. de Figueiredo, and J. M. Snyder Jr. (2003). Why is there so little

  money in U.S. politics? The Journal of Economic Perspectives 17(1), 105130.




                                               34
BBSR (2015). Anteil Wohnungen in Ein- und Zweifamilienhäusern an allen Wohnungen in

  % im Jahr 2009. Database, Bundesinstitut für Bau-, Stadt- und Raumforschung. Acc. 7

  October 2015. http://www.inkar.de/.


BMU      (2011).   Vorbereitung   und    Begleitung    der     Erstellung   des   Erfahrungsberichtes

  2011     gemäÿ   §   65   EEG      Vorhaben    II   c      Solare   Strahlungsenergie       End-

  bericht.         Report,    website:     http://www.erneuerbare-energien.de/leadmin/ee-

  import/les/pdfs/allgemein/application/pdf/eeg_eb_2011_solare_strahlung_bf.pdf,

  im Auftrag des Bundesministeriums für Umwelt, Naturschutz und Reaktorsicherheit,

  Projektleitung: Matthias Reichmuth  Leipziger Institut für Energie GmbH. Acc. April

  10, 2013.


BSW-Solar (2012).      Statistische Zahlen der deutschen Solarstrombranche (Photovoltaik).

  Website: http://www.solarwirtschaft.de/leadmin/media/pdf/bsw_solar_fakten_pv.pdf,

  Bundesverband Solarwirtschaft e.V. Acc. Mar. 14, 2012.


BSW-Solar (2014).      Statistische Zahlen der deutschen Solarwärmebranche (Solarthermie).

  Website:     http://www.solarwirtschaft.de/leadmin/media/pdf/2014_03_BSW_Solar_

  Faktenblatt_Solarwaerme.pdf, Bundesverband Solarwirtschaft e.V. Acc. Oct. 13, 2014.


Comin, D., W. Easterly, and E. Gong (2010). Was the wealth of nations determined in 1000

  BC? American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(3), 6597.


Comin, D. and B. Hobijn (2004). Cross-country technology adoption: making the theories

  face the facts. Journal of Monetary Economics 51(1), 3983.


Comin, D., B. Hobijn, and E. Rovito (2006). Five Facts You Need to Know About Technology

  Diusion. NBER Working Papers #11928, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.


Cooley, T. F. and E. C. Prescott (1995). Economic growth and business cycles. In T. F. Coo-

  ley (Ed.), Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, pp. 138. Princeton: Princeton University

  Press.


Cornelius, W. A. (2004). Mobilized voting in the 2000 elections: The changing ecacy of

  vote-buying and coercion in Mexican electoral politics. In J. I. Dominguez and C. Lawson

  (Eds.), Mexico's Pivotal Democratic Election: Candidates, Voters, and the Presidential

  Campaign of 2000, pp. 4765. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.


Davies, S. (1979). The Diusion of Process Innovations. Cambridge: Cambridge University

  Press.



                                                 35
Deacon, R. and P. Shapiro (1975). Private preference for collective goods revealed through

  voting on referenda. The American Economic Review 65(5), 943955.


DESTATIS (2011). Wohnungen insgesamt und von Eigentümer/-in bewohnte Wohnungen

  nach Gebäudegröÿenklasse in Gebäuden mit Wohnraum am 9. Mai 2011. Data, Statistische

  Ämter des Bundes und der Länder. Data provided after personal request. Acc. June 23,

  2015.


DESTATIS (2012). Regionalstatistik, Sachgebiete: 14111 Allgemeine Bundestagswahlstatis-

  tik, Tabelle 252-01-5-B Bundestagswahl: Wahlberechtigte und -beteiligung, Gültige Zweit-

  stimmen nach Parteien regionale Ebenen. Database, Statistische Ämter des Bundes und

  der Länder. Acc. March 16, 2012.


DESTATIS (2013a).       Genesis, 63121 Laufende Wirtschaftsrechnungen:      Haushaltsbuch 

  63121-0001 Einkommen und Einnahmen sowie Ausgaben privater Haushalte (Laufende

  Wirtschaftsrechnungen):     Deutschland, Jahre, Haushaltsgröÿe.      Database, Statistische

  Ämter des Bundes und der Länder. Acc. April 4, 2013.


DESTATIS (2013b).       Genesis, Sachgebiete: 31231 Fortschreib. d. Wohngebäude- u. Woh-

  nungsbestandes, Tabelle:    035-21-5-B Wohngebäude- und Wohnungsbestand  Stichtag

  31.12.2009  regionale Tiefe: Kreise und krfr. Städte. Database, Statistische Ämter des

  Bundes und der Länder. Acc. April 16, 2013.


Dittmar, J. E. (2011).    Information technology and economic change: The impact of the

  printing press. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(3), 11331172.


                                                                                    2
DWD (2010).         1-km-Rasterdaten der mittleren jährlichen Globalstrahlung (kWh/m ,

  Zeitraum 1981-2000) der gesamten Bundesrepublik Deutschland. Data was provided after

  personal request, Deutscher Wetterdienst, Oenbach. Acc. July 26, 2010.


EEG       (2000).    Erneuerbare-Energien-Gesetz   vom   29.03.2000.      Legal   text,   web-

  site:    http://www.erneuerbare-energien.de/die-themen/gesetze-verordnungen/archiv/eeg-

  vom-2932000/, Bundesministerium für Umwelt, Naturschutz und Reaktorsicherheit. Acc.

  April 11, 2013.


EEG (2004). Erneuerbare-Energien-Gesetz (EEG) 2004 (Fassung vom 21.07.2004), Bundes-

  gesetzblatt Jahrgang 2004 Teil I Nr. 40 S. 1918 .     Legal text, Bundesministerium für

  Umwelt, Naturschutz und Reaktorsicherheit.




                                             36
EEG (2011).   Erneuerbare-Energien-Gesetz (EEG) 2009 (Fassung vom 25.10.2008), Bun-

  desgesetzblatt Jahrgang 2008 Teil I Nr. 49 S. 2074. Legal text, Bundesministerium für

  Umwelt, Naturschutz und Reaktorsicherheit.


Falck, O., R. Gold, and S. Heblich (2014).   E-lections: Voting behavior and the Internet.

  American Economic Review 104(7), 223865.


Festinger, L. (1957). A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Stanford, CA: Stanford University

  Press.


Fischel, W. A. (1979).   Determinants of voting on environmental quality:      A study of

  a New Hampshire pulp mill referendum.           Journal of Environmental Economics and

  Management 6(2), 107118.


Griliches, Z. (1957). Hybrid corn: An exploration in the economics of technological change.

  Econometrica 25(4), 501522.


Jacobsson, S. and V. Lauber (2006). The politics and policy of energy system transforma-

  tion  Explaining the diusion of renewable energy technology. Energy Policy 34, 256276.


Janzing, B. (2010). Innovationsentwicklung der Erneuerbaren Energien. Renews Spezial Aus-

  gabe 37 / Juli 2010, Hintergrundinformationen der Agentur für Erneuerbare Energien,

  Acc. April 4, 2013. http://www.unendlich-viel-energie.de/uploads/media/37_Renews_

  Spezial_Innovationsentwicklung_durch_EE_Juli10.pdf.


KEK (2010).   GIS-gestützte Standortanalyse für Photovoltaik- und thermische Solaranla-

  gen mittels Laserscannerdaten, SUN-AREA. Data was provided after personal request,

  Karlsruher Energie- und Klimaschutzagentur, Karlsruhe. Acc. April 11, 2012.


Klaus, T., C. Vollmer, K. Werner, H. Lehmann, and K. Müschen (2010). Energieziel 2050:

  100% Strom aus Erneuerbaren Energien. Dessau-Roÿlau: Umweltbundesamt.


Manseld, E. (1961). Technical change and the rate of imitation. Econometrica 29, 741766.


Maurer, N., E. Corsi, E. Billaud, and E. Moloney (2012). Germany's green revolution. HBS

  case # 2-713-049, Harvard Business School. October 11.


Mullainathan, S. and E. Washington (2009). Sticking with your vote: Cognitive dissonance

  and political attitudes. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(1), 86111.


Nord, M., A. E. Lulo, and J. C. Bridger (1998). The association of forest recreation with

  environmentalism. Environment and Behavior 30(2), 235246.


                                             37
Pierson, P. (1993). When eect becomes cause: Policy feedback and political change. World

  Politics 45(4), 595628.


pvX (2012). Price Index. Website: http://www.pvxchange.com/priceindex/priceindex.aspx,

  pvXchange International AG. Acc. Apr. 5, 2012.


Rode,   J. (2014).    Renewable Energy Adoption in Germany - Drivers,         Barriers and

  Implications. Doctoral thesis, TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt.


Schaer, F. C. and A. Schedler (2007).    What is vote buying?     In F. C. Schaer (Ed.),

  Elections for sale: the causes and consequences of vote buying. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rien-

  ner Pub.


Schattschneider, E. E. (1935). Politics, Pressure, and the Tari. New York: Prentice Hall.


Schumacher, I. (2014).    An empirical study of the determinants of Green Party voting.

  Ecological Economics 105(0), 306  318.


Skinner, J. and D. Staiger (2007, May). Technology Adoption from Hybrid Corn to Beta-

  Blockers.    In    Hard-to-Measure Goods and Services: Essays in Honor of Zvi Griliches,

  NBER Chapters, pp. 545570. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.


SOEP (2013). Socio-Economic Panel, data for years 1984-2012. version 29.


Soss, J. and S. F. Schram (2007). A public transformed? Welfare reform as policy feedback.

  The American Political Science Review 101(1), 111127.


Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson (2010). Introduction to Econometrics, Volume 3rd Edition.

  Boston: Addison-Wesley.


Tjernström, E. and T. Tietenberg (2008). Do dierences in attitudes explain dierences in

  national climate change policies? Ecological Economics 65, 315324.


Torgler, B. and M. A. García-Valiñas (2007).     The determinants of individuals' attitudes

  towards preventing environmental damage. Ecological Economics 63(2-3), 536552.


Wang, C.-S. and C. Kurzman (2007).       Dilemmas of electoral clientelism:   Taiwan, 1993.

  International Political Science Review 28(2), 225245.


Whitehead, J. C. (1991). Environmental interest group behavior and self-selection bias in

  contingent valuation mail surveys. Growth and Change 22(1), 1020.




                                            38
Wirth, H. (2013). Aktuelle Fakten zur Photovoltaik in Deutschland, Fassung vom 21.3.2013.

  Report, website: http://www.pv-fakten.de, Fraunhofer-Institut für Solare Energiesysteme

  (ISE), Freiburg. Acc. April 2, 2013.


Wooldridge, J. M. (2002). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cam-

  bridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.


Yu, J., R. de Jong, and L. fei Lee (2008).   Quasi-maximum likelihood estimators for spa-

  tial dynamic panel data with xed eects when both N and T are large.        Journal of

  Econometrics 146(1), 118134.


Zelezny, L. C., P.-P. Chua, and C. Aldrich (2000).   New ways of thinking about environ-

  mentalism:   Elaborating on gender dierences in environmentalism.    Journal of Social

  Issues 56(3), 443457.




                                             39
                                                                                        Appendix
   For Online Publication:                                                  The following is not intended to be included in the journal

version of the article, but as online appendix.




A The diusion of eolic systems in Germany
Figure 6 illustrates the diusion of eolic systems and the level of the feed-in tari for elec-

tricity from eolic systems. In contrast to the feed-in taris for PV systems, the feed-in tari

schemes for electricity from eolic plants rose comparatively less through EEG.
                                               0.012




                                                                                                                                                                                             10
                                                         ●    Number of new eolic systems per agricultural area
                                                         ●    Level feed−in tariff




                                                                                                                                                       Level of feed−in tariff [EURCent/kWh]
                                               0.01
             per agricultural area [in sqkm]
              Number of new eolic systems




                                                                                                                                                                                       9
                                               0.008




                                                        ●                                 ●      ●                                               ●




                                                                                                                                                                  for wind electricity
                                                               ●      ●                                 ●
                                                                                                                  ●
                                                                             ●
                                                                                    ●                                 ●
                                                                                                                           ●
                                               0.006




                                                                                                                                 ●




                                                                                                                                                                          8
                                                                                                                                      ●
                                                                                                                                            ●
                                               0.004




                                                                                                                                                             7
                                               0.002
                                               0




                                                                                                                                                       6
                                                       1995         1997         1999          2001          2003         2005       2007       2009

                                                                                                      Year

Figure 6: Number of new eolic (onshore) systems per agricultural area [in sqkm] and the level
of the average feed-in tari for electricity from eolic (onshore) systems (of 90 percent reference
yield without system service or repowering bonus) in Germany from 1995 through 2009.



   Figure 7 illustrates the diusion of eolic systems. By 1998, there were already signicant

regional dierences in the diusion of eolic systems. Some northern regions such as Dith-

marschen, Schleswig-Holstein, (0.32 wind mills per agricultural sqkm) and Hamburg (0.36)

had considerable diusion of eolic systems. In contrast, 48 percent of the regions  many

of them in Bavaria and Baden-Württemberg  had no eolic system installed. In 2009, these

dierences prevailed. The regions with highest diusion levels of eolic systems were Emden,

Lower Saxony, (0.94 wind mills per sqkm) and Bremerhaven, Bremen, (0.94). The share of

regions without eolic systems installed dropped to 24 percent, and these are concentrated in

Bavaria, North Rhine-Westphalia and Baden-Württemberg.




                                                                                                      40
             1998                                      2002                                 2009




                                                                                                    0   200 km
                   Cumulative number of eolic systems per agricultural area [in sqkm]
           <0.01            0.01−0.02        0.02−0.05         0.05−0.1        0.1−0.2       >0.2

Figure 7: Number of eolic (onshore) systems per agricultural area [in sqkm] at NUTS-3 level
for 1998, 2001, 2005 and 2009.


                              Table 11: Descriptive statistics, eolic.

                                                N      Mean    Std. Dev.    Min.    Max.
                        FEolicCapac.,t−1       1171    .044       .098        0      1.7
                        FEolicCapac.,t−k−1     1171    .024       .056        0      .86
                        ∆FEolicCapac.,t−1      1171     .02       .058        0      1.4
                        Vt                     1171    .082       .035      .02      .29
                        ∆Vt                    1171    .013       .015      -.03    .081
                        N                      1171


B The diusion of biomass systems in Germany
Figure 8 illustrates the diusion of biomass systems and the level of the feed-in tari for

electricity from biomass systems.            In contrast to the feed-in taris for PV systems, the

feed-in tari schemes for electricity from biomass plants rose comparatively less but still

signicantly through EEG.


                            Table 12: Descriptive statistics, biomass.

                                                 N      Mean    Std. Dev.    Min.    Max.
                      FBiomassCapac.,t−1        1171    .042         .2        0      3.5
                      FBiomassCapac.,t−k−1      1171     .02        .14        0      3.2
                      ∆FBiomassCapac.,t−1       1171    .022        .12        0      3.2
                      Vt                        1171    .082       .035      .02      .29
                      ∆Vt                       1171    .013       .015      -.03    .081
                      N                         1171


   Figure 9 illustrates the diusion of biomass systems.                    By 1998, regional dierences in

the diusion of biomass systems were low.                Still, some regions such as Freiburg, Baden-

                                                        41
                                                                                                                                                      12
                                                 0.012
                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                           ●    Number of new biomass plants per agricultural area   ●
                                                                                                                          ●




                                                                                                                                                      Level of feed−in tariff [EURCent/kWh]
                                                           ●    Level feed−in tariff
                                                                                                                                ●




                                                                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                     ●




                                                 0.01
                                                                                                                                           ●




               Number of new biomass plants
               per agricultural area [in sqkm]




                                                                                                                                                               for biomass electricity
                                                                                            ●      ●
                                                                                                         ●




                                                 0.008




                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                ●




                                                 0.006




                                                                                                                                                                         9
                                                          ●      ●      ●
                                                                               ●
                                                                                     ●
                                                 0.004




                                                                                                                                                                  8
                                                 0.002




                                                                                                                                                        7
                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                      6
                                                         1995         1997         1999         2001          2003       2005       2007       2009

                                                                                                       Year

Figure 8: Number of new biomass systems per agricultural area [in sqkm] and the level of
                                                                                                                                    
the feed-in tari for electricity from small                                                           at most 150 kWel                  biomass plants (without any
bonus) in Germany from 1995 through 2009.



Württemberg (0.07 wind mills per agricultural sqkm) and Kassel, Hessen (0.06) had biomass

plants. In contrast, 73 percent of the regions had no biomass plant installed. In 2009, the

picture changed. The share of regions without biomass systems dropped to 5 percent. The

regions with highest diusion levels of biomass plants were Pforzheim, Baden-Württemberg,

(0.78 wind mills per sqkm) and Amberg, Bavaria, (0.73).


                   1998                                                                                2002                                           2009




                                                                                                                                                                                              0   200 km
                                          Cumulative number of biomass systems per agricultural area [in sqkm]
           0                                               0−0.01                      0.01−0.05                 0.05−0.1            0.1−0.15                >0.15

Figure 9: Number of biomass plants per agricultural area [in sqkm] at NUTS-3 level for
1998, 2001, 2005 and 2009.
                                                                                                        42
C Proof of Proposition 1
If we adopt technology at    t,   we get

                                                                           
                                            −rt        Pt en + g̃       −αt
                                   Vt = e                         − cj e      .                 (18)
                                                           r

If we adopt technology at    t + dt,   we get

                                                                              
                                                     Pt en + g̃
                                                   −r(t+dt)            −α(t+dt)
                  Et Vt+dt   = (1 − λdt) e                      − cj e                          (19)
                                                         r
                                                                            
                                       −r(t+dt)   φPt en + g̃        −α(t+dt)
                               + λdt e                        − cj e             .
                                                       r

                                                    Et Vt+dt − Vt
The moment of adoption corresponds to                  lim        = 0, and
                                                    dt→0  dt
                                                     
                −r(t+dt)   Pt en + g̃        −α(t+dt)                (φ − 1)Pt en
  Et Vt+dt =   e                       − cj e           + λe−r(t+dt)              dt             (20)
                               r                                          r
                                                               
                −rt              Pt en + g̃                                (φ − 1)Pt en
          =    e (1 − rdt)                   − cj e (1 − αdt) + λe−rt
                                                   −αt
                                                                                        dt + o(dt)
                                      r                                          r
                                           
                −rt   Pt en + g̃        −αt
          =    e                 − cj e
                          r
                                                                              
                    −rt                       −αt        −αt      (φ − 1)Pt en
               +e        −Pt en − g̃ + rcj e       + αe cj + λ                    dt + o(dt).
                                                                        r

Correspondingly, the solution is

                                                                             
         Et Vt+dt − Vt   −rt                     −αt     −αt     (φ − 1)Pt en
    lim                =e     −Pt en − g̃ + rcj e    + αe cj + λ                = 0.            (21)
    dt→0       dt                                                     r

Rearranging, we obtain

                                                           
                                    −αt          (φ − 1)
                       (r + α)e           cj + λ         − 1 Pt en − g̃ = 0.                    (22)
                                                    r

Which yields the optimal adoption condition stated in Proposition 1:

                                                          
                                               1 − λ (φ−1)
                                                       r
                                                             Pt en + g̃
                                   cj =                                                        (23)
                                                    (r + α)e−αt




                                                             43
D Further Tables on NUTS-3 level evidence
                                     Table 13: Descriptive statistics, PV.

                           Total                                   Rural                                   Urban
             Mean    St. Dev.        Min.     Max.   Mean     St. Dev.    Min.      Max.      Mean    St. Dev.    Min.     Max.
 FPV,t−1      .013     .018         8.7e-05    .13    .015       .02     8.7e-05     .13      .0073    .0087     .00016    .051
 FPV,t−k−1   .0038    .0061             0     .047   .0043     .0068        0       .047      .0026    .0035         0     .021
 ∆FPV,t−1    .0092     .012         8.7e-05   .094    .011      .014     8.7e-05    .094      .0047    .0057     9.4e-05   .035
 sun         1035       58            871     1162    1038       58        938      1162      1026       58        871     1160
 Vt           .082     .035            .02     .29    .075      .029       .02       .21        .1      .043       .033     .29
 ∆Vt          .013     .015           -.03    .081    .012      .014      -.028     .081       .015     .017       -.03    .057
 N           1160                                     849                                      311




D.1 Robustness spatial
Table 14: Spatial error model estimation of increase in PV diusion on increase in share of
green votes.

                                                             SER               SER IV
                                                             (1)         (2)            (3)
                                                             ∆Vt    ∆FPV,t−1            ∆Vt
                                ∆FPV,t−1                0.177∗∗∗
                                                         (3.79)
                                ∆F̂PV,t−1                                           0.226∗∗
                                                                                     (2.13)
                                F̂PV,t−k−1                           1.686∗∗∗
                                                                      (10.56)
                                ∆ ln(GDPcap,t )          0.00168     0.000571       0.00159
                                                          (0.52)       (0.23)        (0.49)
                                Spatial
                                γ                        0.758∗∗∗     0.684∗∗∗     0.763∗∗∗
                                                          (31.68)      (16.58)      (32.52)
                              Final log-likelihood L      4239.3       4821.7       4233.9
                              N                            1158         1158         1158
                              t statistics in parentheses, built with Newey-West SE
                              NUTS-3 and time xed eects included
                              ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

                             Notes: Column (1) shows the estimates of the spatial error
                            model for rural regions. Column (2) presents the rst stage
                            (2SLS with spatial error model) estimates with the lagged
                            forecast instrument F̂PV,t−k−1 predicted according to the
                            Diusion Model from column (1) in Table 2 for rural regions
                            and according to the Diusion Model from column (2) in Ta-
                            ble 2 for urban regions. Column (3) shows the second stage
                            estimates (2SLS    with spatial error model) of the adoption rate
                             ∆F̂PV,t−1 on the increase in green votes (∆Vt ). The num-
                                         
                            ber of observations drops to 1158 (in contrast to Table 1) since
                            we analyze the balanced panel when including a spatial error
                            term.




                                                             44
D.2 Robustness lagging the predicted diusion level by two periods
This section contains a robustness check of the eect of PV adoption on green voting. Here,

we lag further the forecasts of the diusion equation (16) to instrument for adoption rates.

In particular, we use          F̂PV,t−2∗k−1   instead of     F̂PV,t−k−1     to instrument for          ∆FPV,t−1 .         Table 15

shows that lagging further the predicted diusion level does not diminish the magnitude or

the signicance of the estimated eect for rural areas.


Table 15: Instrument variable estimation of increase in PV diusion on increase in share of
green votes for rural regions.

                                         Diusion Model                                                    IV
                                                NLS                                            1st stage        2nd stage
                                                (1)                                               (2)              (3)
                                           FPV,t−2∗k−1                                        ∆FPV,t−1            ∆Vt
        a0                                     0.238∗∗∗                         ∆F̂PV,t−1                       0.177∗∗∗
                                                (10.74)                                                          (2.00)
        a1   (sun)                            -0.368∗∗∗                      F̂PV,t−2∗k−1      4.041∗∗∗
                                               (-10.88)                                         (8.03)
              sun2                            0.0148∗∗∗                   ∆ ln(GDPcap,t )      -0.00572         -0.000924
                      
        a2
                                                 (4.21)                                         (-1.01)           (-0.12)
              sun   3                          0.118∗∗∗
                      
        a3
                                                 (9.88)
        b   (speed)                            3.636∗∗∗
                                                (14.06)
        c   (inexion point)                  4.976∗∗∗
                                                (41.40)
        NUTS-3 xed eects                         No             NUTS-3 xed eects              Yes              Yes
        Time xed eects                           No               Time xed eects              Yes              Yes
        NUTS-1×Time xed eects                    No        NUTS-1×Time xed eects              No               No
        R2                                       0.768                                  R2      0.741             0.665
        Adj. R2                                  0.767                            Adj. R2       0.608             0.494
                                                                                        F        251.9            250.2
         Fa1 ,a2 ,a3 =0                         42.38                       FF̂PV,t−2∗k−1 =0    64.56
         p-valuea1 ,a2 ,a3 =0                 1.63e-25                p-valueF̂PV,t−2∗k−1 =0   5.54e-15
         N                                       849                                       N      849             849
         t statistics in parentheses, built with Newey-West-SE
         ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

        Notes: Column (1) shows the estimates of the Diusion Model (equation 16 but lagged by two periods)
       with non-linear least squares for rural regions. a1 , a2 , a3 aect the diusion ceiling, b the diusion speed and
       c the inexion point. Column (2) presents the rst stage (2SLS) estimates with the (by two periods) lagged,
       predicted instrument F̂PV,t−2∗k−1 for rural regions. The lagged instrument is predicted according to the
                                             
       Diusion Model      from column (1). Column (3) shows the second stage estimates (2SLS) of the adoption rate
        ∆F̂PV,t−1 on the increase in green votes (∆Vt ) for rural regions.
                     




                                                              45
D.3 Robustness synthetic instrument
This section contains another robustness check of the eect of PV adoption on green voting.

We rank the NUTS-3 regions according to their average solar radiation. Then, we compute

the synthetic diusion level of a region,            FPV, synthetic,t−k−1 ,    by taking the average value of

diusion,FPV,t−k−1 , in the four regions that are closest in the solar radiation ranking. We
then use FPV, synthetic,t−k−1 to instrument for ∆FPV,t−1 ,. FPV, synthetic,t−k−1 , is, by denition,

exogenous to variation in the adoption rate ∆FPV,t−1 in region i. Finally, we use the instru-

mented adoption rate to estimate the impact of adoption on green votes. Table 16 shows

that the synthetic instrument predicts diusion levels well and the estimate we obtain for

the eect of PV adoption rates on the increase in green votes is signicant and in line with

the OLS and IV estimates.


Table 16: Two-stage least squares estimation of increase in PV diusion on increase in share
of green votes using synthetic instrument.

                                                          (1)            (2)
                                                      ∆FPV,t−1          ∆Vt
                            ∆F̂PV,t−1                                  0.230∗∗
                                                                        (2.28)
                            FPV,   synthetic,t−k−1    2.951∗∗∗
                                                       (8.76)
                            ∆ ln(GDPcap,t )           -0.00599        0.000552
                                                       (-1.40)         (0.08)
                            R2                          0.662           0.644
                            Adj. R2                     0.491           0.463
                            F                           221.5           317.9
                            FInstrument=0               76.75
                            p-valueInstrument=0       1.23e-17
                            N                           1158            1158
                            DFM                          390             390
                            t statistics in parentheses, built with Newey-West SE
                            NUTS-3 and time xed eects included
                            ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                        46
D.4 Industrial vs. household systems
In this section, we conrm that the eect of household PV adoption on green voting is robust

to instrumenting adoption rates by our solar radiation instrument. We consider two possible

cutos for the maximum capacity of household PV systems, 30 kWp and 100 kWp .
                                                                                                                   50

      Column (1) in Table 17 shows the estimates of the diusion model (equation 16) with

non-linear least squares for household systems below 30 kWp . Column (1) in Table 18 shows

the same for household systems below 100 kWp .                        a1 , a2 , a3   aect the diusion ceiling,          b   the

diusion speed and               c   the inexion point. When studying household systems, all coecients

have the expected signs and are highly signicant at both cuto capacities.                                     The speed

of diusion,            b,   is positive and the inexion point lies between years 2001 and 2004.                             For
                                                 2
household systems, the high                  R       conrms the good t of the logistic model where cross-

regional variation in PV diusion is driven by solar radiation.


Table 17: Instrument variable estimation of increase in PV diusion on increase in share of
                                                                            
green votes for household PV systems                       below   30 kWp       in rural regions.

                                          Diusion Model                                                   IV
                                               NLS                                             1st stage        2nd stage
                                               (1)                                                (2)              (3)
                                         FPV≤30 kWp ,t−k−1                                 ∆FPV≤30 kWp ,t−1       ∆Vt
      a0                                      8.144∗∗∗               ∆F̂PV≤30 kWp ,t−1                          0.190∗∗∗
                                                (2.98)                                                           (2.19)
      a1   (sun)                             -22.83∗∗∗               F̂PV≤30 kWp ,t−k−1        1.199∗∗∗
                                               (-2.88)                                          (10.42)
            sun2                              21.19∗∗∗                  ∆ ln(GDPcap,t )        -0.00201         -0.00104
                    
      a2
                                                (2.76)                                          (-0.42)          (-0.13)
            sun   3                          -6.506∗∗∗
                    
      a3
                                               (-2.64)
      b   (speed)                             3.345∗∗∗
                                               (26.31)
      c   (inexion point)                   4.296∗∗∗
                                              (106.65)
      NUTS-3 xed eects                          No              NUTS-3 xed eects             Yes               Yes
      Time xed eects                            No                Time xed eects             Yes               Yes
      NUTS-1×Time xed eects                     No         NUTS-1×Time xed eects              No               No
      R2                                        0.788                                 R2        0.760             0.664
      Adj. R2                                   0.786                            Adj. R2        0.637             0.493
                                                                                       F        262.5             242.9
     Fa1 ,a2 ,a3 =0                           71.95             FF̂PV≤30 kW ,t−k−1 =0           108.6
                                                                           p
     p-valuea1 ,a2 ,a3 =0                   1.93e-41      p-valueF̂PV≤30 kW ,t−k−1 =0          2.24e-23
                                                                           p
     N                                         849                                  N             849        849
     t statistics in parentheses, built with Newey-West-SE
     ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

    Notes: Column (1) shows the estimates of the Diusion Model (equation 16) with non-linear least squares for
   household PV systems below 30 kWp in rural regions. a1 , a2 , a3 aect the diusion ceiling, b the diusion speed
                                             
   and c the inexion point. Column (2) presents the rst stage (2SLS) estimates with the lagged, predicted instru-
   ment F̂PV≤30 kWp ,t−k−1 for household systems in rural regions. The lagged instrument is predicted according to
   the Diusion Model from      column (1). Column (3) shows the second stage estimates (2SLS) of the adoption rate
    ∆FPV≤30 kWp ,t−k−1 on the increase in green votes (∆Vt ) for rural regions.
                           



 50
      Estimations with a smaller, less conservative cuto at 10 kWp conrm the shown results.




                                                               47
Table 18: Instrument variable estimation of increase in PV diusion on increase in share of
                                                                                   
green votes for household PV systems                             below   100 kWp       in rural regions.

                                               Diusion Model                                                    IV
                                                         NLS                                         1st stage         2nd stage
                                                         (1)                                            (2)               (3)
                                              FPV≤100 kWp ,t−k−1                                 ∆FPV≤100 kWp ,t−1       ∆Vt
   a0                                                8.583∗∗∗              ∆F̂PV≤100 kWp ,t−1                          0.170∗∗∗
                                                       (3.00)                                                           (2.21)
   a1   (sun)                                       -24.07∗∗∗              F̂PV≤100 kWp ,t−k−1       1.297∗∗∗
                                                      (-2.90)                                         (10.69)
         sun2                                        22.35∗∗∗                  ∆ ln(GDPcap,t )       -0.00197          -0.00107
                 
   a2
                                                       (2.78)                                         (-0.38)           (-0.14)
         sun 3                                      -6.865∗∗∗
               
   a3
                                                      (-2.66)
   b   (speed)                                      3.336∗∗∗
                                                      (26.40)
   c   (inexion point)                             4.310∗∗∗
                                                     (105.63)
   NUTS-3 xed eects                                    No              NUTS-3 xed eects             Yes               Yes
   Time xed eects                                      No                Time xed eects             Yes               Yes
   NUTS-1×Time xed eects                               No         NUTS-1×Time xed eects             No                No
   R2                                                  0.785                               R2          0.762             0.665
    Adj. R2                                            0.784                  Adj. R2                  0.641             0.494
    F                                                                             262.8                243.4
    Fa1 ,a2 ,a3 =0                          65.07                                 114.2
    p-valuea1 ,a2 ,a3 =0                   7.46e-38       p-valueF̂PV≤100 kW ,t−k−1 =0           2.13e-24
                                                                            p
    N                                         849                                     N             849               849
    t statistics in parentheses, built with Newey-West-SE
    ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

   Notes: Column (1) shows the estimates of the Diusion Model (equation 16) with non-linear least squares for household
  PV systems below 100 kWp in rural regions. a1 , a2 , a3 aect the diusion ceiling, b the diusion speed and c the inexion
                                

  point. Column (2) presents the rst stage (2SLS) estimates with the lagged, predicted instrument F̂PV≤100 kWp ,t−k−1
  for household systems in rural regions. The lagged instrument is predicted according to the Diusion Model          from
  column (1). Column (3) shows the second stage estimates (2SLS) of the adoption rate ∆FPV≤100 kWp ,t−k−1 on the
  increase in green votes (∆Vt ) for rural regions.


   Column (2) in Table 17 presents the rst stage (2SLS) estimates with the lagged predicted
                                                    
instrument           F̂PV≤30 kW        p   ,t−k−1       according to the diusion model from column (1) in Table 17.

The same applies to column (2) and column (1) in in Table 18 for a cuto capacity of 100 kWp .

The predicted instrument is strong for household systems at both cuto capacities.

   In column (3) of Table 17, we see the second stage estimates (2SLS) of the adoption rate
                                
 ∆F̂PV≤30 kW         p   ,t−1       for household systems on the increase in green votes                   (∆vt )     for a cuto

capacity of 30 kWp . We obtain an estimate very close to the full sample estimate (Table 2).

The estimated eect is slightly higher for systems with a capacity of at most 30 kWp than

for systems of at most 100 kWp (see column (3) in Table 18). In both cases, the association

of PV adoption on green voting is signicant with p-values smaller than one percent.




                                                                      48
E Further Tables on survey evidence
                                                Table 19: Descriptive statistics, SOEP.

                                                                         Mean        Std. Dev.       Min.   Max.
                                                ∆Greent                   .023          .15           0      1
                                                Solart−1                  .065          .25           0      1
                                                ∆Solart−3:t−1             .024          .15           0      1
                                                ∆Solart                    .01           .1           0      1
                                                ∆GreenSwitcht             .016          .13           0      1
                                                ∆GreenIntenst              .06          .43           0      5
                                                ∆Greent−3:t−1             .073          .26           0      1
                                                Internett−1                .43           .5           0      1
                                                P Ct−1                     .59          .49           0      1
                                                N                        69456




E.1 Removed PV systems
We exclude respondents who claim that they have removed a PV system. Figure 10 compares

the fraction of respondents who state that they removed a solar system in the SOEP data

set and those in the full sample of PV systems by transmission system operator. The gure

illustrates that, according to the SOEP data set, disproportionately many systems were

removed.
                                          20%




                                                                                                 ●
                                                                                                                    ●
                                                       ●   SOEP
                                                           Amprion
                                                           50 Hertz
                                                                                                             ●
                                                           TenneT
                                          15%




                                                           TransnetBW
                                                                                 ●
                Funinstalled Finstalled




                                                                   ●
                                          10%
                                          5%
                                          0%




                                                 ●



                                                2007              2008       2009             2010          2011   2012

                                                                                       Year

Figure 10: Rate of cumulative removed divided by cumulative installed PV systems by year.




                                                                                 49
E.2 Details on controls
All SOEP estimations include the following controls:


    •   A dummy for vocational education.                        The dummy is set to one if the respondent

        states that she completed one of the following (zero otherwise): Lehre (Apprentice-

        ship), Berufsfachschule, Gesundheitswesen (Vocational School), Schule Gesundheitswe-

        sen (bis 99) (Health Care School), Fachschule, Meister (Technical School), Beamtenaus-

        bildung (Civil Service Training), Sonstiger Abschluss (Other Training).


    •   A dummy for college education. The dummy is set to one if the respondent states that

        she completed one of the following (zero otherwise): Fachhochschule (Technical Col-

        lege), Universität, TH (University, Technical College), Hochschule im Ausland (College

        Not In Germany), Ingenieur-, Fachschule (Ost) (Engineering, Technical School (East)),

        Hochschule (Ost) (University (East)).


    •   A dummy for labor status. The dummy is set to one if the respondent states that she

        has a job (zero otherwise), in SOEP wording: Working (Working).



E.3 Presence vs. intensity of support for the Green Party
In this section, we conrm that the presence of support for the Green Party and the intensity

of support for the Green Party are higher for solar adopters than for non-adopters. We dene

∆GreenSwitcht         to be one if the individual states a change in support from another party to

the Green Party between years                 t−1    and   t   and it is zero in all other cases.     ∆GreenIntenst
is one if the individual states an increase in the intensity of support for the Green Party

between years      t−1     and     t   (and zero in all other cases). In column (3) of Table 20, we show

that under home owners the odds of becoming green are 1.4 times higher for solar adopters

than for non adopters. Similarly, in column (4) of Table 20, we illustrate that under home-

owners the odds of increasing the intensity of Green Party support are 1.7 times higher for

those who adopted a solar system compared to those who did not.


        Table 20: Odds ratio of solar level on change in green attitude (starting 2009).

                                        All                             Home owners            Non-home owners
                             (1)               (2)                (3)                 (4)     (5)            (6)
                      ∆GreenSwitcht ∆GreenIntenst ∆GreenSwitcht ∆GreenIntenst ∆GreenSwitcht ∆GreenIntenst
Solart−1                     1.228          1.430∗∗∗          1.471∗∗         1.714∗∗∗      0.355∗          0.524
                             (1.45)           (2.71)           (2.54)           (3.77)      (-1.79)        (-1.37)
ln (Real Incomet )           1.053            1.096            1.108            1.169        1.138          1.170
                             (0.71)           (1.35)           (0.90)           (1.53)       (1.22)         (1.57)
Observations                 45344            45835            24871            25293        19195          19413
DFM                            65               67               60               64           60             61
Final log-likelihood L      -4045.4          -5175.3          -2218.1          -2876.5      -1786.9        -2249.6
Exponentiated coecients; robust t statistics in parentheses clustered on households
Time∗NUTS-1, college, vocational degree and labor status dummies included
∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

                                                                50
E.4 IV
For the full sample (home owners and non-home owners), the eect from solar adoption

on becoming green is signicant for the probit and the two-stage least squares estimation

(columns (1), (2) and (3) in Table 21) but not for bi-probit (columns (4) and (5) in Table 21).

Table 22 illustrates that there is no eect from solar adoption on becoming green for non-

home owners.

Table 21: Estimation of solar level on change in green attitude (for home and non-home
owners).

                                              Probit                   IV (2SLS)                        Bi-Probit
                                                                1st stage      2nd stage          1st stage    2nd stage
                                               (1)                 (2)            (3)                (4)          (5)
                                             ∆Greent            Solart−1           ∆Greent        Solart−1     ∆Greent
             ˆ t−1
           Solar                                                                   0.544∗∗∗                      0.435
                                                                                    (3.29)                       (1.45)
           Solart−1                          0.159∗∗∗
                                              (2.64)
           Internett−1                                          0.0107∗∗                          0.0904∗∗
                                                                  (2.12)                            (2.13)
           P Ct−1                                               0.0125∗∗                          0.167∗∗∗
                                                                  (2.31)                            (3.19)
           ln (Real   Incomet )              0.0485∗            0.0488∗∗∗      -0.0259∗∗∗         0.431∗∗∗       0.0342
                                              (1.65)              (9.37)         (-2.71)           (10.03)        (1.06)
           ρ                                                                                               -0.139
           χ2ρ=0 (p-value)                                                                             0.898 (0.343)
           χ2Instruments=0 (p-value)                7.671 (0.000470)                                 18.66 (0.0000889)
           Observations                  45455           45538        45538                                45538
           DFM                             67              69           68                                  137
           Final log-likelihood L       -5143.7         -1177.1       7354.1                             -15503.0
           Robust t statistics in parentheses clustered on households
           Time∗NUTS-1, college, vocational degree and labor status dummies included
           ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


 Table 22: Estimation of solar level on change in green attitude (for non-home owners).

                                                      Probit                       IV (2SLS)
                                                                   1st stage              2nd stage
                                                        (1)           (2)                    (3)
                                                     ∆Greent      Solart−1                ∆Greent
                        ˆ t−1
                      Solar                                                                   -1.596
                                                                                              (-1.51)
                      Solart−1                        -0.270
                                                      (-1.41)
                      Internett−1                                  -0.00281
                                                                    (-0.65)
                      P Ct−1                                       -0.00424
                                                                    (-0.98)
                      ln (Real   Incomet )           0.0763∗      0.0157∗∗∗                   0.0275∗
                                                      (1.74)        (3.40)                     (1.76)
                      R2                                            0.0176                     -1.720
                      Adj. R2                                       0.0142                     -1.729
                      F                                              1.278                     2.123
                      Hansen J statistic                                                       0.0114
                      Hansen p-value                                                            0.915
                      Observations                19268       19832                            19832
                      DFM                           61          69                               68
                      Final log-likelihood L     -2242.2     11677.6                          -1840.3
                      Robust t statistics in parentheses clustered on households
                      Time∗NUTS-1, college, vocational degree and labor status dummies included
                      ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

                                                                  51
F Votes for money
F.1 Protability estimations
Table 23: Instrument variable estimation of increase in PV diusion on increase in share of
green votes (controlling for protability).

                                                          OLS                    IV
                                                                     1st stage        2nd stage
                                                           (1)          (2)              (3)
                                                           ∆Vt      ∆FPV,t−1            ∆Vt
                      ∆F̂PV,t−1                          0.281∗∗∗                      0.239∗∗
                                                          (5.14)                        (2.26)
                      F̂PV,t−k−1                                    1.394∗∗∗
                                                                      (10.03)
                       ∆pPV,t−1 /pPV,t−k−1 ∗ sun         0.00432     -0.00230      0.00345
                                                          (1.41)      (-1.44)       (0.88)
                       ∆ ln(GDPcap,t )                  -0.000405    0.00106      -0.000345
                                                          (-0.06)      (0.28)       (-0.05)
                       R2                                  0.643       0.753         0.643
                       Adj. R2                             0.461       0.626         0.460
                       F                                   244.9       251.9         251.3
                       FF̂PV,t−k−1 =0                                  100.7
                       p-valueF̂PV,t−k−1 =0                          2.40e-22
                       N                                   1160         1160         1160
                       t statistics in parentheses, built with Newey-West-SE
                       NUTS-3 and time xed eects included
                       ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

                      Notes: Column (1) presents the OLS estimates of the adoption rate
                     on the increase in green votes for rural regions    while controlling for
                     protability ∆pPV,t−1 /pPV,t−k−1 ∗ sun . Column (2) presents the
                                                                  
                     rst stage (2SLS)     estimates with the lagged, predicted instrument
                      F̂PV,t−k−1 for rural regions according to the Diusion Model from
                                   
                     Table 2 column (1) and according to the Diusion Model from Table 2
                     column (2) for urban regions. Column (3) shows the second stage es-
                     timates (2SLS) of the adoption rate ∆F̂PV,t−1 on the increase in
                     green votes (∆Vt ) for rural regions. In the rst and thesecond stage,
                     we control for protability ∆pPV,t−1 /pPV,t−k−1 ∗ sun .




F.2 Details on calculation of the prot to income ratios
We calculate the prot income ratio of PV systems as follows:

                                                     "    TX
                                                           =19           t
                                                                    1−v
           Prot Income Ratio = Capacity ∗                                     [ Feed-in Tari
                                                           t=0
                                                                    1+r
                                     ∗ # Full-load Hours ] − Investment per kWp                   (24)

                                             TX=19
                                                            !#
                                                      b
                                     ∗ 1+                     /(Household Income ∗ 20).
                                              t=0
                                                   (1 + r)t



                                                         52
See Table 24 for a denition of the parameters in expression (24), their value and source. In

this formula, both the costs and revenues from PV systems are proportional to the capacity

of the PV system. The rst term in the numerator is the present discounted value of revenues

per unit of capacity installed,
                                        51   while the second term is the cost of installing and operating

the PV system per unit of capacity. Because we want to evaluate the economic signicance

of the net revenues from PV systems, we scale them by the annual average household income

(DESTATIS, 2013a).


                           Table 24: Details on the calculation of PV prots.


                    Denition     Parameter                                Value         Source
             Household Income     Disposable income per household          Yearly        DESTATIS (2013a)
                                  [EUR]
                 Feed-in Tari    Level feed-in tari [EUR]                Yearly        EEG (2000, 2004, 2011)
           Investment per kWp     Investment costs [EUR]                   Yearly        2000-05: Janzing (2010);
                                                                                         2006-09: BSW-Solar (2012),
                                                                                         pvX (2012)
                            r     Weighted average cost of capital         5.0 percent   Cooley and Prescott (1995),
                                                                                         BMU (2011),Wirth (2013)
                           b      Yearly operating costs                   1.0 percent   BMU (2011), Wirth (2013)
                        T +1      Life span [years]                        20            EEG (2000, 2004, 2011), BMU
                                                                                         (2011),Wirth (2013)
                            v     Yearly decrease in revenue               0.5 percent   BMU (2011), Wirth (2013)
                     Capacity     Median capacity kWp                      4             KEK (2010), DESTATIS
                                                        
                                                                                         (2013b)
                                  90th percentile capacity kWp             6.4           KEK (2010), DESTATIS
                                                                
                                                                                         (2013b)
               Full-load Hours    Average [hours/year]                     900           BMU (2011), Wirth (2013)
                                  90th percentile [hours/year]             1110          DWD (2010), BMU (2011),
                                                                                         Wirth (2013)


       Revenues from PV systems are calculated by multiplying the level of the feed-in tari

times the number of full-load hours the system operates per year. The feed-in tari varies

with the year of installation of the system. The number of full-load hours depends on the

location and alignment of the installation.                    The average for the number of full-load hours

in Germany is 900 hours (Klaus et al., 2010; Wirth, 2013).                                We also consider a value for
                                                                     th
the full-load hours of 1,110, which is at the 90                          percentile for all the systems installed in

Germany through 2009.
                                 52

       The costs of installing PV systems dropped very signicantly between 2000 and 2009

(Janzing (2010) and BSW-Solar (2012)).                         In 2000, the cost of installing one kWp was

  51
       We use a standard value for the annual discount rate, 5 percent per year (e.g., Cooley and Prescott
(1995)).
  52
       These values come from combining data on solar radiation (DWD, 2010) with an optimistic performance
ratio of 85 percent. KEK (2010), BMU (2011) and Wirth (2013) conrm our calculations.




                                                               53
8,000 EUR while in 2009 it was approximately 4,000 EUR. In addition to the installation

costs, there is an annual cost of operation and maintenance (b) which amounts to 1 percent

of the cost of installation (BMU, 2011; Wirth, 2013).
                                               th
       We calculate the median and 90               percentile capacity installed in single household res-

idences in two steps.         First, we use the information from a roof census conducted by the

Karlsruher Energie- und Klimaschutzagentur (KEK) for Karlsruhe,
                                                                                       53   Baden-Württemberg,

to calculate the potential area in single household roofs to install PV systems.
                                                                                                    54   It follows

that the median potential area for PV installation in single household residences is 37 sqm,
                th
and the 90           percentile is 58 sqm. KEK (2010) documents that it is necessary to install be-

tween 8 and 10 sqm of solar modules to reach a capacity of 1 kWp . Based on this range, we

use a value of 9 sqm per kWp in our calculations. The calculation yields a median capacity
                                                                                 th
supported by single-family residences of 4 kWp , while for the 90                     percentile it is 6.4 kWp .




  53
       Karlsruhe is a 300,000 city (among the 25 largest in Germany) with a solar radiation similar to the
average in Baden-Württemberg and Bavaria (DWD, 2010), two of the regions with highest solar radiation
in Germany and where most German PV systems are installed.
  54
       In particular, the census used information on the roof inclination, area, orientation and solar radiation to
calculate the potential capacity of PV systems on each roof. The census covered 40,043 residential buildings
in Karlsruhe. DESTATIS (2013b) reports that in 2010 there were 17,631 single-family homes in Karlsruhe.
KEK does not identify which of the residential buildings correspond to single-family dwellings. We assume
in our calculations that they are the 17,631 residential buildings with smaller potential roof area for PV
installation.

                                                         54
