NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DID AGE DISCRIMINATION PROTECTIONS HELP OLDER WORKERS WEATHER
THE GREAT RECESSION?
David Neumark
Patrick Button
Working Paper 19216
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19216
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2013

Neumark is Chancellor’s Professor of Economics at UCI, research associate at the NBER, and research
fellow at IZA. Button is a Ph.D. candidate in Economics at UCI. We thank Jason Fichtner, Maureen
Pirog, and three anonymous reviewers for helpful comments. We are grateful to the Social Security
Administration (SSA), through a grant to the Michigan Retirement Research Center (MRRC), for financial
support. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
SSA or the MRRC. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of SSA, the MRRC, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by David Neumark and Patrick Button. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Did Age Discrimination Protections Help Older Workers Weather the Great Recession?
David Neumark and Patrick Button
NBER Working Paper No. 19216
July 2013, Revised December 2013
JEL No. J14,J26,J71,J78
ABSTRACT
We examine whether stronger age discrimination laws at the state level moderated the impact of the
Great Recession on older workers. We use a difference-in-difference-in-differences strategy to compare
older workers in states with stronger and weaker laws, to their younger counterparts, both before, during,
and after the Great Recession. We find very little evidence that stronger age discrimination protections
helped older workers weather the Great Recession, relative to younger workers. The evidence sometimes
points in the opposite direction, with stronger state age discrimination protections associated with
more adverse effects of the Great Recession on older workers. We suggest that this may be because
during an experience like the Great Recession, severe labor market disruptions make it difficult to
discern discrimination, weakening the effects of stronger state age discrimination protections, or because
higher termination costs associated with stronger age discrimination protections do more to deter hiring
when future product and labor demand is highly uncertain.
David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California at Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu
Patrick Button
Department of Economics, UCI
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
pbutton@uci.edu

I. Introduction
The Great Recession led to dramatic increases in unemployment rates and unemployment durations
for workers of all ages. But unemployment durations of older individuals rose far more dramatically
(Figure 1). The relative increase in unemployment durations for older workers indicates that older
individuals who became unemployed as a result of the Great Recession, or who are seeking new
employment, have had greater difficulty becoming re-employed.
The implication is that the effects of the Great Recession – which are likely to linger for many
years – may pose challenges to longer-term reforms intended to increase employment of older workers,
such as increases in the Full Retirement Age (FRA) for Social Security. Unemployed workers may be
more likely to claim Social Security benefits early (Hutchens, 1999), to forego returning to work, and to
seek support from other public programs to bridge the period until age 62 (Autor and Duggan, 2003; Dorn
and Sousa-Poza, 2010; Riphahn, 1997). Difficulties in getting hired seem likely to exacerbate these effects,
making it harder to return to employment, and forestalling efforts of older individuals to find the partialretirement jobs that they often use to bridge career employment to retirement (Cahill et al., 2005; Johnson
et al., 2009).
The increase in unemployment durations for older workers has led to speculation that age
discrimination plays a role.1 One possible perspective is a static one. In particular, there may be no change
in the tendency of employers to engage in age discrimination during and after the Great Recession.
Nonetheless, the large numbers of layoff that occurred may have put more older workers at risk of
experiencing age discrimination, leading to large increases in unemployment durations.
Alternatively, there may have been increases in discrimination. One possibility is that in slack
labor markets long queues of job applicants make it less costly for employers to discriminate, because they
are not passing up qualified older workers in favor of less-qualified younger workers; this argument goes
back to Ashenfelter (1970) and Freeman (1973), and was recently considered by Biddle and Hamermesh

1

See, for example, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/03/business/americans-closest-to-retirement-were-hardest-hitby-recession.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0, http://www.nytimes.com/2009/04/13/us/13age.html?pagewanted=all, and
http://www.cbsnews.com/2100-501445_162-4944750.html (all viewed April 16, 2013).

1

(2013). The data are consistent at least with rising perceived discrimination. As Figure 2 shows, based on
Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) claims filed with the U.S. Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (EEOC), that age discrimination claims rose sharply at the beginning of the Great
Recession, and have remained elevated. (Claims also rose during the earlier recession covered in this
graph, but subsequently fell more quickly.)
This basic hypothesis that age discrimination may have increased or become more important during
the Great Recession, and remained prominent, provides a simple motivation for our analysis. In particular,
many states offer stronger protections against age discrimination than the federal ADEA. Recent work
finds that these stronger state protections affect employment and Social Security benefit claiming of older
individuals, leading to more delaying of claiming benefits until the Full Retirement Age (FRA) and
increased employment prior to the FRA, in part because stronger age discrimination protections are
associated with increased hiring of older individuals into new jobs (Neumark and Song, forthcoming).
Motivated by this hypothesis and this other evidence, we ask whether these stronger age
discrimination protections at the state level also acted to protect older workers during and after the Great
Recession. Of course we do not actually know whether age discrimination was or is occurring. But we can
ask whether these state protections reduced the adverse effects of the Great Recession on older workers
relative to younger workers.
The reality can, however, be more complicated. The labor market turbulence that severe recessions
create may make it difficult to sort out the effects of age discrimination versus changing business
conditions on employment adjustments, reducing the likelihood that workers, attorneys, or the EEOC or
state commissions that enforce state anti-discrimination laws perceive age discrimination, or that claims of
age discrimination can prevail. These conjectures suggest that stronger age discrimination protections may
be particularly valuable during severe recessions, in which case older workers should have fared relatively
better during and after the Great Recession in states with stronger protections. On the other hand, the
diminished effectiveness of age discrimination protections during recessions could give rise to a situation in
which the Great Recession led to worse outcomes for older worker in states with stronger age

2

discrimination protections. One possibility is that because stronger state age discrimination laws impose
constraints on employers, there could be more “pent-up demand” for age discrimination in these states,
which firms act on during a sharp downturn. This type of story has parallels to economic research arguing
that firms may undertake more organizational restructuring or labor reallocation during economic
downturns (e.g., Aghion and Saint-Paul, 1998; Davis and Haltiwanger, 1990; Koenders and Rogerson,
2005).
An alternative story with the same consequence stems from past work thinking about the effects of
anti-discrimination laws on hiring and terminations. In particular, there has been some speculation that age
discrimination laws may reduce hiring of older workers. Why? In hiring discrimination cases it is difficult
to identify a class of affected workers, and for this reason and others economic damages can be much
smaller than in termination cases (Adams, 2004; Posner, 1995), reducing the effectiveness of these laws in
hiring cases. Moreover, because the ADEA makes it more difficult to terminate older workers (Neumark
and Stock, 1999), it may actually discourage their hiring (Bloch, 1994; Lahey, 2008a). This might be a
better argument for younger groups protected by anti-discrimination laws than for older workers, because
older workers are unlikely to stay with employers for a long time (in contrast, say, to a decision about
hiring a young black man protected by race discrimination laws). However, during and after the Great
Recession, product and labor demand may have been sufficiently uncertain that employers – in
contemplating hiring an older worker – perceived a stronger possibility of wanting to terminate that worker
before the worker voluntarily chose to leave. That is, in such a period it is more conceivable that stronger
age discrimination protections deterred hiring through the termination cost channel.
Because of these considerations, we present estimates that distinguish the effects of age
discrimination protections before, during, and after the Great Recession. To summarize the results, we find
some mixed evidence, but generally little evidence that stronger age discrimination protections helped older
workers weather the Great Recession, relative to younger workers. The negative conclusion is particularly
clear for men. Indeed for the subset of cases where we find evidence that stronger state age discrimination
protections mediated the effects of the Great Recession, they appear to have made things relatively worse

3

for older men. In particular, state age discrimination laws allowing larger damages than the federal ADEA
were associated with relatively higher unemployment rates of older men (by about one percentage point in
the period after the Great Recession) and longer unemployment durations of older men by about 5.5 weeks
during and after the Great Recession.
Similarly, in the period after the Great Recession older women in states with stronger age
discrimination protections in the form of applicability of state laws to smaller employers than those covered
by the ADEA experienced larger relative declines in the employment-to-population ratio (by about 1.5
percentage points), and where larger damages are allowed there was also a larger relative decline in the
hiring rate (by about 0.3 percentage point during the Great Recession, and 0.7 percentage point afterwards).
On the other hand, there is some evidence that in states with larger damages older women experienced
relatively smaller increases in unemployment durations during the Great Recession (by about 4.7 weeks) –
our one finding in which age discrimination laws appear to have protected older workers during the Great
Recession.
In general, then, older workers bore more of the brunt of the Great Recession in states with stronger
age discrimination protections. This contrasts with the pre-Great Recession period, when both types of
stronger state age discrimination laws were associated with better relative outcomes for older workers –
most consistently with regard to hiring rates. Thus, this evidence is consistent with the interpretation that in
normal times age discrimination protections help older workers, as suggested by past work (Neumark and
Stock, 1999; Adams, 2004). However, during an experience like the Great Recession age discrimination
may worsen either because severe labor market disruptions make it difficult to discern discrimination, so
that employer behavior in states with and without stronger age discrimination protections becomes more
similar, or higher termination costs associated with stronger age discrimination protections do more to deter
hiring of older workers when future product and labor demand is uncertain.
II. Related Research
There are four strands of related prior research. First, existing research provides ample evidence
that age discrimination remains pervasive (Neumark, 2008). Moreover, some research as well as a good

4

deal of conjecture suggests that age discrimination is particularly pervasive with regard to hiring (Adams,
2004; Hirsch et al., 2000; Hutchens, 1988; Lahey, 2008b; Posner, 1995).
Second, research establishes the effects of state and federal age discrimination laws in increasing
employment of protected older workers (Neumark and Stock, 1999; Adams, 2004), although not new hiring
(Adams, 2004; Lahey, 2008a). More recent evidence establishes that state age discrimination protections
that are stronger than the ADEA made it easier for workers affected by increases in the FRA to remain
employed, and finds evidence that these stronger state age discrimination protections were associated with
increased hiring of those affected by increases in the FRA (Neumark and Song, forthcoming).
Third, research has begun to look at some of the effects of the Great Recession on older workers.
Gustman et al. (2011) find little impact on flows into retirement, although their data go only through 2010
and the labor market for older workers worsened subsequently. Rutledge and Coe (2012) estimate the
effect of the national unemployment rate during the Great Recession on early Social Security benefit
claiming, estimating sizable impacts. Bosworth (2012) studies the impact of the Great Recession on
retirement decisions of older workers, contrasting the push into retirement from job loss with the increased
incentive to work longer stemming from financial losses, and concludes that the job loss effect in
increasing retirement is stronger.
Focusing on age differences, Munnell et al. (2009) note that the increase in unemployment rates for
older men relative to younger men was higher (for the December 2007-December 2008 period they study)
than in past recessions, when unemployment rates for younger men rose much more sharply than
unemployment rates for older men. They ascribe this to a decline in labor market protections for older
workers stemming from the decline in manufacturing as a share of employment – a sector with
considerable protections for more-senior workers – and a decline in the tenure of older workers relative to
younger workers – implying less of a specific human capital advantage for older workers that would make
firms less likely to lay them off.
Finally, although not the focus of their paper, Davis and von Wachter (2011) report estimates of the
earnings loss associated with displacement, disaggregated by age, as well as whether the displacement

5

occurred during a recession. They show that the losses are far bigger for older workers (aged 51-60),
especially in relative terms since their counterfactual no-displacement earnings are higher. However, the
relative difference between displacements occurring during recessions or not are more modest for older
workers than for younger workers (although relative to counterfactual earnings, the losses are larger for
older workers displaced in non-recessionary periods than for any of the younger groups during recessions).
Thus, the existing research suggests that there is age discrimination, that age discrimination laws
have some beneficial effects for older workers, and that the Great Recession adversely affected older
workers (perhaps more than other workers). However, there is no existing research that ties these
phenomena together to ask whether age discrimination laws mediated the effects of the Great Recession on
older workers.
III. Data
We rely primarily on two data sources: the Current Population Survey (CPS) and the Quarterly
Workforce Indicators (QWI). The CPS data provide estimates of the unemployment rate, the employmentto-population ratio, and unemployment durations, while the QWI data measure hiring.
Current Population Survey (CPS)
The CPS monthly micro-data were used to construct estimates by state, month, age group, and sex
of the unemployment rate, the employment-to-population ratio, and median unemployment duration.2
Population weights were used to create statistics that are representative of the populations within each state,
age group, sex, and month cell.
The age groups we use are younger (prime-age) individuals (ages 25 to 44) and older individuals
(55 and older). There are two issues here: the appropriate control group for older workers, and how to
define older workers. The federal ADEA applies to those aged 40 and over, while some state laws extend
to younger workers. In that sense our younger (25-44) age group is not the ideal control. However we
chose this age range to match what is available in the QWI data, which are reported aggregated by age. We
also regard it as relatively unlikely that there is much age discrimination faced by those aged 40-44. In
2

We do not use mean duration due to bias from top coding and changes to the top coding in January, 2011, from two
years to five (http://www.bls.gov/cps/duration.htm, viewed April 13, 2013).

6

defining older workers as 55 and older, we focus on ages for which policy reforms are attempting to
increase attachment to the labor force and lengthen work lives. However, we report sensitivity analyses
later using different age ranges to define both older and younger workers.
Table 1 presents summary statistics for the CPS from 2003 to 2011 by age group and sex, both
unweighted and then weighted by state population.3 The weighted estimates weight more populous states
more heavily, leading to estimates that are representative of the population. In the analysis that follows, we
focus on the weighted estimates for precisely this reason; they are more informative about what age
discrimination laws imply for the effects of the Great Recession on the U.S. labor force.4 We do, however,
also discuss the sensitivity of our results to using unweighted estimates.
Unemployment rates are higher for younger individuals than older individuals, for both men and
women (by 1.6 percentage points for men, and 1.8 percentage points for women, for the weighted
estimates), and unemployment rates are also lower for women (for both age groups). To some extent, the
former difference likely reflects the subjective nature of unemployment, as older individuals who cannot
find work may be more likely to leave the labor force. The employment-to-population ratios similarly
show that younger men and women are more likely to be employed. In contrast to unemployment rates,
durations are much higher for older than younger workers; median duration is higher by 7.8 weeks for older
men, and by 6.7 weeks for women (weighted estimates).
Quarterly Workforce Indicators (QWI)
For the QWI-based estimates of hiring, quarterly data by age, sex, and state were downloaded from
the Cornell University’s Virtual Research Data Center.5 The QWI provides data in age groups bins, so the

3

Most likely due to small sample sizes in some cells, in particular for older individuals in small states there are
occasionally cells with no unemployed individuals in the sample, in which case unemployment durations cannot be
estimated. For our sample period there are two cells of younger men, four cells of younger women, 200 cells of older
men, and 331 cells of older women with no unemployed observations, out of a total of 5,400 observations for each age
group. For these cases, we replace the missing unemployment duration variables with zeros. As we discuss later, the
results were insensitive to dropping these cells from the analysis.
4
Moreover, for the CPS data (although not the QWI data discussed below), we are using a sample of the population to
estimate the data for each state and month cell, which provides an econometric rationale for weighting to account for
the greater accuracy of the estimates from large cells.
5
The QWI provides data for all states and the District of Columbia, with the exclusion of Massachusetts. We use the
R2013Q1 release, as of May 7, 2013. By downloading data from the Cornell RDC website, we acknowledge support
by NSF Grant #SES-0922005 that made these data possible.

7

younger group is generated by summing ages 25 to 34 and ages 35 to 44, and the older group is generated
by summing ages 55 to 64 and ages 65 to 99, separately by sex as well. QWI data became available for
different states at different times, and are updated for each state at different times.6 Data from all states are
available from 2004:Q2 to 2011:Q4 for hires, and 2005:Q3 to 2011:Q4 if DC is included. We use 2004:Q2
to 2011:Q4 and exclude Washington, DC, to create a balanced panel.7 We divided hires by the average
employment level from the QWI in 2005, to normalize hires as rates rather than levels that would reflect
state population; we use employment levels for each of the two age groups, and for men and women
separately. We chose to use 2005 because it is the first full year for which the QWI data are available. We
wanted to fix the base year so that the denominator of the hiring rate would not be influenced by changes in
the employment level, which could itself be influenced by the variables we study. There is a slight risk that
the base becomes less accurate as time moves forward because of changes in the age composition of the
population. But given the relatively short sample period this seems unlikely to matter much.
Table 2 presents summary statistics for the QWI by age group and sex. Not surprisingly, the hiring
rate (as we define it) is higher for younger than for older workers, for both men and women. The hiring
rate is slightly higher for men than for women in both age groups.
The QWI also reports data on separations, but not the reason for the separation (see Abowd et al.,
2009, p. 208). Because we cannot distinguish quits and layoffs, it is difficult to interpret results for
separations. For example, if age discrimination laws are associated with fewer separations for older worker
during the Great Recession, is that because the laws lead to relatively fewer layoffs (i.e., more protection),
or because the laws make it harder to get hired (less protection), so people do not leave jobs as readily?
The latter may be more likely, since more separations are voluntary, although the effects we estimate could
still be driven by the involuntary separations.8

6

See http://www.vrdc.cornell.edu/qwipu/starting_dates.html (viewed May 20, 2013).
We confirmed that results using an unbalanced panel beginning in 2004:Q2 and the later data for DC were very
similar.
8
McLaughlin (1991) points out that the interpretation of quits as voluntary and layoffs as involuntary may not be
correct.
7

8

State Age Discrimination Laws
Data on age discrimination laws at the state level were compiled for Neumark and Song
(forthcoming) and are used here. In this paper we focus on two features of state age discrimination laws
that were found in that research to be effective: lower firm-size minimums for the applicability of state age
discrimination laws, and larger damages than under the federal ADEA.
The firm-size minimum specifies the minimum number of employees working at a firm for state
age discrimination laws to apply. Whereas the ADEA applies for firms with 20 or more workers, many
states have lower minimums, and some apply to firms that have only one employee. Age discrimination
laws are stronger – covering more workers – the lower this minimum firm size.9 Figure 3 shows the
minimum firm size required for each state as of 2003. Following Neumark and Song (forthcoming), we
categorize states as either having lower firm-size minimum (fewer than 10) or higher firm-size minimum
(10 or more).10
Larger potential damages are likely to arise when the state age discrimination laws go beyond those
of the federal law by providing compensatory or punitive damages, whether or not proof of intent or willful
violation is required. In 2003, there were 29 states (plus DC) with larger potential damage (henceforth
“larger damages”). These are shaded in Figure 3. There were no changes to this classification of states
during our sample period. Three states (AR, MS, and SD) do not have state age discrimination laws, and
these are put in the higher firm-size minimum group and classified as not having larger damages, because
in these states the ADEA prevails.

9

Neumark and Song (forthcoming) find that older workers tend to work at smaller firms, which could reinforce the
effects of these lower firm-size minimums. This is also echoed in 2011 data from the Small Business Administration,
which show that the percentage of workers aged 65 and over who work at firms with fewer than 50 employees jumps
markedly (by 10 percentage points), relative to those aged 55-64 (and also drops with age over other age ranges), and
correspondingly the percentage at firms with 500 or more employees drops by 9 percentage points. Data from 1995
cover firms with fewer than 25 employees and the result is starker. The percentage of workers at these small firms
around 25 percent for ages 25-64, and jumps to 44 percent for those aged 65 and older. (See U.S. Small Business
Administration, 2012.) Nonetheless, lower firm-size minimums are still irrelevant for many employers.
10
Since 2003, there have been few changes to these laws; the only change during our sample period is when Nebraska
changed its minimum firm size from 25 to 20 in 2007 and when Oklahoma changed it from 15 to one in December
2011. Since we classify states by having a lower firm-size minimum (fewer than 10) or higher firm-size minimum
(ten or more), only Oklahoma’s change requires recoding, and given that this change occurs in the final month of our
sample, we ignore it as it could only have a negligible effect.

9

IV. Methods
To infer how stronger state age discrimination laws mediated the impact of the Great Recession on
older versus younger workers, we need to isolate the effects of these laws from other influences that affect
outcomes for these two age groups in this period relative to the pre-recession period. These other
influences can include differences that persist over time and across states. For example, we clearly want to
control for average differences between, say, unemployment rates for older and younger workers. In
addition, there may be some age-related differences that vary across states, perhaps because of differences
in industrial composition, the actual demographic makeup of the broad age groups we use, and other policy
differences. Finally, it is possible that the economic shocks caused by the Great Recession differed for
older and younger workers nationally, as well as by state, or that policy changes adopted because of the
recession had differential impacts. With regard to shocks, for example, the industries that were more
affected by the Great Recession may have tended to employ a greater share of older workers in some states.
To control for these confounding factors, we employ a difference-in-difference-in-differences
(DDD) empirical strategy. In our case, we have four groups: (1) older individuals in states with stronger
laws, (2) older individuals in states with weaker laws, (3) younger individuals in states with stronger laws,
and (4) younger individuals in states with weaker laws. (We also have two classifications of stronger and
weaker laws, as noted above, but we ignore that variation for this discussion.) Moreover, we compare
differences between these four groups in periods during and after the Great Recession to before the Great
Recession – which is our third level of differencing – to ask how the impact of the Great Recession on
older versus younger workers depended on state age discrimination laws.
At the same time, as discussed in the Introduction, we are also interested in how labor market
outcomes differed between older and younger workers in the period prior to the Great Recession, and how
these differences were associated with stronger state age discrimination protections. The coefficients
needed to reveal these differences also emerge from the DDD estimates, unless we saturate the model so
much so as to absorb pre-recession differences by age and state; we discuss this point later, and present
results for the post-recession period with and without this added level of saturation.

10

For the statistical analysis, we need to specify pre- and post-Great Recession periods. Based on
NBER recession dates, we define the Great Recession as covering 2007:Q4 to 2009:Q2 for the quarterly
QWI data, and December 2007 to June 2009 for the monthly CPS data. We choose to consider the
recession period itself and the ensuing period separately, in part because (as we will see) the labor market
dynamics were quite different in these periods, and in part because labor market changes often lag the
output changes that define recessions.11 In addition, we might expect the data to be more reflective of the
influence of age discrimination laws (and other factors) in the period following the large layoffs that
occurred at the height of the Great Recession, when the very strong influence of product demand shocks
probably dominated everything else. This implies that we have two DDD estimators – one pertaining to the
Great Recession period relative to earlier, and the other pertaining to the post-Great Recession period
relative to the same pre-recession period.
We start with the basic DDD model that does not include other controls, except seasonal
adjustment:

[1]

×

where the subscript

3+

×

×

4+

indexes the age group – younger (25 to 44) or older (55+) – indexes the state, and

indexes time. The CPS data are monthly and extend from January 2003 to December 2011; the QWI data
are quarterly and cover 2004:Q2 to 2011:Q4.

is the outcome variable, OLD equals one for the older

group, and zero for the younger group, GR is a dummy for the time period of the Great Recession, AfterGR
is a dummy for the time period after the Great Recession, and LAW is a dummy variable, varying across
analyses for the two indicators we use of stronger state age discrimination laws. Rather than seasonally
adjusting the data used in the regressions, we simply include calendar-month (CPS) or calendar-quarter
11

For example, following the Great Recession, aggregate U.S. economic growth became positive in the third quarter
of 2009 (http://www.bea.gov/national/index.htm#gdp, viewed August 27, 2012), whereas job growth (as measured by
the payroll survey) did not become positive until the fall of 2010 (http://www.bls.gov/webapps/legacy/cesbtab1.htm,
viewed August 27, 2012). (It actually ticked up seven months earlier but then declined again slightly.)

11

(QWI) dummy variables – denoted SA in equation [1] – including their interactions with OLD, LAW, and
OLD × LAW, to approximate the seasonal adjustment made in the figures.
The DDD parameters, which of are of prime interest, are β10 and β11 ; the corresponding terms in
equation [1] are highlighted in boldface. β10 captures the effect of stronger age discrimination laws on
older versus younger workers during the Great Recession compared to before, while β11 captures the same
type of effect, but for the period after the Great Recession compared to the same pre-recession baseline.
For example, suppose our dependent variable is hiring rate. A positive coefficient on β10 (β11) would
indicate that age discrimination laws boosted the relative hiring of older workers during (after) the Great
Recession, relative to the period prior to the recession (which means 2003 through November 2007 for the
CPS data, and 2004:Q2-2007:Q3 for the QWI data).
As discussed earlier, we are also interested in β3, which captures the differential effect of stronger
age discrimination laws on older versus younger workers in the baseline period. As outlined in the
Introduction, estimates of this parameter can be helpful in putting a theoretical interpretation on the results.
At the same time, we might be less confident in a causal interpretation of this parameter because it is
identified solely from cross-sectional variation, by age, across states. For example, it is possible that
stronger laws prevailing in the baseline, pre-recession period were adopted in response to longer-term labor
market differences between older and younger workers. In contrast, with age discrimination laws almost
universally fixed over our sample period, the variation that identifies β10 and β11, which is induced by the
Great Recession, is quite clearly exogenous.
The identification argument regarding the DDD parameters is even more compelling in
specifications that more flexibly saturate the model. In all of our main tables, we also report estimates of
augmented versions of the DDD model that add a much greater level of saturation. First, we add a full set
of interactions between state dummy variables and dummy variables for each unique month (or quarter for
the QWI data) in the sample. And second, we add a full set of interactions between the age categories and
dummy variables for each month (quarter). Together, these interactions subsume the OLD, LAW, GR,
AfterGR, GR × OLD, AfterGR × OLD, GR × LAW, and AfterGR × LAW variables in equation [1]. These

12

interactions allow an arbitrary (and hence much less constrained) pattern of changes over time by state in
the dependent variables common to both older and younger workers, and allow for arbitrary changes by age
over time, common to all states. They also let the baseline intercept vary by state, rather than allowing only
a difference between states based on whether or not the state has a stronger age discrimination law. .
With these detailed interactions added, the three variables from equation [1] that remain are the two
triple interactions of most interest – GR × OLD × LAW and AfterGR × OLD × LAW. In addition, because
we have not added interactions between the dummy variables for age and state, the OLD × LAW interaction
also remains. We chose to focus on this saturated specification (without the age-by-state interactions) so
that we could still identify the baseline, pre-Great Recession difference between labor market outcomes for
older versus younger workers, because this difference is potentially informative about the effects of state
age discrimination laws in the pre-Great Recession period.12
In addition to the dummy variable interactions, we added two control variables. The first captures
extensions to the number of weeks of unemployment insurance (UI) available due to automatic increases
from the Extended Benefits program and due to the Emergency Unemployment Compensation program
created in June 2008. These UI increases are linked to decreases in the likelihood of exiting
unemployment, leading to higher unemployment rates (Rothstein, 2011) and longer unemployment
durations (Farber and Valletta, 2013). We use data on the number of extra UI weeks available from Farber
and Valletta (2013). To account for the lagged labor market effects of the extensions, we also include lags
of this variable through two years. This variable (and all its lags) are entered interacted with OLD.
Because we add them to the more-saturated model, the state-by-month (quarter) interactions subsume the
effects of these controls on the reference younger group.
The second control accounts for the possibility that the economic shocks caused by the Great
Recession had differential impacts on older and younger workers that vary by state. If we look at the
correlations across two-digit NAICS industries between employment growth during or after the Great
Recession, and the ratio of older to younger workers, the correlations for the period of the Great Recession
12

We also report the sensitivity of the estimated triple-difference parameters to adding the age by state interactions,
and find very similar results.

13

are –0.17 for men and −0.07 for women. For the period after the Great Recession the corresponding
correlations are 0.07 and 0.04.13 Thus, to a limited extent, industries hit hardest during the Great Recession
tended to employ relatively more older workers, and correspondingly the recovery was a bit stronger for
these industries.
We want this control to be an exogenous measure of the age composition of employment demand
shocks by state. We therefore construct it using information on national changes in employment coupled
with the baseline age composition of industry employment in each state, as explained in the Appendix A.
Again, this variable (and all its lags) are entered interacted with OLD in the more-saturated model.
With the interactions and controls added, our specification becomes (retaining the coefficient
subscripts from equation [1]):

[2]
×

3+

×

×

4+

where Time is a vector of month dummy variables for the CPS data, and quarter dummy variables for the
QWI data.
V. Results
Based on the arguments outlined above, our analysis focuses mainly on whether stronger state age
discrimination protections led to relatively better or relatively worse outcomes for older workers during and
after the Great Recession. We suggested reasons the effects could go in either direction. Our analysis is
also intended to provide information on whether stronger state age discrimination protections were
associated with relatively better labor market outcomes for older workers in the baseline period prior to the
Great Recession.
For each outcome, we first provide information on these questions by presenting a series of figures

13

For these calculations we wanted to measure growth between the same calendar months to avoid seasonality. We
therefore use December 2007 to December 2008 for the Great Recession and June 2009 to June 2011 for after. The
start dates we use (December 2007 and June 2009) match the start and end dates of the GR according to the NBER.

14

that show the levels and differences over time.14 For each outcome and for each type of law (lower firmsize minimum and larger damages), and for men and women, we present three figures. The first presents
seasonally-adjusted time-series estimates for each of the four groups defined by age and the age
discrimination laws. For the estimates derived from CPS data, the estimates are weighted by state
population using the provided population weights, so the estimates are representative of the population in
states with or without stronger laws. For the QWI data, the total number of hires are summed for states
with and without stronger laws, and then divided by the sum of employment in these states in 2005. These
estimates are implicitly weighted by state population, since larger states contribute more weight to the
calculation. The second figure shows the difference in the time-series between older and younger workers,
for states with stronger versus weaker laws. And the third figure shows the difference between these. The
latter figure provides a difference-in-difference estimate at each point in time, and comparing this across
time is then informative about how the influence of age discrimination laws on older versus younger
workers varied with the onset of the Great Recession.
We then turn to the regression estimates of equations [1] and [2], which enable a sharper focus on
the estimated differences between older and younger workers across states before, during, and after the
Great Recession, and permit statistical inference on the differences of interest. In addition, of course, the
regressions allow us to include the other control variables that could have differentially affected older and
younger workers across states, in ways that differ during and after the Great Recession compared to earlier.
Unemployment rates
The top panels of Figure 4 show that, for both sexes, and irrespective of state age discrimination
laws, unemployment rates – which were initially higher for younger than for older workers – rose
substantially more for younger workers during the Great Recession (indicated by the shaded region), and
remained elevated in relative terms for younger workers in the subsequent years shown. Thus, the Great
Recession did not increase unemployment rates as much for older workers as for younger workers.
The second row in the figure displays the differences between unemployment rates of younger and

14

In these figures, the data are seasonally adjusted using X-12-ARIMA.

15

older workers depending on whether there was a stronger state age discrimination law, to make it easier to
see how the Great Recession affected older versus younger workers in each group of states. As the lefthand panel shows, the relative increase in the unemployment rate of younger men during the Great
Recession was larger in states with a lower firm-size minimum. (The lines are in negative territory because
unemployment rates rose less for older than for younger workers.) However, the pattern reverses for some
part of the period after the Great Recession (most notably beginning in 2011), with – in relative terms –
larger increases in the unemployment rates of older men in the states with the lower firm-size minimum.
For women the pattern is different, with the main indication being that a lower firm-size minimum was
associated with relative increases in unemployment rates for older workers in the period after the Great
Recession. In the middle graphs, there is little indication that unemployment rates for older workers
relative to younger workers were much different in states with a lower firm-size minimum for its age
discrimination law in the pre-recession period.
These differences are displayed yet more clearly in the bottom row of the figure, which shows the
difference-in-differences estimates. In these panels a negative (positive) value indicates that a lower firmsize minimum is associated with smaller (larger) increases in unemployment among older workers relative
to younger workers. For men, therefore, we see that during the Great Recession the line is almost always in
negative territory, although often not by much. Subsequent to the Great Recession, however, the evidence
is less clear. And for women the sharpest result appears to be for the period after the Great Recession,
during which the stronger age discrimination protection is associated with higher relative unemployment of
older workers.
In Figure 5, we turn to the same kind of evidence, but focusing on the other type of age
discrimination protection – larger damages. Looking at the bottom row, for men there is no evidence that a
state age discrimination law allowing for larger damages resulted in relatively lower unemployment rates
for older workers. Before the Great Recession there is little apparent difference. During the Great
Recession the pattern is not consistent, although for most months the relative unemployment rate of older
workers was higher in states with larger damages. In the period after the Great Recession there is rather

16

clear evidence that relative unemployment rates for older workers were higher in states with larger damages
under state law – especially the first 18 months or so after the Great Recession ended. For women this
negative conclusion is even stronger. During most of the Great Recession period, and for the entire postrecession period, unemployment rates were higher for older relative to younger workers in the states with
larger damages. However, the size of the gap is generally smaller than for men.
Thus, for unemployment rates, there is relatively little indication that stronger state age
discrimination protections protected older workers from increases in unemployment in the periods during
and after the Great Recession. Indeed the most pronounced evidence appears to be in the opposite
direction, for women with regard to lower firm-size minimums, and for both men and women for the
stronger age discrimination protection in the form of larger damages.
The regression estimates, which are reported in Table 3, confirm these impressions. Columns (1)(4) report the results for lower firm-size minimums, and columns (5)-(8) for larger damages. In each case,
the first two columns are for men – showing first the estimates of equation [1], and then the more-saturated
model with controls (equation [2]) – and the next two columns are for women.
Turning to the estimates for firm-size minimums for men, first consider, as a preliminary, the
evidence regarding some of the main effects. The estimated coefficient for OLD shows that the baseline
(pre-Great Recession) difference in unemployment rates is about a percentage point lower for older men,
consistent with the usual finding that older workers have lower unemployment rates. The estimated
coefficients on GR and AfterGR measure the differences in unemployment rates for the reference group of
younger workers during and then after the Great Recession. The differences, of course, are sharp – about
two percentage points higher during the Great Recession, and five percentage points higher in the
subsequent period. The following two rows, for GR × OLD and AfterGR × OLD, show the differential
effects of the Great Recession on unemployment rates of older workers. Consistent with what we saw in
Figures 4 and 5, these estimates are negative, indicating that unemployment rates rose by less for older
workers – by about one percentage point.
The main estimates of interest are are highlighted in the top three rows. First, the estimated

17

coefficient of OLD × LAW is the baseline difference in the relative unemployment rate of older versus
younger workers in states with stronger age discrimination protection in the form of lower firm-size
minimum. The estimated coefficient is negative, consistent with a lower firm-size minimum lowering
unemployment of older workers in the pre-recession period; but the estimate (– 0.14) is small and
statistically insignificant.
Finally, the DDD parameters are the coefficients of GR × OLD × LAW and AfterGR × OLD ×
LAW. These estimates capture the differential effects of the Great Recession on unemployment rates of
older versus younger workers, across states with and without a lower firm-size minimum. These estimates
can be interpreted as estimating the change in the graphs in the bottom panels of Figure 4 from before the
Great Recession to two subsequent periods – the Great Recession itself, and the period following the Great
Recession. As column (1) shows, in this case both estimates are small and statistically insignificant,
paralleling the ambiguous evidence for men in Figure 4.
In column (2) we enrich the specification by adding the state-by-month and age-by-month
interactions, and the control variables for UI benefits and the age composition of demand. As explained
earlier, with the rich interactions added, only the coefficients of most interest – on OLD × LAW, GR ×
OLD × LAW, and AfterGR × OLD × LAW – are identified. As column (2) shows, the estimates are
essentially unchanged.
Note that the UI extensions were not associated with differential effects on unemployment rates of
older workers, as the estimated coefficient (0.01) is very small and insignificant.15 The estimated
coefficient of the age composition control interacted with OLD is negative but not significant; the negative
sign is as expected since this control indicates that national trends in industry employment were favorable
to older workers in the state, so their unemployment rate rose by less. The estimated sum of the
coefficients is very large, but recall that these coefficients reflect a one percentage point differential
15

If we simply add the controls to the specification in column (1) we can also identify the effect of the UI benefit
extensions on the reference younger group, and overall. In this case the sum of the main effects, which reflects the
effect of an extra week of benefits that lasts for two years, was 0.11 and statistically significant. To put the estimate in
perspective, it implies that a 9.1 week extension that lasted for two years would add one percentage point to the
unemployment rate. We do not necessarily attribute a causal interpretation to this because the extensions are triggered
by unemployment rates.

18

between the “predicted” growth rate of employment for older versus younger workers that persists for two
years. When we look at the individual regression coefficients, we find much smaller effects for any one
period, and the effects dissipate within two years.16
Column (3) and (4) turn to women. As shown in column (3), the baseline unemployment rate
difference between older and younger women – the coefficient on OLD – is larger than for men (1.62
percentage points, versus 1.03 for men). The estimated coefficients for GR and AfterGR show that the
Great Recession had a smaller impact on unemployment rates of younger women than of men.17 Turning to
the DDD estimates, the point estimates for the post-recession period (AfterGR) are larger for women than
for men, consistent with Figure 4. But the estimate is insignificant.
Overall, the estimates in columns (1)-(4) of Table 3 do not provide evidence that a stronger age
discrimination law in the form of a lower firm-size minimum for applicability of state laws had a
statistically significant impact on the influence of the Great Recession on the relative unemployment rates
of older men or women. Certainly there is no statistical evidence that this protection led to smaller
increases in unemployment; and indeed for women the point estimates for the period after the Great
Recession suggest if anything the opposite.
Columns (5)-(8) turn to the same specifications, but looking at stronger age discrimination
protections in the form of larger damages, for which Figure 5 gave a stronger indication that this age
discrimination protection worsened the effects of the Great Recession. Having gone through columns (1)(4) in detail, we can summarize the results in columns (5)-(8) – and the tables that follow– much more
quickly.
First, as reflected in the estimated coefficients of OLD × LAW, for the period prior to the Great
16

This is generally true for all of the models we estimate below, so we do not revisit this point, nor discuss the
estimated coefficients of these control variable more.
17
The difference in the early period, reflected in the estimated coefficient of GR, has been noted in the popular press,
which at the height of the Great Recession coined the label “mancession”
(http://economix.blogs.nytimes.com/2009/08/10/the-mancession/?_r=0, viewed October 18, 2013). This was
attributed to the overrepresentation of men in cyclically-sensitive industries like construction and manufacturing that
were hit hardest initially. However, when government employment fell later on as states faced budget crunches,
women experienced larger job losses (http://www.sfgate.com/news/article/Women-hit-harder-by-government-jobcuts-4322420.php, viewed October 18, 2013). (These overall trends are more likely to be reflected in the
unemployment rates for younger men and women, because their employment rates are so much higher.) Moreover, as
documented by Hoynes et al. (2012), the recovery has been stronger for men (which they term a “he-covery.”)

19

Recession there is no evidence of differential unemployment rates for older workers in states with larger
damages. For the post-Great Recession period, which is the period when unemployment rates peaked, the
DDD estimates of AfterGR × OLD × LAW for men are positive, very close in magnitude – around one –
and statistically significant at the one-percent level. For women the estimates are about 0.5 but not
statistically significant. For both men and women the estimated coefficients of GR × OLD × LAW, which
capture the differential effects in states with stronger damages during the Great Recession, are positive
(around 0.55 for men, and 0.37 for women), but not statistically significant. The positive estimates in all
cases imply that where state age discrimination laws provided for larger damages, unemployment rates for
older workers rose more in relative terms after the Great Recession; but the results are statistically
significant only for men in the period after the Great Recession, for whom there was a relative increase in
the unemployment rate of about one percentage point.
In contrast, the estimated coefficient of OLD × LAW is negative for men, consistent with larger
damages lowering unemployment of older workers prior to the Great Recession (by about 0.25 percentage
point), although recall our earlier caveat that identification of this parameter is less compelling. However,
the estimated differential for men prior to the Great Recession is not statistically significant, and the sign is
reversed for women. Nonetheless, the results for men are indicative of a particular pattern of results that
occurs in many of our analyses reported below – with stronger age discrimination protections associated
with better labor market outcomes for older workers prior to the Great Recession, but a relative worsening
of outcomes during and after the Great Recession.
Employment-to-population ratios
We next turn to similar analyses for employment-to-population ratios. The formats of the figures
for the graphical analysis and the tables for the regression analysis are the same, so we just highlight the
main results.
As shown in the middle panels of Figure 6, prior to the Great Recession the relative employmentto-population ratios of older versus younger workers were higher in states with a lower firm-size minimum,
consistent with a lower firm-size minimum improving labor market outcomes for older workers; for

20

women, however, this is less pronounced. The bottom figure for men does not show much of a change in
relative employment-to-population ratios during or after the Great Recession, whereas for women the
relative advantage of older workers eroded during these periods.
Looking at larger damages, in Figure 7, the results are similar for women. Older women show
persistently higher employment-to-population ratios in states with larger damages, although this does
diminish during the Great Recession. For men, there is no clear difference before the recession, and if
anything a worsening in the relative employment-to-population ratios of older men in the period
immediately subsequent to the Great Recession.
The regression estimates in Table 4 do not provide much statistically significant evidence of
differences in the effects of the Great Recession on employment-to-population ratios associated with
stronger age discrimination protections (the estimated coefficients of GR × OLD × LAW and AfterGR ×
OLD × LAW). The one exception is in column (4), where the estimate implies that where firm-size
minimums are smaller, women’s employment-to-population ratio fell by relatively more (a sizable 1.98
percentage points) in the period after the Great Recession. In addition, the point estimates for the
corresponding specification for women for larger damages (column (8)), for both during and after the Great
Recession, are sizable and in the same negative direction, suggesting employment-to-population ratio lower
by 1.22 percentage points during the Great Recession, and 0.73 percentage points afterward. In contrast,
the estimated coefficients of OLD × LAW are almost always positive, although also not statistically
significant. Nonetheless, like some of the preceding results for men for unemployment rates, the estimates
are in the direction of age discrimination protections improving outcomes for older workers in the prior
baseline period but leading to worse labor market outcomes during or after the Great Recession.
Unemployment durations
Figure 8 does not provide clear evidence one way or the other that lower firm-size minimums for
state age discrimination laws were associated with differential changes in median unemployment durations.
Looking at the bottom panels, for men there is no change apparent during the Great Recession, and in the
period after the Great Recession the direction of the difference varies. For women, there is more of an

21

indication that during the Great Recession a lower firm-size minimum was associated with smaller relative
increase in median durations for women, but the period after the Great Recession the figure shows perhaps
some increase in durations.
In Figure 9, the pre-Great Recession period exhibits significantly shorter durations for older men in
states with larger damages; echoing earlier results, this is consistent with stronger laws helping these older
workers in the pre-recession period. For women, however, there is no evidence of such an effect in this
period. Turning to the period of the Great Recession and afterward, for men the shorter durations of older
workers evaporate, whereas for older women things seem to move in the opposite direction, with the data
pointing to a decrease in durations during the Great Recession.
Table 5 presents the corresponding regression evidence for median unemployment durations. In
columns (1)-(4), there is no statistically significant evidence that a lower firm-size minimum was associated
with differential changes in unemployment durations of older men or older women; the estimated
coefficients of GR × OLD × LAW and AfterGR × OLD × LAW are never statistically significant. As in the
figures, the sign pattern is not consistent, with a lower firm-size minimum associated with longer spells for
older men relative to younger men during the Great Recession, and shorter spells afterwards, whereas for
women the signs are reversed.
For larger damages, as reported in columns (5)-(8), the evidence is stronger (and more consistent
for each gender, although different between men and women). For men, the estimates suggest that larger
damages resulted in longer durations of unemployment for older men relative to younger men by about five
to 5.5 weeks both during the Great Recession and after the Great Recession. The estimates are generally
statistically significant at the one-, five-, or 10-percent level depending on the specification and period. For
women the signs are reversed, indicating that larger damages were associated with smaller increases in
unemployment durations – by about three to four weeks – during and after the Great Recession; only the
estimated coefficient for GR × OLD × LAW in the less-saturated model is statistically significant. Note
also that larger damages under state law were associated with shorter unemployment durations for men in
the period prior to the Great Recession (OLD × LAW); the estimates are sizable (about 4.5 weeks) and

22

statistically significant.
Hiring
Turning to hiring in the QWI data, the top panels of Figure 10 show the dramatic drop in hiring
rates for all groups, in both sets of states, during the Great Recession, and how these hiring rates have
remained low. The middle panels show that the hiring rates for older men and women have been
consistently higher in states with a lower firm-size minimum, consistent with this type of age
discrimination boosting hiring of older workers. However, the middle and bottom panels do not reveal
much evidence of a change in the relative hiring rate of older workers during or after the Great Recession.
For larger damages – shown in Figure 11 – there is a more-pronounced change for women, with the hiring
rate for older women relative to younger women dropping during the Great Recession and afterwards, and
remaining low.
Similarly, in the regression estimates in Table 6 only for women and larger damages (column (8))
is there statistically significant evidence that stronger state age discrimination protections are associated
with differential changes in hiring rates. Paralleling Figure 11, the evidence indicates that larger damages
under state law were associated with relative declines in the hiring of older women in the period after the
Great Recession, with the significant estimate in column (8) indicating that the hiring rate declined by 1.07
percentage points in relative terms. Note also that in both tables, and for men as well as women, the OLD ×
LAW coefficient estimates are positive and (almost always) significant, indicating that stronger age
discrimination protections were associated with higher hiring rates of older relative to younger workers in
the period prior to the Great Recession, by between 1.6 and 2.3 percentage points for men, and between 1.1
and 1.5 percentage points for women.18

18

As noted earlier, the QWI data on separations are harder to interpret, because they reflect both voluntary and
involuntary separations. We report estimates of the same models for separations in Appendix Table B1. We find that
the estimated coefficients of OLD × LAW are always positive and almost always significant, ranging from about a 1.1
to 2.4 percentage point higher separation rate. If this reflects greater ease of getting hired for older workers, as
suggested by the estimates in Table 6, then these positive estimates likely reflect a higher level of voluntary
separations among older workers where age discrimination laws are stronger, presumably because it is easier for them
to find new jobs. The differential effects of stronger age discrimination protections during and after the Great
Recession are generally small and insignificant. The one exception is in column (8), where we find that the separation
rate for older women in the period after the Great Recession rose by significantly less in states with larger damages

23

Statistical power
We have found some evidence that state age discrimination laws were associated with statistically
significant, differential effects of the Great Recession on older workers. This tells us that some of the
changes that actually occurred were large enough relative to the precision of our estimates to be detected.
But it is fair to ask, with respect to the many cases where we do not find statistically significant evidence,
whether this is likely because the effects if they occurred were small, or because our empirical analysis
does not detect as significant estimates that are substantively large.
We do not have any other evidence of expected effects with which to compare our estimated
standard errors. We do have some much earlier evidence (from the 1960s) on the effects of age
discrimination laws on employment rates of older men, which point to increases of about four percentage
points for men aged 60 or 65 and older (Adams, 2004). So it might be reasonable to suppose that, as an
upper bound, a stronger age discrimination law could boost employment by four percentage points. There
is no evidence on which to ask how the extent of discrimination might vary over the business cycle.
However, if we think of this question in the sense of a recession changing the effectiveness of age
discrimination laws, then presumably this effect has to be smaller than four percentage points. And we
have to recognize that this four percentage point figure does not come from the types of variation in age
discrimination laws we study in the current period, but rather comes from the advent of these laws. Hence,
we should probably start with a maximum effect below four percentage points. Suppose we cut it in half,
to two percentage points. Then the question becomes whether we can detect as significant changes of two
percentage points (or less). For employment rates, the standard errors on our DDD estimates in the moresaturated models in Table 4 range from about 1.0 to 1.6 for men, and 0.7 to 1.0 for women. So on this
score the answer is that we might be able to detect reasonably-sized effects of the business cycle on age
discrimination for older women, although perhaps less so for older men. Nonetheless, the point estimates
for older men are small, so that the issue is not large standard errors.

(by 1.06 percentage points). This estimate is almost exactly the same as the corresponding estimate for hires, and so
might be interpreted as also reflecting changes in voluntary quits – lower, in this case, because hiring is also lower.

24

There is no existing research on which to draw for thinking about such calculations in the context
of the other outcomes we study. Nonetheless, we can still think about the standard errors for these
estimates for other outcomes and whether they would allow us to detect as statistically significant what
seem to be meaningful differences. For unemployment rates, the DDD standard errors for the moresaturated models are around 0.4-0.8, meaning that we can detect as significant differences of about 0.8-1.6
or higher. For unemployment durations, the standard errors hover around 2.5. Our sense is that given the
dramatic movements in unemployment rates and durations during and after the Great Recession, this
implies that we could detect as significant relative changes across states that are meaningful, and
conversely that the magnitudes of changes that would not be detected as significant (like changes of two
weeks duration) would not be very substantive anyway. The same goes for hiring rates, which are in the
10-25% range pre-Great Recession but drop by as much as 10 percentage points. The standard errors for
hiring rates in the more-saturated models are about 0.4 to 0.8, suggesting that we would detect meaningful
differences in changes in hiring rates.
Robustness analyses
We next explore the robustness of the key results to variations in the specification, sample, or
estimation. We report these for the five cases where we found significant differences in the relative effect
of the Great Recession on older workers between states with stronger age discrimination protections and
states without them. These five cases are: the effects of larger damages on unemployment rates of men; the
effects of lower firm-size minimums on employment-to-population ratios of women; the effects of larger
damages on unemployment durations of both men and women; and the effects of larger damages on hiring
rates of women.19
The results of many of these analyses are reported in Table 7. In each case, the change indicated in
the panel heading is relative to the baseline specification from the even-numbered columns of Tables 3-6,
for which the estimates are repeated in panel (a). First, in panel (b) we report estimates of the specification

19

We also estimated all of these robustness analyses for the other specifications for which we did not find any
significant estimates of the DDD interactions GR × OLD × LAW and AfterGR × OLD × LAW, and verified that in no
case did these additional analyses discussed below lead to significant estimates.

25

that adds state-by-age interactions, allowing more flexibly for differences in the age profile for each
outcome by state. In this case, we saturate the model as fully as we can with regard to all the two-way
interactions in equation [1]. The coefficient of OLD × LAW is no longer identified, but the two key triple
interactions are. Comparing panels (a) and (b), the point estimates are qualitatively similar, although two
of the estimates become smaller and statistically insignificant – for the effect of lower firm-size minimums
on the employment-to-population ratio of women in the period after the Great Recession, and for the effect
of larger damages on the hiring rate of women in the same period. The estimated effects on unemployment
rates and durations remain very similar, however.
Second, we noted earlier that in a small number of cases there were no unemployed workers in the
cell so we set median duration to zero. However, this may not accurately reflect median durations in the
population in the state and month. Hence, in panel (c) we instead drop these cells from the analysis, and reestimate the models for unemployment duration. The estimates are scarcely affected, and indeed the
estimate for men for the period after the Great Recession becomes more strongly significant.
In panel (d) we drop the weighting by state population. The signs of the estimates are unaffected,
but there are some changes in the magnitudes and most of the estimated effects during and after the Great
Recession become insignificant; in quite a few cases standard errors are larger. However, as argued earlier
the weighted estimates are more representative of what happened to workers during and after the Great
Recession.
Finally, in panels (e)-(g) we use different age groups to define older and younger. In the first
panel, we restrict the older group to 55-64 rather than 55+, and in the last two panels we reports results for
the alternative definitions of the older group, but a more narrowly-restricted younger group (25-34 instead
of 25-44). We view the results as qualitatively very similar. And more generally, across all of the
robustness analyses we have explored this is true, although as Table 7 shows some analyses – especially
not weighting – lead to far fewer significant results.
We did two other analyses for which results are available from the authors upon request. First, the
results are robust to using different lag lengths for the UI benefit and age composition controls (through one

26

year or three years) as well as dropping these controls. Second, using a smaller firm-size minimum (fewer
than six instead of fewer than 10 workers), we found qualitatively similar results, although the significant
effect for the employment-to-population ratio for women becomes insignificant. This confirms the findings
throughout the paper that the results for larger damages are stronger and more robust than the results for
firm-size minimums.
Finally, in addition to the specifications discussed thus far, we estimated specifications where we
substituted for GR and AfterGR a continuous measure that captures the severity of the Great Recession
within each state. This effectively means that we interact GR and AfterGR with a variable with only crossstate variation, allowing for differential impacts of the Great Recession across states, in both the
recessionary period itself and afterwards. The approach and results are described in an appendix available
from the authors. The results were very similar, in part because using an exogenous measure of the
severity of the Great Recession across states – generated from national industry employment trends coupled
with the workforce composition of each state by industry, age, and sex, related to our age composition
control – does not generate much variation in the strength of the Great Recession across states. Using a
measure like changes in unemployment rates would exhibit more cross-state variation, but would
potentially be endogenous with respect to the effects of state age discrimination laws, if these laws affect
the evolution of unemployment for a given economic shock.
Falsification test
Finally, Table 8 reports results for a falsification test. The principal concern is that underlying
trends could drive the results. Even though our estimated model is quite saturated, we of course cannot
control for arbitrary changes in age profiles over time that vary by state (age-by-state-by-time interactions).
So it is possible that changes in age profiles of our outcomes over time that are correlated with differences
in state age discrimination laws could spuriously generate our results.
We test for this alternative explanation of our results by choosing a recent, sustained period without
a recession and asking if changes over this period generate similar findings. We consider the same five
outcomes and state age discrimination protections as in Table 7, using the period 2002-2007, and treating

27

2005-2007 as the “recession.” This was actually a period of continuous expansion, so if we were to find
similar estimates to what we actually find comparing the Great Recession period to the prior period, we
would conclude that the results were instead driven by trends in labor market outcomes by age that happen
to coincide with which states have stronger age discrimination protections. Note that in this case there is
only one “recession” period, post-2004, and hence only one triple interaction, which we denote Post-2004
× OLD × LAW. Also, we can only do this for the CPS data because the QWI data for many states do not
go back far enough.
As the estimates in panel (b) show, there is no evidence of changes over time in labor market
outcomes of older relative to younger workers associated with stronger age discrimination protections that
mimics what we find comparing the Great Recession period to the earlier baseline period. We do find a
positive and significant effect coefficient on Post-2004 × OLD × LAW for the employment-to-population
ratio for women, for lower firm-size minimums. But note that this is the opposite sign from the original
results, and hence does not point to a trend toward lower employment of women in states with this stronger
age discrimination protection. The one estimate that parallels the original results is the estimated
coefficient of OLD × LAW in column (3). However, this captures the same shorter durations of
unemployment for older men in non-recessionary periods that we found before, rather than changes over
time. Thus, the estimates in Table 8 rule out spurious trends driving the results.
Summary of results
Table 9 summarizes the results across both the main results in Tables 3-6, and the other robustness
analyses we have reported. We report results for the two key triple-difference coefficients, of GR × OLD ×
LAW and AfterGR × OLD × LAW, which measure the change in labor market outcomes for older versus
younger workers, during or after the Great Recession relative to the prior period, in states with stronger age
discrimination protections versus other states. We also report on the estimates for OLD × LAW, which
captures the difference in outcomes, associated with stronger protections, for older versus younger workers
prior to the Great Recession. To provide a summary of the evidence across all of the analyses we have
discussed, the table reports the mean and range of estimates, as well as the number that are (1) significant

28

(at the 10-percent level) and positive, (2) significant and negative, and (3) insignificant.
Looking first at the triple-difference results, in the second and third rows, for men, we simply find
no evidence that stronger age discrimination protections helped older workers weather the Great Recession,
relative to younger workers. When there is evidence that stronger state age discrimination protections
mediated the effects of the Great Recession, they appear to have made things relatively worse for older
workers. This is the case for unemployment rates and unemployment durations, for larger damages under
state law. These estimates suggest that state age discrimination laws allowing for larger damages were
associated with higher unemployment durations of men by on average about 5.5 weeks, and unemployment
rates that were higher by about one percentage point (in the post-Great Recession period). These estimates
indicating that age discrimination protections led to a worsening of unemployment-related outcomes for
older workers, relative to younger workers, are shaded in the table.
For women, the evidence is more mixed. On the one hand, there is some evidence that stronger age
discrimination protections in the form of larger damages were associated with relatively smaller increases
in the unemployment durations of older women during the Great Recession – by about 4.7 weeks; the one
cell in the table reflecting this positive effect is indicated by a box. On the other hand, we also find that in
the period after the Great Recession, in states with lower firm-size minimums for age discrimination laws
older women had larger declines in their employment-to-population ratio (by about 1.5 percentage points),
and in states with larger damages they had bigger declines in their hiring rate (by about 0.3 percentage
point during the Great Recession, and 0.7 percentage point afterwards); these estimates indicating adverse
effects of stronger age discrimination protections on older women are also shaded.
Thus, between the results for men and women, there is very little evidence that stronger state age
discrimination protections helped older workers weather the Great Recession. Moreover, there is quite a bit
of evidence that the opposite occurred, with older workers bearing more of the brunt of the Great Recession
in states with stronger age discrimination protections.
Finally, turning to the OLD × LAW estimates, there is some evidence that stronger age
discrimination protections helped older men and women in the period prior to the Great Recession. The

29

evidence consistent with stronger protections helping older workers in the period prior to the Great
Recession is statistically significant for unemployment durations and larger damages for men – indicating
unemployment durations shorter by about 4.4 weeks – and for hiring rates for women – with hiring rates
higher by about 1.0 percentage points. (Indeed Table 6 reports a higher hiring rate for older men and
women in the pre-recession period in nearly all specifications.)
Putting the evidence together, in some cases we find that stronger age discrimination protections
helped older workers in the pre-Great Recession period, but led to a relative worsening of outcomes for
older workers during and after the Great Recession. The estimates where we find at least some statistically
significant evidence of this pattern – i.e., significant beneficial effects pre-Great Recession, and adverse
effects during or after the Great Recession – are boldfaced in Table 9. This evidence arises for
unemployment durations for men, and for hiring rates for women – in both cases for larger damages. And
the point estimates are rather sizable and consistent with this pattern for unemployment durations and larger
damages for women as well.20 Moreover, the pre- and post-Great Recession magnitudes are often similar
but opposite signed, suggesting that the advantages these protections offered prior to the Great Recession
may have been largely eroded during and after the recession.
VI. Conclusions and Discussion
We generally do not find evidence that stronger state age discrimination protections helped older
workers weather the Great Recession, and for some outcomes older workers appear to have experienced
relatively worse outcomes from the Great Recession in states with stronger age discrimination protections.
The effects are often sizable; for example, state age discrimination laws allowing larger damages were
associated with longer unemployment durations of older men by about 5.5 weeks during and after the Great
Recession. In contrast, there is some evidence that – for these same outcomes, in particular unemployment
20

There is an issue largely confined to the legal literature about the ADEA not helping older women so much because
of the inability of women to file “intersectional” discrimination claims based on age and sex, since age and sex are
covered in separate statutes (the ADEA and Title VII). Song (2013) discusses this work and presents some evidence
that the initial enactment of the ADEA and earlier state age discrimination laws did not do as much to help older
women. However, there is not related information on these kinds of differential effects in the contemporaneous
period. And unless age discrimination is worse for women than for men, the inability to file intersecting claims does
not disadvantage women. As the results indicate, we do not find much evidence of weaker effects of age
discrimination laws for women.

30

durations and hiring rates – stronger age discrimination protections helped older men and women in the
period prior to the Great Recession. The combined estimates often suggest that the advantages these
protections offered prior to the Great Recession were largely eroded during and after the recession. In
general, this evidence emerges much more strongly for larger damages than for smaller firm-size
minimums. This is perhaps not surprising given that larger damages apply to all workers potentially
affected by an age discrimination claim, and directly affect the financial incentives to pursue a claim,
whereas firm-size minimums apply to a subset of workers and firms.
This evidence is consistent with some of the theoretical conjectures we outlined in the introduction.
In particular, the evidence that older workers fare better in normal times in states with stronger age
discrimination protections is consistent with the idea that these protections help combat discrimination, and
in general help older workers, and consistent with past work finding that the initial adoption of state and
then federal age discrimination laws laws increased employment of older men (Neumark and Stock, 1999;
Adams, 2004).
The evidence on unemployment durations and on hiring in particular is inconsistent with some
claims in the literature that age discrimination laws generally worsen outcomes for older workers by
deterring hiring, perhaps most plausibly because these laws increase termination costs. In particular, Lahey
(2008a) studies the period pre- and post-1977. Looking first at the period prior to 1978, before the
Department of Labor gave administrative responsibility for ADEA enforcement to the EEOC, Lahey finds
little evidence that state laws affected older workers. In the subsequent period, however, her evidence
suggests that state age discrimination laws reduced employment of white men older than 50 years of age
(measured as weeks worked), and made such individuals more likely to be retired. She also finds lower
hiring rates for older workers where there are state laws. She suggests that because the ADEA makes it
difficult to terminate the employment of older workers, it ends up deterring their hiring in the first place.
This may be exacerbated by the difficulty of bringing suit over age discrimination in hiring, as discussed in
the Introduction.

31

Lahey’s post-1978 results are identified from cross-state variation in laws, and outcomes for older
versus younger workers. In that sense, these results are similar to our results for the pre-Great Recession
period, and therefore point in the opposite direction. However, there are some important differences and
other explanations.
First, Lahey studies the existence of state laws, rather than focusing on the features of these laws
that we study. What the existence of a state law per se does is lengthen the statute of limitations for filing a
claim. However, Neumark and Song (forthcoming) found, in a different type of study of the effects of state
age discrimination laws on older workers, that variation in the length of statutes of limitations has no effect.
Second, we have found, as explained above, that during recessions age discrimination laws may have more
adverse effects on older workers. Lahey’s post-1977 period extends to 1991, and hence includes two
recessions in the early 1980s – during the second of which unemployment rates went higher than in the
Great Recession – and another in the early 1990s. Thus, the results may not in fact be so contradictory,
even putting aside the issue that the studies do not look at the same features of age discrimination laws.
Moreover, Lahey potentially ignores evidence that may point to a different conclusion (see
Neumark, 2008, for a full discussion). If we accept Lahey’s characterization of the federal law as
becoming effective (to a large extent) in 1978, then there is an important source of identifying information
that she ignores – namely, the extension of the federal law to states without anti-discrimination laws in
1978. Her evidence shows that between the pre-1978 and the 1978-1991 period, hours of workers over 50
years of age fell in states with their own age discrimination laws, relative to the states without their own
laws; there was no such change for those aged 50 and under. This implicit difference-in-difference-indifferences estimator suggests that when the federal law became more effective, employment of those older
than age 50 increased precisely in the states that did not previously have state age discrimination laws.
This would seem to imply that age discrimination laws – at least the federal law – boosted employment of
protected workers, contrary to Lahey’s conclusions.
In other words, Lahey is identifying the effects of age discrimination laws from cross-state
variation only – the post-1978 differences between states with and without their own laws. But if the more

32

important source of variation in the strength of age discrimination laws is the strengthening of the federal
legislation post-1978, and the “catching up” of the strength of age discrimination laws in states that did not
previously have their own laws to those that did, then the evidence points in the opposite direction. Thus,
our view is that while there have been conjectures that age discrimination laws can be harmful to older
workers, and in particular reduce hiring, there is little compelling evidence to support this conjecture, and
some evidence to the contrary. That said, this is still an unsettled question that deserves more research.
Moreover, our findings suggest that the effectiveness of age discrimination laws, and in particular
their effects on hiring of older workers (which we presume can be reflecting in hiring rates or
unemployment durations), vary over the business cycle. We discussed why the effectiveness of age
discrimination laws could decline during severe downturns like that experienced during the Great
Recession – and why stronger age discrimination protections could increase discrimination against older
workers relatively more during such downturns. We suggested this could occur because in states with
stronger laws, there is more pent-up demand to shed older workers, and this can be done during recessions
when age discrimination protections are less effective. Alternatively, stronger protections against
discrimination could increase termination costs, and these could weigh more heavily on hiring decisions
during and after a severe recession when product and hence labor demand is uncertain. Naturally it would
be useful to try to distinguish among these alternative explanations; but that awaits further research.
These conjectures about the decreased effectiveness of age discrimination protections in the
aftermath of a severe recession have potentially different implications for longer-run consequences. If
indeed all that happens is that there are temporary increases in age discrimination, then we might anticipate
that as the economy recovers the stronger state age discrimination protections – in the states that have them
– would again become more effective at improving labor market outcomes for older workers.21 On the
other hand, the longer-term effects of even temporary changes in behavior could turn out to be adverse. If

21

A reviewer pointed out one possible exception. Specifically, the “pent-up” demand for discrimination could be
driven by moral hazard among older workers protected by stronger age discrimination laws, leading them to become
less productive. If such behavior led to, for example, lower human capital investment or deterioration of work habits
that would deter their hiring even when age discrimination protections are strong, then older workers terminated
during or after the Great Recession could face persistently worse employment prospects going forward.

33

it did indeed become easier to discriminate against older workers during the Great Recession and its
aftermath, or employers were more likely to engage in such discrimination, then the extended periods of
unemployment, especially among workers near retirement ages, might have hastened transitions out of the
labor market and toward retirement, permanently lowering employment among older workers. In that
sense, the longer-run implications can be more severe than for temporary increases in discrimination after
recessions against other, generally younger groups, for whom permanent labor force exit is much less
likely. If in fact increases in age discrimination during and after sharp economic downturns do spur labor
force exit, then given the imperative to extend work lives of older individuals, it may be useful to think
about whether it is possible to modify age discrimination protections so that they maintain their
effectiveness in times of economic turbulence. It is not obvious what kinds of changes might meet this
objective, since inferring discriminatory patterns in terminations or other dimensions of employer behavior
will inevitably be difficult when labor markets are more volatile. But making it more difficult to
discriminate in hiring, in general, could help.

34

Appendix A: Age Composition Control
Let subscripts s index states, a age group, g gender, and k industries. Denote by SEasgk03 total
employment for age group a, in state s, for gender g and industry k, in the baseline year of 2003. Denote by
AEkt national (aggregate) employment in each period t in industry k, and denote by AEk03 national
employment in industry k in 2003. Then we can predict the variation in employment by age and state (and
gender) based solely on national employment changes subsequent to the base year of 2003, by applying the
national changes to the baseline composition, as in
[A.1]
We use non-seasonally adjusted monthly employment at the national level, by two-digit NAICS
code, to measure AEkt and AEk03, both of which come from the Quarterly Census of Employment and
Wages (QCEW). We use the QWI to measure SEagsk03, since the QWI allows for employment estimates by
age and state (and gender).22 For each k, the ratio in equation [A.1] captures the growth in industry k over
time. This is multiplied by the mean employment of age group a and gender g in state s and industry k in
2003.23 This weights the national industry employment growth by the age and gender composition of
employment in that industry in the baseline year. Our resulting age composition control is the difference in
predicted employment growth rates between the two age groups, or:

[A.2]

CCgst captures the difference in predicted growth rates, which can be interpreted as demand
influences, between older and younger employment within the state (for each sex separately). If both
groups are hit with the same predicted shock, then CCgst equals zero. In contrast, for example, CCgst will be
positive if the shock that hit the state in period t was more favorable to employment of older workers. This

22

Since Massachusetts is missing from the QWI, we use CPS data to generate SEask03 for the state.
Since Arizona has missing data in 2003, we use 2004 as the baseline for that state. See
http://www.vrdc.cornell.edu/qwipu/starting_dates.html (viewed May 20, 2013).
23

35

variable should be exogenous to state economic developments that could in turn be influenced by age
discrimination laws, since it is based on national employment growth with fixed weighting during the base
year of 2003.

36

References
Abowd, John M., Bryce E. Stephens, Lars Vilhuber, Fredrik Andersson, Kevin L. McKinney, Marc
Roemer, and Simon Woodcock. 2009. “The LEHD Infrastructure Files and the Creation of the
Quarterly Workforce Indicators.” In Timothy Dunne, J. Bradford Jensen, and Mark J. Roberts
(Eds.), Producer Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, pp. 149-230.
Adams, Scott J. 2004. “Age Discrimination Legislation and the Employment of Older Workers.” Labour
Economics, Vol. 11, pp. 219-41.
Aghion, Philippe, and Gilles Saint-Paul. 1998. “Virtues of Bad Times: Interaction Between Productivity
Growth and Economic Fluctuations.” Macroeconomic Dynamics, Vol. 2, pp. 322-44.
Ashenfelter, Orley S. 1970. “Changes in Labor Market Discrimination Over Time.” Journal of Human
Resources, Vol. 5, pp. 403-30.
Autor, David H., and Mark G. Duggan. 2003. “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in
Unemployment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 118, pp. 157-205.
Biddle, Jeff, and Daniel S. Hamermesh. 2013. “Wage Discrimination Over the Business Cycle.” IZA
Journal of Labor Policy, Vol. 2, http://www.izajolp.com/content/pdf/2193-9004-2-7.pdf (viewed
Nov. 25, 2011)..
Bloch, Farrell. 1994. Antidiscrimination Law and Minority Employment. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Bosworth, Barry. 2012. “Economic Consequences of the Great Recession: Evidence from the Panel Study
of Income Dynamics.” Center for Retirement Research at Boston College Working Paper No.
2012-4.
Cahill, Kevin E., Michael D. Giandrea, and Joseph F. Quinn. 2005. “Are Traditional Retirements a Thing
of the Past? New Evidence on Retirement Patterns and Bridge Jobs.” Boston College Working
Papers in Economics, No. 626.
Davis, Steven, and John Haltiwanger. 1990. “Gross Job Creation and Destruction: Microeconomic
Evidence and Macroeconomic Implications.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 5, pp. 123-68.
Davis, Steven, and Till M. von Wachter. 2011. “Recessions and the Cost of Job Loss.” NBER Working
Paper No. 17638.
Dorn, David, and Alfonso Sousa-Poza. 2010. “ ‘Voluntary’ and ‘Involuntary’ Early Retirement: An
International Analysis.” Applied Economics, Vol. 42, pp. 427-38.
Farber, Henry and Robert Valletta. 2013. “Do Extended Unemployment Benefits Lengthen
Unemployment Spells? Evidence from Recent Cycles of the U.S. Labor Market.” IZA Discussion
Paper No. 7347
Freeman, Richard B. 1973. “Changes in the Labor Market for Black Americans, 1948-72.” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 6, pp. 67-131.
Gustman, Alan L., Thomas L. Steinmeier, and Nahid Tabatabai. 2011. “How Did the Recession of 20072009 Affect the Wealth and Retirement of the Near Retirement Age Population in the Health and
Retirement Study?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 17547.
Hirsch, Barry T., David A. Macpherson, and Melissa Hardy. 2000. “Occupational Age Structure and
Access for Older Workers.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 53, pp. 401-18.
Hoynes, Hilary, Douglas L. Miller, and Jessamyn Schaller. 2012. “Who Suffers During Recessions?”

Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 26, pp. 27-47.
Hutchens, Robert. 1999. “Social Security Benefits and Employer Behavior: Evaluating Social Security
Early Retirement Benefits as a Form of Unemployment Insurance.” International Economic
Review, Vol. 40, pp. 659-78.
Hutchens, Robert M. 1988. “Do Job Opportunities Decline with Age?” Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, Vol. 42, pp. 89-99.
Johnson, Richard W., Janette Kawachi, and Eric K. Lewis. 2009. “Older Workers on the Move:
Recareering in Later Life.” AARP Public Policy Institute, Washington, D.C.
Koenders, Kathryn, and Richard Rogerson. 2005. “Organizational Dynamics Over the Business Cycle: A
View on Jobless Recoveries.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, Vol. 87, pp. 555-79.
Lahey, Joanna. 2008a. “State Age Protection Laws and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act.”
Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 51, pp. 433-60.
Lahey, Joanna. 2008b. “Age, Women, and Hiring: An Experimental Study.” Journal of Human
Resources, Vol. 43, pp. 30-56.
Munnell, Alicia H., Dan Muldoon, and Steven A. Sass. 2009. “Recessions and Older Workers.” Boston
College, Center for Retirement Research, Issue in Brief No. 9-2.
McLaughlin, Kenneth J. 1991. “A Theory of Quits and Layoffs with Efficient Turnover.” Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 99, pp. 1-29.
Neumark, David. 2008. “The Age Discrimination in Employment Act and the Challenge of Population
Aging.” Research on Aging, Vol. 31, pp. 41-68.
Neumark, David, and Joanne Song. “Do Stronger Age Discrimination Laws Make Social Security
Reforms More Effective?” Forthcoming in Journal of Public Economics.
Neumark, David, and Wendy A. Stock. 1999. “Age Discrimination Laws and Labor Market Efficiency.”
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 107, pp. 1081-125.
Posner, Richard A. 1995. Aging and Old Age. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Riphahn, Regina T. 1997. “Disability Retirement and Unemployment – Substitute Pathways for Labour
Force Exit? An Empirical Test for the Case of Germany.” Applied Economics, Vol. 42, pp. 55161.
Rothstein, Jesse. 2011. “Unemployment Insurance and Job Search in the Great Recession.” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 143-210
Rutledge, Matthew S. and Coe, Norma B. 2012. “Great Recession-Induced Early Claimers: Who are
They? How Much Do They Lose?” Center for Retirement Research at Boston College Working
Paper No. 2012-12.
Song, Joanne. 2013. “Falling Between the Cracks: Discrimination Laws and Older Women.” Unpublished
paper, UCI.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2006. “Current Population Survey Design and Methodology.” Technical
Paper 66, October 2006. Available at www.census.gov/prod/2006pubs/tp-66.pdf (viewed April
16, 2013).
U.S. Small Business Administration. 2012. “The Small Business Economy, 2012.” Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office.

Figure 1: Median Unemployment Durations, in Weeks
A. Men
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Age 25-44

Age 55+

B. Women
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Age 25-44

Age 55+

The shaded areas indicate official dates according to the NBER. Each series was generated using the
Current Population Survey “Basic Monthly” micro-data. State estimates were calculated and weighted by
state population to generate nationally representative estimates. Each series was seasonally adjusted and
smoothed using X-12-ARIMA.

Figure 2: ADEA Claims Filed with the EEOC, Annual
30,000

25,000

20,000

15,000

10,000

5,000

0

Shaded areas are recessions based NBER dates. Data are annual and based on the government fiscal year.
They are assigned to March of each year, which is midway through the fiscal year. Source:
http://eeoc.gov/eeoc/statistics/enforcement/adea.cfm (viewed November 23, 2013)

Figure 3: Minimum Firm Size Required and Potential Size of Damages under State Age Discrimination
Laws

See Neumark and Song (forthcoming) for additional details on age discrimination laws by state.

Figure 4: Unemployment Rates by Age and Firm-Size Minimum, Men (Left) and Women (Right)

See the notes to Figure 1 above. States are divided into two groups based on the minimum firm size
required for age discrimination laws to apply. See Figure 3 for additional details on age discrimination
laws by state. Each series in the top figure is generated using the Current Population Survey “Basic
Monthly” micro-data, using the provided population weights, and seasonally adjusted and smoothed using
X-12-ARIMA.

Figure 5: Unemployment Rates by Age and Size of Damages, Men (Left) and Women (Right)

See notes to Figure 4. The only difference is that larger damages than the federal law are used instead of
firm-size minimum.

Figure 6: Employment-to-Population by Age and Firm-Size Minimum, Men (Left) and Women (Right)

See notes to Figure 4.

Figure 7: Employment-to-Population by Age and Size of Damages, Men (Left) and Women (Right)

See notes to Figures 4 and 5.

Figure 8: Median Unemployment Duration by Age and Firm-Size Minimum, Men (Left) and Women
(Right)

See notes for Figure 4.

Figure 9: Median Unemployment Duration by Age and Size of Damages, Men (Left) and Women (Right)

See notes to Figures 4 and 5.

Figure 10: Hiring Rates by Age and Firm-Size Minimum, Men (Left) and Women (Right)

See the notes to Figure 4. States are divided into two groups based on the minimum firm size required for
age discrimination laws to apply. Each series in the top figure is generated by summing QWI estimates of
the number of hires per quarter, by age group, in states of each law group, and dividing the entire series
by the average employment across all those states in 2005. For most of the hiring series, X-12-ARIMA
smooths using the two nearest quarters, resulting in 2004:Q2 being missing. However, when the data are
smoother it can use fewer quarters to smooth, so in some cases data for 2004:Q2 are available.

Figure 11: Hiring Rates by Age and Size of Damages, Men (Left) and Women (Right)

See notes to Figure 4. The only difference is that larger damages than under the federal law are used
instead of smaller firm-size minimum.

Table 1: Summary Statistics for CPS Data

Unemployment rate
Employment-topopulation ratio
Median unemployment
duration

Unemployment rate
Employment-topopulation ratio
Median unemployment
duration
Compositional control
Extra UI weeks
available

Younger (25-44) Men
Unweighted Weighted
Min
6.1
6.5
0
(3.1)
(3.1)
85.8
85.2
67.9
(4.5)
(4.2)
13.6
14.2
0
(9.7)
(9.2)
Older (55+) Men
Unweighted Weighted
Min
4.4
4.9
0
(2.8)
(2.8)
44.2
43.3
23.4
(5.7)
(4.6)
21.5
22.0
0
(21.1)
(18.9)
Controls
0.009
0.007
-1.7
(0.379)
(0.348)
19.4
21.1
0
(25.5)
(27.4)

Max
21.1
97.1
104

Max
24.1
62.4
119

1.4
73

Younger (25-44) Women
Unweighted Weighted
Min
5.6
6.1
0
(2.5)
(2.5)
72.4
70.5
54.7
(5.3)
(4.6)
13.0
13.8
1
(9.1)
(8.8)
Older (55+) Women
Unweighted Weighted
Min
3.9
4.3
0
(2.5)
(2.4)
33.0
31.8
17.4
(5.0)
(3.8)
19.8
20.5
0
(21.4)
(19.4)
Controls
-0.002
-0.002
-2.0
(0.386)
(0.395)
19.4
21.1
0
(25.5)
(27.4)

Max
19.2
87.9
64

Max
18.3
50.5
119

1.7
73

Standard deviations are in parentheses. These statistics were generated for each state and month from 2003 to 2011 using the Current
Population Survey monthly micro-data, weighting by population. There are 5,508 observations for each age group and sex. The
weighted estimates use state population estimates generated from the CPS. These are generated by summing the provided population
weights for all observations for each state, yielding estimates that are based on Census population estimates and projections (U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2006, Section 10-8). For median durations, for some small cells there are no unemployed workers; in these
cases the missing observations are coded as zeros. Data are not seasonally adjusted.

Hires

Hires

Table 2: Summary Statistics for QWI Data, Hires Relative to 2005 Employment (%)
Younger (25-44) Men
Younger (25-44) Women
Unweighted Weighted Min Max
Unweighted Weighted Min
19.3
18.5
8.7 40.7
17.6
17.3
8.3
(4.9)
(4.2)
(4.2)
(3.9)
Older (55+) Men
Older (55+) Women
Unweighted Weighted Min Max
Unweighted Weighted Min
13.8
13.6
6.6 33.4
11.9
12.1
6.1
(3.6)
(3.0)
(3.2)
(2.9)

Max
37.3

Max
27.4

Standard deviations are in parentheses. These statistics were generated for each state, quarter, and age group from
2004:Q2 to 2011:Q4 using the Quarterly Workforce Indicators. There are 1,519 observations for each age group
and sex. The weighted estimates use Census-based population estimates to weight each state observation by state
population. Data are not seasonally adjusted.

Table 3: Estimated Impacts of Lower Firm Size Minimums and Larger Damages on Unemployment Rates
Men
Women
Men
Women
Firm-Size Minimums
Larger Damages
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
OLD × LAW
-0.14
-0.15
0.08
0.09
-0.26
-0.26
0.14
0.15
(0.23)
(0.32)
(0.30)
(0.43)
(0.19)
(0.27)
(0.24)
(0.38)
GR × OLD × LAW
-0.14
-0.08
-0.18
-0.23
0.56
0.54
0.38
0.36
(0.41)
(0.51)
(0.44)
(0.58)
(0.40)
(0.54)
(0.46)
(0.64)
AfterGR × OLD × LAW
0.14
0.18
0.35
0.47
0.96***
1.03***
0.42
0.51
(0.41)
(0.55)
(0.48)
(0.71)
(0.26)
(0.38)
(0.54)
(0.79)
***
***
***
***
OLD
-1.03
…
-1.62
…
-0.94
…
-1.67
…
(0.20)
(0.28)
(0.14)
(0.19)
LAW
0.45
…
0.01
…
0.62**
…
0.35
…
(0.30)
(0.31)
(0.25)
(0.25)
***
*
***
Great Recession (GR)
1.92
…
0.64
…
2.04
…
0.92***
…
(0.58)
(0.33)
(0.26)
(0.28)
AfterGR
4.95***
…
3.71***
…
5.13***
…
3.82***
…
(0.72)
(0.45)
(0.34)
(0.37)
**
***
GR × OLD
-0.82
…
0.12
…
-1.30
…
-0.26
…
(0.37)
(0.36)
(0.34)
(0.37)
AfterGR × OLD
-1.28***
…
-0.94**
…
-1.85***
…
-1.00**
…
(0.35)
(0.40)
(0.19)
(0.49)
GR × LAW
0.10
…
0.39
…
-0.09
…
-0.04
…
(0.63)
(0.40)
(0.45)
(0.38)
AfterGR × LAW
0.08
…
-0.10
…
-0.19
…
-0.26
…
(0.81)
(0.57)
(0.81)
(0.57)
Cumulative effect, 2 years:
UI benefit extensions
…
0.01
…
-0.02
…
0.00
…
-0.01
(weeks) × OLD
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03)
Age composition control
…
-2.00
…
5.12
…
-2.09
…
-0.79
× OLD
(12.43)
(21.17)
(11.97)
(23.39)
Includes full set of state ×
month and age × month,
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
interactions
Standard errors, clustered at the state level, are in parentheses. *, **, and *** mean statistically significant from zero at the 10%,
5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The sample period is 2003-2011. There are 11,016 observations. All estimates are weighted
by state population. The unemployment rate and other proportion variables in following tables are on a scale of zero to 100. For
both the unemployment insurance and compositional controls, both the contemporaneous variable and 24 months of lags are
included in the even-numbered columns. In these columns, the addition of state-by-month fixed effects removes GR, AfterGR,
LAW, GR × LAW, and AfterGR × LAW, and age-by-month fixed effects remove OLD, GR × OLD, and AfterGR × OLD. In the
regressions, rather than using seasonally-adjusted data, the models include calendar-month dummy variables. To allow for
different seasonality by age group and type of state (defined by age discrimination law) – to better match the separate seasonal
adjustment we do in the figures – these are also entered interacted with LAW, OLD, and LAW × OLD. (Prior to forming these
interactions, the calendar-month dummy variables are demeaned, so that the estimated coefficients of LAW, OLD, and LAW ×
OLD reflect differentials evaluated at the sample means.)

Table 4: Estimated Impacts of Lower Firm Size Minimums and Larger Damages on Employment-to-Population Ratios
Men
Women
Men
Women
Firm-Size Minimums
Larger Damages
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
OLD × LAW
1.55
1.66
0.34
-0.08
0.18
0.26
1.39
0.77
(1.32)
(1.89)
(1.48)
(1.67)
(1.02)
(1.50)
(1.14)
(1.37)
GR × OLD × LAW
0.40
0.07
-0.16
-0.52
-0.41
-0.44
-0.87
-1.22
(1.09)
(1.45)
(0.55)
(0.75)
(0.87)
(1.18)
(0.51)
(0.73)
AfterGR × OLD × LAW
-0.22
-0.25
-0.71
-1.98**
0.27
0.12
0.17
-0.73
(1.00)
(1.56)
(0.58)
(0.81)
(0.75)
(1.04)
(0.65)
(1.02)
***
***
***
***
OLD
-45.47
…
-40.86
…
-44.58
…
-41.60
…
(1.28)
(1.18)
(0.77)
(0.66)
LAW
-0.52
…
0.94
…
-0.76
…
-1.52
…
(0.58)
(1.42)
(0.58)
(1.20)
***
***
GR
-2.24
…
-0.29
…
-2.26
…
-0.31
…
(0.66)
(0.35)
(0.45)
(0.39)
AfterGR
-6.18***
…
-3.34***
…
-6.47***
…
-3.26***
…
(0.94)
(0.30)
(0.44)
(0.47)
***
***
***
GR × OLD
3.47
…
2.39
…
4.00
…
2.90***
…
(1.04)
(0.49)
(0.67)
(0.42)
AfterGR × OLD
6.67***
…
5.62***
…
6.33***
…
5.05***
…
(0.96)
(0.45)
(0.57)
(0.57)
GR × LAW
0.01
…
0.44
…
0.04
…
0.43
…
(0.70)
(0.44)
(0.58)
(0.47)
AfterGR × LAW
0.02
…
0.81*
…
0.43
…
0.60
…
(1.02)
(0.43)
(0.73)
(0.54)
Cumulative effect, 2 years:
UI benefit extensions
…
-0.06
…
0.05
…
0.02
…
0.01
(weeks) × OLD
(0.06)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.10)
Age composition control
…
17.94
…
208.47***
…
22.19
…
188.18**
× OLD
(27.64)
(72.66)
(31.16)
(76.22)
Includes full set of state ×
month and age × month,
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
interactions
See notes to Table 3.

Table 5: Estimated Impacts of Lower Firm Size Minimums and Larger Damages on Median Unemployment
Durations
Men
Women
Men
Women
Firm-Size Minimums
Larger Damages
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
***
***
OLD × LAW
0.26
0.26
-0.28
-0.21
-4.66
-4.46
1.79
1.71
(1.23)
(1.67)
(1.53)
(2.23)
(0.71)
(1.00)
(1.42)
(1.98)
GR × OLD × LAW
1.50
1.37
-2.51
-2.85
5.48***
5.57**
-4.37**
-4.35
(1.76)
(2.51)
(1.79)
(2.47)
(1.68)
(2.29)
(2.02)
(2.98)
***
*
AfterGR × OLD × LAW
-0.89
-2.33
1.31
1.57
5.37
5.04
-3.03
-3.13
(2.03)
(2.71)
(1.69)
(2.39)
(1.82)
(2.52)
(1.98)
(2.89)
OLD
6.91***
…
5.53***
…
10.30***
…
4.11***
…
(0.95)
(1.28)
(0.52)
(1.11)
LAW
0.83
…
0.63
…
0.15
…
-0.42
…
(0.62)
(0.59)
(0.56)
(0.49)
GR
0.56
…
0.45
…
0.58
…
0.24
…
(0.71)
(0.42)
(0.39)
(0.54)
***
***
***
AfterGR
12.67
…
11.34
…
11.91
…
11.86***
…
(2.21)
(1.56)
(0.82)
(1.17)
GR × OLD
-3.36***
…
0.22
…
-6.18***
…
1.62
…
(1.22)
(1.54)
(1.50)
(1.94)
***
***
AfterGR × OLD
4.25
…
4.64
…
-0.03
…
7.56***
…
(1.29)
(1.13)
(1.49)
(1.61)
GR × LAW
-0.33
…
0.09
…
-0.34
…
0.39
…
(0.83)
(0.56)
(0.64)
(0.63)
AfterGR × LAW
-0.21
…
1.00
…
0.90
…
0.15
…
(2.35)
(1.74)
(1.56)
(1.54)
Cumulative effect, 2 years:
UI benefit extensions
…
0.27
…
-0.11
…
0.23
…
-0.08
(weeks) × OLD
(0.18)
(0.21)
(0.15)
(0.21)
Age composition control
…
89.60*
…
9.11
…
58.05
…
17.01
× OLD
(47.52)
(97.79)
(49.96)
(90.84)
Includes full set of state ×
month and age × month,
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
interactions
See notes to Table 3.

Table 6: Estimated Impacts of Lower Firm Size Minimums and Larger Damages on Hires Relative to 2005
Employment (%)
Men
Women
Men
Women
Firm-Size Minimums
Larger Damages
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
***
**
***
*
**
*
***
OLD × LAW
2.25
2.16
1.45
1.30
1.63
1.62
1.37
1.11
(0.67)
(0.96)
(0.53)
(0.68)
(0.64)
(0.89)
(0.50)
(0.68)
GR × OLD × LAW
0.18
0.28
0.18
0.03
-0.11
-0.08
-0.21
-0.37
(0.45)
(0.68)
(0.37)
(0.54)
(0.30)
(0.46)
(0.45)
(0.40)
AfterGR × OLD × LAW
-0.03
-0.40
0.03
-0.71
-0.12
-0.37
-0.49
-1.07**
(0.48)
(0.78)
(0.40)
(0.68)
(0.36)
(0.59)
(0.30)
(0.52)
***
***
***
***
OLD
-8.08
…
-7.83
…
-7.76
…
-7.84
…
(0.55)
(0.40)
(0.40)
(0.35)
***
***
LAW
-3.31
…
-2.88
…
-1.16
…
-1.35
…
(1.05)
(0.94)
(1.10)
(1.03)
GR
-3.08***
…
-2.52***
…
-2.40
…
-2.01***
…
(0.82)
(0.69)
(0.35)
(0.30)
***
***
***
AfterGR
-6.13
…
-5.96
…
-5.06
…
-5.31***
…
(0.94)
(0.73)
(0.60)
(0.53)
GR × OLD
2.10***
…
1.90***
…
2.29***
…
2.15***
…
(0.42)
(0.35)
(0.14)
(0.14)
***
***
***
AfterGR × OLD
4.12
…
3.96
…
4.17
…
4.30***
…
(0.46)
(0.37)
(0.24)
(0.22)
GR × LAW
0.69
…
0.57
…
-0.34
…
-0.22
…
(0.84)
(0.70)
(0.57)
(0.48)
*
**
AfterGR × LAW
1.81
…
1.65
…
0.13
…
0.60
…
(0.98)
(0.78)
(0.81)
(0.69)
Cumulative effect, 2 years:
UI benefit extensions
…
0.15***
…
0.10***
…
0.19***
…
0.12***
(weeks) × OLD
(0.05)
(0.03)
(0.06)
(0.03)
Age composition control
…
3.88
…
29.34***
…
2.85
…
30.67***
× OLD
(8.88)
(9.31)
(9.29)
(9.39)
Includes full set of state ×
quarter and age × quarter,
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
interactions
Standard errors, clustered at the state level, are in parentheses. *, **, and *** mean statistically significant from zero at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% levels, respectively. The sample period is 2004:Q2-2011:Q4. There are 3,038 observations. All estimates are weighted by
state population. The hiring variable is constructed by dividing the number of hires in the quarter by the average employment in
2005 for that state and multiplying by 100. For both the unemployment insurance and compositional controls, both the
contemporaneous variable and lags through eight quarters are included in the even-numbered columns. In these columns, the
addition of state-by-quarter fixed effects removes GR, AfterGR, LAW, GR × LAW, and AfterGR × LAW, and age-by-quarter fixed
effects remove OLD, GR × OLD, and AfterGR × OLD. In the regressions, rather than using seasonally-adjusted data, all
regression models include calendar-quarter dummy variables. To allow for different seasonality by age group and type of state
(defined by age discrimination law) – to better match the separate seasonal adjustment we do in the figures – these are also entered
interacted with LAW, OLD, and LAW × OLD. (Prior to forming these interactions, the calendar-quarter dummy variables are
demeaned, so that the estimated coefficients of LAW, OLD, and LAW × OLD reflect differentials evaluated at the sample means.)

Table 7: Robustness of Key Results
Men,
Women, Lower
Men,
Women
Women
Larger Damages,
Firm-Size Minimum,
Larger Damages,
Larger Damages, Larger Damages,
Unemp. Rate
Empl.-to-Pop.
Unemp. Durations
Unemp. Durations
Hires
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a) Original Results (even-numbered columns in Tables 3-6)
OLD × LAW
-0.26
-0.08
-4.46***
1.71
1.11
(0.27)
(1.67)
(1.00)
(1.98)
(0.68)
GR × OLD × LAW
0.54
-0.52
5.57**
-4.35
-0.37
(0.54)
(0.75)
(2.29)
(2.98)
(0.40)
AfterGR ×
1.03***
-1.98**
5.04*
-3.13
-1.07**
OLD × LAW
(0.38)
(0.81)
(2.52)
(2.89)
(0.52)
(b) Fully Saturated (adding state × old interactions)
GR × OLD × LAW
0.56
-0.16
5.60**
-4.14
-0.15
(0.55)
(0.81)
(2.34)
(2.97)
(0.39)
AfterGR ×
1.03**
-0.98
5.10**
-2.93
-0.41
OLD × LAW
(0.40)
(0.83)
(2.51)
(2.86)
(0.50)
(c) Dropping Missing Median Duration Estimates
OLD × LAW
…
…
-4.88***
0.90
…
(1.04)
(2.14)
GR × OLD × LAW
…
…
5.74**
-4.52
…
(2.46)
(3.06)
AfterGR ×
…
…
5.39**
-2.57
…
OLD × LAW
(2.51)
(3.09)
N
10,811
10,672
(d) Not Weighted by State Population
OLD × LAW
-0.16
-0.16
-3.11**
2.13
1.13*
(0.33)
(1.12)
(1.35)
(1.59)
(0.66)
GR × OLD × LAW
0.43
-0.93
4.77**
-4.54
0.19
(0.45)
(1.15)
(2.21)
(3.11)
(0.31)
AfterGR ×
0.55
-1.30
2.10
-3.81
-0.40
OLD × LAW
(0.52)
(1.10)
(2.67)
(2.67)
(0.46)
(e) 55-64 versus 25-44
OLD × LAW
-0.20
1.26
-4.43**
0.75
1.05
(0.28)
(1.31)
(1.88)
(1.97)
(0.84)
GR × OLD × LAW
0.63
0.20
7.86**
-4.51
-0.20
(0.50)
(1.00)
(3.32)
(4.79)
(0.46)
AfterGR ×
0.87*
-1.47
6.14*
-1.43
-0.89
OLD × LAW
(0.46)
(1.07)
(3.10)
(3.25)
(0.62)
(f) 55+ versus 25-34
OLD × LAW
-0.28
-0.54
-4.03***
2.78
0.58
(0.33)
(1.93)
(1.33)
(1.92)
(0.66)
GR × OLD × LAW
0.59
-0.84
5.25**
-5.93*
-0.53*
(0.70)
(0.73)
(2.32)
(3.47)
(0.30)
AfterGR ×
1.28***
-2.37**
5.75*
-4.85
-0.85**
OLD × LAW
(0.43)
(0.99)
(3.08)
(3.07)
(0.42)
(g) 55-64 versus 25-34
OLD × LAW
-0.19
0.73
-4.13*
1.78
0.52
(0.33)
(1.40)
(2.41)
(1.87)
(0.49)
GR × OLD × LAW
0.59
-0.10
7.40**
-5.97
-0.36
(0.70)
(0.91)
(3.59)
(5.02)
(0.27)
AfterGR ×
1.10**
-1.71
6.70*
-2.85
-0.67*
OLD × LAW
(0.50)
(1.16)
(3.75)
(3.28)
(0.35)
Estimates are based on the specification used in the even-numbered columns in Table 3-6. We include only the outcome variables and
the law characteristics combinations that led to statistically significant results in Tables 3-6. No GR × OLD × LAW and AfterGR × OLD
× LAW coefficients for other outcomes coupled with state age discrimination protections that are not shown in this table here were
statistically significant. In panel (b) the state-by-age interactions subsume OLD × LAW.

Table 8: Falsification Test
Men,
Women, Lower
Men,
Women
Women
Larger Damages,
Firm-Size Minimum,
Larger Damages,
Larger Damages,
Larger Damages,
Unemp. Rate
Empl.-to-Pop.
Unemp. Durations Unemp. Durations
Hires
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a) Original Results (even-numbered columns in Tables 3-6)
OLD × LAW
-0.26
-0.08
-4.46***
1.71
1.11
(0.27)
(1.67)
(1.00)
(1.98)
(0.68)
GR × OLD × LAW
0.54
-0.52
5.57**
-4.35
-0.37
(0.54)
(0.75)
(2.29)
(2.98)
(0.40)
AfterGR ×
1.03***
-1.98**
5.04*
-3.13
-1.07**
OLD × LAW
(0.38)
(0.81)
(2.52)
(2.89)
(0.52)
(b) Falsification: 2002-2007
OLD × LAW
-0.17
-1.31
-5.00**
0.66
…
(0.37)
(1.83)
(2.20)
(3.03)
Post-2004 ×
-0.16
2.04*
0.84
1.38
…
OLD × LAW
(0.34)
(1.19)
(3.31)
(3.37)
See notes to Table 7. Estimates are based on the specification used in the even-numbered columns in Table 3-6. In panel (b), we define
2002-2004 as the “pre-recession” period and 2005-2007 as the “recession” period. Since many states are missing from the QWI before
2004, we cannot conduct this falsification test for hires.

Table 9: Summary of Key Results

OLD × LAW

Mean
Range
# + Sig / − Sig / Not Sig

Men,
Larger Damages,
Unemp. Rate
(1)
-0.24
[-0.28, -0.16]
0/0/10

Women, Lower
Firm-Size Minimum,
Empl.-to-Pop.
(2)
0.09
[-1.00, 1.26]
0/0/11

Men,
Larger Damages,
Unemp. Durations
(3)
-4.39
[-4.88, -3.11]
0/11/0

Women
Larger Damages,
Unemp. Durations
(4)
1.71
[0.75, 2.78]
0/0/11

Women
Larger Damages,
Hires
(5)
1.03
[0.52, 1.37]
4/0/6

GR × OLD × LAW

Mean
Range
# + Sig / − Sig / Not Sig

0.55
[0.43, 0.63]
0/0/11

-0.39
[-0.93, 0.20]
0/0/12

5.82
[4.77, 7.86]
12/0/0

-4.65
[-5.97, -4.14]
0/2/10

-0.29
[-0.53, -0.15]
0/1/10

AfterGR ×
OLD × LAW

Mean
Range
# + Sig / − Sig / Not Sig

0.99
[0.55, 1.28]
10/0/1

-1.45
[-2.37, -0.72]
0/5/7

5.23
[2.10, 6.70]
11/0/1

-3.09
[-4.85, -1.43]
0/0/12

-0.74
[-1.07, -0.40]
0/6/5

This table summarizes the results for the regressions for the even-numbered columns in Tables 3-6, the robustness analyses in Table 7, and the additional robustness analyses
discussed in the text running the even-numbered regressions in Tables 3 to 6 without controls, with lags of the controls through one or three years, with the smaller firm-size
minimum (< 6), and using a continuous measure of the business cycle shock. # + Sig / -Sig / Not Sig counts the number of regressions where the coefficient is positive and
statistically significant (at the 10% level), negative and significant, or neither. Estimates surrounded by a box are those for which the evidence indicates that stronger age
discrimination helped older workers relative to younger workers. Shaded estimates are those that indicate the opposite. Boldfaced sets of estimates are those where the main
effect indicates that prior to the Great Recession stronger age discrimination protections helped older workers, but generated relatively worse outcomes for them during or after
the Great Recession.

Appendix Table B1: DDD Regressions for Separations Relative to 2005 Employment (%)
Men
Women
Men
Women
Firm-Size Minimums
Larger Damages
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
***
**
***
*
**
**
**
OLD × LAW
2.35
2.26
1.49
1.36
1.62
1.60
1.33
1.09
(0.68)
(0.97)
(0.53)
(0.68)
(0.66)
(0.91)
(0.50)
(0.68)
GR × OLD × LAW
0.06
0.19
0.11
0.00
-0.07
-0.04
-0.17
-0.28
(0.44)
(0.67)
(0.36)
(0.50)
(0.31)
(0.47)
(0.24)
(0.37)
AfterGR × OLD × LAW
-0.18
-0.55
-0.01
-0.77
-0.19
-0.42
-0.46
-1.06**
(0.45)
(0.76)
(0.37)
(0.66)
(0.33)
(0.58)
(0.27)
(0.53)
***
***
***
***
OLD
-6.33
…
-5.92
…
-5.94
…
-5.88
(0.56)
(0.41)
(0.40)
(0.35)
LAW
-3.09***
…
-2.69***
…
-1.01
…
-1.17
…
(1.01)
(0.90)
(1.07)
(1.00)
***
***
***
GR
-2.35
…
-2.11
…
-1.75
…
-1.63
…
(0.67)
(0.57)
(0.33)
(0.30)
AfterGR
-6.16***
…
-5.61***
…
-5.18***
…
-4.94***
…
(0.85)
(0.67)
(0.60)
(0.55)
***
***
***
GR × OLD
2.32
…
2.02
…
2.40
…
2.20***
…
(0.40)
(0.34)
(0.16)
(0.13)
AfterGR × OLD
4.60***
…
4.28***
…
4.61***
…
4.58***
…
(0.42)
(0.34)
(0.22)
(0.20)
GR × LAW
0.56
…
0.54
…
-0.34
…
-0.19
…
(0.69)
(0.59)
(0.50)
(0.44)
AfterGR × LAW
1.57*
…
1.44*
…
0.03
…
0.38
…
(0.89)
(0.72)
(0.77)
(0.67)
Cumulative effect, 2 years:
UI benefit extensions
…
0.15***
…
0.10***
…
0.19***
…
0.12***
(weeks) × OLD
(0.05)
(0.03)
(0.06)
(0.03)
***
Age composition control
…
-4.62
…
27.95
…
1.87
…
29.28***
× OLD
(8.79)
(9.45)
(8.95)
(9.53)
Includes full set of state ×
quarter and age × quarter
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
interactions
See notes to Table 6.

