NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IDEA OF ANTIPOVERTY POLICY
Martin Ravallion
Working Paper 19210
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19210
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2013

For comments the author thanks Robert Allen, Tony Atkinson, Pranab Bardhan, Francois Bourguignon,
Denis Cogneau, Sam Fleischacker, Pedro Gete, Karla Hoff, Ravi Kanbur, Charles Kenny, Sylvie Lambert,
Peter Lindert, Will Martin, Alice Mesnard, Branko Milanovic, Johan Mistiaen, Thomas Pogge, Gilles
Postel-Vinay, John Rust, Agnar Sandmo, Amartya Sen, Dominique van de Walle and participants
at presentations at the World Bank, the Midwest International Economic Development Conference
at the University of Wisconsin Madison, the Paris School of Economics, the Canadian Economics
Association and the 12th Nordic Conference on Development Economics. The paper’s title owes a
debt to Gertrude Himmelfarb’s (1984), The Idea of Poverty: England in the Early Industrial Age. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Martin Ravallion. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Idea of Antipoverty Policy
Martin Ravallion
NBER Working Paper No. 19210
July 2013
JEL No. B1,B2,I38
ABSTRACT
How did we come to think that eliminating poverty is a legitimate goal for public policy? What types
of policies have emerged in the hope of attaining that goal? The last 200 years have witnessed a dramatic
change in thinking about poverty. Mainstream economic thinking in the 18th century held that poverty
was necessary and even desirable for a country’s economic success. Today, poverty is more often
viewed as a constraint on that success. In short, poverty switched from being seen as a social good
to a social bad. This change in thinking, and the accompanying progress in knowledge, has greatly
influenced public action, with heightened emphasis on the role of antipoverty policy in sustainable
promotion from poverty, as well as protection. Development strategies today typically strive for a
virtuous cycle of growth with equity and a range of policy interventions have emerged that aim to
help assure that outcome. An expanding body of knowledge has taught us about how effective those
interventions are in specific settings, although many knowledge gaps remain.
Martin Ravallion
Center for Economic Research
Georgetown University
ICC 580
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
mr1185@georgetown.edu

“The poor … are like the shadows in a painting: they provide the necessary contrast.” (Philippe
Hecquet, 1740, quoted in Roche, 1987, p.64).
“Everyone but an idiot knows that the lower classes must be kept poor or they will never be
industrious.” Arthur Young, 1771 (quoted in Furniss, 1920, p. 118).
“May we not outgrow the belief that poverty is necessary?” (Alfred Marshall, 1890, p.2).
“Our dream is a world free of poverty.” (Motto of the World Bank since 1990).

1.

Introduction
It is widely accepted today that eliminating poverty is a legitimate goal of public action

and governments (in both rich and poor countries) typically take some degree of responsibility
for that task. The policy responses include both direct interventions, as are often put under the
heading of “social policies,” and various economy-wide policies—overall policies for economic
development that have important bearing on the extent of poverty. (I will use the term
“antipoverty policy” to embrace both sets of policies.) There are essentially three premises to the
idea of such policies:


Premise 1: Poverty is a social bad.2



Premise 2: Poverty can be eliminated.



Premise 3: Public policies can help do that.

This paper tries to understand how these three premises came to be broadly accepted and what
forms of public action emerged.
Both the differences and the similarities between today’s thinking and that of the past are
of interest. There are some policy debates that live on and some common themes, such as the
role of incentives. However, one is also struck by the differences. Indeed, widespread (though
certainly not universal) acceptance of the three premises above would appear to be relatively
new. Prior to the late 18th century, the dominant school of economic thought saw poverty as a
social good, essential for economic development. It may well have been granted that, other
things being equal, a society with less poverty is to be preferred, but other things were not seen
to be equal. Poverty was deemed essential to incentivize workers and keep their wages low, so as
to create a strong, globally competitive, economy. Nor did the idea of what constitutes
2

Poverty can be seen as a social bad either intrinsically (a society with less poverty is preferred) or instrumentally
(that a less poor society will be better at other things of value, including its overall economic performance).

2

“economic development” embrace poor people as being necessarily amongst its intended
beneficiaries. There was also widespread doubt about the desirability of, or even the potential
for, governmental intervention against poverty. In marked contrast, poverty is widely seen today
as a constraint on development rather than a pre-condition for it. And it is widely (though not
universally) agreed today, across both rich and poor countries, that the government has an
important role in the fight against poverty.
The paper documents this transition in thinking about poverty and policy. Of course, the
inter-relationship between thinking and action is complex, and what emerges in the policy arena
depends on many things, including technology, public awareness and political economy.
Nonetheless, there is a story to be told about how scholarly and popular thinking has evolved.
This helps us understand prevailing views of the distributive role of the state and the specific
policies adopted. The change in thinking also teaches us that the progress in knowledge both
reinforces and reflects progress in development.
A natural starting point is Samuel Fleischacker’s (2004) excellent Short History of
Distributive Justice. Fleischacker defines distributive justice as a situation in which “property is
distributed throughout the society so that everyone is supplied with a certain level of material
means.” 3 He argues that in pre-modern thought, poverty relief was largely motivated by
beneficence—a matter of the donor’s personal choice, not a right for poor people, and so quite
distinct from justice, which emanates from the secular world of laws and taxes. While most
religions see voluntary private efforts to help poor people as a virtue, such charitable relief is not
distributive justice in Fleischacker’s eyes. For the birth of that idea, he argues that we need to
look to Europe in the late 18th century, toward the end of the Age of Enlightenment.
What is largely missing from Fleischacker’s history is the economics. This is important if
we focus on poverty rather than justice. Nor do historical writings on poverty (such as Gertrude
Himmelfarb 1984, Bronislaw Geremek 1994, and Steven Beaudoin 2007) give more than passing
attention to the economics. And it would be fair to say that economists have paid little attention
to the history of thought on poverty and inequality.4

3

Aristotle is widely credited with introducing the term “distributive justice,” in the 4th Century BC. However,
Fleischacker (2004) convincingly argues that Aristotle had something quite different in mind to modern usage. For
Aristotle, distributive justice was about assigning political rewards according to “merit.”
4
In one of the few exceptions, Denis Cogneau (2012) discusses the evolution of thought on inequality in a
development context. On the neglect of the history of thought by economists see Mark Blaug (2001).

3

The paper offers an overview of how philosophical and economic thinking on poverty
and antipoverty policy has evolved and the types of policies that emerged. The discussion will
give less emphasis than Fleischacker on whether poor people were seen to have the legal right to
assistance. States can and do ascribe legal rights, but sometimes with little more than symbolic
value, given that the administrative capabilities for enforcement are weak, and especially so in
poor countries. Instead, the focus here will be on whether (demonstrably or plausibly) public
policy helped families permanently escape poverty, or merely offered a transient (though
potentially important) short-term palliative to protect people from negative shocks. In short, the
acid test for a good antipoverty policy will be whether it is aimed at both promotion and
protection (applying a useful distinction made by Jean Drèze and Amartya Sen, 1989). This idea
of antipoverty policy turns out to be quite recent, with origins in the late 19th century, but only
emerging with confidence in the late 20th century.
The following section begins with a simple characterization of personal wealth dynamics
which will help motivate the paper’s interpretation of past thinking about this class of policies.
The bulk of the paper falls into two parts. The first, comprising sections 3-6, traces out the
history of thought from mercantilist views on the inevitability of poverty through two main
stages of “poverty enlightenment,” out of which poverty came to be seen as a social bad
(Premise 1). The second part focuses on policies, from economy-wide policies to direct
interventions. Sections 7 and 8 turn to an important aspect of Premise 2, namely the country’s
overall development strategy, and in particular whether poverty can be eliminated through
economic growth and the role played by initial distribution. Section 9 focuses on the evolution of
thinking on specific interventions (Premise 3). Section 10 concludes.

2.

An expository characterization of individual wealth dynamics
“Wealth” is used here in a broad sense, including human capital (education, health and

nutrition) as well as physical capital.5 Initial wealth, wt at date t, is distributed across individuals,
some of whom have zero wealth, but can still earn a current labor income, consumed fully on
their survival needs in each period. A fixed share of current wealth is used to augment current
consumption, leaving the remainder for the next period. Each person has a production function
5

A good typology is found in Jeffrey Sachs’s (2005b, Ch.13) six types of capital that poor people lack: human
capital, business capital, infrastructure, natural capital, public institutional capital, and knowledge capital.

4

yielding output h(k) from a capital stock k. There is a threshold capital stock needed to produce
min
any output, i.e., h(k)  0 for all k  k ( 0) .6 Once the threshold is reached, output emerges in

the next period, though diminishing returns start to set in immediately; in other words, the
function h(k) is strictly positive, strictly increasing and strictly concave for all k  k min . Those
for whom the threshold has not been reached ( w  k min ) have no demand for capital since it will
not allow any output to be produced. There is more than one interpretation of the threshold.
Partha Dasgupta (1993) provides a persuasive argument for its existence based on the biological
fact of a positive basal metabolic rate (BMR), given that maintaining the human body at rest
requires a minimum food-energy intake, without which no physical work can be done.
Physiology entails that the set of feasible production activities for an individual is inherently
non-convex. Threshold effects can also reflect non-convexities in production possibilities
associated with the technology or from the existence of a lumpy “threshold good” in
consumption.7 Note that the threshold will cease to matter if there is sufficient technical
progress, raising output at all levels of capital.
There is another constraint on production possibilities stemming from credit market
failures. Because lenders are imperfectly informed about borrowers, a borrowing constraint is
imposed, whereby a person can only borrow up to  times her wealth. Let k * denote the
individual’s desired capital stock. Those with wealth sufficient to produce but less than
k * /(   1) have a desire to invest but are constrained in that, after investing all they can, they

still find that the marginal product of capital exceeds the interest rate, given the borrowing
constraint. Finally, someone who starts her productive life with sufficient wealth (greater than
k * /(   1) ) is able to invest her unconstrained optimal amount, equating the (declining) marginal

product of her capital with the prevailing interest rate ( h ( k * )  r ).
The recursion diagram (the mapping from current wealth to future wealth) then takes the
form depicted in Figure 1. Future wealth is zero at low levels of current wealth ( wt  k min ). For

6

In the special case in which the threshold is not binding this model is essentially the same as that outlined in
Abhijit Banerjee and Esther Duflo (2003), though with antecedents in the literature.
7
On the latter argument see David Just and Hope Michelson (2007). On other sources of poverty traps see Costas
Azariadis (2006) and other papers in the collection edited by Samuel Bowles, Steven Durlauf and Karla Hoff (2006).

5

levels of initial wealth in the interval [ k min , k * /(   1)] , future wealth is a strictly concave
function of current wealth. At higher wealth ( wt  k * /(  1) ), the diagram becomes linear.
There are potentially three steady-state equilibria (with constant wealth over time) for
each individual. Two of these, namely points A and C in Figure 1, are stable while the middle
one, at point B, is unstable in that shocks will move those at B toward A or C.8 In the long run,
after repeated small shocks, the economy will settle in a state that can be thought of as having
two main classes of people. One class has little or no wealth, given that its members are caught
in a wealth poverty trap, at point A. There can be many reasons in practice why people are so
trapped, including lack of any marketable skills, social exclusion, geographic isolation,
debilitating disease, or environmental degradation. The second class comprises people who have
settled at point C, at their respective steady-state levels of wealth (w*). There can still be
inequality within each class. There can be inequality of labor earnings amongst the poorer class,
and there can be wealth inequality amongst the rich, given different steady-state levels of wealth.
While the wealth poverty trap at point A is economically stable for each individual, the
social and political stability of the economy as a whole is another matter. The latter type of
instability can arise in many ways, defying simple generalizations about its economic causes.
However, it is plausible that a large mass of people at point A can threaten social stability,
especially so if their labor earnings and (hence) consumptions are very low, either in steady state,
or as a result of some severe shock, and in the latter case the threat to stability may well be even
greater.9
Motivated by this stylized representation of wealth dynamics, we can think of two broad
types of antipoverty policies. There can be policies that provide short-term palliatives, possibly
to maintain social stability by assuring that current incomes do not fall below some crucial level,
even though poor people remain in the wealth poverty trap. These are purely protection policies.
And there are promotion policies that allow poor people to break out of the poverty trap, by
permitting a sufficiently large wealth gain to put them on a path to eventually reaching their own
(higher and stable) steady state level of wealth.

8

Imagine someone at point B in Figure 1. Any small wealth gain will put her in a region of accumulation (current
wealth lower than future wealth) and so the person will progress toward point C. Similarly, a small contraction will
put her on a path to point A.
9
In Politics, Aristotle (350BC, un-numbered) put the point nicely: “It is a bad thing that many from being rich
should become poor; for men of ruined fortunes are sure to stir up revolutions.”

6

The rest of this paper will study the origins and nature of both types of policies. It will be
argued that, while the idea of a public responsibility for protecting poor people from negative
shocks is an old one, the idea of such a role for promotion is remarkably new. The latter idea was
associated with a significant evolution in the underlying economic model of poverty. As the
following sections will try to show, those models have changed dramatically over time. A longstanding theme in thinking about poverty (still heard today) is that poor people are the cause of
their own poverty.10 Moral weaknesses are often identified: high fertility, laziness, or bad
spending choices; excessive consumption of alcohol was widely identified as a cause of poverty
in Europe and North America during the 18th and 19th centuries.11 This model suggested little
scope for public action to promote people from poverty. That was up to them, as it required their
behavior to change. Any public responsibility was confined to limited, and highly targeted,
protection to address extreme transient poverty. But here too the “moral worthiness” of relief
recipients was often a condition for that assistance. In more recent times—starting in the late 19th
century but not carrying much policy weight until the second half of the 20th century—deeper
causal understandings of poverty pointed to a new role for public action in fighting, and
eventually eliminating, persistent poverty.

3.

The utility of poverty
There was a great deal of poverty in the world 200 years ago. Francois Bourguignon and

Christian Morrisson (2002) have estimated that in 1820 (the earliest year for which they provide
an estimate) 84% of the world’s population lived in what they term “extreme poverty.” Their
poverty line was chosen to accord with the “$1 a day” line at 1985 purchasing power parity
proposed by Martin Ravallion, Gaurav Datt, and Dominique van de Walle (1991), which was a
typical line for low-income developing countries at the time. So this is a frugal line. 200 years
ago, the vast majority of the world’s population was very poor.
The categories “rich world” and “poor world”, “developed” and “developing world,”
were little used and probably did not have much meaning 200 or more years ago. Of course,
10

This view seems to have been especially prominent in Anglo-Saxon countries (Wim Van Oorschot and Loek
Halman, 2000).The view has drawn some recent support from claims made by the behavioural social sciences
(including behavioural economics) that people do not always behave rationally, although the experiments used are
often open to other interpretations about the nature of the optimizing behaviour (Gilles Saint-Paul, 2011).
11
Benjamin Klebaner (1964) points to official claims that 75-90% of pauperism in the US in the 19th century was
due to intemperance. (Klebaner also points to dissenting views at the time, but argues that these were unusual.)

7

there were disparities in average levels of living across the countries of the world, but much less
so than today—indeed, quite possibly less than one finds amongst developing countries today.
Average living standards in 18th century Europe were probably somewhat higher than in Asia or
Africa, but the proportionate difference was less than we see today.12 Yet today there is virtually
no extreme poverty left in Western Europe, when judged by the standards of poor countries
today, or even the standards of today’s rich countries when they were poor. Understanding how
Western Europe largely escaped extreme poverty deserves to be a central theme of development
research.
Europe’s poor around this time were essentially those with little or no wealth, who relied
solely on the supply of relatively unskilled labor for their sustenance and survival. Of course,
there was heterogeneity within this group according to employment, wages and dependency.
More complex forms of poverty were to emerge in modern times. However, in the context of
pre-20th century Europe (and North America) we can essentially equate poverty with
membership of the working class.
For much of the 16th-18th centuries, when Western Europe was mired in poverty, the
dominant economic theory of the time, mercantilism, saw poverty as instrumentally good, as a
means of encouraging work effort. The goal was to maximize a nation's export surplus—the
balance of trade, which was equated with the future prosperity and power of the realm—and the
means were cheap production inputs, i.e., cheap raw materials (for which Colonies proved
useful) and cheap, and therefore poor, labor at home. Poverty was not just accepted, it was seen
as an essential precondition for a country’s economic development. Hunger would encourage
work, and lack of it would do the opposite. As the early 18th century philosopher and economist
Bernard de Mandeville (1732, p.286) put it:
“… it is manifest, that in a free Nation where Slaves are not allow'd of, the surest Wealth consists
in a Multitude of laborious Poor; for besides that they are the never-failing Nursery of Fleets and
Armies, without them there could be no Enjoyment, and no Product of any Country could be
valuable.”

The seemingly widely-held economic premise was that the individual supply curve for unskilled
work was negatively sloped—in modern economic terms, that the income effect on demand for

12

See Paul Bairoch (1981), Shahid Alam (2006) and Robert Allen (2013). Backward projections have suggested
larger disparities, although these estimates are subject to a number of biases, as discussed in Alam (2006).

8

leisure dominated the substitution effect. As Joseph Townsend (1786) put it: 13 “The poor know
little of the motives which stimulate the higher ranks to action—pride, honor and ambition. In
general, it is only hunger which can spur and goad them onto labor.” (p. 23). And so: “..in
proportion as you advance the wages of the poor, you diminish the quantity of their work.”
(p.29).
The idea of a negatively sloped labor supply curve is what Edgar Furniss (1920, p. 117)
dubbed “the utility of poverty.” The basis for this idea appears to have been little more than
casual anecdotes; Furniss (1920, Ch.6) provides many examples from writings of the time, often
with references to the attractions of the alehouse when workers got a wage increase. It was not
the last time in the history of thought about poverty that casual incentive arguments resting on
little or no good evidence would buttress strong policy positions.
A continuing future supply of cheap labor was also seen to be crucial. Large families
were encouraged and good work habits were to be instilled from an early age. Like higher
current wages, too much schooling would discourage both current and future work effort.
Consistently with this model, few sustainable opportunities were expected to be available to any
educated children from poor families. In de Mandeville’s (1732, p.288-311) mind, the only
realistic future prospect for the children of laboring (and hence poor) parents was to be laboring
and poor. So schooling was seen as socially wasteful:
“To make the Society happy and People easy under the meanest Circumstances, it is requisite that
great Numbers of them should be Ignorant as well as Poor…..Going to School in comparison to
Working is Idleness, and the longer Boys continue in this easy sort of Life, the more unfit they'll
be when grown up for downright Labour, both as to Strength and Inclination…. There is not a
more contented People among us, than those who work the hardest and are the least acquainted
with the Pomp and Delicacies of the World.”

In this view of economic development, there is little or no prospect of reducing wealth poverty—
of escaping the type of poverty trap described in Figure 1. There was little or no perceived scope
for upward mobility of working class children. They are born poor and stay poor.
Modern progressive ears may be shocked by de Mandeville’s views, but his claim that a
modest amount of extra schooling for working-class children is wasted is consistent with the
model in Figure 1. The poor—the working class—are concentrated at the wealth poverty trap
(point A in Figure 1). A small increase in their wealth, in the form of extra human capital only

13

On Townsend’s influence on subsequent thinkers (including Malthus and Darwin) see Montagu (1971).

9

sufficient to get them to the threshold (say), will not bring any lasting benefit. In due course the
dynamics will push them back to point A.
And de Mandeville’s pessimism on schooling would not surprise many poor children in
the developing world today. Katherine Boo’s (2011) vivid description of life in a Mumbai slum
includes a discussion of the choices made by Sunil, a young scavenger (probably 10 years of age,
though nobody is sure) who spends long hours collecting whatever he can find of any value in
the trash deposits around Mumbai airport. Sunil is clearly very poor. He is also clearly capable of
learning, and is aware that with sufficient schooling he might escape his wretched life. But how
can he finance sufficient schooling? At one point he spends a few days in a private after-hours
school run by a college student who lives in the slum, and after much rote learning he masters
the “twinkle-star” song.14 Boo (2011, p.68) writes:
“He’d sat in on [the English class taught in the slum] for a few days, mastering the English
twinkle-star song, before deciding that his time was better spent working for food.”

By interpretation, the modest amount of schooling that Sunil could afford would be insufficient
for him to escape poverty. He is better off addressing his current hunger.
Early social protection policies: Recall that the poverty trap in Figure 1 has people stuck
at zero wealth but they still earn enough to survive (as Sunil does through scavenging). Higher
wages or prices for their outputs increase their welfare, and uninsured shocks to their health (say)
have the opposite effect. There is space here for social protection policies providing statecontingent income support. Such policies can exist and be seen as reasonably effective without
changing the fact that poor people are stuck in the wealth poverty trap.
The idea of a public role in social protection from shocks that threaten extreme poverty is
an old one. For example, around 300 BC, the famous Indian academic and advisor to royalty,
Chanakya (also known as Kautilya), recommended that when famine looms a good king should
“..institute the building of forts or water-works with the grant of food, or share [his] provisions
[with the people], or entrust the country [to another king]” (quoted in Drèze, 1990a, p. 75). If
one thinks of antipoverty policy primarily in terms of protection from adverse events then the
idea is very old indeed.
In the earliest reference I have found to the modern idea of distributive justice, Charles de
Montesquieu (1748, p.533) made a passing reference to the idea that the state “..owes to every
14

“Twinkle-twinkle little star, how I wonder what you are. Up above the world so high, like a diamond in the sky.”

10

citizen a certain subsistence, a proper nourishment, convenient clothing, and a kind of life not
incompatible with health.” However, he did not appear to have in mind more than a role for the
state in protection from shocks and a page later he warns explicitly about incentive effects on
work, such that “…transient assistances are much better than perpetual foundations.”
While staunchly opposed to efforts to promote poor families, mercantilist thinking
encouraged a limited role for the state in social protection. In the pre-mercantilist feudal and
slave economies, the employer had a responsibility for insuring workers, even very poor
workers, who may well have faced subjugation and exploitation in return, but were at least
protected to some degree. (This was not necessarily altruistic in any sense; a slave owner had a
purely selfish interest in keeping his property alive.) Mercantilists were keen to see the state take
over these roles, but consistently with their economic ideas.
The 16th and 17th centuries saw the emergence of fledgling social policies in Europe in
response to rising “pauperism.” There were increasing numbers of dislocated and unemployed
workers and beggars in the streets of the cities. While the cause was widely seen to be the moral
weaknesses of poor people, deeper explanations could be found in the combination of changes in
the organization of production (including in agriculture with the break-up of feudalism) with
greater mobility (also with implications for family support of the aged). While unemployment
was not commonly identified as a cause of poverty, work was widely seen as the solution.
Publicly financed workhouses were introduced around 1600 (probably the first being in
Amsterdam). Welfare recipients were incarcerated, where their “bad behaviors” could be
controlled, and obliged to work for their upkeep. From the outset, the idea was that this would be
“self-targeting” in that only the poorest would be willing to be so confined. The workhouses
were clearly intended for protection rather than as a general remedy for pervasive and persistent
poverty. They were seen as a cost-effective means of poverty relief (Pat Thane, 2000, p.115).
England’s Poor Laws: A major policy response to poverty emerged in Elizabethan
England in the form of the Poor Laws.15 This was a system of publicly provided insurance
against income poverty due to specific sources, notably old age, widowhood, disability, illness,
or unemployment. Essentially the central government instructed local parishes to deal with their
poverty problem. As a system of protection, the Poor Laws were quite comprehensive and came

15

On the history of the English Poor Laws and their influence see Mencher (1967), Boyer (2002) and Hindle (2004).

11

to be reasonably generous in some places.16 Arguably the pinnacle of the Poor Laws was the
Speenhamland System of 1795 introduced by the justices of Berkshire. This aimed to assure a
guaranteed minimum income through a sliding scale of wage supplements indexed to the price of
bread (Ashley Montagu, 1971; Himmelfarb, 1984a).
The antipoverty programs elsewhere in Europe around this time relied heavily on
charitable giving and so faced free-rider problems; levels of church and private spending on
transfers to poor people were low—well under 1% of national income in most countries (Peter
Lindert, 2013). In contrast, the disbursements under the Poor Laws in England and Wales were
largely financed by local property taxation. There was evidently some displacement of private
charity, though the latter continued to exist (Steve Hindle, 2004; Lindert, 2013). But there can be
little doubt that the Poor Laws entailed a net gain in social protection. By the late 17th century
almost all parishes of England and Wales were covered and, under the “Old Poor Laws” up to
the 19th century, all persons were eligible for relief. (New Poor Laws came out of reforms in the
1830s, which we return to.) The parishes had the responsibility for implementation, subject to
monitoring by central authorities. Being based in the parishes was convenient but possibly never
ideal, as they were small and so provided limited scope for pooling risks, and there was
undoubtedly considerable horizontal inequity (whereby equally poor people in different parishes
fared very differently).17 Nor could these policies ever be expected to have much impact on the
steady-state wealth distribution (as would allow people to break out of the poverty trap in Figure
1). However, it is clear that the Poor Laws did provide a degree of protection, and it has been
argued that they helped break the historical link between harvest failures and mortality (Morgan
Kelly and Cormac Ó Gráda, 2010; Richard Smith, 2011).
Until the 19th century, the Poor Laws were a long-standing and seemingly successful
social protection policy. Solar (1995) argues that they were crucial to England’s long-term social
stability, including in periods (such as the late 18th century) of concern about the possibility of
the dramatic instability in France spilling across the English Channel. The Poor Laws were
arguably the social policy that made most sense to the mercantilists in that they helped assure a

16

Peter Solar (1995) cites evidence that aggregate disbursements reached 2% of England’s national income by the
late 18th century.
17
Hindle (2004) notes the large geographic differences in pensions, depending on the economic circumstances of the
parishes.

12

relatively docile and sustained working class, and with little threat to the steady-state distribution
of wealth.
The Old Poor Laws would be called these days an “un-targeted” policy, and no doubt
proposals would be heard to target such a policy better if it was found in a developing country
today. However, the universality was arguably important to the long-term success of the Poor
Laws, which spanned 300 years (Solar, 1995). Broad political support was assured by the fact
that anyone could turn to the Poor Laws if needed. For example, widowhood was a threat to
many of those who would not normally expect to turn to the parish for relief.18 As novels of the
time often pointed out, even the well-to-do upper middle class family could be vulnerable to
poverty (a favorite theme of Charles Dickens).
Fleischacker’s (2004, p.51) discussion of England’s Poor Laws argues that they were
motivated by the “...virtue of charity rather than the virtue of justice,” and as such they did not
constitute the beginnings of the modern role for public policy in assuring distributive justice. As
a quibble, one can conjecture that the motivation for the Poor Laws was at least as much to do
with maintaining social stability as charity or justice. However, whatever may have been the
motives of policy makers, the Poor Laws constituted a legally enforceable state policy for limited
relief from the specified events, financed by redistributive taxes. And parish residents (though
not outsiders) had a legal recourse under the Poor Laws, which is why they could help assure
social stability over some 300 years (Solar, 1995). Against Fleischacker’s interpretation, it seems
that the Poor Laws came very close to being a pre-modern example of policies to help assure
distributive justice.
However, an aspect of the Poor Laws that should not be ignored is that they were clearly
intended for protection rather than promotion. This was an early form of social insurance
intended for a world in which the poor and the middle-class faced many uninsured risks
associated with uncertain employment, health crises, harvest failures and simply bad luck
(Hindle, 2004). Such risks may well spill over into production, with adverse long-term
consequences. It has been argued that the Poor Laws did have benefits for longer-term promotion
from poverty by enhanced insurance against risk (Solar, 1995; Smith, 2011). By assuring greater

18

Widows were listed as eligible for relief from the earliest Poor Laws, and they are mentioned often in the
literature; for example, Hindle’s (2004) discussion of parish archival information related to the Poor Laws mentions
widows 75 times.

13

social stability, this too would have brought longer term gains. However, it is clear that this was
promotion attained via protection. Protection was clearly the main aim of the Poor Laws.
Instead of focusing on whether the motivation was charity or justice, the more important
reason why the Elizabethan Poor Laws, or Chanakya’s famine relief policy, did not constitute a
comprehensive antipoverty policy is that these policies were unlikely to change the steady-state
distribution of the levels of wealth. In terms of the model in section 2, what these policies were
doing was preventing the consumption levels of those stuck in the wealth poverty trap from
falling. They provided them a degree of protection, but did not help them escape the trap. By the
economic logic of the mercantilists, hunger was a good thing, as it motivated poor people to
work, with social protection playing a limited and well-defined role. After all, just like the slave
owner, one must keep the workers alive.
By the late 18th century, a significant change in thinking was underway.

4.

The First Poverty Enlightenment
The incidence of poverty had clearly been increasing for some time in Britain and much

of Europe in the latter part of the 18th century, due mainly to falling real wages (Rufus Tucker,
1975; Allen, 2001). In Europe and North America, there was mounting concern about prospects
for social instability and even rebellion amongst the working class. And there was frustration
amongst the middle class about the constraints they faced on their upward mobility.
The masses came to reject longstanding excuses for the deprivations they faced. Of
course, there had been sporadic pro-poor protest movements before. For example, there was the
(short-lived) “Levellers” movement for suffrage and religious tolerance in mid-17th century
England, during the Civil War period (Christopher Hill, 1972). But the late 18th century saw both
new thinking and widespread demands for change across Britain, Europe and America. Popular
politics flourished in the cafes and alehouses of London, Paris and elsewhere in Europe in the
late 18th century.19 The historian Crane Brinton (1934, p.281) identifies the “essential
characteristic” of the change in ideas in the last decade of the 18th century in Europe as the
transition from the view that “…life on this earth is a fleeting transition to eternity, that such life
is inevitably one of misery” to “…an assertion of the possibility of the harmonious satisfaction
19

The Proceedings of the Old Bailey (2012) contains descriptions for London; an example was the “London
Corresponding Society,” founded in 1792, and dedicated to expanding working class political representation.

14

here on earth of what are assumed to be normal human appetites.” There was a new mass
awareness of the scope for economic and political institutions to serve the material needs of all
people. Political representation, notably suffrage, was widely seen to be the key.
New philosophical thinking opened the way to greater respect for poor people as fellow
citizens. Immanuel Kant (1785, p.62) put forward the idea that every rational human being must
be treated “as an end withal, never as means.” This was indeed a radical idea, which gave poor
people the same moral worth as rich people. Of course there was some measure of respect for
poor people even in (say) de Mandeville’s earlier writings, but it was a respect for their labor,
consistent with the role assigned to them by their birth. They were merely the means to an end.
In Kant, by contrast, there was respect for all rational agents, whatever their economic
circumstances. This was an essential step for both political equality and comprehensive
antipoverty policy, although both were still a long way off.
Adam Smith (1776) lambasted the mercantilist view that a country’s economic welfare
was to be judged by the balance of trade. This had long been questionable (not least for ignoring
corrective adjustments through price changes).20 By arguing for a broader conception of welfare
based on the population’s command over commodities (including basic consumption goods, not
just luxury goods, and also including leisure), Smith opened the way to seeing progress against
poverty as a goal for development, rather than a threat to it.21 He saw the virtue of self-interest—
though he did not see it as the sole motive for human behavior (Smith, 1759, Ch.1, I.I.1)—but
only in so far as it advanced social welfare, which depended crucially on the institutional
context. And gone was the “utility of poverty” with its negatively sloped individual supply
function.22 Despite the popular characterizations of Smith’s non-interventionist views in the 20th
century (Emma Rothschild, 2001), he argued in favor of promotional antipoverty policies, such
as limited public subsidies to help cover tuition fees for the basic schooling of the “common
people” (Smith, 1776, Book V, Ch. I, Article 2d). However, on this and other social issues,
Smith was evidently far more progressive than most of his peers.
This was a time when significant cracks started to appear in mainstream views on the role
of the state in influencing distribution. A long-standing view—often attributed to Cicero in
20

See Blaug’s (1962, Ch.2) discussion of Smith and the mercantilist doctrines.
See the discussion in Jerry Muller (1993, p.58). Also see Himmelfarb’s (1984a,b) discussion of Smith’s views
relative to others around the same time.
22
“Where wages are high, accordingly, we shall always find the workmen more active, diligent, and expeditious,
than where they are low” (Smith, 1776, p.72)
21

15

Ancient Rome—distinguished justice from beneficence, with only the former entailing a role for
the state (Fleischacker, 2004, Ch.1). Local religious organizations had long been charged with
the beneficence role. One crack was opened up by Kant. Theologies have long applauded charity
as virtuous. Kant questioned this, arguing that there was an inherently unequal relationship
between giver and receiver in charity for poor people and so questioned whether it was
“virtuous” to give alms that flatter the giver’s pride:
“Kant sees moral corruption in the private relationships by which well-off people bestow of their
bounty to the needy and looks to the state to provide for a more respectful relationship between
rich and poor.” (Fleischacker, 2004, p.71)

Such challenges to established thinking about beneficence paved the way for much public debate
in Europe and America on the role of the state in fighting poverty and in distribution more
broadly, and an eventual shift of responsibilities from religious organizations to the state.
A key step in philosophical thinking relevant to poverty and policy was the rejection of
the view that prevailing inequalities were inevitable. The social contract approach that emerged
in the 17th century (often attributed to Thomas Hobbes) asked a fundamental question: how
should we decide what constitutes good government? In modern terms, this is a question of
evaluation, and the relevant counterfactual was a “natural state” in the absence of government.
Like all counterfactuals, the natural state was fundamentally unknown and open to debate.23
Hobbes argued that it would be a state of conflict, of “all against all.” The question was taken up
again in the late 18th century by Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who opened up an important new strand
of thinking about the distributive role of the state. In his Discourse on the Origin of Inequality
Rousseau argued that, while self-interest was a motivation in the natural state, so too was
empathy for the situation of others.24 Human institutions, however, can develop to either support
or thwart our natural empathy. Rousseau thus saw poverty and inequality as stemming in no
small measure (though not solely) from bad institutions—social arrangements that created:
“..different privileges, which some men enjoy to the prejudice of others, such as that of being
more rich, more honored, more powerful or even in a position to exact obedience.”

23

Rousseau (1754, 11) put the point nicely: “The philosophers, who have inquired into the foundations of society,
have all felt the necessity of going back to a state of nature; but not one of them has got there.”
24
Rousseau was writing prior to Darwin. Scientific research on animal behavior has revealed strong social and
empathic behaviors (Frans de Waal, 2009), suggesting deeper origins for human sociability. It has also been argued
that (recently discovered) mirror neurons are the neural foundation of such behavior; see, for example, Christian
Keysers (2011).

16

Here Rousseau made a key step in recognizing the role played by institutions, including
governments, in influencing distribution.25 Poverty was not then inevitable.
The change in thinking was not just found in the writings of philosophers and
economists. There was a new questioning of established social ranks, famously so in France in
the latter part of the 18th century. The Marriage of Figaro by Pierre Beaumarchais (1778) had
Parisian audiences taking side with the servants in laughing at the aristocracy, and deeply
questioning their privileges.26
The three words that best capture the spirit of the period are “liberté, égalité, fraternité”—
the motto of the French Revolution (and adopted as France’s national motto in the late 19th
century). While the first few decades after the French Revolution hardly lived up to these lofty
words, and the suffrage that emerged was largely confined to men with property, there can be
little doubt that the underlying ideas had lasting impact. “Liberty” was understood in a way
consistent with modern usage (as in, say, John Rawls, 1971), in that the individual was deemed
to have whatever freedoms were consistent with like freedoms for others. “Equality” was not,
however, understood as equality of outcomes but was initially defined in terms of legal rights of
opportunity, deeming that the law must be the same for everyone and so allow all citizens equal
opportunity for public positions and jobs, with the assignment determined solely by ability.
There was little immediate sign of a perceived role for the state in redistribution of rewards,
although some calls for this did start to emerge in the 1790s with the left-wing Jacobin Club and
(in particular) François-Noël (“Gracchus”) Babeuf.27 However, if there was hope for poor people
in the mainstream ideas of “liberté, égalité, fraternité,” then it was more in “fraternity” than
“equality;” as Brinton (1934, p.283) explains:
“Fraternity had meant to the hopeful eighteenth century the outpouring of its favorite virtue,
benevolence, upon all human beings, and especially on the downtrodden and the distant—on
peasants, Chinamen and South Sea Islanders.”

25

Rousseau allowed for the existence of what he termed “natural inequality,” which would exist in the
counterfactual “natural state.” Natural inequality reflected innate differences (health, strength, mental ability).
26
For example, in the fifth act, the servant Figaro asked of the Count who employed him: “What have you done to
deserve such advantages? Put yourself to the trouble of being born—nothing more. For the rest—a very ordinary
man!” While the play was written in 1778 it was censored by King Louis XVI and did not play until 1784. It is
widely seen as a precursor to the French Revolution.
27
Fleischacker (2004) gives credit for anticipating the modern concept of distributive justice to Gracchus Babeuf,
though also giving credit to the German philosopher Johann Fichte, a follower of Kant. (A seemingly odd pair:
Babeuf is considered a founder of Communism, and was executed in 1797 for his rebellious left-wing ideas, while
the anti-Semitic Fichte is considered a key influence on the National Socialist movement in Germany). However, as
noted in section 3, de Montesquieu appears to have beaten both to the honor.

17

Similar views were being heard in America where advocates of a strong state role in fighting
poverty saw this as an essential element of what it meant to be “a great friendly society”
(Alexander Everett, 1827, quoted by Klebaner, 1964, p.394).
The changes in popular and scholarly thinking around this time came with implications
for ongoing policy debates relevant to income distribution. One such debate was on whether
income taxes should be progressive and whose incomes should be taxed.28 The milieu gave
impetus to arguments for redistributive taxation. Smith had strongly favored exempting
subsistence wages, as did others subsequently, including those who favored proportional taxes
above the exemption—implying a progressive tax system overall.
An important prelude to the eventual emergence of promotional policies came with new
thinking on the importance of schooling; “Illiteracy had become a stigma instead of an ordinary
accompaniment of humble life” (Brinton, 1934, p.279). Condorcet, the late 18th century French
philosopher and mathematician, advocated free universal basic education (though warning
against the state instructing on moral or political matters, as he greatly valued diversity in views);
Condorcet also advocated equal rights for women and all races (Gareth Stedman Jones, 2004).
However, these were still radical ideas, well ahead of implementation. The classical economists
who came to dominate thinking about policy in the 19th century also saw education as having the
potential to make economic growth more poverty-reducing, notably by attenuating population
growth through “moral improvement.” But they did not see mass education as having a role in
promoting that growth, and saw little scope for mass public education (Blaug, 1962, p. 216).
The key contribution of the First Poverty Enlightenment was in establishing the moral
case for the idea of public effort toward eliminating poverty. That moral case rested on respect
for hard-working poor families (and less popular respect for the privileges of the rich). The idea
of antipoverty policies rests on that respect—what Frans de Waal (2009, p.116) calls “emotional
identification.” And important new progressive ideas emerged in the writings of Smith,
Rousseau, Kant, Fichte, Condorcet, Babeuf and others. However, we were still a long way from
the three premises identified in the introduction. While the First Poverty Enlightenment brought
new thinking relevant to antipoverty policies it did not mark any dramatic change in the lives of
the poor, and they were still being blamed for their poverty, which persisted into the 19th and 20th

28

Richard Musgrave (1985) reviews the history of this and other debates in public finance.

18

centuries.29 Except for relief under the Poor Laws in England and Wales, neither private
assistance nor public support for poor people showed any marked rise in Europe, from their
relatively low levels (Lindert, 2013). The main economic beneficiaries of the First Poverty
Enlightenment were probably in the middle class, who could now aspire to sources of wealth and
power they had been excluded from.

5.

The long germination of the idea of a world free of poverty
While mercantilist ideas lost influence with the emergence of classical economics,

mainstream thinking in the 19th century still held out little prospect for a world free of poverty. A
new growth path had emerged, starting in England toward the end of the 18th century, stemming
from the technical innovations of the industrial revolution in the context of a relatively laissezfaire capitalist economy. However, at the time, it was not widely believed amongst either
supporters of capitalism or its critics that workers would share much in this new growth process.
(As we will see in section 7, their pessimism on this point was excessive.) Well beyond the start
of the industrial revolution, poverty seemed as plentiful as ever. Social novels (such as
Dickens’s, 1838, Oliver Twist) and qualitative observational studies (such as Friedrich Engels,
1845) described the poor health environments and harsh working conditions of English industrial
cities in the mid-19th century.
The economics of the time appeared to offer little reason to be hopeful about progress
against persistent poverty. The classical theories of wage determination allowed the possibility of
a short-term rise in real wage rates through an upward shift in the aggregate demand for labor
associated with technical progress.30 However, the induced growth in the size of the working
class due to higher earnings—seen to reflect the “moral weaknesses” of poor people—would
soon bring the wage rate back down to the subsistence level. Thomas Malthus is famous for this
argument, but it is also found in Smith (1976, Book 1, Ch. 8). As Agnar Sandmo (2013) notes,
the idea that population growth would assure that real wages would stay constant despite
29

See, for example, Klebaner’s (1964) descriptions of views of poverty in 19th century America.
Those who accepted the (seemingly popular) idea of a negatively-sloped individual supply curve for labor might
also have entertained the possibility that upward shifts in the demand curve would entail lower wages, suggesting
that the economic growth would be poverty increasing. (The induced population effect would presumably magnify
this effect in the longer term.) This would require a strong work disincentive effect of higher wages, whereby the
supply curve was steeper than the demand curve, also implying an unstable equilibrium (under the standard wage
adjustment assumption out of equilibrium).

30

19

technical progress was widely held even to the end of the 19th century; see, for example, the
writings of Knut Wicksell (1901). The economics was hardly conclusive; lags in the population
response and repeated shifts in aggregate demand for labor with technical progress could still
yield a secular rise in real wages. However, the classical schema was seen to point to seemingly
powerful economic and demographic correctives that would tend to inhibit progress against
poverty in a growing economy.
Nor did the most influential classical economists after Smith offer much support for
direct public interventions to fight poverty. Indeed, Malthus and David Ricardo were positively
hostile to the idea of antipoverty policy, with incentive arguments figuring prominently. Here too
it is hardly evident that the economics was decisive one way or the other. Indeed, Malthus (1806)
acknowledged that better health and education for working class families could break the brutal
population corrective to rising real wages. But, the main interpretation given to the economics of
the time was hostile to such policies.
The debate on the Poor Laws: By the early 19th century a major public debate began
about the Poor Laws (though there had been debates on poverty relief back to at least the late
17th century). A strong political push for reform came from the landlords, who were financing
relief under the Old Poor Laws and dominated the English parliament around this time, and were
(it seems) no longer worried about impending revolution (Lindert, 2004, Ch.4). The backlash
against the poor laws often invoked incentive arguments, and England’s classical economists
were widely cited by critics of the Poor Laws, including in America (Klebaner, 1964).
This was a significant debate in the history of thought on poverty. For some time,
powerful critics had been concerned about the overall cost of the policy. Labor migration in
response to industrialization had meant that local landlords were left financing a rising support
bill for children and the elderly (Solar, 1995). Nor was work found by all, and unemployment
was causing many in Europe and America to turn to the state for help. But these were not the
explanations for the rising relief bill that gained favor. Observers such as Alexis de Tocqueville
(1835) (in a memoir reporting on a visit to England with the aiming of understanding why there
were so many paupers despite the country’s affluence) argued that the Poor Laws were a
disincentive to work, such that they helped create the poverty problem they aimed to solve.
Prominent classical economists, including Malthus (1806, Chapters 5 and 6) and Ricardo (1817),
argued for either abandoning the Poor Laws or at least reforming them to assure better
20

targeting.31 In an influential earlier pamphlet, A Dissertation on the Poor Laws, Townsend
(1786, p.17) wrote that: “These laws, so beautiful in theory, promote the evils they mean to
remedy, and aggravate the distress they were intended to relieve.” Assumptions about incentives
were the core of Townsend’s argument. Public relief from hunger would discourage work, and
the fiscal burden on the landholding class would discourage the growth of manufacturing and
innovation in agriculture (Townsend, 1786, Section V). For the same reason, Ricardo (1817,
p.61) predicted (plainly with huge exaggeration) that the cost of the Poor Laws would rise out of
control:
“as the legislature benevolently intended, to amend the condition of the poor, but to deteriorate
the condition of both rich and the poor; instead of making the poor rich, they are calculated to
make the rich poor; and whilst the present laws are in force, it is quite in the natural order of
things that the fund for the maintenance of the poor should progressively increase until it has
absorbed all the net revenue of the country.”

Malthus argued that the Poor Laws encourage early marriage and high fertility (though counter
arguments could also have been made that assured old-age support would reduce fertility). Moral
hazard appears to have been a concern, whereby assistance to those who took high risks, and lost
out, would encourage excessively risky behavior. The Poor Laws came to be seen by many as a
cause of poverty rather than its cure. Similar debates were also going on about America’s poor
laws, with calls for reforms to cut their rising cost (Klebaner, 1964).
However, the evidence base was clearly weak for the claims that behavioral responses to
the laws were an important cause of the poverty they tried to address. The evidence appears to
have been largely based on easily manipulated anecdotes and characterizations, with plainly
weak claims of attribution; for example, was the claimed high incidence of intemperance a cause
or effect of poverty? Nor was there much recognition that non-intervention could be social costly
too—that problems of heterogeneous risk and asymmetric information could entail that the
private insurance was unavailable,32 and that uninsured risk could spill over into production and
investment decisions of poor people in ways that can impede longer-term prospects of escaping
poverty. For example, against the concerns that relief would reduce labor supply, Solar (1995)
argues that the Old Poor Laws had the opposite effect, by providing the security against the risk
of unemployment for smallholders considering whether to become laborers instead. The type of
31

See the discussion of the views of Malthus and Ricardo on this topic in Sandmo (2013).
This economic argument for social insurance was not well developed in the literature until much later, notably by
Michael Rothschild and Joseph Stiglitz (1976).
32

21

model outlined in section 2 (Figure 1) is not an evidently implausible characterization and
motivates social protection even for people at their “high” steady-state equilibrium (point C in
Figure 1). For imagine someone at that equilibrium receiving a sufficiently large negative shock
to push them just past the unstable equilibrium. There will be no chance of recovery, and
destitution will be the inevitable result. Lack of insurance could well have been a more important
reason for poverty than too much insurance.
While incentive effects and dependency were a legitimate concern, the economic
arguments against England’s Old Poor Laws may well have been exaggerated to serve political
ends (and it was not the first or last time this happened). The “evidence” was weak and the
arguments were somewhat one-sided, with many potential economic benefits ignored.
Significant reforms to the Poor Laws were implemented in 1834 (including repeal of
Speenhamland). Spending was slashed, from a peak of about 2.5% of national income around
1830 to 1% in 1840 (Lindert, 2013, Figure 1). Wider use was made of workhouses. These had
long existed and by the late 18th century, 1-2% of the population of London was seeking relief in
some 80 workhouses.33 Their role expanded under the reform effort to assure better targeting and
the new 19th century workhouses appear to have been even more unpleasant and punitive places
than in the past (described well in London Lives). Earnings in the workhouse were never to
exceed local wages (Beaudoin, 2007, p.80). The policy became better targeted, but it lost the
broad public support of the Old Poor Laws, and (indeed) became the subject of intense social
criticism. By confining beneficiaries to workhouses, the reformed policy was seen by critics to
treat poor people as criminals. The conditions under which inmates were kept in the workhouses
became a specific focus of criticism, famously so in the early chapters of Dickens’s (1838)
Oliver Twist. And the criticisms (which started almost immediately) of the New Poor Laws were
not just confined to social critics, but reached deeply into the leading circles of the Conservative
Party, including Benjamin Disraeli (Himmelfarb, 1984a,b).
Utilitarianism: Social contract theory, with its emphasis on rights and freedoms, lost
ground in the 19th century and much of the 20th century to a new school of thought,
utilitarianism, which came to have great influence on normative economics—indeed, it became
33

See the entry on workhouses in London Lives 1690-1800. Also see in Hindle’s (2004, p.176) discussion of the use
of encouragements to work under the Old Poor Laws, whereby the Church vestry often became a “job-creation
service” (p. 176). Workhouses existed elsewhere in Europe including Holland where they were introduced in
Amsterdam around 1600 (Beaudoin, 2007, p.48).

22

the “official theory of traditional welfare economics” (Sen, 2000, p. 63). The rights- and
freedom-centered approaches were to fall by the wayside until the latter decades of the 20th
century (section 6). Jeremy Bentham, the leading thinker of utilitarianism, was motivated by
practical policy reform, and this led him to reject ideas like “natural rights.” (Frederick Artz,
1934, p.83, quotes him as describing the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen as
“a hodge-podge of confusion and absurdity.”) Instead, utilitarianism, advocated that social
choices should maximize the sum of utilities across all individuals, where “utility” was equated
with “happiness.” Assuming diminishing marginal utility of income this objective generated a
case against income inequality, since the marginal losses to rich donors of any mean-preserving
transfer would be outweighed by marginal gains to poor recipients. This did not, however, open
the floodgates of redistributive interventions. Assuming diminishing marginal utility of income
and a common utility function only implied that equality of incomes was optimal if total income
was invariant to its distribution. The case was unclear if income redistribution lowered overall
output, as Bentham expected to be the case. Even aside from incentive effects, merely
introducing inter-personal heterogeneity (such that the utility valuation of a given income level
varies) upsets the claim that an equal allocation of income maximizes social welfare (though this
point did not seem to get the same attention as the growth-equity trade-off).
Bentham and followers had seen government as a necessary evil, and put any actual or
contemplated policy effort to the utilitarian test. Some of the literature has (derisively)
characterized this as a period of “laissez-faire,” although to an economist’s eyes it was a
welcome discipline in sound policy making, to assure maximum social welfare. The real issue
was what one meant by “social welfare.” The influential rights-based thinkers on policy prior to
the utilitarians, such as Condorcet, would no doubt have also advocated higher social welfare,
but rejected any attempt to equate welfare with “happiness” or “utility” (Rothschild, 2001).
By the mid-19th century it was becoming accepted in prominent progressive circles that
the state did have a role in “..redressing the inequalities and wrongs of nature” (John Stuart Mill,
1848, p.805). Even so, it is clear that poverty was still widely accepted as a normal state of
affairs. Poor people were still being blamed for their poverty (notably by their excessive
reproduction) and there was little role for the state. Even protection was increasingly “targeted”
to extreme cases. The best that could be hoped for was that workers would somehow come to see
the wisdom of curtailing their desired family sizes. Even amongst the most progressive utilitarian
23

voices of the time (such as Mill), the closest one came to promotional policies would be to point
to a role for (private) education of the working class in reducing population growth. Only then
could real wages be expected to rise.
Schooling debates: Children from poor families typically started their working lives at an
early age; while the evidence is patchy, it was common prior to the 19th century for workingclass children in England to start earning from seven years of age, if work was available (Hugh
Cunningham, 1990). The survival of the family demanded that every able-bodied person worked.
Any skills required would only be those that could be passed on by the family. Idle poor children
were abhorrent to the rich; work was seen as the only solution. Prior to the 19th century, child
labor was not only condoned but widely seen as desirable; unemployment of poor children was
seen as the bigger social problem (Cunningham, 1990). The idea of mass public schooling
appears to have had little support. Indeed, echoing de Mandeville’s views, a common view was
that mass schooling was wasteful, and even dangerous.
Nor was the state deemed to have an important role in the schooling that was provided.
Prior to the 19th century, and well into that century in some countries (including England), almost
all schooling received by children from poor families was by religious groups. The system of
voluntary schooling in England and elsewhere in Europe was clearly highly stratified and
unequal. Schooling by religious groups had a mixed record. In England, the church resisted any
public role in provision, yet also left much unmet demand (Lindert, 2004, Ch. 5). The debate on
mass schooling opportunities continued in England until quite late in the 19th century, and the
country lagged much of Europe and North America in schooling attainments, despite its wealth.
Poor families did not always see Church schools as being in their interests. Informal
private schools were often more promising for those who could afford them. James Van Horn
Melton (1988, p.11) describes the “backstreet schools” in Austria and Prussia that offered more
efficient instruction “subordinating religious instruction to the goal of imparting literacy to their
pupils” and it appears that these were often favored by poor parents keen on their children’s
efficient learning and eventual employability; with reference to Prussia, Van Horn Melton (p.11)
writes that: “… backstreet schools offered poorer families a more cost-effective means of
acquiring literacy.” This echoes observations of the “backstreet schools” found throughout India
today, reflecting evident failures of the state-run schooling system (Probe Team, 1999).

24

A change in popular views about schooling for poor families started to be evident in
much of Europe and North America in the mid-19th century. Mercantilism had lost its influence,
and the Classical Economics that replaced it was not opposed to promotional policies such as
public schooling—policies that were capable of a pro-poor change in the distribution of wealth.
The working conditions of children in the factories of the time provided fuel for social novels
and for the increasingly vocal critics of capitalism, most notably Karl Marx and Engels.
Prominent calls started to be heard for improving the working conditions of children and for
schooling as the better way to address their unemployment. Schooling for poor children came to
be seen as key to their self-improvement and mobility. Mass schooling was also seen to have
external benefits, such as through reduced crime.
The change in policy was no doubt also influenced by the technical progress of the 19th
century in Europe and North America, and the increase in the demand for skilled labor. Without
new policies supporting mass education on the supply side, the economic growth that was fuelled
by technical progress would be more inequitable and less poverty reducing. And in the longerterm there were also concerns that there would be less growth. Yet by the mid-19th century some
40% of children aged 5-9 in England and Wales were still not in school.34
There was much public debate in Britain, Europe and North America during the 19th
century about the idea of compulsory basic schooling (Myron Weiner, 1991, Ch. 6). While there
are some who argued against almost any intrusion by the state into private decision making,35
this does not appear to have been the main argument of opponents. Mill’s (1859) influential
volume On Liberty argued that the state had a role in compelling parents to school their children,
although Mill did not favor government monopoly in the provision of that schooling. As one
would expect, the industries that were heavily dependent on child labor lobbied against
compulsory schooling. There were also concerns about enforcement. It was not until birth
registration systems had been developed around the mid-19th century that truancy laws could be
properly enforced (Weiner, 1991, p.121). National legislation to make basic schooling
compulsory only emerged in a few countries (including Austria and Prussia) toward the end of
34

This is based on the 1851 census (as reported in Cunningham, 1990, Table 1) 39% of boys and 44% of girls in this
age group were not classified as “scholars” (the alternatives being employment or “at home”). The subsequent
spread of literacy was also highly uneven geographically (Stevens, 1998).
35
In the US one occasionally hears arguments that compulsory schooling is unconstitutional, the reference being to
the anti-Slavery amendment introduced near the end of the Civil War on the grounds that (it is claimed) compulsory
schooling is “involuntary servitude.” See here, for an example.

25

the 18th century, and was not widespread in Europe and North America until the late 19th
century.36
Socialism: Carl Landauer (1959) identifies the widespread acceptance of poverty in the
th

19 century, and even indifference to it, as one of the factors that led to the emergence of
socialism. Since the root cause of poverty, and most other ills, was seen to be capitalism itself, it
is not surprising that Marxism (as the leading strand of socialist thought) also saw little merit to
the idea of antipoverty policies within a capitalist economy; only Communism could reliably
eliminate poverty. Nor was much value attached to past philosophical and economic thought on
poverty. For example, Marx was as disparaging as Bentham about talk of “rights.”37
Even so, it is notable that at least a couple of the demands outlined in the Communist
Manifesto of Marx and Engels (1848) can be recognized today as quite mainstream antipoverty
policies, including progressive income taxation and free education in public schools.
Fleischacker (2004) identifies one key influence of Marx’s thinking on subsequent non-Marxist
thinkers, including Rawls, namely his insistence that human nature was largely a product of
social context. Instead of seeing poverty as the outcome of individual attributes (being lazy is a
favorite in some quarters), one should look to social influences on behavior. Of course, this idea
also had pre-Marxian antecedents, notably in Rousseau.
Social research: Much new research on social problems was emerging in the 19th
century, and poverty was increasingly seen as a social problem. Social research was used to
promote better informed public debate on antipoverty policy. Important contributions included
Henry Mayhew’s (2008) newspaper reports on London’s poor in the 1840s, Frederic Le Play’s
budget studies of working class families in Europe in the mid-19th century (Michael Brooke,
1998) and Mathew Carey’s use of data on budgets and wages of poor people to “startle the
complacent into giving alms” in Philadelphia in the 1830s (Klebaner, 1964, p.384).
Landmarks in the development of modern scientific research on poverty were the (largely
independent) studies by Charles Booth and Seebohm Rowntree, documenting the living
conditions of England’s poor (in London and York respectively) in the late 19th century. These
were pioneering measurements using seemingly careful household surveys that revealed to nonpoor people how poor people lived. Their work attracted much attention. Booth is generally
36

There were some progressive local initiatives for mass schooling, such as Massachusetts in the late 17th century
(Weiner, 1991, Ch.6).
37
Fleischacker (2004, p.9)7 quotes Marx as calling appeals to “rights” as “ideological nonsense.”

26

credited with introducing the idea of a “poverty line.”38 The English public was shocked that one
million Londoners—about one third of the population—lived below Booth’s frugal poverty line
of 21 shillings per week for a family. And this was indeed a frugal line; by my calculations it was
equivalent to 1.5 pounds of good wheat per person per day, which is a modest line by modern
standards—roughly comparable to poverty lines found in today’s developing countries.39
Booth’s research responded to a demand for clarity and data amongst legislators. His
empirical research into old-age poverty and its geographic variation influenced Britain’s
introduction of a public pension in 1908 (Thane, 2000, Ch. 9) and national insurance in 1911
(Himmelfarb, 1984a,b). The research of Booth and Rowntree also stimulated debates about
poverty. For example, 15 years after Booth’s books appeared, Alfred Marshall was
argumentatively claiming that there was even more poverty in Germany than Booth’s figures
suggested was the case in England; this was in response to Marshall’s (1907, p.12) perception
that “one of the few things which every German knows for certain about England is that there are
a million people in London living in extreme poverty on the verge of hunger.”
The poverty studies by Booth and Rowntree were influential in social science research.
Robert Hunter (1904) followed their lead in estimating the extent of poverty in the US in 1904.
Village studies in India by Mann and collaborators were influenced by Booth and Rowntree
(Daniel Thorner, 1967). A long and distinguished tradition of quantitative-economic studies of
selected villages followed, including surveys by Askok Rudra and Pranab Bardhan (Bardhan,
1984), Christopher Bliss and Nicholas Stern (1982), Thomas Walker and James Ryan (1990) and
Pater Lanjouw and Stern (1998). Booth’s approach influenced the development of quantitative
sociology in both Britain and the US.40 Peter Townsend’s (1979) empirical study of poverty in
38

Alan Gillie (1996) argues that Booth adapted his poverty line from the London School Board’s schedule for the
remission of school fees. There were antecedents to the idea of the poverty line in Booth and Rowntree, including
the “standard of comfort” proposed by Davies 100 years earlier (Allen, 2013).
39
Marshall (1907) estimates that 21 shillings was equivalent to three-quarters of a bushel of good wheat. At 13.5%
moisture by weight a bushel of wheat weights 60lb according to the Wikipedia entry on “bushel.” I assume a
household of 4.5 people, which is the lower bound of the range 4.5-5 given by Booth (1993, Chapter 4) for the
average size of working men’s families at the time. Booth’s line is thus equivalent to slightly less than 700gms of
wheat per person per day. Of course, this is just the wheat equivalent. A reasonable dietary breakdown would be
400gms per person for wheat and the remainder for meat, vegetables and (very minimal) non-food needs. This then
is similar to India’s national poverty line in 1993, which World Bank (1997) calculates to be equivalent to a daily
food bundle per person of 400gms of coarse rice and wheat, 200gms of vegetables, pulses and fruit, plus modest
amounts of milk, eggs, edible oil, spices and tea. After buying such a food bundle, one would be left with about
$0.30 per day (at 1993 purchasing power parity) for non-food items.
40
On Booth’s influence see the Wikipedia entry on Charles Booth and the Archive maintained by the London
School of Economics.

27

England some 80 years later clearly owed much to Booth and Rowntree. So too did the Chicago
School of Sociology that began studying urban poverty in the US during the 1930s.
The late 19th century saw new questioning of the longstanding idea that poverty was
inevitable in any capitalist economy and the emergence of prominent arguments for promotional
antipoverty policies in such an economy. The historian Robert Webb (1974, p.384) argues that,
in England, it was the late 19th century when it came to be recognized that poverty “could and
must be eliminated.”41 Near the turn of the century, Marshall’s (1890, p.2) Principles of
Economics was posing the question quoted at the beginning of this paper, bemoaning that the
children of the poor received too little schooling (p. 467), and sketching policies for fighting
poverty (esp., pp. 594-9) that were not just intended as short term moralistic palliatives but were
driven by a recognition that persistent poverty was itself a constraint on wealth generation—
clearly a very different perspective to the mainstream view in the economics of 100 years earlier.
Marshall (1890, p.468) wrote of the “cumulative evil:”
“The worse fed are the children of one generation, the less they will earn when they grow up and
the less will be their power of providing adequately for the material wants of their children; and
so onto following generation.”

Thus:
“The inequalities of wealth, and especially the very low earnings of the poorest classes
..(are)…dwarfing activities as well as curtailing the satisfaction of wants” (p. 599)

Marshall’s reference here to “dwarfing activities” anticipates a view that is prominent in
development thought today whereby certain inequalities are seen as instrumentally important as
inhibitors of overall economic progress, notwithstanding their intrinsic relevance in “curtailing
the satisfaction of wants.” While Marshall was careful to avoid naïve utopianism (see, especially,
the comments in Marshall, 1907), his writings reflect a far more positive perspective on social
policy, as a means of expanding opportunities for all to share in the potential of a competitive
market economy. Here we had a forthright and prominent advocacy of promotional policies such
that “..children once born into it [poverty] should be helped to rise out of it” (p. 598).
After the First World War, there was a mounting enthusiasm for policy intervention in
the West, and there appears to have been broad agreement that greatly reducing, if not
eliminating, poverty was a legitimate role for government (Mencher, 1967). In the writings of
prominent economists, such as Arthur Pigou (1920, Part IV, Chapter 1), it had become accepted
41

Beaudoin (2007, p.100) gives the idea a more recent origin in the 20th century, after the Second World War.

28

that losses to the “national dividend” could be justified by gains to poor people. The incidence of
absolute poverty had come to be recognized as an important yardstick for measuring social
progress. For example, the eminent statistician Arthur Bowley (1915, p.213) (a founder of the
modern use of sampling methods in social surveys) wrote that:
“There is perhaps, no better test of the progress of a nation than that which shows what proportion
are in poverty and for watching the progress the exact standard selected as critical is not of great
importance, if it is kept rigidly unchanged from time to time.”

By the inter-war period it seems that poverty was no longer being seen in mainstream
circles as primarily caused by the bad behavior of poor people, but was seen to reflect deeper
economic and social problems. If nothing else, the observation of mass involuntary
unemployment during the Great Depression made that much clear. However, while the
Depression saw massive relief efforts (such as the New Deal in the US), they were largely
transient efforts for protection rather than promotion (Hugh Heclo, 1986).

6.

The Second Poverty Enlightenment
The middle of the 20th century saw a marked a turning point in progress against poverty

globally. Figure 2 plots two series for the $1 a day poverty rate, from Bourguignon and
Morrisson (2000) and Shaohua Chen and Ravallion (2010). There is a long list of data problems
in these sources and their comparability.42 However, these are the best estimates we have, and
the comparability problems are unlikely to alter two key observations from Figure 2:43 First, the
incidence of extreme poverty in the world is lower now than ever before. While there have been
calls to end extreme poverty at various times during the last century or so, they are surely now
more credible than ever. Second, the time around 1950 saw a turning point, with significantly
faster progress against extreme poverty.44 To assess the extent of the break in 1950, suppose that
42

The list includes differences in the purchasing power parity exchange rates (both the methods of estimation and
the base year for the price surveys). Bourguignon and Morrisson (2000) attempted to make their “extreme poverty”
line accord with the $1 a day at 1985 PPP of Ravallion et al. (1991). While there is no strictly comparable series in
Chen and Ravallion (2005) (given data and methodological differences), the closest series is clearly that for $1 a day
at 2005 PPP, Also, the Bourguignon-Morrisson series uses means anchored to national accounts (they had no choice
given their data) but pre-existing inequality measures based on surveys, while Chen-Ravallion use surveys for both.
In splicing with the Chen-Ravallion series it is assumed that nobody lives below $1 a day in the developed countries
after 1980. This is plausible, and is consistent with the Luxembourg Income Study data base (author’s calculations).
43
Neither observation has been made before to my knowledge.
44
Allowing for a change in the trend rate of poverty reduction (% points per year) in 1950, but constraining the
estimates to assure continuity in 1950, the trends are -0.26% points per year up to 1950 (with a standard error of
0.03) and -0.72 after 1950 (standard error of 0.02).

29

it had not occurred—that the pre-1950 trajectory had been maintained. We would then have
expected to find that 36% (standard error =3.3%) of the world’s population lived below $1 a day
in 2005,45 as compared to the Chen and Ravallion estimate of 14%. The difference implies that
an extra 1.5 billion people would have lived in poverty by this measure if not for the break in
trajectories around 1950.
About the same time that the trajectory of poverty incidence was changing, a significant
shift in economic and philosophical thinking was underway, with bearing on antipoverty policy.
This was the Second Poverty Enlightenment, dating from about 1960. Across the globe—
including in the newly free countries of the developing world—there was new optimism amongst
policy makers about the scope for fighting poverty. Evidence for the change in public attention to
poverty can be found in the striking rise in the incidence of use of the word “poverty” in the
writings of the time after 1960. This is evident if one enters the word “poverty” in the Google
Books Ngram Viewer (the Viewer hereafter).46 The Viewer’s counts are normalized by the total
number of words in the corpus for that year. One can refer to the normalized frequency as the
“incidence.” Figure 3 gives the Viewer’s graph for the incidence of the word “poverty” from
1700-2000 in both English and French. The upturn started around 1960 in both languages. By
2000 the incidence of references to “poverty” reached its highest value in 300 years. And the rise
in incidence continued after 2000 and up to the latest year (2008) for which the data are available
at the time of writing; indeed, with moderate smoothing of the time series, 2008 is the year since
1600 when poverty has had the most attention in the literature.47 Attention to poverty appears to
be higher now than any time since 1800 while the incidence of extreme poverty is at its lowest
point since then (Figure 2).
45

This is based on a simple linear projection. Nonlinearity can be expected eventually, but Figure 2 does not suggest
this is a concern for the present purposes.
46
This tool was introduced by Jean-Baptiste Michel et al. (2010). In this context, an “n-gram” is just a phrase, made
up of words (“1-grams”). Michel et al. created a corpus of over 500 billion n-grams (360 billion in English) from
over five million books. Naturally the total number of words in a given year has increased over time. Michel et al.
estimate that there were about one million words in English in 2000, but barely half that number in 1900. (And most
of that growth was in the latter half of the 20th century.) Ravallion (2011) discusses the use of the Viewer for the
present purpose, including potential sources of bias.
47
The relevant plot up to 2008 and as far back as possible can be found here. There are two spikes in 1634 and
1659. Naturally the volume of words in the Viewer’s data base is low in these earlier years, often with only a few
books per year. Each of these spikes largely reflects one or two volumes that used the word “poverty” a lot. This is
clearly deceptive. With any smoothing parameter greater than three, the peak year becomes the last year in the
series, 2008. Also note that the count is case sensitive. The use of capitalized words mid-sentence was more
common in English writing of the 17th and 18th centuries so it is important to include capitalized words when going
back that far. But this matters little after 1800 or so.

30

Similarly to the First Poverty Enlightenment, the Second was a time of radical
questioning and instability, although, unlike the First, it did not come in the wake of rising
absolute poverty. There were demands for new freedoms across the world. There was social
ferment and civil unrest in the rich world, and newfound political independence combined with
much political and economic upheaval in the poor world.48 And, similarly to the First, there was
new scholarly thought with great bearing on antipoverty policy.
In philosophy and economics, the 1960s and ‘70s saw the emergence of a significant
questioning of the utilitarian-welfarist paradigm as a basis for public action against poverty and
inequality, and in other domains of public policy. The objective of maximizing the sum of
utilities reflects an aversion to income inequality (assuming diminishing marginal utility of
income) but is indifferent to inequality of welfare and to individual rights. Utilitarianism can be
used to justify actions that increase poverty, as long as there is a greater welfare gain to the nonpoor. Yet it was never established, and is not obvious, that all income levels must have strictly
positive weight under utilitarianism, and in practice they did not given that utilitarian analytics
was almost invariably confined to the residents of the country in question.49 The idea that
poverty is fundamentally a lack of individual freedom to live the life one wants—a severe
deprivation of basic capabilities in Sen’s (1985, 1999) terms—and that such freedom has an
over-riding ethical merit, gets no intrinsic weight in classical utilitarianism.50 When combined
with the view in some quarters that poor people are irrational, and do not do what is in their own
interests, a lack of explicit weight on individual freedom can readily lead to paternalistic
antipoverty policies, such as past coercive efforts to encourage poor parents in developing
countries to have fewer children.51
It is hard to prescribe antipoverty policies without making some form of interpersonal
comparison of utility. Yet, in the wake of an influential book by Lionel Robbins (1935), the
period up to around 1950 saw economists striving to purge welfare economics of interpersonal
48

While the 1960s was a famous period in the West, with vocal new movements for peace and racial and gender
equity, much was also happening in the developing world. In the 1960s alone, 32 countries in Africa gained
independence, though often with contested borders. China’s “Cultural Revolution” started in 1966, and wreaked
havoc for 10 years. South Asia (Bangladesh and India) and parts of Africa were fighting famines in the 1960s and
1970s, and there was much political instability; even relatively stable India had its share of political upheaval
including the “Emergency” in the mid-1970s.
49
As Dasgupta (1993, Ch. 2) points out, classical utilitarianism can also be modified to incorporate constraints such
that no utility is allowed to fall below some stipulated minimum, but this was never done to my knowledge.
50
Freedom of choice can, of course, be instrumentally important to welfare, but that is not at issue here.
51
See the examples given in Hartmann (1987).

31

comparisons—leaving little scope for normative economic analysis of poverty or income
distribution more generally.52 A turning point in thinking on this issue came with Kenneth
Arrow’s (1951) famous theorem, which was taken to point to the need to make some form of
interpersonal comparability, or accept a dictator’s choices for society (and his theorem also led to
new questioning of whether democracy could deliver policy reform).53 Ethical considerations
soon returned to policy analysis by economists, although it also came to be understood that not
all such analyses required fully comparable cardinal utilities (Sen, 1970b). The futility of
attempting to infer comparable utilities solely on the basis of demand behavior also came to be
accepted (especially following Robert Pollak and Terence Wales, 1979). The 1970s and ‘80s saw
new efforts to put poverty and inequality measurement on firmer theoretical foundations.54 There
was an explosion of interest in the measurement of poverty and inequality, both in theory and in
practice, starting from around 1970, as is evident in Figure 4.
Other seemingly sacred elements of welfare economics started to be questioned,
including whether people were rational, although some of the claims of “irrationality” that
emerged from behavioral economics appeared to stem more from limited characterizations of
utility functions and/or limited allowances for mistakes, as pointed out by Saint-Paul (2011),
amongst others. Even the idea that social welfare had to be strictly increasing in all utilities (the
Pareto principle) was being questioned as either a sufficient or a morally compelling basis for
policy making (as in, for example, Shiv Nath, 1969). The Pareto principle was even found to be
inconsistent with seemingly mild requirements for personal liberty (Sen, 1970a).
If there is a single scholarly landmark of the Second Poverty Enlightenment it must be
Rawls’s (1971) Theory of Justice. Borrowing from early formulations of social contract theory,
Rawls proposed that the principles of justice should be the social contract agreed amongst equals
in a veil of ignorance about where they would find themselves in the real world. (Of course this
was unobservable—a counterfactual—but nonetheless with evaluative import.) Rawls argued
that two principles would emerge. First, each person should have equal right to the most
52

For an authoritative overview of this and other issues in the history of thought on income distribution see Sandmo
(2013).
53
Developing arguments first made by Condorcet in 1785, Arrow (1951) established that, under seemingly
defensible axioms, a unique social ordering over three or more options that is derived solely from a set of
unrestricted individual orderings must be either imposed or dictatorial. Notice, however, that allowing interpersonal
comparisons is only one of the possible resolutions of Arrow’s dictatorship result (Sen, 1970).
54
Important contributions came from Harold Watts (1968), Anthony Atkinson (1970, 1987), Serge Kolm (1976),
Sen (1973, 1976) and James Foster, Joel Greer and Erik Thorbecke (1984).

32

extensive set of liberties compatible with the same rights for all; this borrowed from the idea of
liberty that had emerged toward the end of the Age of Enlightenment, and became the motto of
the French Revolution (and subsequently of France). Second, subject to the constraint of liberty,
social choices should provide the greatest benefit to the least advantaged and provide equal
opportunity to all. These two elements were not equally new. Equality of opportunity was
essentially the French Revolution’s idea of “equality.” The idea that public action should focus
on the worst off (“maximin”) was the more radical and controversial idea. The “worst off” were
to be identified by what Rawls called their command over “primary goods.” These are all those
things needed to assure that one is free to live the life one wants. This is a broader than what are
often called “basic needs” as it includes social inclusion needs and basic liberties.
As Rawls recognized, one will need an index for determining the least advantaged.
Possibly because of his evident desire to break all ties with utilitarianism, Rawls avoided using
the term “utility function” (or “welfare function”), but this is evidently what he has in mind in his
discussions of the “index problem” (esp., Rawls, 1971, esp. pp.90-95)—namely a function that
expresses the accepted trade-offs. And Rawls agreed that it is also compelling that those tradeoffs be consistent with individual preferences over primary goods (Rawls, 1971, p.94). However,
he argues that we need not be concerned with the preferences of the non-poor under the
assumption that their primary good vectors are bound to dominate those of the poor. 55 (This is an
empirical question, but a plausible assumption in the absence of data.) Thus the utility function
of the worst off person should be decisive in aggregations across primary goods.56
The Second Poverty Enlightenment had intellectual roots in the First. Rawls saw his
principles of justice as reflecting the French Revolution’s dictum, “Liberté, égalité, fraternité.”
He saw maximin as a natural interpretation of “fraternity:” “the idea of not wanting to have
greater advantages unless this is to the benefit of others who are less well off.” This a natural
step (though it took a long time) from the aspirations for fraternity that emerged in the First
Poverty Enlightenment. Utilitarianism was seen to be in conflict with fraternity, since it justified
losses to the individual in the name of total utility. There would always be some gain to the

55

More generally, the partial ordering of vectors of primary goods required by Rawls’s maximin principle need not
require a mathematically precise aggregation function; a sufficient partial orderings may be possible by only
specifying certain generic properties of that function; for further details see Atkinson and Bourguignon (1982).
56
“The only index problem that concerns us is that for the least advantaged group.” (Rawls, 1971, p. 93)

33

richest person that could justify a loss to the poorest. The individual is subordinated to the
common good, as measured by the sum of utilities. This Rawls rejected.
Rawls saw his theory as a re-interpretation of Kant. Poor people should have the right to
veto any scheme that brings gains to the well-off at their expense. In direct contradiction to the
dominant view 200 years earlier, poverty for some was unacceptable as the means to others’
prosperity. He argued that the social contract would then be “stable” in that “the institutions that
satisfy it will generate their own support” (Rawls, 1967), unlike a utilitarian schema. It was not,
however, clear why stability could only be threatened by the poor.
Rawls’s theory of justice soon stimulated debate. Whether maximin would in fact emerge
behind the Rawlsian “veil of ignorance” was open to dispute. Some took this to imply rather
extreme risk aversion in an expected-utility formulation, although the relevance of that critique
was questionable given that the probabilities of different states of nature were also unknowable
behind the veil. However, as Thomas Pogge (1989) argues, one can accept Rawls’s principles of
justice without accepting his rationale in terms of a social contract. Robert Nozick (1974)
published a libertarian critique giving primacy to historical property rights above all else,
although it was never clear why property rights were never to be questioned.57 Sen (1980) took
issue with Rawls’s concept of primary goods, arguing that this idea does not adequately reflect
the freedoms that people have to pursue their goals, recognizing the heterogeneity in the ability
of people to transform primary goods into freedoms. This critique led to Sen’s (1985)
conceptualization of welfare in terms of primary “functionings”—“what people are able to be
and do (rather than in terms of the means they possess)” (Sen, 2000, p.74).
The rediscovery of poverty in America: The industrialized world saw a boom in social
spending in the second half of the 20th century (Lindert, 2004).The new public attention to
antipoverty policies is evident in the marked increase in references to “antipoverty” and
“redistribution” in the Viewer (Figure 5). “Poverty alleviation” grew rapidly in usage through to
the 1980s. References to “redistribution” peaked around 1980. “Redistribution of wealth” was
often mentioned in the Great Depression, but declined in use during the Second World War 2
(WW2) and after until about 1960 when a new upsurge of interest emerged.

57

Pogge (1989) reviews this and other critiques of Rawls’s principles of justice and provides a re-interpretation and
(vigorous) defence of Rawls’s original arguments.

34

The change in thinking was especially evident in the US.58 In the wake of the civil rights
movement (starting around 1955), the rediscovery of poverty in the midst of affluence was
stimulated by important social commentaries, including John Kenneth Galbraith’s (1958) The
Affluent Society and Michael Harrington’s (1962) The Other America, both best sellers at the
time.59 The success of Harrington’s book, in particular, was clearly a surprise; the first print-run
was 2,500 copies, but by the mid-1990s it had sold 1.3 million copies.
Knowledge technology had shifted significantly to make this new awareness of poverty
possible. The First Poverty Enlightenment lacked the theories and data that we take for granted
today in trying to understand poverty and so inform public action. Nor was there much sign yet
of the theories and movements that could claim to represent the interests of poor people. All that
had changed by the 1950s. Authors like Harrington and Galbraith could formulate accessible
arguments grounded on a body of theory and data, the latter stemming from sample surveys and
much analytic work in measuring living standards and setting poverty lines. Many people were
shocked in the early 1960s when the official calculations indicated that almost on-in-five
Americans lived in poverty.
While the type of quantification initiated by Booth and Rowntree 70 years earlier had
been crucial, credibly reported qualitative observations in the media and popular books were
hugely influential, including on policy making at the highest levels. Many people were
influenced by Harrington’s efforts to “describe the faces behind the statistics” (p.17):
“Tens of millions of Americans are, at this very moment, maimed in body and spirit, existing at
levels beneath those necessary for human decency. If these people are not starving, they are
hungry, and sometimes fat with hunger, for that is what cheap foods do. They are without
adequate housing and education and medical care…The millions who are poor in the United
States tend to become increasingly invisible. Here is a great mass of people, yet it takes an effort
of the intellect and will even to see them....The other America, the America of poverty, is hidden
today in a way that it never was before. Its millions are socially invisible to the rest of us.”

This was research aimed squarely at promoting change through knowledge. In an introduction to
a 1993 reprint of The Other America, Irving Howe (1993, p.xii) describes its central premise:
“…that if only people knew the reality they would respond with indignation, that if people
became aware of “the invisible poor” they would act to eliminate this national scandal.”

58

Though not only in America; the 1960s saw rising attention to poverty in other rich countries, including Britain
where The Poor and the Poorest, by Brian Abel-Smith and Peter Townsend (1966) was influential.
59
References to both books in the Viewer skyrocketed from the 1960s; the graph can be found here.

35

Galbraith and Harrington described a new “minority poverty” in America. A long period
of poverty reduction had meant that the poor were now a (sizeable) minority. While overall
economic growth had allowed many of the “old poor” to move into the new middle class, others
were left behind or thrown into poverty from which they could not escape. Widely held views
about upward mobility and equality of opportunity in America also came into question based on
empirical studies showing how much parental income and schooling affects the schooling and
life chances of children (Otis Duncan et al., 1972; Bowles and Herbert Gintis, 1976).
There were differences between Galbraith and Harrington in their understanding of this
new poverty in America. Galbraith identified two reasons why so many of the old poor were
unable to participate in the new opportunities. The first was physical or mental disability—what
Galbraith called “case poverty”—while the second was that some were trapped in geographic
pockets of poverty (his “insular poverty”). While not rejecting these categories, Harrington
argued that this was incomplete in that many of the minority poor had been negatively impacted
by the same economic expansion that had benefited so many others. Significant economic
change had created their poverty, and they were unable to recover. Here Harrington is making an
important point—that even pro-poor overall progress comes with losers as well as winners. And
his description sounds a lot like the model of wealth dynamics in Section 2, whereby large
negative shocks create persistent poverty, and recovery to get back on track is no small thing.
The political response in the US included new social programs, notably under the
Economic Opportunity Act of 1964, popularly known as the Johnson administration’s War on
Poverty (James Sundquist, 1968). The new programs included Head Start, which continues
today (and is discussed further in section 9). Knowledge support to the War on Poverty was
provided by (amongst other efforts) a new national institute created in 1966, The Institute for
Research on Poverty at the University of Wisconsin Madison. This was charged with studying
the causes of poverty in the US and evaluating antipoverty programs.60 Harold Watts served as
the first director, and Timothy Smeeding is the director at the time of writing.
The War on Poverty was not, it seems, prompted by a mass shift in American public
opinion; indeed, Hugh Heclo (1986) refers to public opinion polls for the US indicating that the
public was evenly divided on whether welfare spending should increase. It seems that the
political response was motivated more by evidence and ideas than by attracting voters. While
60

A good history of the Institute can be found on their website.

36

causality is unclear, it is nonetheless notable that the US poverty rate fell appreciably over 196080 (Bruce Meyer and James Sullivan, 2012).61
In due course, a backlash emerged. An influential counter-attack came from Charles
Murray’s (1984) Losing Ground. Concerns about adverse incentive effects returned to loom
large, such as claims that welfare benefits to single mothers encouraged families to break up.
However, as in the 19th century debates on the Poor Laws, there was rather little credible
supportive evidence presented, and evidence to the contrary could be cited (Ellwood and
Summers, 1986). Yet reforms followed in the US in the 1990s; 30 years after declaring a “War
on Poverty,” critics of the reforms argued that America had declared a “War on Welfare.”62
While (again) the attribution to social policies alone can be questioned, it is notable that
the decline in US income poverty rates up to about 1980 stalled, and even reversed after that.
Also notable is that this came with a marked shift in the demographic profile of US poverty,
favoring the elderly. Indeed, the incidence of poverty continued to fall amongst the elderly in the
US after 1980, albeit at a slower rate. Lindert (2013) attributes this difference to a bias in US
social spending in favor of the elderly over the young, in common with other rich countries.
In attempting to explain America’s poverty amidst affluence, the ideas of a “culture of
poverty” and an “underclass” that emerged in the 1960s were also much debated. Critics saw
these ideas as blaming poor people for their poverty and ignoring more deep rooted “structural”
inequalities (Herbert Gans, 1995; Alice O’Connor, 2002). In some versions of the “underclass”
idea, such as in Julius Wilson’s (1987) The Truly Disadvantaged, a “culture of poverty” was
seen to stem from structural inequalities and so part of their explanation; echoing Harrington,
Wilson emphasized macroeconomic factors, including structural changes in the economy, urban
structural changes and aggregate unemployment rates. But even so there has been much debate
about the role of cultural factors. The literature of the late 20th century came to question whether
there was any legitimate space for policy intervention aimed at changing culture.63
The rich world’s rediscovery of global poverty: A further surge of attention to poverty in
the popular and scholarly literature in the late 20th century stemmed from the Western public’s
increasing awareness of the existence of severe and widespread poverty in the developing world.
61

This is true for both incomes and consumptions; income poverty rates crept back up after 1980, though
consumption-based measures continued to fall. On the choice between these measures see Daniel Slesnick (2001).
62
The latter term was used by Katz (1987); also see Albelda et al. (1996).
63
This debate re-opened again in Steinberg’s (2011) comments on Small et al. (2010).

37

Poverty and inequality in developing countries started to attract substantial mainstream scholarly
attention in the West from the early 1970s.64 GDP per capita was no longer seen as the sole
metric for judging success; for example, in his foreword to an overview by the World Bank of 25
years of development the Bank’s first Chief Economist, Hollis Chenery (1977, p.v) wrote that:
“The difficulty of attempting social change and growth simultaneously in the conditions of the
1950s…led to an emphasis on increased GNP as a measure of success in development. This
…has now been replaced by a more complex statement of social objectives, which recognizes
that economic growth is a necessary but not sufficient condition for social progress and that more
direct attention should be given to the welfare of the poorest groups.”

For most of the developing world, poverty was “majority poverty”—in marked contrast
to Galbraith’s characterization of “minority poverty.” Travel and visual media made it visible to
those in the West, though it was already so to almost everyone in the developing world. And
poverty data were playing an important role in the post-Independence policy debates in some
poor countries, including India, notably through its National Sample Surveys. As was the case
with the poverty research by Booth and Rowntree in late 19th century England, around 1990
many people were shocked to learn that there were about one billion people in the world living
on less than $1 per day, at purchasing power parity (PPP) (World Bank, 1990; Ravallion et al.,
1991)—an explicitly frugal line anchored to the national poverty lines found amongst the
world’s poorest countries.65 Since 1990 there has been a massive expansion in survey data
collection and availability, and refinements to the methodology; the original estimates by
Ravallion et al. (1991) used data for 22 countries, with one survey per country, while the latest
estimates in Chen and Ravallion (2010) and are based on survey data for 125 countries with
more than six surveys per country. The efforts of country statistics offices—often with support
from international agencies such as the UNDP and World Bank’s Living Standards Measurement
Study (LSMS)—to collect household survey data and price data have provided the empirical
foundation for domestic and international efforts to fight poverty since the 1980s.66 Public access
64

Important contributions in the 1970s and’80s included V.M. Dandekar and N. Rath (1971), Irma Adelman and
Cynthia Morris (1973), Hollis Chenery et al. (1974), Michael Lipton (1976), World Bank (1980), Gary Fields
(1980), Nanak Kakwani (1980), Sen (1981a), Sudhir Anand (1983), Bardhan (1984) and Ravi Kanbur (1987).
65
The $1 a day line was chosen as a typical poverty line for low-income countries. It was never exactly $1 a day,
and the latest line (based on a much larger and more representative sample of national lines) is $1.25 a day at 2005
PPP (Ravallion et al., 2009).
66
While there has been huge progress in the coverage and quality of these data, there are continuing concerns,
including biases associated with selective compliance with the survey’s randomized assignment and problems of
under-reporting of incomes in surveys. On these problems and their implications for standard measures see Korinek
et al. (2006). There are also continuing concerns about national accounts data for developing countries; see, for

38

to such data was crucial, and gradually improved, with help from efforts such as the Bank’s
LSMS and the Luxembourg Income Study. The Bank’s (1990) World Development Report:
Poverty was influential in development policy circles, and soon after a “world free of poverty”
became the Bank’s overarching goal. A large body of empirical research on poverty followed in
the 1990s, helped by a number of texts that provided useful expositions for practitioners of
relevant theory and methods.67 The UNDP’s Human Development Reports began in 1990, and
have consistently argued for public action to promote basic health and education in developing
countries. The importance to human development of combining income-poverty reduction with
better access to basic services came to be appreciated (Anand and Ravallion, 1993). Sri Lanka’s
longstanding emphasis on basic health and education services had been shown to bring a large
dividend in longevity and other human development indicators relative to countries at a similar
level of average income (Sen, 1981b). The emphasis most East Asian countries have long given
to broadly shared investments in human development also came to be recognized in the 1990s as
a crucial element to their economic success, even though the role played by some other elements
of the East Asian policy package remained contentious (World Bank, 1993; Albert Fishlow and
Catherine Gwin, 1994; Dani Rodrik, 1994). It is clear that by the late 20th century there had been
a complete reversal in policy thinking about poverty, from the view 200 years earlier that human
capital development for poor families was a waste of public resources to the view that it is an
essential pre-condition for growth and development.
The period also saw a broadening of the range of types of policies under consideration,
especially in the developing world. There was a new political will for antipoverty policy in many
of the newly independent, post-Colonial, states, although with mixed success. Policies for
promoting economic growth came to be seen and judged by their efficacy in promoting (amongst
other goals) poverty reduction (World Bank, 1990). (The next section will return to this point.)
By the 1990s, it seems that nothing in the policy arena was off-limits in discussing impacts on
poverty. This brought a new danger too, since without some degree of separability to allow
instruments to be tied to goals there was a risk of policy paralysis. But economic analysis, and a
measure of good sense, could often be trusted to guide effective policy action, recognizing the

example, Morten Jerven’s (2013) observations on the quality of the national accounts data in much of Sub-Saharan
Africa.
67
Examples include Ravallion (1994a), Elisabeth Sadoulet and Alain de Janvry (1995), Angus Deaton (1997) and
Margaret Grosh and Paul Glewwe (2000).

39

trade-offs. And the shift in focus from protection to promotion is also evident in the types of
policies being tried within the sub-class of direct interventions, as we will see in the section 9.
By the turn of the 21st century, a new optimism on the scope for global poverty reduction
had emerged. The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) were ratified in 2000 at the
Millennium Assembly, a meeting of world leaders at the United Nations. The first MDG was to
halve the developing world’s 1990 “$1 a day” poverty rate by 2015. Jeffrey Sachs (2005b, p.1)
wrote a New York Times Bestseller, The End of Poverty, outlining his personal vision of how
“Our generation can choose to end that extreme poverty by the year 2025.” Some of this
optimism was well founded in subsequent events. Using the $1.25-a-day poverty line in 2005
prices, the first MDG was attained in 2010, a full five years ahead of the goal (Chen and
Ravallion 2013). Even so, that important achievement leaves over one billion people living in
extreme poverty, as judged by the standards of the poorest countries. But continuing the success
against extreme poverty seen since 2000 will lift one billion people out of extreme poverty by
2030 (Ravallion, 2013). Progress in reducing global relative poverty will be slower; today over
2.5 billion people remain poor by the standards of the country they live in. However, national
poverty elimination targets have emerged in many countries, both rich and poor. In 2010 the
European Union adopted its Europe 2020 poverty reduction target to reduce by 25% the numbers
of Europeans living below national poverty lines.
Some of the debates of 200 years ago survive today. For example, at the time of writing
the US Congress was implementing substantial cuts to the Supplementary Nutrition Assistance
Program (“Food Stamps”). During the relevant House of Representatives Committee Meeting, a
Congressman was quoted as saying that “While it was a Christian duty to care for the poor and
hungry, it was not the government’s duty” (Fifield, 2013). One heard such claims often 200
years ago; the difference today is that most people in the world clearly do not agree.
While there is continuing debate on the causes of poverty and on policy prescriptions,
modern writings are invariably premised on a belief that poverty is something that can be greatly
reduced with the right economic and social policies and, indeed, eliminated. By this view,
poverty is in no small measure a global public responsibility, and governments and the economy
are to be judged (in part at least) by the progress that is made against poverty.

40

7.

The idea of a progressive market economy
Until the late 20th century, the prevailing view was one of skepticism that poor people

would benefit much from economic growth in a capitalist economy. Well into the 1980s it was
common to hear in both popular and scholarly writings that economic growth was expected to
largely by-pass poor people in both rich and poor countries. Where did this skepticism come
from and was it justified?
By one view, poverty is likely to persist in a growing economy because poverty is
relative. A widely used definition of poverty in Western Europe sets the poverty line at a
constant proportion of the current mean (or median).68 Strictly, poverty could still be eliminated
when using such a measure, with sufficient redistribution in favor of poor people. Growth in the
mean will not do so without a change in relative distribution. However, the explicit acceptance
of poverty among economists and non-economists alike over some 200 years or more did not
appear to be the product of such a relativist view. While Adam Smith is often cited as supporting
the idea that poverty is relative, it is unlikely that he would subscribe to strongly relative
measures. In a famous passage in the Wealth of Nations (1776, Book 5, Chapter 2, Article 4) he
pointed to the social role of a linen shirt in eighteenth century Europe.69 However, this merely
suggests that Smith would have wanted a poverty line to be relevant to the society in which
poverty is being estimated. A linen shirt in 18th century Europe is an example of what can be
termed a “social inclusion need.” The cost of that shirt will be roughly the same for the poorest
person as the richest. More generally, the cost of social inclusion needs cannot be expected to go
to zero in the limit, as mean income goes to zero, as postulated by strongly relative poverty lines.
To allow for a (positive) minimum cost of social inclusion one requires what Ravallion and Chen
(2011) dub “weakly relative measures.” These have the feature that the poverty line will not rise
proportionately to the mean, but will have an elasticity less than unity for all finite mean
incomes. Then sufficient inequality-neutral growth will eliminate poverty.70

68

See, for example, Eurostat (2005). Townsend (1979) was an early advocate of relative lines. For a thoughtful
discussion of the various measures used in Western Europe see Atkinson (1998, Lecture 1). The global measures
proposed by Atkinson and Bourguignon (2001) are strongly relative above some critical level of mean income.
69
In more recent times, a number of studies have also pointed to the social roles played by festivals, celebrations
and communal feasts; see, for example, Rao (2001), Banerjee and Duflo (2007) and Branko Milanovic (2008).
70
For any linear schedule of relative poverty lines as a function of the mean, and all standard measures of poverty,
saying that there is a positive lower bound to the cost of social inclusion is essentially equivalent to saying that
inequality-neutral growth in the mean will reduce the measure of poverty (Ravallion and Chen, 2011).

41

But growth was not expected to be inequality-neutral. Most classical and Marxist
economic thinkers saw little hope that even a growing capitalist economy would deliver rapid
poverty reduction, or even any poverty reduction. While Smith was optimistic about the potential
for a progressive, poverty-reducing, market economy, later prominent classical economists, such
as Malthus and Ricardo, were more pessimistic on the prospects for higher real wages and
(hence) less poverty, suggesting that they anticipated rising inequality from a growing capitalist
economy. As discussed in section 5, demographic responses to rising wages were expected to
play a key role in attenuating the poverty impact of growth. The socialist movement that
emerged toward the middle of the 19th century shared the same pessimistic view on the prospects
for poverty reduction, but took it to be a damning criticism of capitalism. And the thirst for
profits to finance capital accumulation, combined with the large “reserve army” of unemployed,
was seen as the constraint on rising real wage rates, rather than population growth.
Distributional dynamics has long been a central theme of development economics.
Poverty was a concern for the post-Colonial governments of the newly independent countries,
but the earliest policy-oriented discussions were pessimistic on the prospects of economic growth
bringing much benefit to poor people. It was widely believed that growth in low-income
countries was bound to be inequitable, and that view is still heard today.
A foundation for this view was provided by Simon Kuznets (1955), and came to be
known as the “Inverted U Hypothesis,” whereby inequality first increases with growth in a poor
country but falls after some critical income level is reached.71 While there are now other
theoretical models that can generate such a relationship, in the original model the economy was
assumed to comprise a low-mean, low-inequality rural sector and a high-mean, high-inequality
urban sector, and growth occurred through the migration of workers from the former to the latter.
This was assumed to entail that a representative “slice” of the rural distribution is transformed
into a representative slice of the urban distribution, preserving distributions within each sector. It
is easy to see what this implies for distributional dynamics. Assume that everyone is initially in
the rural sector. When the first sub-group of the rural sector moves into the urban sector under
the Kuznets process inequality will appear that was not there before, namely that between a
typical urban resident and a typical rural resident. Inequality will increase. Consider the last

71

Also see Adelman and Morris (1973), Sherman Robinson (1976), Montek Ahluwalia (1976), Ahluwalia et al.
(1979) and Anand and Kanbur (1993).

42

sub-group to leave the rural sector; the same inequality will now disappear. Extending this
reasoning, an inverted U can be derived linking certain indices of inequality and the population
share of the urban sector can be derived (Robinson, 1976; Anand and Kanbur, 1993).
Some policy-makers appear to have incorrectly inferred that this model also implied that
economic growth in poor countries would bring little benefit to poor people. (This sometimes
reflected a long-standing confusion between the ideas of “poverty” and “inequality” in
development policy discussion.) It is easy to show that for all additive poverty measures, if
poverty is initially higher in the rural sector then aggregate poverty must fall under the Kuznets
process of migration described above. Not for the last time, thinking about how the overall
development strategy might allow more rapid poverty reduction was led astray by
misunderstandings of a theoretical model.
The economic history of today’s rich countries has often been seen as a source of lessons
for the developing world. Contrary to the expectations of both the 19th century supporters and
critics of capitalism, Britain’s industrial revolution that started around 1760 was almost certainly
poverty reducing through rising real wages rates. But there was a long lag. Just how long
depends on the position one takes in a debate on price indices. Gregory Clark’s (2005) series of
builders’ real wage rates in England suggests that higher wages from about 1800, while Allen
(2007, 2009) argues that the increase started closer to 1830. Either way the pessimists appear to
have been right for at least a few decades after the technical innovations.72 Real wages rates in
Britain did start to rise in the 19th century despite continuing population growth. Falling food
prices in Europe due to refrigeration and lower freight transport costs helped later in that century
(Jeffrey Williamson, 1998). And there is evidence that the gains in real wages for the working
class from the mid-19th century came hand-in-hand with improved nutritional status.73
The lag in the real wage rate response to the industrial revolution is suggestive of a Lewis
(1954) model in which a surplus of labor in the rural economy keeps wages at a low level until
that surplus is absorbed by the economy’s modern (urban) sector, as this expands due to
technical progress. Allen (2009) offers an alternative explanation whereby the extra demand for
capital due to technical progress could only be met by savings from non-labor income, under the
72

Also see Williamson (1985) and O’Rourke and Williamson (1997).
See the Robert Fogel et al. (1983) series on mean height of working class boys in London, which tracks quite
closely Tucker’s (1975) series on real wages of London artisans. However, Francesco Cinnirella (2008) puts the
turning point (after which mean height rose) much later, around the mid-19th century.

73

43

assumption that workers were too poor to save. Then profits had to rise to finance the
investments needed, and only when sufficient capital had accumulated did real wages rise. In
short, high poverty had to persist for some time, despite growth, because poor people simply
could not generate the savings required to support that growth. However, even a small amount of
saving by each of a large number of workers could suffice in the aggregate to help finance
capital accumulation provided that those savings could be mobilized. Financial
underdevelopment may then be seen as a root cause of the lag.
The empirical foundations for the expectation that inequality would inevitably rise in
growing developing countries were not particularly secure at the time the Kuznets Hypothesis
was influential. There was not much data to draw on. A debate in the early 1970s on the
distribution of the gains from economic growth in Brazil left an appetite for better survey data
for measuring poverty and inequality.74 As better evidence from household surveys accumulated,
it turns out that very few low-income countries have developed over time in a manner
consistently with the Kuznets Hypothesis, as shown by Michael Bruno et al. (1998) and Fields
(2001). We have learnt that growth in developing countries tends to be distribution-neutral on
average, meaning that changes in inequality are roughly orthogonal to growth rates in the mean
(Ravallion, 1995, 2001; Dollar and Kraay, 2002; Ferreira and Ravallion, 2009). Distributionneutral growth implies that the changes in any standard measure of either absolute or weaklyrelative poverty will be negatively correlated with growth rates in the mean.
There is also evidence of inequality convergence, whereby inequality tends to increase in
low inequality countries, and decrease in high inequality countries (Roland Bénabou, 1996;
Ravallion, 2003). This is consistent with neoclassical growth theory, which shows that a fully
competitive market economy contains strong forces for reducing inequality, as demonstrated by
Stiglitz (1969) and Bénabou (1996). As Ravallion (2003) argues, the evidence we see of
inequality convergence can also be explained by how economic policy convergence in the world
during the 1990s interacted with pre-reform differences in the extent of inequality. To see why,
ssuppose that reforming developing countries fall into two categories: those in which pre-reform
controls on the economy were used to benefit the rich, keeping inequality artificially high
(arguably the case in much of Latin America up to the 1980s), and those in which the controls

74

Contributions in this debate included Fishlow (1972), Fields (1977) and Ahluwalia et al. (1979).

44

had the opposite effect, keeping inequality low (as in Eastern Europe and Central Asia prior to
the 1990s). Then liberalizing economic policy reforms may well entail sizable redistribution
between the poor and the rich, but in opposite directions in the two groups of countries.
The periods of global trade openness have also seen convergence in living standards
across countries. While much attention has been given to the current globalization period, Jeffrey
Williamson (1998) argues that the prior period of globalization, 1870-1914, fostered economic
expansion and convergence within the “Atlantic economy” (essentially Western Europe and
North and South America). This process was almost certainly poverty reducing globally.
Post-Independence policies in most developing countries strived for economic growth,
facilitated by government planning in relatively closed economies, although capabilities for
effective implementation were often weak. The approach of India’s Second and Third Plans, and
of many other planning documents, aimed for growth via accelerated capital accumulation and
industrialization. These ideas were influenced by classical economics and the Harrod-Domar
equations, although, here too, policy-makers arguably misinterpreted the implications of the
model.75 The prioritization given to the capital-goods sector in India’s Second Plan was directly
influenced by a two-sector growth model in Prasanta Mahalanobis (1953), although there were
dissenters at the time (including C.N. Vakil and Brahmanand, 1956) and subsequent research in
growth economics did not find any robust implication to justify this prioritization. As Lipton
(1977) points out, the planners also ignored Adam Smith’s warning that food supply would
constrain urban growth in a closed economy. And poor people were financing the
industrialization push, which typically depended on extracting a surplus from agriculture, which
provided most of their incomes.76 The plans were overly-optimistic for rapid industrialization,
and for its potential to raise the demand for labor, and so promote poverty reduction. And the
demands of rapid industrialization displaced other policies; for example, rural infrastructure
(electrification and roads) took a back seat to the needs of fledgling industries.
China’s enormous progress against absolute poverty, alongside rising inequality, since
around 1980 might superficially be seen as testimony to the idea that the country has been in the
rising segment of the Kuznets inverted U. However, here too, the model just does not fit the
facts. For one thing, inequality is lower in urban China than rural China. For another, neither
75

See the insightful discussion of the history of thought on economic growth in Debraj Ray (1998, Ch.3)
Even now probably three-quarters of the developing world’s poor by the standards of poor countries live in rural
areas (Ravallion et al., 2007).

76

45

analytic decompositions of the changes in poverty nor regression-based decompositions suggest
that the Kuznets process of growth through modern-sector enlargement was the main driver of
growth and poverty reduction in China (Ravallion and Chen, 2007). One must look elsewhere,
notably to the initial agrarian reforms—including what the massive land-reform when the land of
the collectives was assigned to individual farmers—and market-liberalization more broadly for
an explanation of China’s rapid poverty reduction in the 1980s.77 Manufacturing growth came to
play an important role later, though that success was premised in part on favorable initial
conditions, notably the legacy of investments in human development, including in rural areas.
Unlike many developing countries, there was a large literate rural population to draw on as the
workforce for China’s labor-intensive modern-sector enlargement.
In thinking about policies for fighting poverty the role played by the rural sector has been
much debated. The sequence in China was roughly right: initial attention in the reform period
from 1978 was given to the rural sector, and agrarian reforms to restore farmer incentives (in
land allocation and prices) were crucial to assuring a sustainably pro-poor development path, as
had been the case elsewhere in East Asia.78 Rather few other countries got the sequence right,
and here China’s experience contains an important lesson for Africa today (Ravallion, 2009).
There were efforts to re-prioritize development policy in the 1970s and ‘80s. World
Bank President Robert McNamara’s (1973) “Nairobi speech” signaled such an effort from the
international development institutions. In development thinking, “urban bias” was increasingly
recognized as bad for growth as well as for poverty reduction, though reflecting political
structures in much of the developing world (Lipton, 1968, 1977). However, the temptation to
industrialize rapidly—“run before you have walked”—was strong. Combined with huge
inequities in access to finance and human development the subsequent growth paths were
disappointing, both in growth and (especially) poverty reduction.
The debt crises of the 1980s brought a wave of structural adjustment programs supported
by the International Financial Institutions, aiming to restore macroeconomic balances and
promote economic growth. Given that the World Bank had produced Redistribution with Growth
77

Similarly, in Taiwan and South Korea the initial conditions for more pro-poor growth were laid by radical
redistributive land reform, which (although imposed from abroad) led to productive and dynamic owner-farmed
smallholdings.
78
Given that the rest of the economy was growing rapidly, China could delay reforms to its State-Owned Enterprises
(SOES). Indeed, it was not until the late 1990s (20 years after the agrarian reforms began) that China started
reforming its SOEs. Some observers have suggested that this should have happened sooner.

46

some 10 years earlier (Chenery et al., 1974), it is perhaps surprising that its own adjustment
programs in the early and mid-1980s gave little serious attention to the impacts on poor people,
though this neglect was consistent with the broader 1980s backlash in the Anglo-Saxon world
against the distributional focus of the 1960s and ‘70s. The Bank and Fund programs were much
criticized for their neglect of distributional impacts, and the criticisms clearly stuck. A
progressive recovery in thinking within the IFIs was underway by the late 1980s, and add-on
programs to “compensate the losers from adjustment” were becoming common. Today it is
widely recognized that poverty and inequality mitigation has to be designed into economy-wide
reform programs from the outset.
By the turn of the 20th century enough evidence had accumulated to be confident that
higher growth rates tended to yield more rapid rates of absolute poverty reduction.79 A more
poverty-reducing process of global economic growth emerged after 2000, and not just because of
China’s growth. The trend rate of decline in the “$1.25 a day” poverty rate for the developing
world outside China rose from a miserably low 0.4 percentage points per year over 1980-2000 to
a very respectable 1.0 percentage points per year after that (Ravallion, 2013).80
However, the poverty impact of a given rate of growth depends in part on the initial
distribution.81 Intuitively, when inequality is high poor people will tend to have a lower share of
the gains from growth. Ravallion (1997a, 2007) confirmed this using household survey data over
time.82 William Easterly (2009) conjectured that the initial poverty rate is likely to be the better
predictor of the elasticity than initial inequality, though no evidence was provided. Ravallion
(2012) provided that evidence, and it is compelling in showing that it is not high initial inequality
that impedes the pace of poverty reduction at a given rate of growth, but high poverty.
Saying that growth typically reduces poverty does not, of course, mean that any growthpromoting policy will do so or that everyone will benefit. That depends on the distribution—

79

See Ravallion (1995, 2001, 2007), Fields (2001), Dollar and Kraay (2002), Kraay (2006) and World Bank (1990,
2000). Also see the review of the arguments and evidence on this point in Ferreira and Ravallion (2009).
80
The difference in trends is significant (t = 10.01, p < 0.00005). To help understand the extent of this shift in
trajectories, imagine if the pre-2000 trajectory had continued. Then 30% of the population of the developing world
outside China would have lived below $1.25 a day in 2012 instead of 23% percent, representing an extra 280 million
people who would otherwise have lived below $1.25 a day (Ravallion, 2013).
81
See Ravallion (1997a, 2007, 2012); World Bank (2000, 2006); Bourguignon (2003) and Humberto Lopez and
Luis Servén (2006).
82
Ravallion (1997a) did not find that the elasticity of poverty to growth varied systematically with the mean,
although if incomes are log-normally distributed then such a variation is implied theoretically (Bourguignon, 2003;
Lopez and Servén, 2006).

47

horizontally as well as vertically—of the gains from that policy. There may be vertical
inequalities—between people at different level of mean income—generated in the process that
mitigate the gains to poor people from growth. And there can be horizontal inequities, whereby
people at the same initial levels of income fare very differently, and some poor people may well
lose from a policy that is poverty reducing in the aggregate. (Recall that Harrington, 1962, had
emphasized this point in describing the new “minority poverty” in the “other America.”)
This point has been clearest in the literature on external trade and poverty. A number of
studies have found support for the view that trade openness—typically measured by trade
volume as a share of GDP—promotes economic growth.83 It is unclear that trade volume can be
treated as exogenous in these cross-country regressions; higher trade volume may be a response
to growth rather than a cause. The policy implications are also unclear since trade volume is not
a policy variable; see the discussion in Rodrik (1994) and Francisco Rodriguez and Rodrik
(2001). But, putting this issue to one side, what about the distributional effects? A number of
studies have combined survey-based measures of income inequality at country-level with data on
trade and other control variables to assess the distributional impacts of trade openness, as
reviewed in Alan Winters et al. (2004). The evidence is mixed. An influential study by Dollar
and Kraay (2004) finds little or no effect of trade volume on inequality. Other studies have
reported adverse effects. Mattias Lundberg and Lyn Squire (2003) find evidence that higher trade
volume tends to increase inequality. On balance, Ravallion (2006) reports little or no correlation
between greater trade openness and the pace of poverty reduction in developing countries.
However, there can be gainers and losers at all levels of living even when a standard
measure of inequality or poverty is unchanged. There are many sources of heterogeneity,
yielding horizontal impacts of reform. Geographic disparities in access to human and physical
infrastructure affect prospects for participating in the opportunities created by greater openness
to external trade. Differences in household demographic composition influence consumption
behavior and hence the welfare impact of the shifts in relative prices associated with trade
openness. Ravallion (2006) reports on two case studies of this heterogeneity in the welfare
impacts of liberalizing trade reform, for China and Morocco. The results indicate a sizable, and
83

In a meta-study of all the cross-country growth regressions with an average of seven regressors (chosen from 67
candidates drawn from the literature on cross-country growth regressions) Xaviar Sala-I-Martin, Gernot
Doppelhofer and Ronald Miller (2004) report that trade volume is a significant factor in two-thirds of the
regressions, though it is not amongst their sub set of 18 robust predictors of economic growth.

48

at least partly explicable, variance in impacts across households with different characteristics—
differences that influenced their net trading positions in the relevant markets.
Where does all this leave us? The anti-trade policies (on quotas, tariffs and
exchange-rates) of the post-Independence development policy regimes were unlikely to bring
much benefit to poor people, the bulk of whom produced tradable goods from primarily
non-tradable inputs. While this remains a plausible generalization, there is likely to be
considerable heterogeneity across countries in such effects, and one might be skeptical of basing
policy advice for any specific country on generalizations from either standard Stolper-Samuelson
arguments or cross-country regressions (Ravallion, 2006). For example, some studies have found
evidence that higher trade volume is inequality increasing in poor countries but that the reverse
holds at higher mean income (Ravallion, 2001; Milanovic, 2005). The macro perspective,
focusing on impacts on an aggregate measure of poverty or inequality, hides potentially
important horizontal impacts, with implications for other areas of policy, notably social
protection efforts that may well be needed to complement the growth-promoting reforms.
Trade policies have also played a role in social protection, though this has been much
debated. Governments of food-exporting but famine-affected areas have often implemented food
export bans in the hope of protecting vulnerable citizens. Classical economists were influential in
arguing against such policies in favor of free trade. For example, Wallace Aykroyd (1974)
describes how the Governor of Bombay in the early nineteenth century quoted Smith’s The
Wealth of Nations in defending his policy stance against any form of trade intervention during
the famines that afflicted the region. Various “Famine Commissions” set up by the British Raj
argued against the trade interventions that were being called upon to help protect vulnerable
populations. Similarly, Cecil Woodham-Smith (1962) describes the influence that Smith and
other classical economists had on British policy responses to the severe famines in Ireland in the
mid-nineteenth century. In modern time, free trade has been advocated as a means of stabilizing
domestic food consumption in the presence of output shocks (World Bank, 1986). Others have
been less supportive. Sen (1981a) and Ravallion (1987) pointed to the possibility that real
income declines in the famine affected areas can generate food export while people starved.84

84

The analysis of the time series data for famines in British India in in Ravallion (1987) indicated that the aggregate
income effects were not strong enough to undermine the consumption-stabilizing effects of unrestricted trade.

49

Regulated trade through taxes or even export bans may then be a defensible policy response in
helping vulnerable groups relative to feasible alternatives (Ravallion, 1997b).
Critics of trade intervention for the purpose of protection from external price shocks
(such as in the period 2007-11) have pointed out that such a policy can exacerbate the problem of
price volatility (William Martin and Kym Anderson, 2012). However, in the absence of better
options for aggregate inter-temporal smoothing, the optimal non-trade protection policy would
entail transfers between net food producers and net consumers, to co-insure. And this too would
exacerbate the volatility, as shown by Quy-Toan Do et al. (2013). So one cannot simply argue
that the external trade intervention is an inferior form of social protection; any such protection
would have a similar feature. Trade interventions will probably entail some price distortions,
which must be evaluated against the distortions generated by alternative schemes. There are
situations in which trade insulation dominates feasible options for protection. For example, as Do
et al (2013) also show, when famine threatens, people at the brink of starvation are likely to
spend everything they have on food in which case the inefficiencies of trade intervention largely
vanish. And in highly unequal societies trade insulation can readily emerge as the preferred
social protection policy amongst feasible options.
The key point here is to avoid sweeping generalizations about policies. To take another
example (possibly even more contentious than trade policy) consider active industrial policies—
the effort to encourage selected promising sectors or firms using tariffs, subsidies or tax breaks.85
Advocates point to the successes of some East Asian countries with these policies, though
sometimes downplaying the failures of other countries with similar policies. Instead of debating
for or against such policies in the abstract, the focus should be on understanding under what
conditions these, or other interventions, work.
Possibly any country will have a good chance of success with a reasonably wide ranges
of policies in a context of macroeconomic stability and a capable public administration that can
pragmatically choose sensible interventions and minimizing the damage from mistaken ones. But
will that be enough? The next section turns to another set of potentially important initial
conditions related to the distribution of wealth and income.

85

A good review of this class of policies and the debate surrounding them can be found in Ann Harrison and Andres
Rodríguez-Clare (2010). Supportive discussions can be found in Rodrik (2004) and Justin Lin (2012); a more critical
perspective can be found in Howard Pack and Kamal Saggi (2006).

50

8.

The final blow to the idea of the utility of poverty?
A strand of thought back to the mercantilists has essentially argued that, whatever moral

position one takes about poverty, a more unequal initial distribution of income allows a higher
long-run mean income for any given initial mean. Since higher inequality at a given initial mean
almost certainly entails higher poverty (by any standard measure) this amounts to an
instrumental excuse for higher poverty now. In other words, by this view, one need not worry
about poverty today since it will come with higher growth and (hence) less poverty in the future.
The precise form of this argument evolved over time, although incentives always played
a role. Mercantilists worried about adverse effects of higher wages on work effort and export
competitiveness. Later arguments switched to the idea that aggregate savings constrained
growth. By this view, in a fully employed (closed) economy, capital accumulation was
constrained by domestic savings, and saving is something rich people naturally do more of than
poor people. Thus—the argument went—efforts to redistribute income in favor of the poor
risked retarding growth and (hence) had ambiguous implications for poverty reduction.
The 20th century saw a new set of ideas challenging the “utility of poverty.” Recall that
there was an early hint of this challenge in Marshall (1890), but there was little immediate takeup. It appears to have been long understood that rich people saved a greater share of income than
or nothing, as assumed by Michael Kalecki (1942) and Nicholas Kaldor (1955). It would then
have been only a small step to the conclusion that a higher poverty rate at a given mean income
would yield lower aggregate savings and (hence) a lower growth rate in any economy for which
aggregate savings constrained growth. But that conclusion was never drawn to my knowledge. It
was, however, understood at least back to the 1930s that the same property of the savings
function implied a growth-equity trade off, whereby higher inequality would generate higher
savings and (hence) higher growth. John Maynard Keynes (1936, Ch. 24) questioned the
existence of such a tradeoff. His interpretation of the causes of unemployment predicted that it
was lack of consumption that prevented full-employment, and so a higher share of national
income in the command of poor people would promote growth, until full-employment was
reached.
In the 1990s, a new set of ideas emerged that seriously questioned the instrumental case
for poverty and inequality even in a fully-employed economy. By this view, poor and/or unequal
51

societies stifled investment, invention, and reform.86 These ideas opened up a new window on
the potential role of antipoverty policies in economic development.
Probably the most influential strand of this new literature pointed to the implications of
borrowing constraints associated with asymmetric information and the inability to write binding
enforceable contracts. Credit market failure leaves unexploited opportunities for investment in
physical and human capital and there are assumed to be a diminishing marginal product of
capital. (This idea can be extended to also embrace technical innovation, assuming that everyone
gets new ideas, but that the poor are more constrained in responding.) Then higher current
inequality implies lower future mean wealth at a given value of current mean wealth.87
The model outlined at the beginning of this paper illustrates this point well in the special
case in which the distribution of wealth (given production technologies) is such that the threshold
is not binding ( wt  k min for everyone). Mean future wealth in a growing economy is then a
weakly quasi-concave function of the distribution of current wealth. By standard properties of
such functions, a mean-preserving increase in wealth inequality will entail lower mean wealth in
the future, i.e., a lower growth rate (Banerjee and Duflo, 2003). This is no longer true in general
when the threshold is binding. Then there will exist increases in inequality embracing the lower
end of the wealth distribution (below k min ) that can increase the growth rate of wealth. Thus the
type of model illustrated by Figure 1 has ambiguous implications for how much an exogenous
reduction in inequality will promote overall growth. That depends crucially on precisely where in
the distribution the reduction in inequality occurs.
Borrowing constraints are not the only way that inequality can matter to growth. Other
models have also been proposed, implying that high inequality leads democratic governments to
implement distortionary redistributive policies, as in the model of Alberto Alesina and Rodrik
(1994). Another class of models is based on the idea that high inequality restricts efficiencyenhancing cooperation, such that key public goods are underprovided, or desirable economic and

86

See Glenn Loury (1981), Banerjee and Newman (1993), Roberto Perotti (1996), Hoff (1996), Philippe Aghion et
al. (1999), Bardhan et al. (2000), Maitreesh Ghatak and Neville Nien-Huei Jiang (2002), Banerjee and Duflo (2003),
Azariadis (2006) and World Bank (2006, Chapter 5). Sarah Voitchovsky (2009) provides a survey of the arguments
and evidence on how the initial level of inequality influences the subsequent growth rate.
87
Models with such features include Loury (1981), Oded Galor and Joseph Zeira (1993), Bénabou (1996), Aghion
and Bolton (1997) and Abhijit Banerjee and Esther Duflo (2003).

52

political reforms are blocked.88 Raghuram Rajan (2009) provides an interesting analysis of how
the two main types of economic reforms that are widely seen as key to poverty reduction, namely
making markets more competitive and expanding access to education, can be blocked in a
democracy in which three classes—the rich oligopolists who benefit from market distortions, an
educated middle class and the uneducated poor supplying unskilled labor—strive to preserve
their rents in the status quo. The model helps us understand the observations of Weiner (1991)
and others about India’s relative lack of progress in attaining mass literacy.
But is it inequality that matters, or something else, such as poverty, the size of the middle
class or the extent of polarization? Inequality is obviously not the same thing as poverty;
inequality can be reduced without a lower poverty measure by redistributing income amongst the
non-poor, and poverty can be reduced without lower inequality. (Similarly, efforts to help the
middle-class may do little to relieve current poverty.) In fact there is another implication of credit
market failures that received less attention until recently. While the literature has emphasized
that higher inequality in such an economy implies lower growth, so too does higher current
wealth poverty for a given mean wealth. 89 Again, the point can be illustrated using the basic
model outlined in section 2. Plainly, a larger density of people near the zero wealth equilibrium
will entail lower subsequent growth. What if the threshold is not binding? It is assumed that the
poverty line does not exceed k * /(   1) and let Ht* denote the poverty rate (headcount index) at
this maximum poverty line. Now consider the growth effect of a mean-preserving increase in the
poverty rate. I assume that Ht* increases and that no individual with wealth less than k * /(   1)
becomes better off. If this holds then we can say that poverty is unambiguously higher. Then the
simple fact of a credit constraint implies that unambiguously higher current poverty incidence—
defined by any poverty line up to the minimum level of initial wealth needed to not be liquidity
constrained in investment—yields lower growth at a given level of mean current wealth. Since
this point does not appear to have been made in the literature, the Appendix demonstrates the
point more formally.
This implies an aggregate efficiency cost of a high incidence of poverty. But note that the
theoretical prediction concerns the level of poverty at a given initial value of mean wealth.

88

Arguments along these lines include Bardhan et al. (2000); Banerjee and Iyer (2005); Acemoglu and Robinson
(2006); Rajan (2009a,b) and Stiglitz (2012).
89
Ravallion (2001) argued intuitively that poverty retards growth when there are credit market failures.

53

Without controlling for the initial mean, the sign of the effect of higher poverty on growth is
ambiguous (Appendix). Two opposing effects can be identified. The first is the usual conditional
convergence property, whereby countries with a lower initial mean (and hence higher initial
poverty) tend to have higher subsequent growth in a neoclassical growth model. Against this,
there is an adverse distributional effect of higher poverty. Which effect dominates is an empirical
question, which we will return to.
Credit-market imperfections are not the only argument suggesting that poverty is a
relevant parameter of the initial distribution. Lopez and Servén (2009) introduce a subsistence
consumption requirement into the utility function in the model of Aghion et al. (1999) and show
that higher poverty incidence (failure to meet the subsistence requirement) implies lower growth.
Another example can be found in the theories that have postulated impatience for consumption
(high time preference rates possibly associated with low life expectancy) and hence low savings
and investment rates by poor people (see, for example, Azariadis, 2006). Here too, while the
theoretical literature has focused on initial inequality, it can also be argued that a higher initial
incidence of poverty means a higher proportion of impatient consumers and hence lower growth.
Yet another example is found by considering how work productivity is likely to be
affected by past nutritional and health status. As noted in section 2, only when past nutritional
intakes have been high enough (above BMR) will it be possible to do any work, but diminishing
returns to work will set in later; see the model in Dasgupta and Ray (1986). Impacts on the
nutrition of young children in poor families are also of special concern. A number of research
findings suggest that poor nutrition in the early years of life retards child growth, cognitive and
learning ability, schooling attainments and (in all likelihood) earnings in adulthood (Alderman et
al., 2006). Following Flavio Cunha and James Heckman (2007), this type of argument can be
broadened to include other aspects of child development that have lasting impacts on learning
ability and earnings as an adult. By implication, having a larger share of the population who
grew up in poverty will have a lasting negative impact on an economy’s aggregate output.
There are also theoretical arguments involving market and institutional development,
although this is not a topic that has received as much attention in this literature. While past
theories have often taken credit-market failures to be exogenous, poverty may well be a deeper
causative factor in financial development (as well as an outcome of the lack of financial

54

development). For example, given a fixed cost of lending (both for each loan and for setting up
the lending institution), liquidity constraints can emerge as the norm in very poor societies.
A strand of the theoretical literature has also pointed to the possibilities for multiple
equilibria associated with a non-convexity in the production possibility set, as in Figure 1. As
noted already, in poor countries, the nutritional requirements for work can readily generate such
nonlinearity in the dynamics, as argued by Dasgupta (1997). Such a model predicts that a large
exogenous income gain may be needed to attain a permanently higher income and that seemingly
similar aggregate shocks can have dissimilar outcomes; growth models with such features are
also discussed in Day (1992) and Azariades (1996, 2006) amongst others. Sachs (2005a,b) has
invoked such models to argue that a large expansion of development aid would be needed to
assure a permanently higher average income in currently poor countries.
A strand of the empirical literature on economic growth has tested for inequality as an
initial condition and the results have generally supported the view that higher initial inequality
impedes growth.90 And the effect is quantitatively large, as well as statistically significant.
Consider the two most recent published studies at the time of writing. Herzer and Vollmer (2012)
find that a one percentage point increase in the Gini index results in a decrease in long-run mean
income of 0.013%; when normalized by standard deviations, this is about half the growth impact
of the investment share. Berg et al. (2012) also find that more unequal countries tend to have less
sustained spells of growth, and this effect is also quite large; a one percentage point higher Gini
index is associated with a decline in the length of the growth spell of 11-15%.
Not all the evidence has been supportive.91 The main reason why some studies have been
less supportive appears to be that they have allowed for additive country-level fixed effects in
growth rates. This specification addresses the problem of time-invariant latent heterogeneity in
growth rates. However, it may well have little power for detecting the true relationships given
that the changes over time in growth rates will almost certainly have a low signal-to-noise ratio.
Simulation studies have found that the coefficients on growth determinants are heavily biased
toward zero in fixed-effects growth regressions (William Hauk and Roman Wacziarg, 2009).

90

See Alesina and Rodrik (1994), Rodrik (1994), Persson and Tabellini (1994), Nancy Birdsall et al., (1995), Clarke
(1995), Perotti (1996), Klaus Deininger and Squire (1998), Stephen Knowles (2005), Voitchovsky (2005), Dierk
Hertzer and Sebastian Vollmer (2012), and Andrew Berg et al. (2012).
91
See Hongyi Li and Heng-fu Zou (1999), Robert Barro (2000) and Kristin Forbes (2000).

55

There are a number of remaining issues in this literature. The bulk of the literature has
used consumption or income inequality measures. Theoretical arguments based on borrowing
constraints point to the importance of asset inequality, not income inequality per se. There is
evidence of adverse effects of asset inequality in growth; see Rodrik (1994), Birdsall and Juan
Londono (1997) and Deininger and Pedro Olinto (2000), all using cross-country data, and
Ravallion (1998) using regional data for China.
The aspect of initial distribution that has received almost all the attention in the empirical
literature is inequality, as typically measured by the Gini index of (relative) inequality. The
popularity of the Gini index appears to owe more to its availability in secondary data
compilations on income and consumption inequality measures than to any intrinsic relevance to
the economic arguments.92 However, as Lopez and Servén (2009) observe, the significance of
the Gini index in past studies may reflect an omitted variable bias, given that one expects that
inequality will be highly correlated with poverty at a given mean.
There are also issues about the relevant control variables when studying the effect of
initial distribution on growth. The specification choices in past work testing for effects of initial
distribution have lacked clear justification in terms of the theories predicting such effects.
Consider three popular predictors of growth, namely human development, the investment share,
and financial development. On the first, basic schooling and health attainments (often significant
in growth regressions) are arguably one of the channels linking initial distribution to growth.
Indeed, that is the link in the original papers of Loury (1981) and Galor and Zeria (1993).93
Turning to the second, one of the most robust predictors of growth rates is the share of
investment in GDP (Ross Levine and David Renelt, 1992); yet arguably one of the main
channels through which distribution affects growth is via aggregate investment and this is one of
the channels identified in the theoretical literature. Finally, consider private credit (as a share of
GDP), which has been used as a measure of “financial sector development” in explaining growth
and poverty reduction (Thorsten Beck et al., 2000, 2007). The theories discussed above based on
borrowing constraints suggest that the aggregate flow of credit in the economy depends on the
initial distribution.
92

The compilation of Gini indices from secondary sources (and not using consistent assumptions) in Deininger and
Squire (1996) led to almost all the tests in the literature since that paper was published.
93
More recently, Catalina Gutiérrez and Ryuichi Tanaka (2009) show how high initial inequality in a developing
country can yield a political-economy equilibrium in which there is little or no public investment in basic schooling;
the poorest families send their kids to work, and the richest turn to private schooling.

56

While the theories and evidence reviewed above point to inequality and/or poverty as the
relevant parameters of the initial distribution, yet another strand of the literature has pointed to
various reasons why the size of a country’s middle class can matter to the fortunes of those not
(yet) so lucky to be middle class. It has been argued that a larger middle class promotes
economic growth, such as by fostering entrepreneurship, shifting the composition of consumer
demand, and making it more politically feasible to attain policy reforms and institutional changes
conducive to growth. Analyses of the role of the middle class in promoting entrepreneurship and
growth include Daron Acemoglu and Fabrizio Zilibotti (1997) and Matthias Doepke and Zilibotti
(2005). Middle-class demand for higher quality goods plays a role in the model of Murphy et al.
(1989). Birdsall et al. (2000) conjecture that support from the middle class is crucial to reform. E.
Sridharan (2004) describes the role of the Indian middle class in promoting reform. Easterly
(2001) finds evidence that a larger income share controlled by the middle three quintiles
promotes economic growth.
So we have three contenders for the distributional parameter most relevant to growth:
inequality, poverty and the size of the middle class. The fact that very few encompassing tests
are found in the literature, and that these different measures of distribution are not independent,
leaves one in doubt about what aspect of distribution really matters. As already noted, when the
initial value of mean income is included in a growth regression alongside initial inequality, but
initial poverty is an excluded but relevant variable, the inequality measure may pick up the effect
of poverty rather than inequality per se. Similarly, the main way the middle class expands in a
developing country is probably through poverty reduction, so it is unclear whether it is a high
incidence of poverty or a small middle class that impedes growth. Similarly, a relative concept of
the “middle class,” such as the income share of middle quintiles, will probably be highly
correlated with a relative inequality measure, clouding the interpretation.
Possibly the strongest evidence to date to support the view that it is poverty not inequality
per se that impedes growth in developing countries comes from an observation made by
Ravallion (2012b), namely that we see convergence in average living standards amongst
developing countries and greater progress against poverty in faster growing economies yet we do
not see poverty convergence; the poorest countries are not enjoying higher proportionate rates of
poverty reduction. Ravallion resolves this paradox by arguing that a high initial incidence of
poverty, at a given initial mean, impedes subsequent growth (consistently with a number of the
57

theories outlined above). This is shown to be consistent with data for 100 developing countries,
which reveal an adverse effect on consumption growth of high initial poverty incidence at a
given initial mean. Ravallion finds that high poverty at a given initial mean matters more than
inequality, or measures of the middle class or polarization. Also, starting with a high incidence of
poverty limits progress against poverty at any given growth rate. For many poor countries, the
growth advantage of starting out with a low mean is lost due to their high poverty rates. That
does not, however, imply that any antipoverty policy will promote growth. That will depend on
many factors, as discussed in the next section.
Poverty can bring lasting efficiency costs even without a poverty trap. However, when a
poverty trap is present the cost of poverty can rise greatly. But do such traps exist? On a priori
grounds, it is highly plausible that threshold effect must exist. Unless current wealth is sufficient
to cover the nutritional needs of the body at rest (the BMR) it will be impossible to do any work,
and so generate any future wealth (Dasgupta, 1993). Whether this is of economic significance in
practice (even in poor economies) is another matter. As Deaton (2006) points out (in reviewing
Fogel, 2004) human caloric requirements can be covered with seemingly modest spending on
food staples.94 However, as Deaton also points out, exposure to disease can interact with poverty
to create a nutrition trap. Other sources of threshold effects are also plausible on a priori
grounds, such as the fact that a minimum level of schooling is essential before schooling can be a
viable route out of poverty (recalling the story of Sunil in Boo, 2011).
There have been some tests for threshold effects due to lumpiness in capital requirements,
with mixed results. Alice Mesnard and Ravallion (2006) find evidence of nonlinear wealth
effects on new business startups in Tunisia, but do not find signs of thresholds effects. Nor do
David McKenzie and Christopher Woodruff (2006) find any sign of non-convexities in
production at low levels amongst Mexican microenterprises. In one of the few studies using
wealth data, Barrett et al. (2006) do find evidence of the nonconvexity in asset data for rural
Kenya and Madagascar.95
It can also be difficult to detect theoretically plausible threshold effects on dynamics in
standard micro-data sets (Day, 1992). For one thing, depending on the frequency of the
observations over time in the data, the existence of the unstable “middle” equilibrium (point B in

94
95

Similar reasoning leads Anand Swamy (1997) to question the nutrition-based efficiency wage hypothesis.
Also see the discussion in Michael Carter and Christopher Barrett (2006).

58

Figure 1) can generate attrition—the destitute simply drop out of the data (including by
becoming homeless) (Michael Lokshin and Ravallion, 2004). For another, there will be high
social returns to informal risk-sharing arrangements to prevent most people falling into the trap.
The trap is still there, but may only be evident in extreme situations when those social
relationships break down, as Ravallion (1997b) argues is the case in famines.
A testable implication of the models based on credit-market failures is that individual
wealth should be an increasing concave function of its own past value. In principle, this can be
tested on suitable micro panel data, though most data sets have only had consumption or income,
not wealth. Lokshin and Ravallion (2004) provide supportive evidence on concavity in panel
data on incomes for Hungary and Russia while Jyotsna Jalan and Ravallion (2004) do so using
panel data for China. These studies do not find the threshold properties in the empirical income
dynamics that would be needed for a poverty trap. Using similar methods, but arguably a better
identification strategy, Stefan Dercon and Ingo Outes (2013) do find evidence of a low, unstable,
equilibrium in the income dynamics for a long panel of households in rural India.
Micro-empirical support for the claim that there are efficiency costs of poor nutrition and
health care for children in poor families has come from a number of studies. In a recent example,
an impact evaluation by Karen Macours et al. (2008) of a conditional cash transfer scheme in
Nicaragua found that randomly assigned cash transfers to poor families improved the cognitive
outcomes of children through higher intakes of nutrition-rich foods and better health care. This
echoes a number of findings on the benefits to disadvantaged children of efforts to compensate
for family poverty.96
The upshot of all this is that present day thinking is both more optimistic about the
prospects of eliminating absolute poverty through an expanding economy, and more cognizant of
the conditionalities in the impact of growth on poverty. Under the right conditions, economic
growth can be a powerful force against poverty. Those conditions pertain in large part to aspects
of both the initial distribution and how it evolves. As we will see in the following section, the
focus of much antipoverty policy has shifted over time toward efforts to assure that the
conditions are in place that will allow poor people to contribute to an expanding overall
economy, and so escape poverty, permanently.

96

For reviews of this literature see Janet Currie (2001, 2012)

59

9.

Direct interventions in modern times
If all incomes are observable without costs and there are no behavioral responses then

assuring a guaranteed minimum income is straightforward—one simply makes transfers
sufficient to bring everyone up to the desired minimum. Administrative capabilities, constraints
on information and incentive effects have meant that the practice of social policy is far more
complicated. A range of interventions has emerged. This section begins with a discussion of
some generic issues—information, incentives and policy design—before reviewing the main
types of direct interventions found today. The discussion will focus more on developing
countries, though viewed in the light of the history of such policies in present-day developed
countries. The section concludes with some thoughts on the political economy of this class of
policies.
Generic issues: The stage of development influences the types of policies chosen. Poor
places tend as a rule to have weaker administrative capabilities, which tends to mean less reliable
information for deciding who should receive help. Self-targeting mechanisms and indicatorbased targeting tend to be more popular in developing countries (now and when the rich
countries of today were developing), notably when there is a large informal sector, while the
income tax system and transfer payments that require formalization naturally dominate in rich
countries.
The existence of a large informal sector is associated with both information and incentive
constraints on social policy in developing countries. The information constraints are obvious,
given that informalization essentially means that one has little systematic data on actual or
potential beneficiaries. The incentive constraint comes from the fact that the informal sector is an
option for anyone in the formal sector (though the converse is generally not true). Thus a social
policy that can apply only to a formal-sector worker will have an added efficiency cost (through
the scope for substitution) that would not be the case in a purely formal, developed, economy.97
Incentive effects have figured in the debates about all forms of targeted direct
interventions across all settings. A perfectly targeted set of transfers to poor families in the
imaginary world of complete information—meaning that the transfers exactly fill the poverty
gaps and so bring everyone up to the desired minimum income—would impose 100% marginal
97

Similarly, informal sector firms can evade taxation by resorting to cash (Roger Gordon and Wei Li, 2009).

60

tax rates on recipients. This is very unlikely to be optimal from the point of view of poverty
reduction given labor supply responses. The simulations by Ravi Kanbur, Michael Keen and
Matti Tuomala (1995) suggest that marginal tax rates around 60-70% would be called for in an
optimal antipoverty policy using transfers allowing for incentive effects.
At the opposite extreme to perfect targeting one can imagine a basic income scheme,
which provides a fixed cash transfer to every person, whether poor or not.98 This has been
advocated by (amongst others) Juliet Rhys-Williams (1943), James Meade (1972), Daniel
Raventós (2007) and Bardhan (2011). The idea has spanned both rich and poor countries, and
also appears to span the political spectrum. There are no incentive effects of the transfers since
there is no action that anyone can take to change their transfer receipts. But nor is there any
purposive targeting to poor people. While a poll transfer is unlikely to alter incentives to work
(say), a complete assessment of the implications for efficiency (and equity) must take account of
the methods of financing the poll transfer, and once one allows for financing, the incentive and
information issues re-emerge. The administrative cost would probably be low, though certainly
not zero given that in some low income countries, some form of personal registration system
would be needed to avoid “double dipping” and to assure that larger households receive
proportionately more. Proposals in developed countries have typically allowed for financing
through a progressive income tax scheme (such as in Meade, 1972), in which case the idea
becomes formally similar to the Negative Income Tax (Milton Friedman, 1962), though the
mode of administration may differ. Atkinson and Holly Sutherland (1989) demonstrate a basic
income scheme can be devised as a feasible budget-neutral way of integrating social benefits and
income taxation in Britain. In poor countries a basic income scheme could be costly, depending
on the benefit level and method of financing. However, there may well be ample scope for
financing by cutting current subsidies favoring the non-poor, as Bardhan (2011) argues is the
case for India. This type of scheme would appear to clearly dominate many policies found in
practice today; for example, it would clear yield a better incidence than subsidies on the
consumption of normal goods, which is a type of policy still found in a number of countries.
While incentives can never be ignored in social policy, history also teaches us that
concerns about incentives are often invoked, with little or no evidence, to serve the needs of

98

This has been called many things including a “poll transfer,” “guaranteed income,” “citizenship income” and an
“unmodified social dividend.”

61

political opponents to such policies. (It also seems that incentives get far more attention in
discussing programs intended to help poor people than other programs.) With the better data and
analytic tools available today, it can be hoped that future policy debates will be better informed
about actual behavioral responses.
Efforts to improve the cost-effectiveness of direct interventions have often called for
better targeting. This has been a recurrent debate. We have seen that it was an issue in the
debates over England’s Poor Laws in the early 19th century. The reforms in the 1830s called for
better targeting, motivated in large part by the fiscal burden on the landholding class. Similarly,
calls for better targeting in the West came in the wake of the 1979 oil crisis, and in many
developing countries facing debt crises in the 1980s.
The bulk of the direct interventions found in practice fall somewhere between the above
extremes of “perfect targeting” and a basic income. Antipoverty policy making in many
countries (both rich and poor) has put considerable emphasis on better targeting since the 1980s,
typically defined as avoiding “leakage” of benefits to the non-poor, implicitly downplaying
concerns about coverage of the poor (as pointed out by Giovanni Cornia and Frances Stewart,
1995). Readily measurable proxies for poverty are widely used for such targeting. Geographic
proxies have been common, as has gender of the recipient, family size and housing conditions.99
These targeting methods can be thought of as a “proxy means test” in which transfers are
allocated on the basis of a score for each household that can be interpreted as predicted income
or consumption, based on readily observed indicators. Depending on how it is designed, this type
of scheme can have better incentive effects than perfect means testing, and have a higher impact
on poverty for a given outlay than a poll transfer. However, policy advisors and policy makers
sometimes appear to have treated “better targeting” as the objective of the policy design
problem, forgetting that it is really only an instrument, and not necessarily the best instrument
given the aforementioned costs and the political economy response to targeting, whereby finely
targeted programs can undermine the political support for social policies.100
State-contingent transfers financed by taxation: Recall that the essential idea of
England’s Old Poor Laws was state-contingent transfers financed by taxation. There was little
99

Grosh et al. (2008) provides a useful overview of the targeting methods found in practice in developing countries,
with details on many examples.
100
For further discussion see van de Walle (1998), Philippe De Donder and Jean Hindriks (1998) and Jonah Gelbach
and Lant Pritchett (2000).

62

effort at targeting prior to the 1834 reforms, which aimed to target benefits to those in greatest
need, notably though work requirements. The idea of un-targeted state-contingent transfers (as in
the Old Poor Laws) re-emerged in 20th century Britain in the form of the Beveridge Report
(William Beveridge, 1942), which outlined detailed proposals for social insurance, whereby all
those of working age would be obliged to pay a national insurance contribution to finance state
contingent transfers to the unemployed, the sick, the elderly or widowed. However, unlike the
Old Poor Laws, this was to be a national scheme, rather than implemented locally. Two other
elements completed the social protection policy. First, family allowances were proposed, to
cover the costs of dependent children (after the first). Second, an income top-up was proposed
for those falling below absolute standards taking account of all income sources.101 While the aim
of these proposals was squarely to eliminate poverty, Beveridge was opposed to means-testing—
universal provision at a flat-rate was seen to avoid the costs of targeting and to encourage social
cohesion.102 The past, deliberately stigmatizing, approach typified by the workhouses was to be
abandoned. Beveridge’s plan formed the basis for the policies of the new Labour government
elected in 1945; the Conservative resistance to the (popular) Beveridge plan helped assure a
Labour victory (Thane, 2000, p.369).
America’s Social Security System had also grown out of prior relief efforts (notably in
response to the Depression) and came to provide fairly comprehensive state-contingent transfers,
financed by taxation, soon after World War 2. As with the Poor Laws, there was much debate
about these policies. (America’s Social Security System was decried as “socialism” in some
quarters, and still is.) Similarly to the 1834 reforms to the Old Poor Laws, calls for targeting have
become common since 1980, in attempting to reduce the fiscal cost of social insurance in many
developed countries.
Uniform but state-contingent transfers are not common in developing countries today. It
seems that developing countries have largely skipped this stage in the history of social policy.
However, it is not entirely clear why this is the case or that it is a good idea from the point of
view of sound policy making. To explain why uniform state-contingent transfers of the social
insurance type are not used, it is sometimes claimed that such policies are unsuitable to poor
economies; they would be too costly, and targeting is called for. While the fiscal burden of social
101

This came to be known as the “Supplementary Benefit” and became more important in practice than Beveridge
envisaged; see the discussion in Meade (1972).
102
There is an interesting discussion of Beveridge’s arguments in Thane (2000, esp., Ch.19).

63

policies must never be ignored, it is notable that the Old Poor Laws were invented in what was
clearly a poor economy by today’s standards. For some 300 years the Old Poor Laws provided a
degree of social protection and stability at seemingly modest cost (Solar, 1995).
As we will see, while better targeting can sometimes help, finely targeted policies can
have costs that are often hidden but must be considered in any proper evaluation of the policy
options.
Workfare: The workhouses that emerged in Europe around 1600 can be interpreted as a
means of getting around the information and incentive problems of targeting. This was done by
design features that only encouraged those truly in need of help to turn to the workhouse and
encouraged them to drop out of it when help is no longer needed, given better options in the rest
of the economy. The attraction of this approach is that it elegantly solves the information
problem of targeting. However, it does so by imposing costs on participants that are essentially
deadweight losses—notably the forgone earnings and the welfare costs of stigma and subjugation
(as Oliver Twist experienced). A truly utilitarian-welfarist assessment relative to un-targeted
transfers would clearly be ambiguous without further evidence.
Arguably England’s workhouses of the 19th century went too far in imposing costs on
participants to assure self-targeting. The costs came to be widely seen as objectionable (Section
5). But the idea of self-targeting had lasting influence. The workhouses are an example of a
class of direct interventions often called today “workfare schemes”—schemes that impose work
requirements on welfare recipients as a means of assuring incentive compatibility. Though not
involving workhouses, this idea was embodied in the Famine Codes introduced in British India
around 1880, and the idea has continued to play an important role to this day in the sub-continent
(Drèze, 1990a). Such schemes have helped in responding to, and preventing, famines including
in Sub-Saharan Africa (Drèze, 1990b). Workfare was also a key element of the New Deal
introduced by US President Roosevelt in 1933 in response to the Great Depression.
A sub-class of workfare schemes has aimed to guarantee employment to anyone who
wants it at a pre-determined (typically low) wage rate. Employment Guarantee Schemes (EGSs)
have been popular in South Asia, notably (though not only) in India where the Maharashtra EGS,
which started in 1973, and was long considered a model. In 2005, the central government
implemented a national version, the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural EGS. This promises 100
days of work per year per household to those willing to do unskilled manual labor at the statutory
64

minimum wage notified for the program. The work requirement is (more or less explicitly) seen
as a means of assuring that the program is reaching India’s rural poor.103
These schemes can be interpreted as attempts to enforce a minimum wage rate in
situations in which there is no other means of legal enforcement. Minimum wage rates appeared
in the late 19th century, with the first such law being introduced by New Zealand in 1894. Critics
have long pointed to concerns about the possible negative effects on overall employment of
minimum wages rates, although advocates have pointed out that those effects may be small in
practice, and even positive in monopsonistic labor markets.
However, enforcement of minimum wage legislation has been famously weak in
developing countries with large informal sectors (including traditional farming). For example,
Rinku Murgai and Ravallion (2005) show that in 2004-05 three-quarters of India’s casual labor
was paid less than the country’s (state-level) statutory minimum wage rates. In an EGS, anyone
who wants work can (in theory) get it provided they are willing to do unskilled manual labor at
the statutory minimum wage rate in agriculture.
An important difference between and EGS and minimum wage legislation is that an EGS
aims to provide comprehensive insurance for the able-bodied poor, in that anyone who needs
work can get it, at least on paper. Eligibility is open to all, so that a farmer who would not need
the scheme in normal times can turn to it in a drought (say). This was explicit from the outset of
the idea of an EGS (as it developed in Maharashtra in the early 1970s). Whether this insurance
function is served in practice is another matter; Dutta et al. (2012) find evidence of considerable
rationing on India’s current national EGS. The rationing tends to be greater in poorer states,
which may well reflect weaker administrative capabilities for implementing a complex program
such as India’s national EGS.
Workfare schemes illustrate well the point that even a well-targeted transfer scheme can
be dominated by un-targeted transfers when one takes account of all the costs involved,
including deadweight losses, such as income forgone or other costs in complying with the
conditionalities imposed on more sophisticated transfer schemes. Ravallion and Datt (1995) and
Dutta et al (2013) provide evidence on the deadweight losses to participants in both the

103

Puja Dutta et al. (2013) provides an assessment. Also see Raghbendra Jha et al. (2012), Raghav Gaiha (1997),
Clement Imbert and John Papp (2011).

65

Maharashtra EGS and the new national scheme indicating that an un-targeted basic income
scheme would have been more cost effective in transferring incomes to poor people.
Workfare schemes have typically been seen as short-term palliatives—a form of social
insurance. In principle, a workfare scheme can also directly serve promotional goals by
generating assets that could change the wealth distribution, or shift the production function, to
break out of the poverty trap illustrated in Figure 1. However, in practice asset creation has not
been given high weight in these schemes in South Asia, although it seems to have higher weight
elsewhere, including in Latin America (such as Argentina’s Trabajar Program). Next we turn to
a policy for which the creation of human wealth is seen as crucial to poverty reduction.
Schooling for children from poor families: Children from poor families tend to get less
schooling. This “economic gradient” in schooling persists to this day almost everywhere and has
long been seen as a factor perpetuating poverty across generations—a potential source of a
poverty trap. The inability of poor families to finance their children’s schooling has long been
recognized as a key factor perpetuating poverty and entailing that a more unequal initial wealth
distribution will generate aggregate efficiency costs. This was precisely the mechanism
postulated in one of the earliest formal economic models with this feature, namely Loury (1981).
Thus policies that can promote the schooling of children from poor families can be seen as an
important social policy idea that could improve both equity and efficiency, and credibly allow
poor people to break out of the wealth poverty trap.
Such policies are a modern idea, advocated at times but little known in practice prior to
th

19 century (Section 5). Past and ongoing policy debates over mass education have raised many
issues, but a fundamental one is whether compulsory schooling is even in the interest of poor
families, for it was typically their children who were un-schooled. Opponents (on both the left
and right) of compulsory schooling pointed to the costs (primarily their forgone earnings) to poor
families of sending their children to school. While making schooling compulsory could break the
poverty trap, a short-term tradeoff was to be expected due to the costs imposed on poor families.
Advocates argued, in effect, that the longer-term benefits from breaking out of a poverty trap
outweighed these costs.
After much debate, compulsory schooling, with a significant state role in both public
provision and support for private schooling, had emerged in virtually all industrialized countries
by the early 20th century. In England, the “Elementary Education Act” of 1870 was a
66

breakthrough in establishing a secular public sector institutional framework, including
democratic school boards. Implementation was uneven geographically, and there was a
continuing struggle for control of schools between the democratically elected local bodies and
religious organizations (W.B. Stephens, 1998). It was not until the 1880 act of the same name
that education was compulsory in England for children aged 5-10. This happened in France
about the same time. In the US, 34 states had compulsory schooling laws by 1900, 30 of which
required attendance until at least age 14. Japan in the Meiji period (1868-1912) was not behind
the West in promoting mass education, which was virtually universal by the end of the period.
Mass public education (with tertiary education left largely to the private sector) was given high
priority throughout developing East Asia, with educational attainments far surpassing most
developing countries, and some developed countries.
The payoffs from mass public education were clearly huge. Equitable, broad-based,
education has been identified by Claudia Goldin and Lawrence Katz (2008) as a key factor in the
US record of relatively equitable and rapid growth in the period 1940-80. The ability of the
schooling system to support a relatively rapid increase in education attainments in the US in this
period (though slowing down greatly after 1980) meant that the supply of skilled workers kept
up with the extra demand stemming from new technologies—what Jan Tinbergen (1975) dubbed
the “race between education and technology”—thus attenuating the inequality-increasing effects
of technical progress favoring demand for relatively skilled labor. The fact that American
educational expansion was so broad-based in this period was key. A more elitist schooling
system would have entailed a more unequal distribution of the gains from growth. And Goldin
and Katz argue that rising inequality in the US since 1980 stems in large part from the fact that
the education system has not allowed the supply of the types of skilled labor required for the new
technologies of the time to keep up with the demand. And it tends to be children from poor
families who are most disadvantaged in this race.
Broad-based education has also been identified as a key factor in East Asia’s relatively
equitable growth. Using a regression of GDP per capita growth rates over 1960-85 on primary
and secondary education attainments in 1960—with controls for initial GDP per capita,
population growth, and the share of investment in GDP—an influential report by the World Bank
(1993) identified primary education as the most important single factor, accounting for
somewhere between 58 percent (Japan) and 87 percent (Thailand) of GDP growth. Of course,
67

such calculations can be sensitive to model specification; the education variables could well be
correlated with other omitted factors. However, it is nonetheless striking that primary education
is found to account for a greater share of the variance in growth rates than private (non-human)
investment.
There is also evidence that education attainments interact strongly with India’s growth
process in determining the impact of that growth on poverty. This was demonstrated by
Ravallion and Datt (2002) by comparing rates of poverty reduction across states of India. While
the elasticities of measured poverty to farm yields did not vary significantly across states, those
for non-farm output did. The non-farm growth process tended to be significantly more poverty
reducing in states with initially higher literacy rates, and inter-state differences in literacy rates
were the dominant factor amongst those identified by Ravallion and Datt. The importance of
mass education has long been acknowledge in principle in India. A “directive principle” of state
policy in the 1949 Constitution was free compulsory education to the age of 14.104 However,
implementation has lagged considerably, with large inter-state differences, and often poor quality
schooling across the country (Probe Team, 1999).
Bans on child labor have often been proposed and legislated. Moshe Hazan and Binyamin
Berdugo (2002) model an interesting version of a poverty trap in which, at the early stage of
development, child labor is abundant, while fertility is high and mean output is low. With
economic growth stemming from technical progress, the returns to schooling rise, making child
labor less attractive, and also lowering fertility. In this model, the economy eventually converges
to a new equilibrium in which child labor has vanished. Hazan and Berdugo show that an
effective ban on child labor will speed up the transition to this new equilibrium.
However, in economies with large informal sectors, the enforcement of such bans is
difficult. Legislation to set a minimum working age was introduced in some countries from the
late 19th century, although it is unclear how much this helped reduce the incidence of child labor;
Carolyn Moehling’s (1999) analysis indicates little effect. Kaushik Basu (1999) argues that
compulsory schooling is a better way of implementing a ban on child labor than an actual ban,
and compulsory schooling can also break the poverty trap.
Policy incentives for schooling: While the forgone earnings of children figured in the
19th century debates about the idea of compulsory education, there was not much discussion of
104

A Right to Education Act was passed by India’s parliament in 2009, essentially ratifying the Constitution.

68

the obvious policy response: a bursary for poor families. Smith (1786) and Mill (1856, Ch.5) had
advocated tuition subsidies for children from poor families. Marshall (1890, p.594) took a less
sympathetic attitude and proposed instead penalizing poor parents (a public policy of “paternal
discipline”) who neglected to send their children to school or to care for their health. Educational
institutions have for a long time provided relief on tuition fees and other costs to selected
students, often based on some sort of means test. England’s 1870 Elementary Education Act
recommended tuition subsidies for children from poor families (Gillie, 1996). However,
implementation of public policies providing any form of schooling incentive for poor parents had
to wait until the middle of the 20th century, after which it started to become common practice to
build in incentives for children from poor families to stay in school. Britain’s 1942 Beveridge
Report recommended a universal child allowance paid up to the age of 16 if the child stayed in
school.105 Australia had a school bursary program from the 1960s that essentially paid parents
from poor families to keep their children in school beyond the school leaving age as long as the
children passed a special exam. It is common today for various forms of education subsidies
(scholarships, tuition subsidies, subsidized loans) to be means tested.
In the development literature in the 1990s, targeted bursaries came to be known as
“conditional cash transfers” (CCT).106 The idea was the same: a monetary incentive for parents
in poor families to keep their children in school. Transfers are made under the condition that the
children of the recipient family demonstrate adequate school attendance (and health care in some
versions). Plainly, the promotion benefits of these programs rest crucially on assuring that the
transfers go to poor families, on the presumption that the children of the non-poor will already be
in school. Thus targeting has been instrumentally important to both the protection and promotion
benefits. The promotion benefits also depend on designing the conditions such that the required
level of schooling would not be attained in the absence of the program. Early influential
examples of these programs in developing countries were Mexico’s PROGRESA program (now
called Oportunidades) and Bolsa Escola in Brazil. Another early example was the Food-forEducation Program in Bangladesh for which the transfers were made in kind, but also
conditional on school attendance. Over 30 developing countries now have CCT programs and the
number is growing (World Bank). And other countries have formally similar policies not called
105

Similarly, the US Earned Income Tax Credit (introduced in 1975) gives different age cut offs for full time
students.
106
Note that other direct interventions also have conditions; for example, workfare entails a work requirement.

69

CCTs; for example, in attempting to assure that poverty did not constrain schooling, since 2002
China has had a “two exemptions, one subsidy” policy for students from poor rural families; the
exemptions are for tuition fees and textbooks and the subsidy is for living costs.
These programs are clearly designed with a view to breaking the poverty trap stemming
from the aforementioned economic gradient in human development. If the sole concern was with
current income gains to participating households then a policy maker would not impose
schooling requirements, which entail a cost to poor families by incentivizing them to withdraw
children or teenagers from the labor force, thus reducing the (net) income gain to poor people.
The idea of these programs is to strike a balance between protection and promotion, premised on
the presumption that poor families cannot strike the socially optimal balance on their own. The
incentive effect on labor supply of the program (often seen as an adverse outcome of transfers) is
now judged to be a benefit—to the extent that a well-targeted transfer allows poor families to
keep the kids in school, rather than sending them to work. Notice too that concerns about
distribution within households underlie the motivation for such programs; the program’s
conditions entail that relatively more of the gains accrue to children. Some advocates of CCTs
also claimed that they would reduce child labor, although the economics is unclear about
whether such a policy will work for this purpose; Ravallion and Quentin Wodon (2000a) show
that, under standard assumptions, a tuition subsidy will increase schooling but has theoretically
ambiguous effects on the supply of child labor; empirically, the authors find little effect of a
tuition subsidy on child labor in Bangladesh.
There is evidence from impact evaluations that these schemes bring non-negligible
benefits to poor households, in terms of both current incomes and future incomes, through higher
investments in child schooling and health care.107 The conditions change behavior. In the UK,
means-tested grants paid to secondary students have been found to be very effective in reducing
the incidence of school drop outs from poor families (Lorraine Dearden et al., 2005). The various
evaluations of Mexico’s PROGRESA/Oportunidades program have been positive; see the survey
in Ariel Fiszbein and Norbert Schady (2009). Sarah Baird, Craig McIntosh and Berk Ozler
(2010) found sizeable gain from the schooling conditions in a Malawi CCT. In a study for
Burkina Faso, Richard Akresh, Damien de Walque and Harounan Kazianga (2013) found that
the conditionality mattered more in encouraging the school enrollment of children who were
107

Fiszbein and Schady (2009) provide a comprehensive review. Also see the discussion in Jishnu Das et al. (2005).

70

initially less likely to go to school, including girls—children who are less likely to receive
investments from their parents. Lisa Cameron (2002) found that a CCT program in Indonesia,
Jaring Pengamanan Sosial, had greatest impact at the lower secondary school level where
children are most susceptible to dropping out. The design features have also been critically
assessed. A series of papers on PROGRESA revealed that a budget-neutral switch of the
enrolment subsidy from primary to secondary school would have delivered a net gain in school
attainments, by increasing the proportion of children who continue onto secondary school.108
While PROGRESA had an impact on schooling, it could have had a larger impact. However, it
should be recalled that this type of program has two objectives: promotion by increasing
schooling (reducing future poverty) and protection by reducing current poverty, through the
targeted transfers. To the extent that refocusing the subsidies on secondary schooling would
reduce the impact on current income poverty (by increasing the forgone income from children’s
employment), the case for this change in the program’s design would need further analysis.
Impact evaluations have also pointed to high returns to early childhood interventions in
some settings. The experimental Perry Preschool Program in the US in the 1960s provided
schooling and home visits to children aged 3-4 year from poor families. The benefits included
higher adult earnings and reduced crime, and the benefit-cost ratio (even without putting higher
weight on the pro-poor distribution of the gains) was estimated to be over eight to one
(Heckman, 2006). Head Start (also starting in the US’s 1960s War of Poverty) was a similar
national pre-school program, which targeted a package of education, health and nutrition services
to poor families; the program continues at the time of writing and, as of 2005, some 22 million
pre-school children had participated. Head Start has also been found to generate sizeable longterm gains in schooling, earnings and reduced crime (Eliana Garces, Duncan Thomas and Currie,
2002). The aggregate benefits from Head Start also appear likely to exceed the cost, even
without distributional weights (Jens Ludwig and Deborah Phillips, 2007). The literature on preschool and other early childhood interventions targeted to poor families also points to
complementarities with support for more standard school-age programs. There is much interest
in how effective early childhood interventions might be devised for developing countries.
All these interventions require complementary efforts on the supply side, through
effective (public or private) service delivery. This has been an important concern in many
108

See Todd and Wolpin (2002), Attanasio et al., (2004) and de Janvry and Sadoulet (2006).

71

developing countries; World Bank (2004) reviews the evidence and discusses how better
incentives for service delivery might be developed.
Microfinance schemes: As we have seen, credit market failures have been identified as a
cause of poverty, and a reason why it can be costly to overall economic performance. On top of
long-standing moral arguments, transfers to poor people can be interpreted as a means of
relieving the constraints stemming from such market failures. But there is another option, namely
policies that aim to make financial institutions for saving and borrowing work better for poor
people. Microfinance programs aiming to support small-scale credit and savings transactions by
poor people have attracted much interest since the idea emerged in the late 1970s, and there are
now many examples in the developing world.
The classic argument is about promotion, namely that relaxing borrowing constraints
facing poor people allows them to invest and so eventually escape poverty by their own means.
Credit and savings are also potentially important instruments for protection, by allowing poor
households to more effectively smooth their consumption in the face of income fluctuations.
Much of the early (and on-going) enthusiasm for microfinance was really little more than
advocacy, with weak conceptual and empirical foundations. In recent times there has been a rise
in popular concern in the media (in South Asia especially) about over-borrowing by poor people
once given new access to microfinance. Much of this concern also appears to stem from
anecdotes, and the debate has also become politicized. Positive average impacts do not, of
course, mean that there are no losers amongst recipients. This is probably true of all antipoverty
policies but it is especially so in the case of credit-based interventions. Risk is not eliminated,
shocks do occur and mistakes are made, such as due to faulty expectations. There will be both
gainers and losers.
The earliest and still most famous example of this class of policies is Bangladesh’s
group-based lending scheme, Grameen Bank (GB). GB has made a conscious effort to reach the
poor both through their eligibility criteria and their branch location decisions, which (in contrast
to traditional banks) have favored areas where there are unexploited opportunities for poor
people to switch to non-farm activities (Ravallion and Wodon, 2000b). Research on GB has
indicated that the scheme has helped in both protection and promotion; in the former case by
facilitating consumption smoothing and in the latter by helping to build the physical and human

72

assets of poor people.109 This was found by Mark Pitt and Shahidur Khandker (1998) who
exploited the design features of GB, notably that it is targeted to the landless, for identifying
impacts. Given that access to GB raises the returns to being landless, the returns to having land
will be higher in villages that do not have access to GB credit. Thus, comparing the returns to
having land between villages that are eligible for GB and those not (with controls for other
observable differences) reveals the impact of access to GB credit. Put another way, Pitt and
Khandker measure impact by the mean gain amongst households who are landless from living in
a village that is eligible for GB, less the corresponding gain amongst those with land. They
found to be generally positive impacts on measures relevant to both protection and promotion.
Even careful observational studies such as Pitt and Khandker require identifying
assumptions that can be questioned, and there has been some debate about the robustness of their
results.110 This is a type of policy intervention for which it will inevitably be hard to convince
everyone of the validity of the identifying assumptions given the likelihood of unobservable
factors jointly influencing take-up and impacts. Experimental evaluations relying on randomized
assignment (typically at the community level) have offered the hope of more robust results and
there have been some interesting examples. A study by Banerjee et al. (2009) of the impacts of
opening new micro-finance back branches in slums of Hyderabad India found that overall
borrowing, business start-ups and spending on consumer durables (but not non-durables)
increased in the areas that were randomly assigned the new branches relative to the control areas.
However, the study did not find evidence of positive impacts on health, education or women’s
self-efficacy. Heterogeneity was the focus of a recent experimental evaluation of access to
micro-credit by working-age women in Mexico (under the Compartamos Banco scheme) by
Manuela Angelucci, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman (2013). The authors found positive
average impacts in a number of dimensions. There was heterogeneity in the impacts, but they
found little evidence of significant losses, including amongst poor borrowers. More research on
the benefits and costs of microfinance schemes can be expected.
It is clear that we have seen a huge shift in thinking about this class of policies over the
last 200 years; in the days when poor people were routinely blamed for their poverty, giving
them a loan would not have made much sense. Of course, identifying credit market failures as
109

An early contribution to knowledge about GB was made by Mahabub Hossain (1988).
See Jonathan Morduch (1999) and David Roodman and Morduch (2009) as well as the latest detailed rejoinder in
Pitt and Khandker (2012).
110

73

one cause of poverty does not imply that credit for the poor will solve the problem. But welldesigned programs do have a role, as a complement to other policies for both protection and
promotion.
Poor area development programs: Almost all countries have their well-recognized “poor
areas,” in which the incidence of absolute poverty is unusually high by national standards. We
would hope, and under certain conditions expect, that the growth process will help these poor
areas catch up. But this process appears often to have been slow, and geographic divergence has
sometimes been evident. This has led to antipoverty policies focused on lagging poor areas.
“Poverty maps” are widely used in such geographic targeting and the method proposed by Chris
Elbers, Jean Lanjouw and Peter Lanjouw (2003) has facilitated many applications.
The existence of lagging poor areas has led to a great many examples of poor area
development projects—one of the oldest forms of development assistance, though under various
headings (including “Integrated Rural Development Projects” and “Community Driven
Development”). Extra resources are channeled to the targeted poor areas for infrastructure and
services and developing (farm and non-farm) enterprises. Emphasis is often given to local citizen
participation in deciding what was done, although a survey of the available evaluative research
by Ghazala Mansuri and Vijayendra Rao (2012) sound somewhat mixed success given the scope
for capture by local elites. It is widely agreed that poor areas are typically characterized by low
capital to labor ratios, but there is less agreement on the right policy responses between efforts to
augment local capital—investing in lagging poor areas—versus policies to encourage out
migration. Geographic externalities clearly play an important role, but a still poorly understood
role for lack of convincing empirical research.
In the case of China, where poor area development has been the main form of direct
intervention against poverty since the mid-1980s, there is evidence of pervasive geographic
externalities, whereby households living in poor areas have lower growth prospects than
seemingly identical households living in well-off areas (Jalan and Ravallion, 2002; Ravallion,
2005). This suggests that there is scope for poor-area development as a means of assuring longerterm promotion from poverty, as well as protection. However, here too the evidence is mixed on
the success of the policies found in practice.111

111

For example, contrast the findings of Jalan and Ravallion (1998) with Chen et al. (2009) on poor area programs
in China.

74

The main concerns about the incentive effects of poor-area programs have related to the
responses of local governments to external aid and to migration. On the former, an example is
found in Chen et al. (2009) who demonstrate that local government spending allocations changed
in response to efforts by higher levels of government to target poor villages in rural China,
dampening the targeting outcomes. On migration, it appears to be a widely accepted assumption
that there is limited intra-rural mobility in developing countries, sometimes reflecting
institutional and policy impediments (such as local administrative powers for land re-allocation
as in China). It is not clear how confident we can still be in making that assumption.
There is still much we do not know about the impacts of poor-area development efforts,
especially over the longer-term, and the trade-offs faced against policy options. While local
infrastructure development is clearly crucial to fighting poverty it has not attracted the degree of
attention in evaluative research that we have seen in social policies. Here an important factor is
the extent to which “development impact” is challenged by donors and citizens. “Impact” is too
often taken for granted with infrastructure. By contrast, the “softer” social policies have had to
work hard to justify themselves, and evaluative research has served an important role. If the
presumption of impact is routinely challenged by donors, aid organizations and citizens then we
will see stronger incentives for learning about impact, and fewer knowledge gaps.
Information campaigns: There has been recent interest in the scope for using
information-based interventions. The premise is that lack of information is a decisive factor
inhibiting successful participatory action by poor people to get the services to which they are
entitled. There are some signs of support for this premise from past research. Strömberg (2004)
reports evidence that a US antipoverty programs have worked better in places with greater access
to radios. Besley and Burgess (2003) found that the governments of Indian states where
newspaper circulation is greater are more responsive in their relief efforts to negative agricultural
shocks. Reinikka and Svenson (2005) found significant impacts of information through a
newspaper campaign on school outcomes in Uganda.
There have been some evaluations of information interventions.112 The results so far
seem mixed. Focusing on one country and one sector, Priyanka Pandey et al. (2008) report that a
community-based information campaign led to short-term gains in schooling outcomes, while the

112

For a survey of research using field experiments to test the potential for influencing governance outcomes see
Moehler (2008).

75

findings of Banerjee et al. (2010) are less encouraging on the scope for using information
interventions to improve the monitoring of education service providers in India. Mixed results of
this sort might not be surprising given that incomplete information is only one of the possible
reasons why poor people do not access services (Philip Keefer and Stuti Khemani 2005;
Alexander Cappelen et al., 2010). Mixed results might also stem from heterogeneity in the
quality of the information intervention itself. Also for India, Ravallion et al. (2013) report
success in changing public awareness of rights and rules under India’s EGS using an entertaining
and high-quality fictional movie that can be taken to village settings. However, the results also
warn that poor people knowing their rights is not sufficient for positive change. Public awareness
can be improved, but this must be combined with effective responses on the supply-side.
On the political economy of direct interventions: Lindert (2004) has observed that, over
time and across countries, one tends to see more attention to direct interventions against poverty
when there is less poverty. This paper has argued that the balance between protection and
promotion has also evolved over time. While the change has not been the same everywhere, or
always in the same direction, it is clear that over some 200 years we have seen greater efforts at
promotion, and this has happened alongside declining numbers living in extreme poverty.
It is plausible that the political economy of antipoverty policy is different at different
levels of poverty. One can think of two equilibria. When the incidence of poverty is persistently
very high, the wealth distribution will be such that the cost to the non-poor of getting people out
of a low-level trap (including the necessary infrastructure investments) will be seen to be
prohibitively high. If pressed, even Bernard de Mandeville could well have imagined the
theoretical possibility of a big push lifting the entire distribution in a beneficial way, but far more
modest reforms were all that could be seriously contemplated. The short-term burden of mass
promotion may well have been too high. Limited protection from shocks then becomes the sole
focus, as in England’s Poor Laws and India’s famine relief policies. Calculations for present-day
developing countries suggest that very poor countries have little capacity for redistribution as a
means of eliminating poverty, given the implied tax burdens on the non-poor (Ravallion, 2010).
By contrast, in the second equilibrium, at sufficiently low levels of poverty, promotional
policies become feasible. The political economy switches.113 Getting from the first equilibrium to

113

This is broadly consistent with the evidence in Durr (1993) on how economic growth shifts “policy sentiment” in
favor of poor people.Also see Markussen (2008).

76

the second is not easy, however, since poverty and inequality are likely to impede overall growth
prospects (as discussed in section 8), thus limiting the resources for funding social programs.
Whether effective policies are forthcoming also depends on prevailing social preferences
and institutions. Inequalities and social divisions can make it harder to attain consensus for
effective antipoverty policies. Inequalities of political voice have not helped. When only the
elite can exercise political power (including voting) there is no doubt less support for fighting
persistent poverty. As Lindert (2004, Ch.5) observes, broad suffrage (for men) tended to precede
mass schooling amongst the industrialized countries. The transition between these two equilibria
appears to be more than a story about the benefits of national-level electoral democracy, since
one can easily point to undemocratic states for which promotional antipoverty policies are far
more prominent than effective protection policies (China is arguably a good example), and
democratic states where the imbalance goes in the other direction (India, for example). Poor
people in non-democratic states can still have reasonably effective political voice in the
immediate, local, affairs that matter greatly to their livelihoods; yet elsewhere poor people find
themselves effectively disempowered in a country with a robust electoral democracy nationally.
It is also important to note that democracy did not suddenly emerge, but came out of political
struggles; indeed, 50 or more years of fighting for political representation (including by the labor
movements) preceded broad suffrage in most countries of the industrialized world. Nonetheless,
struggles for effective antipoverty policies often came in tow with broader political voice.
The time those struggles took to succeed depended on a number of other factors, which
also had an independent role in the transition in thinking and policy related to poverty. As this
paper has shown, knowledge about living conditions has repeatedly played a shaming role in
stimulating public action (even by the elite). The preferences of donors and taxpayers have also
played a role; at least some of the non-poor are happy to be more generous when they know that
the recipients are being compelled to do something to help themselves escape poverty in the
future, thus allowing a coalition to form in favor of certain promotional policies (such as CCTs).
Even though it was undoubtedly stifled to some degree by persistent poverty and
inequality, technical progress eventually happened, and it generated greater demand for more
skilled labor, which generated political demands for better working-class schooling. The
expansion in production possibilities would also have helped directly in avoiding wealth poverty
traps. (Imagine an upward shift in the nonlinear function in Figure 1.) But the changes in the
77

economy also came with new demands on the state. A more mobile and skilled labor force was
essential for the modern capitalist economy, and this put pressures on the state to take on both
promotion and protection functions. And the initial successes of promotional policies would have
helped create a virtuous cycle by reducing the fiscal burden of the types of policies needed to
assure that mass promotion is politically feasible.

10.

Conclusions
This paper has tried to describe and better understand how the idea of antipoverty policy

emerged and evolved over the last 200 or more years. It has been argued that we have transited
between two radically different views of poverty. In the first, there was little reason to think that
poor people had the potential to be anything else than poor. Poverty would inevitably persist, and
was indeed deemed necessary for economic expansion, which required a large number of people
eager for work, and avoiding hunger was seen as the necessary incentive for doing that work.
Social policy had a role in assuring social stability—most importantly, a generally docile
working class willing to work for low wages—and successfully so it seems in the case of
England’s Poor Laws. Promotional antipoverty policies would probably not have made much
sense to those in power, although the need for protection from shocks would have been more
evident, and appears to have had reasonably broad support from the elites even when mass
poverty was taken for granted. However, beyond short-term palliatives to address shocks, there
was little or no perceived scope for public effort to permanently reduce poverty. And a world
free of poverty was unimaginable—after all, who then would be available to farm the land, work
the factories and staff the armies?
In the second, modern, view, poverty is not only seen as a social ill that can be avoided
through public action, but doing so is seen as perfectly consistent with a robust growing
economy and indeed the right antipoverty policies are expected to contribute to that growth by
removing material constraints on the freedom of individuals to pursue their own interests. In
short, antipoverty policy came to be quite widely seen as an important element of the “social
commitment to individual freedom” (Sen, 1999, p.284).
Granted, such a commitment is not universal today in any country. Some observers still
point to behaviors of poor people as causes of their poverty, while others point to constraints
beyond their control. Advocates against poverty are often frustrated by the setbacks. However,
78

the progress that has been made in both the idea of antipoverty policy and its effective
implementation is undeniable. For example, it would seem unlikely that anything more than a
small minority of people today would accept how the founder of the modern police force Patrick
Colquhoun (1806, p.7) wrote about poverty over 200 years ago:
“Poverty ... is a most necessary and indispensable ingredient in society, without which nations
and communities could not exist in a state of civilization. It is the lot of man—it is the source of
wealth, since without poverty there would be no labour, and without labour there could be no
riches, no refinement, no comfort, and no benefit to those who may be possessed of wealth.”

Recognizing such a marked transition in mainstream thinking over 200 years makes one more
optimistic that the idea of eliminating poverty can be more than a dream.
Progress was uneven over time. Two key historical steps in the transition can be
identified, dubbed here as the First and Second Poverty Enlightenments. The First, just prior to
the turn of the 19th century, saw the emergence of a new respect for poor people, as people—no
longer the “shadows in a painting” or merely serving some purely instrumental role as means of
production. Instead, the economy itself came to be seen as a means for promoting human
welfare, including that of poor people. The Second Poverty Enlightenment, in the latter part of
the 20th century, came with the strongest case yet for antipoverty policy, which saw poverty as a
severe constraint, possibly the most important constraint, on freedom and personal selffulfillment. A consensus emerged that poverty was morally unacceptable in any reasonably
affluent society, though with continuing debates on how best to address poverty and some
persistent knowledge gaps.
While the foundation for this change was laid in the First Poverty Enlightenment—
notably in seeing all human beings as morally equal, with legitimate desires for freedom and
self-fulfillment—it was really only by the time of the Second Poverty Enlightenment that it came
to be understood that freedom and self-fulfillment required (amongst other things) that people
were not constrained by poverty. The state was seen to have a role in assuring that all individuals
had access to the essential material conditions for their own personal fulfillment—arguably the
most important requirement for equity, but also the key to breaking out of poverty traps.
Antipoverty policy came to be seen as a matter of both promotion and protection. Along with
rising real wages and (hence) savings by poor people, public education systems, sound health
systems and reasonably well functioning financial markets all came to be seen as crucial
elements for the next generation of poor families to escape poverty, for good.
79

Why did we see this transition? Three mutually reinforcing factors stand out: new
technology, new knowledge and political voice. New technologies implied demands for new
skills in the workforce, which only mass schooling could provide effectively, and a smarter
workforce also needed to be healthy. New data and research on poor people influenced public
thinking and policy making, and also taught us about the efficacy of policy responses. This fed
back, in time, into better policies, although the history of thought also provides examples of
influential writings that misguided efforts for fighting poverty. Popular writings, social novels
and plays helped transform knowledge into public awareness. Success of the, often painful,
struggles for broad political representation came roughly hand-in-hand with better informed
policy debates and better policies, and were reinforced by new knowledge and awareness.
Once it started to be widely accepted that those born poor could in fact escape poverty
through their own efforts, public support congruent with those efforts became more acceptable,
and more people joined political coalitions or struggles toward that end. Once successful
promotion policies had been initiated, the fiscal burden of providing extra poverty relief started
to fall. Beyond some point, a self-reinforcing cycle emerged in the successful countries to help
assure a sustained and (over time) more rapid escape from poverty. It is a cycle that can be
broken, however. The history of thinking and action on poverty gives ample illustration of the
fragility of the progress we have seen. But we have seen progress.

80

Appendix
This Appendix proves the claim made in section 8 about the properties of the
characterization of wealth dynamics in section 2.
Initial wealth, wt for date t, is distributed across individuals according to the cumulative
distribution function, Ft (w ) , giving the population proportion with wealth lower than w, and let
H t  Ft ( z ) denote the headcount index of poverty (“poverty rate”) when the poverty line is z. It

will be analytically easier to work with the inverse of Ft (w ) , namely the quantile function,
wt ( p ) . The claim in section 8 referred to a situation in which the threshold is not binding,

giving the Banerjee and Duflo (2003) model. The recursion diagram for a given individual then
takes the form:
*
wt 1   ( wt )   [ h ((   1) wt )   rw t ] for wt  k /(  1)

  [h(k * )  ( wt  k * )r ] for wt  k * /(  1)

(1.1)
(1.2)

Here  is the fixed share of current wealth that is not currently consumed. Plainly,  ( w t ) is
strictly concave up to k * /(   1) and linear above that. It is assumed that z  k * /(   1) and let

H t*  Ft [k * /(  1)] . Mean future wealth is:


 t 1   [ wt ( p)]dp

(2)

0

By standard properties of concave functions, we can readily verify that an inequality-increasing
spread in the wealth distribution in this economy will reduce mean future wealth at a given level
of mean current wealth, i.e., reduce the growth rate, as in Banerjee and Duflo (2003). Note that,
using (1.1) and (1.2), we can re-write (2) as:
H t*

1

0

H t*

 t 1    [ h((  1) wt ( p ))  rwt ( p )]dp    [ h( k * )  ( wt ( p )  k * ) r ]dp

(3)

Now consider the growth effect of a mean-preserving increase in the poverty rate. It is
assumed that Ht* increases and that no individual with wealth less than k * /(   1) becomes better
off, implying that wt ( p) / H t*  0 for all p  H t* . If this holds then we can say that poverty is
*
unambiguously higher. Note that the function  is continuous at k /(  1) . Then it is readily

verified that:
81

H*

H*

t
t
t 1
wt ( p)
w ( p)
   [h((  1)wt ( p))(  1)  r ]
dp  r  t * dp
*
*
H t
H t
0
0 H t

(4)

The sign of this expression cannot be determined under the assumptions so far. It may be noted
that, if there is (unrestricted) first-order dominance, whereby wt ( p ) / H t*  0 for all p  [ 0, 1] ,
then  t 1 / H t*  0 . However, first-order dominance is ruled out by the fact that the mean is
held constant in this “thought experiment;” there is a redistribution from the “wealth poor” to the
“wealth nonpoor”. On imposing a constant initial mean,  t   , equation (4) simplifies to:
*

Ht
   t 1 
wt ( p )
   [ h ((   1) w t ( p ))  r ](   1)
dp  0

* 
 H t*
 H t   t  
0

(5)

Thus we find that an unambiguously higher initial headcount index of poverty holding the initial
mean constant implies a lower growth rate, as claimed in section 8.

82

Figure 1: Wealth dynamics with a poverty trap
wt+1= wt

Future wealth (wt+1)
C

B

A: (0, 0) Threshold
(kmin)

w*

83

Current wealth (wt)

Figure 2: Global poverty rates 1820-2005
100

Global poverty rate (% below $1 a day)

Bourguignon-Morrisson
Chen-Ravallion

80

60

40

20

0
1800 1820 1840 1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000

Sources: Bourguignon and Morrisson (2000) and Chen and Ravallion (2010).

84

Figure 3: References to poverty in Google Books, 1700-2000
(a) English

(b) French

85

Figure 4: Incidence of references to various concepts in the measurement of poverty

Figure 5: Intentions regarding poverty and inequality

86

References
Abel-Smith, Brian and Peter Townsend, 1966, The Poor and the Poorest: A New Analysis of the
Ministry of Labour's Family Expenditure Surveys of 1953-54 and 1960. London: Bell.
Acemoglu, Daron and Fabrizio Zilibotti, 1997, “Was Prometheus Unbound by Chance?” Journal
of Political Economy 105(4): 709-751.
Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson, 2006, Economic Origins of Dictatorship and
Democracy, Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Adelman, Irma and Cynthia Taft Morris, 1973, Economic Growth and Social Equity in
Developing Countries. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Aghion, Philippe and Patrick Bolton, 1997, “A Theory of Trickle-Down Growth and
Development,” Review of Economic Studies 64: 151-172.
Aghion, Philippe, Eve Caroli and Cecilia Garcia-Penalosa, 1999, “Inequality and Economic
Growth: The Perspectives of the New Growth Theories”, Journal of Economic Literature
37(4): 1615-1660.
Aghion, Philippe, Abhijit Banerjee and Thomas Piketty, 1999, “Dualism and Macroeconomic
Volatility,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(4): 1359-1397.
Ahluwalia, Montek S., 1976, “Inequality, Poverty and Development,” Journal of
Development Economics 3:307-342.
Ahluwalia, Montek S., Nicholas G. Carter, and Hollis B. Chenery, 1979, “Growth and Poverty in
Developing Countries,” Journal of Development Economics 6:299-341.
Ahluwalia, Montek S., John Duloy, Graham Pyatt and T.N. Srinivasan, 1980 “Who Benefits
from Economic Development? Comment,” American Economic Review 70(1): 242-45.
Akresh, Richard, Damien de Walque,and Harounan Kazianga, 2013, “Cash Transfers and Child
Schooling : Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation of the Role of Conditionality,”
Policy Research Working Paper 6340, World Bank.
Alam, M. Shahid, 2006, “Global Disparities Since 1800: Trends and Regional Patterns,” Journal
of World Systems Research 12(2): 37-59.
Albelda, Randy, Nancy Folbre and the Center for Popular Economics, 1996, The War on the
Poor. A Defense Manual. New York: The New Press.
Alderman, Harold, John Hoddinott and Bill Kinsey, 2006, “Long-Term Consequences of Early
Childhood Malnutrition,” Oxford Economic Papers 58(3): 450-74.
87

Alderman, Harold and Kathy Lindert, 1998, “The Potential and Limitations of Self-Targeted
Food Subsidies,” World Bank Research Observer 13(2): 213-29.
Alesina, Alberto and Dani Rodrik, 1994, “Distributive Politics and Economic Growth”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 108: 465-90.
Allen, Robert, 2007, “Pessimism Preserved: Real Wages in the British Industrial Revolution,”
Oxford University Department of Economics Working Paper 314.
___________, 2009, “Engels’ Pause: Technical Change, Capital Accumulation, and Inequality in
the British Industrial Revolution, Explorations in Economic History 46: 418-435.
___________, 2013, “Poverty Lines in History, Theory, and Current International Practice,”
mimeo, Nuffield College Oxford.
Anand, Sudhir, 1983, Inequality and Poverty in Malaysia, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Anand, Sudhir and Ravi Kanbur, 1993, “The Kuznets Process and the Inequality-Development
Relationship,” Journal of Development Economics 40:25-52.
Anand, Sudhir, and Martin Ravallion, 1993, “Human development in poor countries: On the role
of private incomes and public services,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7(Winter):
133-150.
Angelucci, Manuela, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman, 2013, “Win Some Lose Some?
Evidence from a Randomized Microcredit Program Placement Experiment
by Compartamos Banco,” mimeo.
Aristotle, 350BC, Politics Book 2 (translated by Benjamin Jowett),
http://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/politics.2.two.html.
Arrow, Kenneth J., 1951, Social Choice and Individual Values, New York: John Wiley.
Artz, Frederick B., 1934, Reaction and Revolution: 1814-1834. New York: Harper and Row.
Atkinson, Anthony B., 1970, “On the Measurement of Inequality,” Journal of Economic Theory
2: 244-263.
_________________, 1975, The Economics of Inequality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
_________________,1987, “On the Measurement of Poverty,” Econometrica 55: 749-764.
_________________, 1998, Poverty in Europe, Oxford: Blackwell Press.
Atkinson, Anthony B., and Francois Bourguignon, 1982, “The comparison of multi-dimensional
distributions of economic status,” Review of Economic Studies 49:183-201.

88

__________________, and __________________, 2001, “Poverty and Inclusion from a World
Perspective.” In Joseph Stiglitz and Pierre-Alain Muet (eds) Governance, Equity and
Global Markets, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Atkinson, Anthony B., and Holly Sutherland, 1989, “Analysis of a Partial Basic Income
Scheme,” in A.B. Atkinson (ed.) Poverty and Social Security. Hertfordshire: Harvester
Wheatsheaf.
Attanasio, Orazio, Costas Meghir and Ana Santiago, 2004, “Education Choices in Mexico: Using
a Structural Model and a Randomized Experiment to Evaluate PROGRESA,” Working
Paper EWP04/04, Institute of Fiscal Studies, London.
Aykroyd, Wallace R., 1974, The Conquest of Famine. London: Chatto and Windus.
Azariadis, Costas, 2006, “The Theory of Poverty Traps: What Have we Learned?,” in Samuel
Bowles, Steven Durlauf and Karla Hoff (eds) Poverty Traps, Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Baird, Sarah, Craig McIntosh and Berk Ozler, 2010, “Cash or Condition? Evidence from a Cash
Transfer Experiment,” Policy Research Working Paper 5259, World Bank.
Bairoch, Paul, 1981, “The Main Trends in National Economic Disparities Since the Industrial
Revolution.” In Disparities in Economic Development Since the Industrial Revolution,
edited by P. Bairoch and M. Levy-Leboyer. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Rukmini Banerji, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Stuti Khemani, 2010,
“Pitfalls of Participatory Programs: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in
Education in India,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2(1): 1-30.
Banerjee, Abhijit and Esther Duflo, 2003, “Inequality and Growth: What Can the Data Say?”
Journal of Economic Growth 8(3): 267-99.
______________ and __________, 2007, “The Economic Lives of the Poor,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 21(2): 141-167.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Cynthia Kinnan, 2009, “The
Miracle of Microfinance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation,” BREAD Working
Paper No. 278, BREAD.
Banerjee, Abhijit and Lakshmi Iyer, 2005, “History, Institutions and Economic Performance:
The Legacy of Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India,” American Economic Review
95(4): 1190-1213.
89

Banerjee, Abhijit and Andrew Newman, 1993, “Occupational Choice and the Process of
Development,” Journal of Political Economy 101(2): 274-298.
Bardhan, Pranab, 1984, Land, Labor and Rural Poverty: Essays in Development Economics.
New York: Columbia University Press.
_____________, 2011, “Challenges for a Minimum Social Democracy in India,” Economic and
Political Weekly 46(10): 39-43.
Bardhan, Pranab, Samuel Bowles and Herbert Ginitis, 2000, “Wealth Inequality, Wealth
Constraints and Economic Performance,” in A.B. Atkinson and F. Bourguignon (eds)
Handbook of Income Distribution Volume 1, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Barrett, C. B., Marenya, P. P., McPeak, J. G., Minten, B., Murithi, F. M., Oluoch-Kosura, W.,
Place, F., Randrianarisoa, J. C., Rasambainarivo, J. and Wangila, J. 2006, “Welfare
Dynamics in Rural Kenya and Madagascar.” Journal of Development Studies 42(2): 178199.
Barro, Robert, 2000, “Inequality and Growth in a Panel of Countries,” Journal of Economic
Growth 5(1): 5-32.
Basu, Kaushik, 1999, “Child labor: Cause, Consequence and Cure, with remarks on International
Labor Standards,” Journal of Economic Literature 37: 1083-1119.
Beaumarchais, Pierre, 1778, La Folle Journée ou Le Mariage de Figaro. Paris: Nathan 2007.
Beaudoin, Steven, 2006, Poverty in World History New York: Routledge
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt and Ross Levine, 2007, “Finance, Inequality and the Poor,”
Journal of Economic Growth 12: 27-49.
Beck, Thorsten, Ross Levine and Norman Loayza, 2000, “Finance and the Sources of Growth,”
Journal of Financial Economics 58: 261-300.
Bénabou, Roland, 1996, “Inequality and Growth”, in Ben Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg
(eds) National Bureau of Economic Research Macroeconomics Annual,
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Berg, Andrew, Jonathan D. Ostry and Jeromin Zettelmeyer, 2012, “What Makes Growth
Sustained?” Journal of Development Economics 98: 149-166.
Besley, Timothy and Robin Burgess, 2003, “The Political Economy of Government
Responsiveness: Theory and Evidence from India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
117(4):1415-51.
90

Beveridge, William, 1942, Social Insurance and Allied Services, London: His Majesty’s
Stationary Office.
Birdsall, Nancy, Carol Graham and Stefano Pettinato, 2000, “Stuck in the Tunnel: Is
Globalization Muddling the Middle Class?” Center on Social and Economic Dynamics,
Working Paper 14, Brookings Institution, Washington DC.
Birdsall, Nancy and Juan Luis Londono, 1997, “Asset Inequality Matters: An Assessment of the
World Bank’s Approach to Poverty Reduction.” American Economic Review, Papers and
Proceedings 87(2): 32-37.
Birdsall, Nancy, D. Ross and R. Sabot, 1995, “Inequality and Growth Reconsidered: Lessons
from East Asia”, World Bank Economic Review 9(3): 477-508.
Blaug, Mark, 1962, Economic Theory in Retrospect, London: Heinemann Books.
__________, 2001, “No History of Ideas, Please, We're Economists,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 15(1): 145-164.
Bliss, Christopher and Nicholas Stern, 1982, Palanpur: The Economy of an Indian Village.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Boo, Katherine, 2012, Behind the Beautiful Forevers, Random House, New York.
Booth, Charles, 1903, Life and Labour of the People of London. Second Series. Industry. Volume
5. London: Macmillan and Co.
Bourguignon, François, 2003, “The Growth Elasticity of Poverty Reduction: Explaining
Heterogeneity across Countries and Time Periods,” in T. Eicher and S. Turnovsky (eds)
Inequality and Growth: Theory and Policy Implications, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Bourguignon, Francois and Christian Morrisson, 2002, “Inequality Among World Citizens:
1820-1992,” American Economic Review 92(4): 727-744.
Bowles, Samuel and Herbert Gintis, 1976, Schooling in Capitalist America: Educational Reform
and the Contradictions of Economic Life, Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Bowles, Samuel, Steven Durlauf and Karla Hoff, 2006, Poverty Traps, Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Bowley, Arthur L., 1915, The Nature and Purpose of the Measurement of Social Phenomena.
London: P.S. King and Sons.
Boyer, George, 2002, “English Poor Laws,” EH.Net Encyclopedia, edited by Robert Whaples.
Brinton, Crane, 1934, A Decade of Revolution 1789-1799, New York: Harper and Row.
91

Brooke, Michael Z. 1998. Le Play: Engineer and Social Scientist. New Brunswick: Transaction
Publishers.
Bruno, Michael, Martin Ravallion and Lyn Squire, 1998, “Equity and Growth in Developing
Countries: Old and New Perspectives on the Policy Issues,” in Vito Tanzi and Ke-young
Chu (eds) Income Distribution and High-Quality Growth, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Cameron, Lisa, 2002, “Did Social Safety Net Scholarships Reduce Drop-Out Rates during the
Indonesian Economic Crisis?” Policy Research Working Paper 2800, World Bank.
Cappelen, Alexander, Ottar Mæstad and Bertil Tungodden, 2010, “Demand for Childhood
Vaccination—Insights from Behavioral Economics,” Forum for Development Studies
37(3): 349–364.
Carter, Michael and Christopher Barrett, 2006, “The Economics of Poverty Traps and Persistent
Poverty: An Asset-Based Approach,” Journal of Development Studies 42(2): 178-199.
Chen, Shaohua, Ren Mu and Martin Ravallion, 2009, “Are There Lasting Impacts of Aid to Poor
Areas?” Journal of Public Economics. 93: 512-528.
Chen, Shaohua and Martin Ravallion, 2010, “The Developing World is Poorer than we Thought,
But no Less Successful in the Fight against Poverty,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
125(4): 1577-1625.
____________ and ______________, 2013, “More Relatively Poor People in a Less Absolutely
Poor World,” Review of Income and Wealth 59(1): 1-28.
Chenery, Hollis, 1977, Forward to David Morawetz, Twenty-Five Years of Economic
Development. Washington DC: World Bank.
Chenery, Hollis, Montek S. Ahluwalia, Clive Bell, John Duloy and Richard Jolly, 1974,
Redistribution with Growth, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cinnirella, Francesco, 2008, “Optimists or Pessimists? A reconsideration of nutritional status in
Britain, 1740–1865,” European Review of Economic History, 12: 325–354.
Clark, Gregory, 2005, “The Condition of the Working Class in England 1209-2004,” Journal of
Political Economy 113: 1307-1340.
Clarke, George R.G., 1995, “More Evidence on Income Distribution and Growth”, Journal of
Development Economics 47: 403-428.
Cogneau, Denis, 2012, “The Political Dimension of Inequality during Economic Development,”
Région et Développement 35-2012.
92

Colquhoun, Patrick, 1806, Treatise on Indigence. London: Hatchard.
Cornia, Giovanni and Frances Stewart, 1995, “Two Errors of Targeting,” in Dominique van de
Walle and Kimberly Nead (eds) Public Spending and the Poor, Johns Hopkins University
Press for the World Bank.
Cunha, Flavio and James Heckman, 2007, “The Technology of Skill Formation,” American
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 97(2): 31-47.
Cunningham, Hugh, 1990, “The Employment and Unemployment of Children in England
c.1680-1851,” Past and Present 126: 115-150.
Currie, Janet, 2001, “Early Childhood Development Programs,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 15(2): 213-38.
__________, 2012, “Antipoverty Programs for Poor Children and Families,” in The Oxford
Handbook of the Economics of Poverty, edited by Philip N. Jefferson, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Dandekar, V.M., and N. Rath, 1971, Poverty in India. Pune: Indian School of Political
Economy.
Das, Jishnu, Quy-Toan Do and Berk Ozler, 2005, “A Welfare Analysis of Conditional Cash
Transfer Schemes,” World Bank Research Observer 20(1): 57-80.
Dasgupta, Partha, 1993, An Inquiry into Well-Being and Destitution, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
______________, 1997, “Poverty Traps”, in David M. Kreps and Kenneth F. Wallis (eds)
Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Dasgupta, Partha and Debraj Ray, 1986, “Inequality as a Determinant of Malnutrition and
Unemployment”, Economic Journal 96: 1011-34.
Datt, Gaurav and Martin Ravallion, 1992, “Growth and Redistribution Components of
Changes in Poverty Measures: A Decomposition with Applications to Brazil and
India in the 1980s,” Journal of Development Economics, 38: 275-295.
Day, Richard H., 1992, “Complex Economic Dynamics: Obvious in History, Generic in
Theory, Elusive in Data,” Journal of Applied Econometrics 7: S9-S23.
Dearden, Lorraine, Carl Emmerson, Christine Frayne and Costas Meghir, 2009, “Conditional
Cash Transfers and School Dropout Rates,” Journal of Human Resources 44(4): 827-857.
93

Deaton, Angus, 1997, The Analysis of Household Surveys: A Microeconometric Approach to
Development Policy, Washington DC: World Bank.
____________, 2006, “The Great Escape: A Review of Robert Fogel’s The Escape from Hunger
and Premature Death, 1700-2100,” Journal of Economic Literature 44: 106-114.
De Donder, Philippe, and Jean Hindriks, 1998, “The Political Economy of Targeting,”
Public Choice 95: 177-200.
De Mandeville, Bernard, 1732, “An Essay on Charity and Charity Schools,” in the Fable of the
Bees : Or, Private Vices, Publick Benefits, The Sixth Edition, London, Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 1957 (reprint).
Deininger, Klaus and Pedro Olinto, 2000, “Asset Distribution, Inequality and Growth”, Policy
Research Working Paper 2375, World Bank.
Deininger, Klaus and Lyn Squire, 1996 “A New Data Set Measuring Income Inequality,” World
Bank Economic Review 10: 565-591.
______________ and _________, 1998, “New Ways of Looking at Old Issues: Inequality and
Growth,” Journal of Development Economics 57(2): 259-87.
De Janvry, Alain and Elisabeth Sadoulet, 2006, “Making Conditional Cash Transfer Programs
More Efficient: Designing for Maximum Effect of the Conditonality,” World Bank
Economic Review 20(1): 1-29.
De Tocqueville, Alexis, 1835, Memoir on Pauperism: Does Public Charity Produce and Idle
and Dependent Class of Society? New York: Cosimo Classics edition 2005.
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), 2008, “Appendix A: Program Data,”
Washington DC: Department of Health and Human Services, United States Government.
Dercon, Stefan and Ingo Outes, 2013, “The Road to Perdition: Rainfall Shocks, Poverty
Traps and Destitution in Semi-Arid India,” mimeo, Oxford University.
de Waal, Frans, 2009, The Age of Empathy. Nature’s Lessons for a Kinder Society. New York:
Three Rivers Press.
de Montesquieu, Charles, 1748, The Spirit of Laws, Thomas Nugent translation, London: G. Bell
and Sons, 1914 edition.
Dickens, Charles, 1838, Oliver Twist. London: Richard Bently (Penguin edition 2003).
Do, Quy-Toan, Andrew Levchenko and Martin Ravallion, 2013, “Copying with Food Price
Volatility: Trade Insulation as Social Protection,” in Jean-Paul Chavas, David Hummels,
94

and Brian Wright (eds) The Economics of Food Price Volatility, University of Chicago
Press, forthcoming.
Doepke, Matthias and Fabrizio Zilibotti, 2005, “Social Class and the Spirit of Capitalism,”
Journal of the European Economic Association 3(2-3): 516-524.
Dollar, David and Kraay, Aart, 2002, “Growth is Good for the Poor,” Journal of Economic
Growth, 7(3): 195-225.
___________ and __________, 2004, “Trade, Growth and Poverty,” Economic Journal,
114(493): F22-49.
Drèze, Jean, 1990a, “Famine Prevention in India,” in Drèze and Sen (eds) The Political Economy
of Hunger, Oxford: Oxford University Press, Volume 2.
_________, 1990b, “Famine Prevention in Africa: Some Experiences and Lessons,” in Drèze
and Sen (eds) The Political Economy of Hunger, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
Volume 2.
Drèze, Jean and Amartya Sen, 1989, Hunger and Public Action, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Duncan, Otis, David Featherman and Beverly Duncan, 1972, Socioeconomic Background and
Achievement, Seminar Press.
Durr, Robert H., 1993, “What Moves Policy Sentiment?” American Political Science Review
87(1): 158-170.
Dutta, Puja, Rinku Murgai, Martin Ravallion and Dominique van de Walle, 2012, “Does India’s
Employment Guarantee Scheme Guarantee Employment?” Economic and Political
Weekly 48 (April 21): 55-64.
_________, ___________, ______________ and ____________________, 2013, Rozgar
Guarantee? Assessing India’s Biggest Antipoverty Program in India’s Poorest State,
World Bank, Washington DC.
Easterly, William, 2001, “The Middle Class Consensus and Economic Development,” Journal of
Economic Growth 6(4): 317-335.
______________ 2009, “How the Millennium Development Goals are Unfair to Africa,”
World Development 37(1): 26-35.
Elbers, Chris, Jean Lanjouw and Peter Lanjouw, 2003, “Micro–Level Estimation of Poverty and
Inequality,” Econometrica 71(1): 355-364.
95

Ellwood, David and Lawrence Summers, 1986, “Poverty in America: Is Welfare the Answer or
the Problem?” in Sheldon Danziger and Daniel Weinberg (eds) Fighting Poverty: What
Works and What Doesn’t. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Engels, Friedrich, 1845, The Condition of the Working Class in England, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1993 edition.
Eurostat, 2005, “Income Poverty and Social Exclusion in the EU25,” Statistics in Focus 03/2005,
Office of Official Publications of the European Communities, Luxembourg.
Ferreira, Francisco H.G., and Martin Ravallion, 2009, “Poverty and Inequality: The Global
Context,” in The Oxford Handbook of Economic Inequality, edited by Wiemer Salverda,
Brian Nolan and Tim Smeeding, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fields, Gary S., 1977, “Who Benefits from Economic Development? A Reexamination of
Brazilian Growth in the 196O's,” American Economic Review 67(4): 570-582.
____________., 1980, Poverty, Inequality and Development. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
____________, 2001, Distribution and Development. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Fifield, Anna, 2013, “Starved of Healthy Options,” Financial Times June 14, p.9
Fishlow, Albert, 1972, “Brazilian Size Distribution of Income,” American Economic Review,
Papers and Proceedings 62:391-402.
Fishlow, Albert and Catherine Gwin, 1994, “Overview: Lessons from the East Asian
Experience,” in Fishlow, Albert, Catherine Gwin, Stephan Haggard, Dani Rodrik and
Robert Wade (eds), Miracle or Design? Lessons from the East Asian Experience,
Washington DC: Overseas Development Council.
Fiszbein, Ariel and Norbert Schady, 2010, Conditional Cash Transfers for Attacking Present and
Future Poverty, World Bank, Washington DC.
Fleischacker, Samuel, 2004, A Short History of Distributive Justice. Cambridge MA: Harvard
University Press.
Fogel, Robert W., 2004, The Escape from Hunger and Premature Death, 1700-2100,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fogel, Robert W., Stanley Engerman, Roderick Floud, Gerald Friedman, Robert Mango,
Kenneth Sokoloff, Richard Steckel, James Trussell, Georgia Villaflor, Kenneth Watchter,

96

1983, “Secular Change in American and British Stature and Nutrition,” in Robert Rotberg
and Theodore Rabb (eds) Hunger in History, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Forbes, Kristin J., 2000, “A Reassessment of the Relationship Between Inequality and
Growth,” American Economic Review 90(4): 869-87.
Foster, James., J. Greer, and Erik Thorbecke, 1984, “A Class of Decomposable Poverty
Measures,”Econometrica 52: 761-765.
Friedman, Milton, 1962, Capital and Freedom, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Furniss, Edgar, 1920, The Position of the Laborer in a System of Nationalism. A Study in the
Labor Theories of the Later English Mercantilists, Boston and New York: Houghton
Mifflin.
Gaiha, Raghav, 1997, “Rural Public Works and the Poor: The Case of the Employment
Guarantee Scheme in India,” in S. Polachek (ed.) Research in Labour Economics,
Connecticut: JAI Press.
Galbraith, John Kenneth, 1958, The Affluent Society. Boston: Mariner Books.
Galor, Oded, and Joseph Zeira, 1993, “Income Distribution and Macroeconomics.” Review of
Economic Studies 60(1): 35–52.
Gans, Herbert, 1995, The War Against the Poor, New York: Basic Books.
Garces, Eliana, Duncan Thomas, and Janet Currie, 2002, “Longer Term Effects of Head Start.”
American Economic Review 92(4): 999-1012.
Gelbach, Jonah and Lant Pritchett, 2000. “Indicator Targeting in a Political Economy: Leakier
can be Better.” Journal of Policy Reform 4: 113–45.
Geremek, Bronislaw, 1994, Poverty: A History. Oxford: Blackwell.
Ghatak, Maitreesh and Neville Nien-Huei Jiang, 2002, “A Simple Model of Inequality,
Occupational Choice, and Development,” Journal of Development Economics 69(1):
205-226.
Gillie, Alan, 1996, “The Origin of the Poverty Line,” Economic History Review 49(4): 715-730.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz, 2008, The Race Between Education and Technology.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Gordon, Roger and Wei Li, 2009, “Tax Structures in Developing Countries: Many Puzzles and a
Possible Explanation,” Journal of Public Economics 93(7-8): 855-66.

97

Grosh, Margaret, Carlo del Ninno, Emil Tesliuc and Azedine Ouerghi, 2008, For Protection and
Promotion: The Design and Implementation of Effective Safety Nets, World Bank,
Washington DC.
Grosh, Margaret and Paul Glewwe, 2000, Designing Household Survey Questionnaires for
Developing Countries. Lessons from 15 years of the Living Standards Measurement
Study. (Three Volumes) Washington DC: World Bank.
Gutiérrez, Catalina and Ryuichi Tanaka, 2009, “Inequality and Education Decisions in
Developing Countries,” Journal of Economic Inequality 7: 55-81.
Harrington, Michael, 1962, The Other America: Poverty in the United States. New York:
Macmillan.
Harrison, Ann and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, 2010, “Trade, Foreign Investment, and Industrial
Policy for Developing Countries,” Handbook of Development Economics Volume 5,
Amsterdam: North Holland.
Hartmann, Betsy, 1987, Reproductive Rights and Wrongs: The Global Politics of Population
Control and Contraceptive Choice, New York: Harper and Row.
Hauk, William R. and Romain Wacziarg, 2009, “A Monte Carlo Study of Growth Regressions,”
Journal of Economic Growth, forthcoming.
Hayek, Friedrich, 1944, The Road to Serfdom, London: Routledge Press. (Fiftieth Anniversary
Edition, University of Chicago Press 1994.)
Hazan, Moshe and Binyamin Berdugo, 2002, “Child Labour, Fertility, and Economic Growth”
Economic Journal 112(482): 810-828.
Heckman, James, 2006, “Skill Formation and the Economics of Investing in Disadvantaged
Children,” Science 30: 1900-1902.
Heclo, Hugh, 1986, “The Political Foundations of Antipoverty Policy,” in Sheldon Danziger and
Daniel Weinberg (eds) Fighting Poverty: What Works and What Doesn’t. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Herzer, Dierk and Sebastian Vollmer, 2012, “Inequality and Growth: Evidence from Panel
Cointegration,” Journal of Economic Inequality 10: 489-503.
Hill, Christopher, 1972, The World Turned Upside Down: Radical Ideas During the English
Revolution. London: Maurice Temple Smith.

98

Himmelfarb, Gertrude, 1984a, The Idea of Poverty: England in the Early Industrial Age.
London: Faber and Faber.
__________________, 1984b, “The Idea of Poverty,” History Today 34(4).
Hindle, Steve, 2004. On the Parish? The Micro-Politics of Poor Relief in Rural England 15501750, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hoff, Karla, 1996, “Market Failures and the Distribution of Wealth: A Perspective from the
Economics of Information,” Politics and Society 24(4): 411-432.
Hossain, Mahabub, 1988, “Credit for Alleviation of Rural Poverty: The Grameen Bank
in Bangladesh.” IFPRI Research Report 65. International Food Policy Research Institute,
Washington, D.C.
Howe, Irving, 1993, Introduction to Michael Harrington,’s The Other America, 1993 Reprinting.
New York: Touchstone.
Hume, David, 1739, A Treatise of Human Nature, web edition published by eBooks@Adelaide.
Hunter, Robert, 1904, Poverty, London: MacMillan Company.
Imbert, Clement and John Papp, 2011, “Estimating Leakages in India’s Employment Guarantee,”
in Reetika Khera (ed.) The Battle for Employment Guarantee, New Delhi: Oxford
University Press.
Jha, Raghbendra, Raghav Gaiha, Manoj K. Pandey, 2012, “Net Transfer Benefits under India's
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme,” Journal of Policy Modeling 34(2): 296-311.
Jalan, Jyotsna and Martin Ravallion, 1998, “Are There Dynamic Gains from a Poor-Area
Development Program?” Journal of Public Economics 67(1): 65-86.
____________and _____________, 2002, “Geographic Poverty Traps? A Micro Model of
Consumption Growth in Rural China”, Journal of Applied Econometrics 17(4): 329-346.
____________and _____________, 2004, “Household Income Dynamics in Rural China,” in
Stefan Dercon (ed) Insurance Against Poverty, Oxford University Press.
Jerven, Morten, 2013, Poor Numbers How We Are Misled by African Development Statistics and
What to Do about It, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Jones, Gareth Stedman, 2004, An End to Poverty? A Historical Debate, New York: Columbia
University Press.
Just, David and Hope Michelson, 2007, “Wealth as Welfare: Are Wealth Thresholds Behind
Persistent Poverty?” Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 29(3), 419–426.
99

Kakwani, Nanak, 1980, Income Inequality and Poverty: Methods of Estimation and Policy
Applications, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kaldor, Nicholas, 1955, “Alternative Theories of Distribution,” Review of Economic Studies
23(2): 94-100.
Kalecki, Michael, 1942, “A Theory of Profits,” Economic Journal 52: 258-267.
Kanbur, Ravi, 1987, “Measurement and Alleviation of Poverty,” IMF Staff Papers 36: 60-85.
Kanbur, Ravi , Michael Keen and Matti Tuomala, 1995, “Labor Supply and Targeting in
Poverty-Alleviation Programs,” in Dominique van de Walle and Kimberly Nead
(eds) Public Spending and the Poor, Johns Hopkins University Press for the
World Bank.
Kant, Immanuel, 1785, Fundamental Principles of the Metaphysic of Morals (Thomas Kingsmill
Abbott. ed. 10 edition). Project Gutenberg.
Katz, Michael B., 1987, The Undeserving Poor: From the War on Poverty to the War on
Welfare. New York: Pantheon Books.
Keefer, Philip and Stuti Khemani, 2005, “Democracy, Public Expenditures, and the Poor:
Understanding Political Incentives for Providing Public Services.” World Bank Research
Observer 20 (1): 1–28.
Kelly, Morgan and Cormac Ó Gráda, 2010, “Living Standards and Mortality since the Middle
Ages,” Working Paper 201026, School Of Economics, University College Dublin.
Keynes, John Maynard, 1936, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. London:
Macmillan Press.
Keysers, Christian, 2011, Empathic Brain. How the Discovery of Mirror Neurons Changes our
Understanding of Human Nature, Social Brain Press.
Klebaner, Benjamin J., 1964, “Poverty and Its Relief in American Thought, 1815-61,” Social
Service Review 38(4): 382-399.
Knowles, Stephen, 2005, “Inequality and Economic Growth: The Empirical Relationship
Reconsidered in the Light of Comparable Data,” Journal of Development Studies 41(1):
135-159.
Kraay, Aart, 2006, “When is Growth Pro-Poor? Evidence from a Panel of Countries,” Journal of
Development Economics, 80: 198-227.

100

Kraay, Aart and Claudio Raddatz, 2007, “Poverty Traps, Aid and Growth,” Journal of
Development Economics 82(2): 315-347.
Kolm, Serge-Christophe, 1976. “Unequal inequalities. I,” Journal of Economic Theory 12(3):
416-442.
Korinek, Anton, Johan Mistiaen and Martin Ravallion, 2006,“Survey Nonresponse and the
Distribution of Income,” Journal of Economic Inequality. 4(2): 33-55.
Kuznets, Simon, 1955, “Economic Growth and Income Inequality,” American Economic Review
45:1-28.
Landauer, Carl, 1959, European Socialism: A History of Ideas and Movements from the
Industrial Revolution to Hitler’s Seizure of Power. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Lanjouw, Peter and Nicholas Stern, 1998, Economic Development in Palanpur over Five
Decades, Oxford: Calrendon Press.
Levine, Ross and David Renelt, 1992, “A Sensitivity Analysis of Cross-Country Growth
Regressions,” American Economic Review 82: 942-963.
Lewis, Arthur, 1954, “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor,”
Manchester School of Economic and Social Studies 22: 139-191.
Li, Hongyi and Heng-fu Zou, 1998, “Income Inequality is not Harmful to Growth:
Theory and Evidence,” Review of Development Economics 2(3): 318-334.
Lin, Jusin Yifu, 2012, New Structural Economics: A Framework for Rethinking Development
and Policy, Washington DC: World Bank.
Lindert, Peter H., 2000, “Three Centuries of Inequality in Britain and America,” in A.B.
Atkinson and F. Bourguignon (eds.) Handbook of Income Distribution Vol. 1,
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
______________, 2004, Growing Public: Volume 1, The Story: Social Spending and Economic
Growth since the Eighteenth Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
______________, 2013, “Private Welfare and the Welfare State,” in Larry Neal and Jeffrey
Williamson (eds), The Cambridge History of Capitalism, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

101

Lipton, Michael, 1968, “Urban bias and rural planning: strategy for agriculture', in Paul Streeten
and Michael Lipton (eds.), The Crisis in Indian Planning, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
______________, 1977, Why Poor People Stay Poor: Urban Bias and World Development,
London: Temple Smith.
Lipton, Michael and Martin Ravallion, 1995, “Poverty and Policy,” in Handbook of Development
Economics Volume 3, (edited by Jere Behrman and T.N. Srinivasan) Amsterdam: North
Holland.
Lokshin, Michael and Martin Ravallion, 2000, “Welfare Impacts of Russia’s 1998 Financial
Crisis and the Response of the Public Safety Net”, Economics of Transition, 8(2), 269295.
______________ and _______________, 2004, “Household Income Dynamics in Two
Transition Economies,” Studies in Nonlinear Dynamics and Econometrics, 8(3).
Lopez, Humberto and Luis Servén, 2006, “A Normal Relationship? Poverty, Growth and
Inequality,” Policy Research Working Paper 3814, World Bank.
______________ and __________, 2009, “Too Poor to Grow,” Policy Research Working Paper
5012, World Bank.
Loury, Glenn, 1981, “Intergenerational Transfers and the Distribution of Earnings,”
Econometrica 49; 843-867.
Ludwig, Jens and Deborah A. Phillips, 2007, “The Benefits and Costs of Head Start,” NBER
Working Paper 12973.
Lundberg, Mattias, and Lyn Squire, 2003, “The Simultaneous Evolution of Growth and
Inequality.” Economic Journal 113: 326–44.
Macours, Karen, Norbert Schady and Renos Vakis, 2008, “Cash Transfers, Behavioral Changes
and Cognitive Development in Early Childhood,” Policy Research Working Paper 4759,
World Bank, Washington DC.
Mahalanobis, Prasanta Chandra, 1953, “Some Observations on the Process of Growth,” Sankhya
12: 307-12.
Malthus, Thomas Robert, 1806, An Essay on the Principle of Population, 1890 Edition, London:
Ward, Lock and Co.

102

Mansuri, Ghazala and Vijayendra Rao, 2012, Localizing Development: Does Participation
Work?, Washington DC: World Bank.
Markussen, Simen, 2008, “How the Left Prospers from Prosperity,” European Journal of
Political Economy 24: 329-342.
Marshall, Alfred, 1890, Principles of Economics (8th edition, 1920), London: Macmillan.
_____________, 1907, “Some Possibilities of Economic Chivalry,” Economic Journal 17(65):
7-29.
Martin, Will and Kym Anderson, 2012, “Export Restrictions and Price Insulation During
Commodity Price Booms,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 94(2): 422–427.
Marx, Karl and Friedrich Engels, 1848, Manifesto of the Communist Party. London.
Mayhew, Henry, 2008, London Labour and the London Poor. London: Wordsworth Classics
(reprinting a selection of newspaper articles from the 1840s).
McKenzie, David and Christopher Woodruff, 2006, “Do Entry Costs Provide an Empirical Basis
for Poverty Traps? Evidence from Mexican Microenterprises,” Economic Development
and Cultural Change 55(1): 3-42.
Meade, James, 1972, “Poverty in the Welfare State,” Oxford Economic Papers 24: 289-326.
Mencher, Samuel, 1967, Poor Law to Poverty Program: Economic Security Policy in Britain
and the United States, Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Mesnard, Alice and Martin Ravallion, 2006, “The Wealth Effect on New Business Startups in a
Developing Economy,” Economica, 73: 367-392.
Meyer, Bruce D. and James Sullivan, 2012, “Consumption and Income Poverty in the United
States,” in The Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Poverty, edited by Philip N.
Jefferson, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Michel, Jean-Baptiste, Yuan Kui Shen, Aviva P. Aiden, Adrian Veres, Matthew K. Gray, The
Google Books Team, Joseph P. Pickett, Dale Hoiberg, Dan Clancy, Peter Norvig, Jon
Orwant, Steven Pinker, Martin A. Nowak, and Erez Lieberman Aiden, 2010,
“Quantitative Analysis of Culture Using Millions of Digitized Books,” Science, 16
December 2010.
Milanovic, Branko, 2005, “Can we Discern the Effect of Globalization on Income Distribution?”
World Bank Economic Review, 19(1): 21-44.

103

_______________, 2008, “Qat Expenditures in Yemen and Djibouti: An Empirical Analysis,”
Journal of African Economies 17(5): 661–687.
Mill, John Stuart, 1848, Principles of Political Economy. 1965 edition, NewYork: A.M. Kelly.
______________, 1859, On Liberty, Toronto: Dover Thrift Edition, 2002.
Moehler, Devra, 2010, “Democracy, Governance, and Randomized Development Assistance,”
The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 628: 130-46.
Moehling, Carolyn M., 1999, “State Child Labor Laws and the Decline of Child Labor,”
Explorations in Economic History 36(1): 72-106.
Montagu, Askley, 1971, “Forward,” in the 1971 reprint of Townsend (1786).
Morduch, Jonathan, 1999, “The Role of Subsidies in Microfinance: Evidence from the Grameen
Bank,” Journal of Development Economics 60: 229-248.
Muller, Jerry Z. 1993. Adam Smith in his Time and Ours: Designing a Decent Society. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Murgai, Rinku and Martin Ravallion, 2005, “Is a Guaranteed Living Wage a Good Antipoverty
Policy?” Policy Research Working Paper 3460, World Bank.
Murphy, Kevin, Andrei Schleifer and Robert Vishny, 1989, “Industrialization and the Big Push,”
Journal of Political Economy 97(5): 1003-1026.
Murray, Charles A., 1984. Losing Ground. American Social Policy 1950-1980. New York: Basic
Books.
Musgrave, Richard, 1985, “A Brief History of Fiscal Doctrine,” in A.J. Auerbach and M.
Feldstein (eds) Handbook of Public Economics Volume 1, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Nath, Shiv K., 1969, A Reappraisal of Welfare Economics. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Nozick, Robert, 1974, Anarchy, State and Utopia, New York: Basic Books.
O’Connor, Alice, 2002, Poverty Knowledge: Social Science, Social Policy, and the Poor in
Twentieth-Century U.S. History. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
O’Rourke, Kevin and Jeffrey Williamson, 1997, Globalization and History: The Evolution of the
Nineteenth Century Atlantic Economy, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Pack, Howard and Kamal Saggi, 2006, “The Case for Industrial Policy: A Critical Survey,”
Policy Research Working Paper 3839, World Bank, Washington DC.
Pandey, Priyanka, Sangeeta Goyal and Venkatesh Sundararaman, 2009, “Community

104

Participation in Public Schools: Impacts of Information Campaigns in Three Indian
States,” Education Economics 13(3): 355-375.
Perotti, Roberto, 1996, “Growth, Income Distribution and Democracy: What the Data Say,”
Journal of Economic Growth, 1(2): 149-187.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini, 1994, “Is Inequality Harmful for Growth?” American
Economic Review 84: 600-621.
Pigou, Arthur, 1920, The Economics of Welfare. Fourth Edition. London: Macmillan, 1971.
Pitt, Mark and Shahidur Khandker, 1998, “The Impact of Group-Based Credit
Programs on Poor Households in Bangladesh: Does the Gender of Participants
Matter?” Journal of Political Economy 106: 958-96.
________ and ________________, 2012, “Replicating Replication Due Diligence in Roodman
and Morduch’s Replication of Pitt and Khandker (1998),” Policy Research Working
Paper 6273, World Bank, Washington DC.
Pogge, Thomas W., 1989, Realizing Rawls, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Pollak, Robert and Wales, Terence, 1979, “Welfare Comparison and Equivalence Scale,”
American Economic Review 69: 216–21.
Prasad, Eswar and Shang-Jin Wei, 2005, “The Chinese Approach to Capital Inflows: Patterns
and Possible Explanations,” NBER Working Paper 11306, Cambridge Massachusetts.
Probe Team, 1999, Public Report on Basic Education in India, New Delhi: Oxford University
Press.
Proceedings of the Old Bailey, 2012, London, 1760-1815. Web Site, London.
Rajan, Raghuram, 2009a, “Rent Preservation and the Persistence of Underdevelopment,”
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1(1): 178-218.
______________, 2009b, “Saving Growth from Unequal Influence,” in Santiago Levy and
Michael Walton (eds) No Growth without Equity? Inequality, Interests and Competition
in Mexico, Washington DC: World Bank.
Rao, Vijayendra, 2001, “Poverty and Public Celebrations in Rural India,” Annals of the
American Academy of Political and Social Science 573(1): 85-104.
Ravallion, Martin, 1987, “Trade and Stabilization: Another Look at British India's Controversial
Foodgrain Exports,” Explorations in Economic History 24: 354-370.
_____________, 1994, Poverty Comparisons. Chur, Switzerland: Harwood University Press.
105

_____________, 1995, “Growth and Poverty: Evidence for Developing Countries in the
1980s,” Economics Letters, 48, 411-417.
______________, 1997a, “Can High Inequality Developing Countries Escape Absolute
Poverty?” Economics Letters, 56, 51-57.
______________, 1997b, “Famines and Economics,” Journal of Economic Literature, 35(3):
1205-1242
______________, 1998, “Does Aggregation Hide the Harmful Effects of Inequality on Growth?”
Economics Letters, 61(1): 73-77.
______________, 2001, “Growth, Inequality and Poverty: Looking Beyond Averages,”
World Development, 29(11): 1803-1815.
______________, 2003, “Inequality Convergence,” Economics Letters 80: 351-356.
______________, 2005, “Externalities in Rural Development: Evidence for China,” in Ravi
Kanbur and Tony Venables (eds) Spatial Inequality and Development, Oxford University
Press.
______________, 2006, “Looking Beyond Averages in the Trade and Poverty Debate,” World
Development 34(8): 1374-1392.
______________, 2007, “Inequality is Bad for the Poor,” in J. Micklewright and S. Jenkins
(eds.), Inequality and Poverty Re-Examined. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
______________, 2009, “Are there Lessons for Africa from China’s Success Against Poverty?”
World Development, 37(2), 303-313.
______________, 2010, “Do Poorer Countries Have Less Capacity for Redistribution?” Journal
of Globalization and Development 1(2): 1-29.
______________, 2011, “The Two Poverty Enlightenments: Historical Insights from Digitized
Books Spanning Three Centuries.” Poverty and Public Policy 3(2): 1-45.
______________, 2012a, “Poverty Lines Across the World” in The Oxford Handbook of the
Economics of Poverty, edited by Philip N. Jefferson, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
______________, 2012b, “Why Don’t we See Poverty Convergence?” American Economic
Review, 102(1): 504-523.
______________, 2013, “How Long Will It Take To Lift One Billion People Out Of Poverty?”
World Bank Research Observer.

106

Ravallion, Martin, Shaohua Chen and Prem Sangraula, 2007, “New Evidence on the
Urbanization of Global Poverty,” Population and Development Review, 33(4): 667-702.
Ravallion, Martin, Shaohua Chen and Prem Sangraula, 2009, “Dollar a Day Revisited,” World
Bank Economic Review, 23(2): 163-184.
Ravallion, Martin and Shaohua Chen, 2007, “China’s (Uneven) Progress Against Poverty.”
Journal of Development Economics, 82/1: 1-42.
______________ and ____________, 2011, “Weakly Relative Poverty,” Review of Economics
and Statistics, 93 (4): 1251-1261.
______________ and ____________, 2013, “A Proposal for Truly Global Poverty Measures,”
Global Policy, forthcoming.
Ravallion, Martin and Gaurav Datt, 2002, ““Why Has Economic Growth Been More Pro-Poor in
Some States of India than Others?” Journal of Development Economics 68: 381-400.
Ravallion, Martin, Gaurav Datt, and Dominique van de Walle, 1991, “Quantifying Absolute
Poverty in the Developing World,” Review of Income and Wealth 37: 345-361.
Ravallion, Martin, Dominique van de Walle, Puja Dutta and Rinku Murgai, 2013, “Try Telling
People their Rights? On Making India’s Largest Antipoverty Program work in India’s
Poorest State,” Department of Economics, Georgetown University, Washington DC.
Ravallion, Martin and Quentin Wodon, 2000a, “Does Child Labor Displace Schooling? Evidence
on Behavioral Responses to an Enrolment Subsidy,” Economic Journal 110: 158-176.
______________ and _____________, 2000b, “Banking on the Poor? Branch Location and
Non-Farm Rural Development in Bangladesh,” Review of Development Economics 4(2):
121-139.
Raventós, Daniel, 2007, Basic Income: The Material Conditions of Freedom, London: Pluto
Press.
Rawls, John, 1967, “Distributive Justice,” in P. Laslett and W.G. Runciman (eds) Philosophy,
Politics and Society, Series III, London.
__________, 1971, A Theory of Justice, Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Ray, Debraj, 1998, Development Economics, Princeton University Press.
Reinikka, Ritva and Jakob Svensson, 2005, “Fighting Corruption to Improve Schooling:
Evidence from a Newspaper Campaign in Uganda,” Journal of the European Economic

107

Association 3(2/3): 259-267, Papers and Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual Congress
of the European Economic Association.
Rhys-Williams, Juliet, 1943, Something to Look Forward To, London: MacDonald.
Ricardo, David, 1817, Principles of Political Economy and Taxation. London: Everyman
Edition, 1911.
Robbins, Lionel, 1935, An Essay on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science. London.
Robinson, Sherman, 1976, “A note on the U-hypothesis relating income inequality and economic
development,” American Economic Review 66:437-440.
Roche, Daniel, 1987, The People of Paris: An Essay in Popular Culture in the Eighteenth
Century. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Rodrik, Dani, 1994, “King Kong Meets Godzilla: The World Bank and The East Asian Miracle,”
in Fishlow, Albert, Catherine Gwin, Stephan Haggard, Dani Rodrik and Robert Wade
(eds), Miracle or Design? Lessons from the East Asian Experience, Washington DC:
Overseas Development Council.
___________, 2004, “Industrial Policy for the Twenty-First Century,” Kennedy School of
Government Working Paper RWP04-047, Harvard University.
Rodriguez, Francisco and Dani Rodrik, 2001, “Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Sceptic’s
Guide to the Cross-National Evidence,” NBER Macroeconomic Annual 2000,
Cambridge: MIT Press, pp. 261-324.
Roodman, David and Jonathan Morduch, 2009, “The Impact of Microcredit on the Poor in
Bangladesh: Revisiting the Evidence,” Working Paper 174, Center for Global
Development.
Rothschild, Emma, 2001, Economic Sentiments: Adam Smith, Condorcet, and the Enlightenment,
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Rothschild, Michael and Stiglitz, Joseph, 1976, “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets:
An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information”, Quarterly Journal of Economics
90(4): 629-650.
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 1754, Discourse on the Origin of Inequality, A Discourse on a Subject
Proposed by the Academy of Dijon: What is the Origin of Inequality Among Men, and is
it Authorised by Natural Law? Translated by G. D. H. Cole.
Rowntree, Benjamin Seebohm, 1902, Poverty: A Study of Town Life. London: Macmillan.
108

Sachs, Jeffrey, 2005a, Investing in Development: A Practical Plan to Achieve the Millennium
Development Goals, Millennium Project, United Nations, New York.
____________, 2005b, The End of Poverty. Economic Possibilities for Our Time. New York:
Penguin Books.
Sadoulet, Elisabeth, and Alain de Janvry, 1995, Quantitative Development Policy Analysis,
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Saint-Paul, Gilles, 2011, The Tyranny of Utility. Behavioral Social Science and the Rise of
Paternalism. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Sala-I-Martin, Xavier, Gernot Doppelhofer and Ronald Miller, 2004, “Determinants of LongTerm Growth: A Bayesian Averaging of Classical Estimates (BACE) Approach,”
American Economic Review 94(4): 813-836.
Sandmo, Agnar, 2013, “The Principal Problem in Political Economy: Income Distribution in the
History of Economic Thought,” Department of Economics, Norwegian School of
Economics. Forthcoming in Handbook of Income Distribution, Volume 2, edited by
Anthony B. Atkinson and Francois Bourguignon, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
Sen, Amartya K., 1970a, Collective Choice and Social Welfare. San Francisco: Holden Day.
_____________, 1970b, “Interpersonal Aggregation and Partial Comparability,” Econometrica
38(3): 393-409.
_____________, 1973, On Economic Inequality. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
_____________, 1976, “Poverty: An Ordinal Approach to Measurement,” Econometrica 46:
437-446
_____________, 1980, “Equality of What? In S. McMurrin (ed.) Tanner Lectures on Human
Values, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
_____________, 1981a, Poverty and Famines. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
____________ , 1981b, “Public action and the quality of life in developing countries'
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 43(4): 287-319.
_____________, 1983, “Poor, Relatively Speaking,” Oxford Economic Papers 35(2):153-69
_____________, 1985, Commodities and Capabilities. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
_____________, 1999, Development as Freedom, New York: Alfred Knopf.

109

_____________, 2000, “Social Justice and the Distribution of Income,” in Anthony B. Atkinson
and Francois Bourguignon (eds) Handbook of Income Distribution Volume 1,
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
Slesnick, Daniel, 2001, Consumption and Social Welfare, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Small, Mario Luis, David J. Harding and Michèle Lamont, 2010, “Reconsidering Culture and
Poverty,” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 629: 6-29.
Smith, Adam, 1759, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, London: A. Millar.
___________, 1776, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, Electronic
Classic Edition, Pennsylvania State University.
Smith, Richard M., 2011, “Social Security as a Development Institution? The Relative Efficacy
of Poor Relief Provisions under the English Old Poor Law,” in C.A. Bayly, M.
Woolcock, S. Szreter and V. Rao (eds) History, Historians and Development Policy: A
Necessary Dialogue, Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Solar, Peter M., 1995, “Poor Relief and English Economic Development before the Industrial
Revolution,” Economic History Review 48: 1-22.
Sridharan, E., 2004, “The Growth and Sectoral Composition of India’s Middle Class: Its Impact
on the Politics of Economic Liberalization,” India Review 3(4): 405-428.
Steinberg, Stephen, 2011, “Poor Reason: Culture Still Doesn't Explain Poverty,” Boston Review
January 13.
Stephens, W.B., 1998. Education in Britain 1750-1914 London: Macmillan.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., 1969, “Distribution of Income and Wealth Among Individuals,”
Econometrica 37(3): 382-397
______________, 2012, The Price of Inequality, New York: W.W. Norton & Co.
Strömberg, David, 2004. “Radio's Impact on New Deal Spending.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 119 (1): 189-221.
Sundquist, James L., 1968, Politics and Power: The Eisenhower, Kennedy and Johnson Years.
Washington DC: Brookings.
Swamy, Anand, 1997, “A Simple Test of the Nutrition-based Efficiency Wage Model,” Journal
of Development Economics 53: 85-98.
Thane, Pat, 2000, Old Age in English History. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
110

Thorner, Daniel, 1967, “Social and Economic Studies of Dr Mann,” Economic and Political
Weekly 2(13): 612-645.
Tinbergen, Jan, 1975, Income Distribution: Analyses and Policies, Amsterdam: Noth-Holland.
Todd, Petra and Kenneth Wolpin, 2002, “Using a Social Experiment to Validate a Dynamic
Behavioral Model of Child Schooling and Fertility: Assessing the Impact of a School
Subsidy Program in Mexico,” Penn Institute for Economic Research Working Paper 03022, Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania.
Townsend, Joseph, 1786, A Dissertation on the Poor Laws By a Well-Wisher to Mankind. 1971
reprint: Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Townsend, Peter, 1979, Poverty in the United Kingdom: A Survey of Household Resources and
Standards of Living. Harmonsworth: Penguin Books.
Tucker, Rufus S., 1975, “Real Wages of Artisans in London, 1729-1935,” in Arthur J. Taylor
(ed.) The Standard of Living in the Industrial Revolution. London: Methuen.
United Nations Development Programme, 1990, Human Development Report, New York: New
York: Oxford University Press for the UNDP.
Vakil, C.N. and Brahmanand, 1956, Planning for an Expanding Economy, Bombay: Vora and
Company.
van de Walle, Dominique, 1998, “Targeting Revisited,” World Bank Research Observer,
13(2): 231-48.
Van Horn Melton, James, 1988, Absolutism and the Eighteenth Century Origins of Compulsory
Schooling in Prussia and Austria, Cambridge University Press.
Van Oorschot, Wim and Loek Halman, 2000, “Blame or Fate, Individual or Social? An
International Comparison of Popular Explanations of Poverty,” European Societies 2(1):
1-28.
Vincent, David, 2000, The Rise of Mass Literacy: Reading and Writing in Modern Europe.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Voitchovsky, Sarah, 2005, “Does the Profile of Income Inequality Matter for Economic
Growth?” Journal of Economic Growth 10: 273-296.
________________, 2009, “Inequality and Economic Growth,” in The Oxford Handbook of
Economic Inequality, edited by Wiemer Salverda, Brian Nolan and Tim Smeeding,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
111

Walker, Thomas S., and James G. Ryan, 1998, Village and Household Economies in India’s
Semi-Arid Tropics, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Watts, Harold W., 1968, “An Economic Definition of Poverty,” in Daniel P. Moynihan (ed.),
On Understanding Poverty, New York, Basic Books.
Webb, Robert K., 1974, Modern England from the 18th Century to the Present. New York:
Dodd, Mead and Company.
Weiner, Myron, 1991, The Child and the State in India, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Wicksell, Knut, 1901, Lectures on Political Economy. 1934 English Edition. London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul.
Winters, L. Alan, Neil McCulloch and Andrew McKay, 2004, “Trade Liberalization and
Poverty: The Evidence So Far,” Journal of Economic Literature 42(March): 72-115.
Williamson, Jeffrey, 1985, Did British Capitalism Breed Inequality? London: Routledge.
________________, 1998, “Globalization and the Labor Market: Using History to Inform
Policy,” in Philippe Aghion and Jeffrey Williamson (eds) Growth, Inequality and
Globalization, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wilson, William Julius, 1987, The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass and the
Truly Disadvantaged. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Woodham-Smith, Cecil, 1962, The Great Hunger: Ireland 1845-9. London: Hamilton.
World Bank, 1980, World Development Report: Poverty and Human Development, New York:
Oxford University Press.
__________, 1986, Poverty and Hunger: issues and Options for Food Security in Developing
Countries. Washington DC: World Bank.
__________, 1990, World Development Report: Poverty, New York: Oxford University Press.
__________, 1993, The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy, New York:
Oxford University Press.
__________, 2000, World Development Report: Attacking Poverty, New York: Oxford
University Press.
__________, 2004, World Development Report: Making Services work for the Poor, New York:
Oxford University Press.
__________, 2006, World Development Report: Equity and Development, New York: Oxford
University Press.
112

