                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE CONSEQUENCES OF USING ONE ASSESSMENT SYSTEM TO PURSUE
                            TWO OBJECTIVES

                                               Derek Neal

                                         Working Paper 19214
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19214


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2013




I thank the Searle Freedom Trust for research support. I also thank Lindy and Michael Keiser for research
support through a gift to the University of Chicago’s Committee on Education. I thank Michael Greenstone,
Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach and Robert S. Gibbons for useful comments. I thank Robert D. Gibbons
and David Thissen for their insights on psychometrics and assessment development. I thank Ian Fillmore,
Sarah A. G. Komisarow and Richard Olson for excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Derek Neal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Consequences of Using One Assessment System To Pursue Two Objectives
Derek Neal
NBER Working Paper No. 19214
July 2013, Revised December 2013
JEL No. I20,I21

                                              ABSTRACT

Education officials often use one assessment system both to create measures of student achievement
and to create performance metrics for educators. However, modern standardized testing systems are
not designed to produce performance metrics for teachers or principals. They are designed to produce
reliable measures of individual student achievement in a low-stakes testing environment. The design
features that promote reliable measurement provide opportunities for teachers to profitably coach students
on test taking skills, and educators typically exploit these opportunities whenever modern assessments
are used in high-stakes settings as vehicles for gathering information about their performance. Because
these coaching responses often contaminate measures of both student achievement and educator performance,
it is likely possible to acquire more accurate measures of both student achievement and education performance
by developing separate assessment systems that are designed specifically for each measurement task.


Derek Neal
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and The Committee on Education
and also NBER
d-neal@uchicago.edu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Introduction


                                                      Assessment-based accountability systems in education typically pursue two
distinct objectives using data gathered from a single assessment system.                                                                                                                                                                          The first
objective is to provide reliable information about student achievement and how levels of
achievement vary among student populations defined by time and geography.                                                                                                                                                                              The
second objective is to induce educators to teach well by attaching consequences to
assessment-based measures of their performance. The text of the No Child Left Behind
Act of 2001 (NCLB) makes clear that these two objectives should be key goals in each
state’s accountability system, but these twin objectives were also present in systems that
pre-date NCLB. Further, these dual goals are also implicit in the work of two consortia
of states that are now developing new assessment systems designed to measure student
achievement relative to the Common Core State Standards, a collection of curriculum and
achievement standards that forty-five states have now adopted.1
                                                      The empirical literature on the effects of assessment-based accountability systems
in education raises concerns about this approach and provides evidence that existing
accountability systems have not done an effective job of pursuing these two objectives
simultaneously. In a recent chapter in the Handbook of Economics of Education, Neal
(2012), I review the empirical literature on high-stakes assessments systems used to
create performance metrics for educators and note that many studies find the same
pattern. Following the introduction of high-stakes assessment-based accountability or
performance pay systems, student scores typically rise on the high-stakes assessments
used to create educator performance metrics, but scores on other low-stakes assessments
often show no improvement or rates of improvement that are much slower than those
observed on high-stakes assessments of the same subject.


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1
 The SMARTER Balanced Assessment Consortium (SBAC) and the Partnership for Assessment of
Readiness for College and Careers (PARCC) are the two groups assessment systems for the Common Core
State Standards using funds awarded as part of the Obama Administration’s Race to the Top initiative. 	  
                  This common pattern suggests that educators usually respond to the introduction
of assessment-based incentive systems by taking actions that raise the measured
achievement of their students on exams generated by a particular assessment system, but
these same actions may not create commensurate improvements in student subject
mastery.2 Thus, high-stakes assessment systems may be failing to meet both of their
objectives. They may be inducing teachers to teach in ways that are not best for their
students, and these same actions may be inflating test scores and contaminating public
information about prevailing levels of student achievement at various points in time.3
                  There are large literatures in sociology, economics, and management that
document unwanted consequences of incentive systems built around objective but poorly
designed performance metrics.4 In a seminal paper, Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991)
highlight the central role of hidden action in these scenarios by demonstrating how
incentive systems employed in government or the private sector should be expected to
produce poor results in settings where employees can easily take unobserved actions that
improve their measured performance without generating commensurate improvement in
their true performance.
                  My thesis is that features of modern testing systems that promote reliable scoring
when tests are given under low-stakes directly create opportunities for educators to take
actions that are difficult to monitor and that improve student scores without generating
commensurate improvements in student learning. These features of modern assessments
are not problematic when tests are given in low-stakes settings where educators have no
interest in student test scores per se but are interested in test scores only as sources of
feedback about their students’ skills. However, when modern tests become components
of high-stakes accountability systems, teachers find that they do have a per se interest in
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2
 The pattern described here is not definitive proof that student test score gains on high-stakes assessments
do not reflect real gains in subject mastery since the parallel low-stakes assessments are never identical in
terms of subject content. See Koretz (2002) for more on this point. However, many of the studies in this
literature present results that are difficult to explain in a credible way without some story that explains how
high-stakes assessments scores can rise quickly without commensurate improvements in true levels of math
or reading achievement.	  
3
  Glewwe, Ilias, and Kremer (2010), Jacob (2005), Klein et al (2000), Koretz and Barron (1998), Koretz
(2002), and Vigdor (2009) all present results that show divergence between student assessment results on
two assessments of the same subject matter in settings where one assessment became a high-stakes
assessment for educators and the other assessment continued to involve relatively low-stakes. Neal (2012)
provides a detailed discussion of this literature.	  
  See Campbell (1979), Kerr (1995), and Rothstein (2009) for many examples.	  
4
student test scores, and teachers respond by exploiting the opportunities for manipulation
that are built into modern testing systems.
       After explaining why modern assessments always invite coaching when they are
administered in high-stakes settings, I discuss an alternative paradigm that requires two
assessment systems. The first is a standard, modern testing system that tests students
under low-stakes and provides reliable measures of student achievement. The second is a
high-stakes system that is designed for the purpose of creating performance measures for
educators. Because this second system would seek to remove coaching opportunities by
avoiding repeated items and minimizing the predictability of item formats, it would likely
not create the information necessary to produce scaled measures of student achievement
that meet modern psychometric standards for reliability. However, such measures are not
needed if the only purpose of the assessment system is to gather data on educator
performance. Policy makers can form useful performance metrics for educators if they
are simply able to reliably rank students at any test date according to their performance
on a particular assessment form.
       For the foreseeable future, public actors will continue to demand information
concerning variation in levels of student achievement among various student populations
as well as consequential measures of the relative performance of various school districts,
schools, and teachers. To date, many attempts to satisfy both of these demands using a
single assessment system have produced less than optimal results, and there are reasons
to believe that no single system can ever simultaneously gather both types of information
well. Thus, the obvious agenda for future research is the exploration of ways to develop
two distinct assessment systems that gather these two types of information separately.


                             1. Screening versus Incentives


       Modern assessment systems are used in many high-stakes settings that do not
involve the creation of performance metrics for educators. These systems are employed
as one component of various high-stakes screening systems, and in these contexts, there
is considerable evidence that test takers prepare for these exams in ways that likely
improve test-taking strategies without fostering commensurate improvements in subject
mastery. As an example, consider the Graduate Record Exam (GRE). Graduate schools
use GRE scores to assess the aptitudes of applicants for graduate study, and many GRE
takers spend significant time and money on books and courses that provide advice and
practice on test-taking strategies that enhance GRE performance. These expenditures of
time and money likely build few lasting skills, but if one is willing to assume that
students who possess higher true levels of aptitude and subject mastery find it no harder
to master test-taking strategies than other students, it is easy to write down economic
models of the GRE market such that, ex post, GRE scores provide a reliable ranking of
applicants with respect to the aptitudes that these scores are supposed to measure and also
serve as useful predictors of graduate school performance. Further, since gathering
information about the suitability of particular students for graduate study in different
universities is costly, the GRE system as a whole may be a fairly efficient system for
providing graduate schools with screening information about their applicants even when
one accounts for the resources that students devote to test-preparation activities.
Applicants pay the costs of preparing for and taking the exam once, but they are then able
to simultaneously send a set of signals concerning their skills and aptitudes to all schools
that they may wish to attend.
                                                      In contrast, the stated purpose of assessment-based accountability systems is not
screening but on-going incentive provision. A key reason to hold educators responsible
for the measured performance of their students is to induce educators to teach well in all
classes at all times. In this context, if one concludes that the use of modern assessments
in accountability systems is inducing teachers to consistently allocate class time to test-
preparation activities that build few lasting skills, then one must also conclude that the
decision by policy makers to measure educator performance using data from these
systems has directly undermined a stated purpose of accountability systems.5




	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
5
  The effort distortions induced by assessment-based accountability are not one-time costs. Any system
that induces teachers to adopt teaching methods that raise test scores but degrade the true quality of
instruction imposes an on-going cost on students, and students bear these costs throughout all grades and
classes where their teachers are subject to assessment-based accountability. 	  
                              2. Assessment Development


       Here, I discuss features of modern assessment systems that make coaching
students on test-taking strategies possible, profitable and likely when assessments are
given under high stakes. I then briefly discuss alternatives to the current paradigm.


                              2.1 Standards and Prior Use


       Consider the following hypothetical question: How do the math achievement
levels of fifth grade students in Chicago in 2012 compare to those of fifth grade students
in Chicago in 2011? It is hard to imagine how the results from any assessment system
could provide an answer to this question unless the system found a way to link the
assessments given in these two years.
       To see this point, assume that a testing agency simply created an entirely new
assessment for 2011. By “entirely new,” I mean that no other students at other points in
time or in other school systems have ever seen these questions on any exam. Now, also
assume that the same testing agency created another entirely new assessment for 2012.
Given this scenario, the results from these two assessments could never provide any
information about whether or not achievement levels were higher or lower in 2012
compared to 2011. As long as the two assessments contain no common items and no
items that have been previously administered to other populations of students, one can
always explain any observed difference in the distributions of scores for 2011 and 2012
by asserting that the two populations of students shared a common achievement
distribution but the two assessments differed in difficulty or discrimination in particular
ways or by asserting that the two assessments were comparable but that the underlying
distributions of student achievement levels differed in specific ways across years.
       In order to place student results from 2012 and 2011 on the same scale, testing
agencies need prior information about at least some of the items on the 2012 assessment.
Typically, test developers acquire this information in one of two ways. They either
repeat a portion of the items on a given year’s assessment on the assessment for the
following year, or they pre-test items during experimental administrations and calibrate
the difficulty of items that form a test bank.                                                                                                                                                                                     Given either approach, assessment
developers can use their prior knowledge of the difficulty of specific items to isolate
year-to-year performance variation that is due to changes in the underlying distribution of
student achievement holding item difficulty constant, and this leverage allows researchers
to place assessment results from different years on a common scale.
                                                      The key point here is that one cannot place the results of the 2012 assessment on
the 2011 scale without some prior information about the difficulty of at least some of the
items on the assessment, and one cannot acquire the needed prior information without
administering these items to students. Thus, if the 2012 assessment is a high-stakes exam
for educators, educators face a clear incentive to acquire copies of assessments given in
previous years or in any experimental administrations used for calibration and then use
these copies to drill their students on the answers to these specific items. The strength of
this incentive varies with the details of the testing system in question, but in many
modern testing systems, the assessment form for a given year often contains twenty
percent or more of the items on the previous year’s assessment.6
                                                      This practice creates strong incentives for educators to obtain copies of each
year’s assessment form or forms and then have next year’s students memorize the
answers to the questions found on these exams. Further, in their book on equating
procedures, Kolen and Brennan (2010) argue that when two distinct exam forms are part
of the same assessment system and test developers plan to use a set of common items to
link these exams and equate scores on the two forms, test developers should make sure
that these common items are representative of the entire test form. They write that the
common-item set should be a “mini-version of the total test form.”7 This practice makes
common-items more useful for equating, but it also makes prior assessments more useful
as coaching material because the items repeated this year from last year’s assessment will
be representative of the items on the entire assessment.




	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
      See Hambleton, Swaminathan, and Rogers (1991) p. 135.	  
6

      See Kolen and Brennan (2010), p 19.	  
7
                                                                                                         2.2 Item Properties and Guidelines for Item Development


                                                      Further, high-stakes assessment systems create strong incentives for educators to
obtain copies of prior exams even if only a tiny portion of the items on this year’s exam
came from prior assessments. Modern assessment systems employ screening and pre-
testing procedures that impose certain types of uniformity on test items. While this
uniformity promotes reliable measurement when students are tested under low-stakes, it
also implies that educators benefit from being able to coach their students on test taking
techniques that help them do well when questions are asked in a particular manner or
format.
                                                      The dominant paradigm in modern test development is Item Response Theory
(IRT).8 IRT models express the likelihood that an individual test taker gives a particular
response to a particular question as a function of both latent traits of the test taker and
latent traits of the question, and IRT models assume that these traits are invariant in the
following sense: the characteristics of an item are not influenced by the traits of the test
taker, and the traits of the test-taker are not altered by the difficulty of the items she is
asked to answer.
                                                      Thus, as an example, the IRT paradigm requires that if Suzy is at a higher latent
achievement level than Joe, then the probability that Suzy gets any item on a given exam
correct is always greater than the corresponding probability for Joe regardless of the
particular item in question. Further, if Betty is less likely to answer question A correctly
than question B, then Jim is also less likely to answer question A correctly than question
B, and a similar result must hold for all possible pairs of students and questions.
                                                      Test developers use diagnostic tools to determine whether or not specific items
used in experimental sessions held prior to the public introduction of an assessment series
or in experimental sections of a particular assessment form exhibit these invariance
properties, and items that do exhibit these properties are more likely to be used in future
assessments as questions that count toward students’ scores. Note that if item-developers
come up with a format or style for asking questions that results in desirable invariance
properties, they face a strong incentive to develop more items that follow this format
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
      For more on IRT models, see Hambleton, Swaminathan, and Rogers (1991).	  
8
because they know such items are more likely to be retained after they are given
experimentally. Thus, the incentives that test developers face within the IRT framework
create incentives for educators to not only coach students on the answers to prior
assessments but also to create new questions that mimic the styles and formats that are
most common on prior assessments and drill students on test-taking strategies that are
suited to these formats.
                                                      Other steps in the modern assessment development process also foster
predictability in item styles and formats, and this point is easily illustrated if one
examines the literature surrounding recent efforts to develop two new assessment systems
that may be widely used in future years for both accountability and assessment purposes.
In September of 2010, the Obama Administration awarded $330 million for the
development of new assessments that will be used in state accountability systems. Two
consortia of states received funding to create new assessments that will be available for
the 2014-2015 academic year. The states in these two consortia are coordinating on both
the development of new assessments and the development of curriculum standards that
the assessments will address.
                                                      In December 2010, Bay-Borelli et al (2010) produced a report for a leading
educational testing firm that discusses the process of developing tests that reliably assess
student performance relative to the curriculum standards that these consortia are
developing. As expected, their report discusses the need for pre-testing items to gather
information that will “inform writing efforts so that the statistical characteristics of the
resulting items are consistent with (expectations).”9 But, Bay-Borelli et al (2010) also
provide other details concerning the need to regulate the item development process. They
write, “close alignment between the content of the items developed and the standards is
best supported by the establishment of clear and specific item development guidelines,
which are also called item development specifications. These guidelines are used to
clarify the intent of the curriculum standards for both item writers and item reviewers.”10
                                                      At one level, the Bay-Borelli et al (2010) recommendations make perfect sense.
If one is trying to design a series of assessments that can be scored in a manner such that

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
          See Bay-Borelli (2010), page 25.	  
9

                        See Bay-Borelli (2010), page 19.	  
10
the scores generated in 2015, 2016, 2017 and beyond are consistently scaled measures of
student achievement relative to a specific set of standards, one must make a commitment
ex ante to develop items for each yearly assessment that possess similar psychometric
properties and also probe the content of the standards in the similar ways. However,
these consortia are also interested in creating assessments that will be used to gather
information for accountability systems, and it takes little imagination to see how the ex
ante commitments that Bay-Borelli (2010) recommend may provide strong incentives for
school districts, consulting firms, or even individual teachers to gain all the information
they can about these ex ante guidelines for item development in order to develop
coaching and test-preparation strategies that boost student performance on items that
follow these guidelines.
                                                      The psychometric reasoning behind all of the Bay-Borelli (2010) guidelines is
sound11, and in the best of all possible worlds, assessment developers could prevent
educators or education consultants from learning anything directly or indirectly about the
precise content of the test specifications and other guidelines that govern the development
of modern assessment forms. However, basic economic reasoning and considerable
empirical evidence suggests that, when stakes are high, assessment developers will find it
practically impossible to keep items or item development guidelines secret. Interested
parties typically find ways to build coaching strategies around at least indirect evidence
(from prior assessment forms) concerning what the item development guidelines actually
are.                                          Thus, in the presence of high-stakes, the procedures that modern assessment
developers employ to promote reliable assessment and proper equating inevitably
produce the material that educators use to form coaching and test-preparation strategies
that waste class time and, over time, inflate student scores relative to true subject
mastery.




	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
11
  Kolen and Brennan (2010) assert that proper ex post equating of the results from different exam forms is
not possible without an ex ante commitment to systematic procedures that govern item and form
development, and they give several examples of cases where equating procedures did not work well ex post
because different assessment forms in a series were not developed and administered in a consistent manner.
See Chapter 8.	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3. More of the Same?


                                                      The SMARTER Balanced Assessment Consortium (SBAC) and the Partnership
for Assessment of Readiness of College and Careers (PARCC) are the two consortia of
states who are developing new assessment systems for the Common Core State Standards
using funds awarded as part of the Obama Administration’s Race to the Top initiative.
Both SBAC and PARCC aim to reduce the prevalence of multiple-choice questions and
to require students to convey their knowledge and understanding in more varied formats
and settings. Both will include constructed-response items and performance events that
attempt to measure how well students can analyze, use, and present information. Further,
the SBAC plan employs computer-adaptive testing that presents more in-depth challenges
for students who demonstrate competence on early portions of the exam.12
                                                      Given these new features, it may seem reasonable to hope that, even if SBAC and
PARCC induce coaching, that the coaching induced by these schemes will involve
activities that at least approximate good teaching. However, recent experience with an
assessment system similar to those proposed by SBAC and PARCC suggests that this
may not be the case.
                                                      The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) administers the
Uniform CPA exam and awards the credential of “Certified Public Accountant” based on
the results of this exam. The Uniform CPA exam contains four separate exams covering
specific areas of accounting practice. The exams are Auditing and Attestation (AUD),
Financial Accounting and Reporting (FAR), Regulation (REG) and Business
Environment and Concepts (BEC). In 2004, the AICPA abandoned a paper and pencil
form of the exam and adopted a computer-administered, IRT format for the exam, and
this format contains many of the features proposed by SBAC and PARCC, e.g.
constructed response items, simulation exercises, and computer-adaptive testing.
                                                      Between 2010 and 2011, the AICPA made several changes to the Uniform CPA
exam. The AICPA made changes to the computer simulations and question formats on
all four exams. Further, the AICPA added questions that cover aspects of International
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) to three of the exams: AUD, FAR, and BEC.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                See http://www.k12.wa.us/smarter/ and http://www.parcconline.org/	  
12
However, the AICPA made no significant changes to the content specifications for the
REG.
                                                      The first full year of testing under the new exam was 2005. Figure 1 plots pass
annual rates on the REG exam for 2005-2012,13 and the patterns in Figure 1 are striking.
The pass rates on REG rose from just over 40 percent in 2005 to over 50 percent in 2010
while the content and format of the exam remained roughly constant. Then, when the
AICPA adopted a new computer format for the REG exam in 2011, pass rates fell
dramatically.14 These patterns are interesting because (i) the noteworthy 2011 changes in
the REG exam involved changes in format not content and (ii) the AICPA claims that the
IRT methods used to score the exam make sure that the standard for passing remains
constant over time.
                                                      In fact, the following appears on the AICPA website:


                                                      “In reviewing passing rates, it is important to remember that candidates
                                                      are evaluated against an established standard of competence, and that the
                                                       examination is scored and scaled so that scores are comparable across test
                                                       forms and over time. The examination is not harder or easier to pass at
                                                       different times. An increase in passing rates simply means that candidates
                                                       are better prepared.”15


                                                      Between 2005 and 2010, pass rates rose by almost 25%. Further, between 2010
and 2011, pass rates fell by more than 10% in one year. Since tens of thousands of


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
13
    The new exam was not given in the first quarter of 2004, and pass rates historically vary by quarter, with
pass rates for first quarters being below the corresponding year-wide averages. The pass rate in the final
three quarters of 2004 was almost identical to the 2005 annual pass rate and may have been slightly below
if the exam was given in all four quarters of 2004.	  
14
    The pass rates for the other three components of the exam follow a similar pattern, but the patterns on
other exams are more difficult to interpret because both the format and the item content of the other three
exams changed substantially to reflect new international standards for accounting. The 2011 drop in annual
pass rates is less than one percent for BEC and roughly five percent for AUD and FAR. For all three
exams, the decline in pass rates is more pronounced when one compares pass rates from the first two
quarters of 2011 to the pass rates from the first two quarters of 2010. The changes in content specifications
for all exams were announced more than a year before the 2011 exams were administered.
15
  http://www.aicpa.org/BecomeACPA/CPAExam/PsychometricsandScoring/Passing\\Rates/Pages/default.a
spx 	  
persons take at least one section of the Uniform CPA exam in each quarter, these striking
variations in pass rates cannot be attributed to sampling error.
                                                      It seems unlikely that swift improvements or collapses in the quality of college
accounting classes could explain these patterns. So, given the AICPA's assertions
concerning the consistency of the passing standard, one must ask what could be
responsible for such dramatic changes in the preparation of candidates over such short
intervals?
                                                      The CPA exam is a high-stakes exam for the examinees. Thus, examinees are
willing to pay for advice concerning how to exploit the coaching opportunities that must
be present given the exam’s IRT format and the AICPA's desire for a fixed passing
standard.                                                                             In fact, a brief survey of websites for companies that offer CPA exam
preparation classes reveals that these companies offer detailed advice and practice on
test-taking strategies designed to maximize scores on exams that follow particular
formats that are common on the Uniform CPA exam. Further, following the 2011 format
change, one test-preparation service placed the following claim on their website,


                                                      “(We used our team of) software experts to ensure that (our new test
                                                      preparation) course’s computer-based components mirrored exactly the
                                                      new exam’s functionality and replicated the exam-day experience for
                                                      students.”16


                                                      Thus, the most straightforward interpretation of the patterns in Figure 1 is that
pass rates on REG rose as test-prep companies refined their test-taking strategies for the
new exam, and scores fell as soon as the AICPA changed the exam format because the
previous strategies were no longer optimal. In addition, the partial rebound in 2012 may
be evidence that the test-preparation companies are now in the process of figuring out
how to prepare candidates for the new format.
                                                      The Uniform CPA exam employs modern methods for assessment development
and scoring. Thus, in a technical, psychometric sense, the AICPA's claims concerning a
fixed standard for passing are true, but there are many ways to become “better prepared”
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                        http://www.becker.com/accounting/cpaexamreview/2011examchanges/\\nailed_the_exam.cfm?ff=true	  
16
for modern IRT exams, and it appears that some useful ways to prepare for the Uniform
CPA exam involving practicing test-taking skills that are specific to the exam format
used in a particular year. The fact that CPA candidates may waste considerable resources
in their attempts to master test-taking techniques should be of little concern to the
AICPA. If one assumes that the vast majority of examinees invest in learning the test-
taking techniques taught in exam preparation classes, one must also believe that the
AICPA is likely still awarding its credential to the examinees with the best command of
accounting principles and practice. Further, the AICPA has no interest in minimizing the
costs that new CPAs must pay to demonstrate their competence.
        However, education policy makers have quite a different mission than the
AICPA. If the exams being developed by the SBAC and PARCC consortia induce
similar coaching activities that do not build real subject mastery, future accountability
systems linked to these assessments will provide perverse incentives for teachers to
allocate class time inefficiently.
        The striking rise in REG pass rates between 2005 and 2010 suggests that,
following the introduction of the SBAC and PARCC assessments, an entire industry of
private firms may soon contact schools offering sophisticated test-prep services tailored
to the sophisticated formats of these new exams. However, the sharp drop is REG
passing rates between 2010 and 2011 raises concerns about the long-term value of the
services these firms may offer.


                                     4. A Different Approach


        The current paradigm in education policy centers on defining achievement
standards for students and then holding educators responsible for helping their students
reach these standards. Thus, it is not surprising that the SABC and PARCC consortia are
trying to develop single assessment systems that will simultaneously produce both
reliable measures of student achievement and consequential measures of educator
performance. However, given current testing technologies, there is no way to meet both
of these objectives using a single assessment system. The very features of modern
assessments systems that make reliable measurement relative to standards possible under
low-stakes testing create the opportunities for coaching behaviors that inevitably waste
class time and inflate test scores when student exams become high-stakes assessments for
educators.
                                                       Nonetheless, policy makers can form useful performance metrics for educators
without scaled measures of student achievement and without knowing anything about
how students performed this year relative to previous cohorts of students. This claim
likely sounds heretical to many in the education policy and testing communities.
However, economists who work on personnel policy have long understood that it is
possible to build useful incentive schemes without ever specifying absolute performance
standards. Organizations can often provide effective incentives for their workers by
having them compete in properly structured contests and then rewarding the winners of
these contests with prizes in the form of raises, bonus pay, or promotions. Employers do
not always need scaled performance measures to provide incentives.                                                                                                                                                                 Ordinal
performance measures alone may be enough.17
                                                       In recent work (Barlevy and Neal (2012)), Gadi Barlevy and I demonstrate that
policy makers can, in fact, build useful performance metrics for educators if they are
simply able to form groups of students who are comparable in terms of their baseline
skills and then later rank all students according to their final performance on a given
assessment.18 Policy makers can effectively quantify educator performance using the
ordinal content of assessment outcomes without ever measuring the distance between the
achievement levels of any two particular students or placing assessment results from
different years on a common scale.
                                                      Note that, if test developers do not need to equate the results of assessment forms
used in different years to gather data for accountability purposes, they have greater
freedom to develop and design assessments in ways that eliminate prior information
about item contents or formats. Given this freedom, test developers may be able to
design high-stakes assessments that induce teachers to teach in ways that build deep

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
   See Lazear and Rosen (1981) as well as Chapters 10 and 11 in Lazear and Gibbs (2008).	  
17
18
  The performance metric we propose is called the Percentile Performance Index (PPI). It is similar in
construction to Student Growth Percentile measures (SGP) that are already being used in some states as
accountability measures; see Betebenner (2009). Free PPI software is available at
http://sites.google.com/site/dereknealresearch/home/pay-for-percentile-software.	  
subject mastery and also prepare their students to convey this mastery in response to
questions that take many different forms and formats.
       To see the potential value of such an assessment system, consider a recent
proposal by Eric Hanushek. Hanushek (2009) proposes that policy makers improve
assessment-based accountability systems by developing an assessment system such that
“teaching to the test” is equivalent to teaching well.       Hanushek’s recommendation
involves creating a large and diverse item bank and then generating yearly assessments
by taking random draws from this item bank.
       Implicit in this recommendation is the idea that test developers can make the item
bank so large and so diverse that educators will not find it in their interests to have
students memorize answers from past assessments or devote time to test-taking strategies
that are only optimal given specific item formats. However, it is useful to consider two
different scenarios for how this proposal might be implemented. In scenario A, test
developers assemble the item bank that Hanushek envisions using standard procedures,
i.e. they retain only items that adhere to strict development guidelines and exhibit
appropriate psychometric properties in field testing. In scenario B, developers place few
restrictions on the item development process, encourage item developers to experiment
with many different items formats and styles, and they also prohibit pre-testing of items.
       If education authorities implemented Hanushek's proposal under scenario A, the
researchers involved in the effort would be able to place student results from each annual
assessment on a common scale and make reliable inferences about student proficiency
relative to a set of predetermined standards. However, shortly after the introduction of
this assessment system, interested parties would be working diligently and effectively to
reverse engineer the item development specifications used to develop the item bank, and
it is reasonable to expect that widespread coaching tailored to these specifications would
soon follow.
       In contrast, if developers followed the procedures described in B, they would find
it difficult if not impossible to reliably measure individual student achievement levels in
each year relative to some fixed set of proficiency standards. The best researchers could
hope for is that they would be able to assign meaningful percentile scores (ranks) to
students within populations that take the particular exam forms generated for specific
years. Further, the plan B procedures still may not produce ordinal measures of student
achievement levels that are as reliable those ordinal ranks implied by results from modern
assessment systems.
                                                      However, as strange as it may sound to those in the educational testing
community, this reduction in reliability is not necessarily a problem.                                                                                                                                                             Performance
metrics for educators typically reflect the distribution of test score outcomes over many
students, and it may be possible to create performance metrics for educators that are
reliable enough for effective incentive provision without creating measures of student
achievement that meet modern standards for reliability.19
                                                      Such an approach may seem bizarre to many testing experts, but it resembles the
approach that many academics already employ on college campuses for their own
classes. In our internet age, it seems that, once a college exam is given, a copy of the
exam is soon posted on some student website or stored in some student-run test bank so
that students who take the same class in future years can study the specific questions on
the exam.
                                                      In this environment, professors have two choices. First, they can recycle old
exams or give exams where questions differ in minor ways from those on previous
exams. This strategy saves time and makes consistent grading easy ex post, but many
students will respond ex ante by devoting too much time to studying answers to a small
set of questions and may leave the class with a superficial understanding of the material.
Second, professors can adopt a policy of asking brand new questions each year that vary
greatly in format but always probe student mastery of the material. The second approach
requires more effort and makes grading much more difficult. In fact, professors who
adopt this approach typically resort to grading on a curve, i.e. assigning grades based on
the ordinal ranks implied by the exam results. However, this second approach provides
better incentives for students to study in ways that build knowledge and skills that last
longer than the vacation breaks between semesters.


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
19
  Standard results on optimal incentive contracts show that, if educators are risk-neutral, a reduction in
reliability does not hamper efficient incentive provision. On the other hand, if educators are risk-averse,
they will demand to be compensated for assuming the extra risk created by any drop in reliability.
However, as the number of students that any educator or group of educators teaches grows large, this effect
may well become a second order concern. 	  
                                                                                                                            5. Other Methods of Assessing Teacher Performance


                                                       If one starts with the premise that parents and taxpayers expect public schools to
foster not only cognitive development in children but also social and emotional
development, then it is obvious that any performance metrics derived from assessments
of cognitive skills, even optimal ones, can never provide all the information required for a
comprehensive system of performance measurement and accountability for educators.
Thus, one can easily imagine the need for additional evaluation systems that involve
direct observation of classroom practice, examination of lesson plans, and safety
inspections.
                                                       Although there is considerable evidence from both the private sector and public
schools that observational evaluations of worker performance are often compromised by
favoritism or leniency, there is no logical reason that this has to be the case.20 If systems
require evaluators to produce complete performance rankings over all schools in a
particular comparison sets, then within each comparison set, some school must be the
best performer and another must be the worst, and all schools cannot be deemed “above
average.” A firm commitment to ranking the performance of schools relative to the
performance of other schools instead of relative to some administratively-defined
standard can mitigate and possible eliminate concerns about rating inflation or leniency
while providing incentives for schools to foster important skills that may not be assessed
by cognitive achievement tests.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Conclusion


                                                      An entire industry now offers classes, books, and on-line tutorials that help
students prepare for high-stakes screening exams like the SAT, ACT, GRE, LSAT, etc.,
as well as professional exams like the Uniform CPA exam. The purpose of these exams
is to screen potential entrants to educational programs and professions, and these systems
may serve as fairly efficient screening mechanisms as long as the skills required to


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                See Prendergast (1999), Neal (2012).	  
20
perform well on these exams are, in equilibrium, highly correlated with the skills that
institutions wish to screen.
       However, modern psychometrics does not address the question of how to create
performance metrics that serve as incentive mechanisms for educators because
psychometricians are not trying to design systems that direct the efforts of educators.
Psychometricians are trying to build assessments systems that measure student
achievement in a coherent way while taking as given the methods that educators employ
to prepare students for exams. In contrast, the designers of accountability systems are, by
definition, trying to influence how teachers teach. Thus, those who design accountability
systems cannot ignore the coaching behaviors that are universal responses to high-stakes
administrations of modern assessments.
       Figure 1 above suggests that even the most sophisticated IRT exams create
opportunities for coaching activities that inflate scores when these exams are
administered under high stakes. The sharp drop in REG pass rates in 2011 hints that the
dramatic rise in pass rates during 2005 to 2010 period did not result from a revolution in
the quality of college accounting classes but steady improvement in the capacity of test-
preparation services to both anticipate the item content of exams and devise test-taking
drills that are specific to a particular format. It seems reasonable to expect similar
responses to the new assessments that are now being developed by the SBAC and
PARCC consortia.
                                        References


Barlevy, Gadi and Neal, Derek, “Pay for Percentile,” American Economic Review, 2012,
102(5), pp. 1805-1831.


Bay-Borelli, Michael; Rozunick, Christine; Way, Walter D., and Weisman, Eric,
“Considerations for Developing Test Specifications For Common Core Assessments:
Adopting Curriculum Standards – Only the First Step,” A White Paper from Pearson,
December 2010.


Betebenner, Damian W., “Norm- and Criterion-Referenced Student Growth,”
Educational Measurement: Issues and Practice, Winter 2009, 28(4), pp. 42-51.


Campbell, Donald T., “Assessing the Impact of Planned Social Change,” Evaluation and
Program Planning, 1979, 2, pp. 67-90.


Glewwe, Paul; Ilias, Nauman, and Kremer, Michael, “Teacher Incentives,” American
Economics Journal: Applied Economics, 2010, 2(3), pp. 205-227.


Hambleton, Ronald; Swaminathan, H., and Rogers, H. Jane, Fundamentals of Item
Response Theory, Sage Publications, Newbury Park, CA, 1991.


Hanushek, Eric, “Building on No Child Left Behind,” Science, 2009, 326(5954), pp. 802-
803.


Holmstrom, Bengt and Milgrom, Paul, “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive
Contracts, Asset Ownership and Job Design," Journal of Law, Economics and
Organization, 1991, 7, pp. 24-52.
Jacob, Brian, “Accountability Incentives and Behavior: The Impact of High Stakes
Testing in the Chicago Public Schools,” Journal of Public Economics, 2005, 89(5), pp.
761-796


Kerr, Steven, “On the Folly of Rewarding A While Hoping for B,” The Academy of
Management Executive, 1995, 9(1), pp. 7-14.


Klein, Stephen P.; Hamilton, Laura S.; McCaffrey, Daniel F., and Stecher, Brian M.,
“What Do Test Scores in Texas Tell Us?” RAND Corporation, 2000.


Kolen, Michael J., and Brennan, Robert J., Test Equating, Scaling, and Linking: Methods
and Practices, Springer Science, 2010.


Koretz, Daniel M. and Barron, Sheila, The Validity of Gains on the Kentucky
Instructional Results Information System (KIRIS), RAND Corporation Monograph
Reports, Santa Monica, CA, 1998.


Koretz, David M., “Limitations in the Use of Achievement Tests as Measures of
Educators’ Productivity,” Journal of Human Resources, 2002, 37(4), pp. 752-777.


Lazear, Edward, and Rosen, Sherwin, “Rank Order Tournaments as Optimum Labor
Contracts,” Journal of Political Economy, 1981, 89(5), pp. 841-864.


Lazear, Edward, and Gibbs, Michael, Personnel Economics in Practice, John Wiley &
Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2008.


Neal, Derek, "Providing Incentives for Educators," in Handbook of Economics of
Education, Eric Hanushek, Steve Machin, and Ludger Woessmann, eds., 4 (Amsterdam:
Elsevier), 2012.
Prendergast, Canice, “The Provision of Incentives in Firms,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 37:1, 1999, pp. 7-63.


Rothstein, Richard, “Holding Accountability to Account, ” in Performance Incentives:
Their Growing Impact on American K-12 Education, Matthew Springer, ed.,
(Washington DC: Brookings), 2009.


Vigdor, Jacob, “Teacher Salary Bonuses in North Carolina,” in Performance Incentives:
Their Growing Impact on American K-12 Education, Matthew Springer, ed.,
(Washington DC: Brookings), 2009.
       Figures




                 	  
	  
