                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    REAL EXCHANGE RATES AND
                   PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN THE
                    UNITED STATES AND JAPAN




                       Richard C. Marstori




                     Working Paper No. 1922




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                             May 1986




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              Working Paper #1922
                                              May 1986




                Real Exchange Rates and Productivity Growth
                       in the United States and Japan



                                  ABSTRACT

     Real exchange rates between the yen and dollar based on general price

indexes overestimate the competitiveness of the United States relative to

Japan. High productivity growth in the traded sector of the Japanese economy

results in a continuous fall in the prices of traded goods relative to

nontraded goods in Japan. In order to keep U.S. traded goods competitive, the

real exchange rate based on general price series like the GDP deflator or the

CPI index must continually fall resulting in a real appreciation of the yen.

     This paper provides estimates of how far real exchange rates based on

general price series would have had to fall over the 1973—83 period in order

to keep U.S. traded goods competitive. The real exchange rate based on GDP

deflators, for example, would have had to fall by 38% relative to the real

exchange rate based on unit labor costs in the traded sector. The GDP series

remained roughly constant over the period, thus giving the misleading

impression that U.S. goods were still competitive despite a sharp rise in the

relative price of U.S. traded goods. The paper also provides estimates of the

relative wage changes which would have to occur to restore the competitiveness

of U.S. traded goods.

                                              Rithard C. Mars   ton
                                              Wharton School
                                              University of Pennsylvania
                                              2300 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
                                              Phi1adelhia, PA 19104
                 REAL EXCHANGE RATES AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH

                       IN THE UNITED STATES AND JAPAN*


     The recent misalignment of the dollar relative to the yen has obscured

the effects of a longer—term influence on the relative competitiveness of the

two economies, productivity growth in Japan. For the past few decades,

productivity growth has been much more rapid in Japan than in the United

States. Such a gap in productivity performance would not ordinarily affect

real exchange rates except that productivity growth is concentrated in the

traded sectors of both economies. Thus through time, the prices of' traded

relative to nontraded goods must adjust to reflect productivity gains, but

this adjustment is much more extensive in Japan. As a result, the U.S.

general price level must continually fall relative to the Japanese price

level, when both are measured in a common currency, just to keep U.S. traded

goods competitive.

     In the extensive literature on the purchasing power parity (PPP) theory

of exchange rates, a number of studies have cited productivity differentials

between the nontraded and traded sectors of economies as a prime cause of

deviations between any exchange rate and its PPP value. Several of these

studies, including Balassa (19614, 1973), De Vries (1968), Clague and Tanzi

(1972), and Officer (1976b), have reported empirical tests of' this phenomenon,

but have differed widely in their conclusions about whether productivity

differentials explain deviations from PPP.1 Hsieh's (1982) recent study using

time series rather than cross section data, however, has provided strong

evidence supporting the role of productivity differentials.2

     The real exchange rates used in the present study, defined as the nominal

exchange rate (yen/dollar) adjusted for the relative prices of U.S. and

Japanese goods, measure departures from PPP defined in terms of several
alternative price indexes. This study, however, is less concerned with

whether PPP holds or does not hold than with assessing the quantitative

effects of productivity differentials between the United States and Japan on

the alternative real exchange rates between the yen and dollar.3 The rapid

productivity growth in the traded sector of' the Japanese economy requires a

continuing adjustment of real exchange rates between the yen and dollar

measured in terms of general price indexes to <eep U.S. goods competitive with

Japanese goods. Similarly, the sharp changes in the prices of raw materials

since 1973, which have affected the U.S. and Japanese economies in different

ways, also require adjustments in real exchange rates.

     Movements in real exchange rates over time are influenced by numerous

short term demand factors in addition to the supply factors emphasized in this

paper. The differential movement between two real exchange rates, however,

should be primarily influenced by supply factors such as productivity

differentials rather than short term demand factors. For that reason, the

expressions we develop below measure the real exchange rate based on one price

series relative to that based on an alternative price series. In the case of

the United States and Japan, supply factors lead to a widening gap between

real exchange rates based on the consumer price index or wholesale price index

and those based on traded goods alone. Estimating the magnitude of this gap

is important since the relative competitiveness of these two economies is

often determined by examining movements in real exchange rates based on the

broader price indexes. The analysis will show that any appreciation of the

yen large enough to restore real exchange rates based on such indexes to their

levels prior to the recent misalignment would fall far short of restoring U.S.

traded goods to their previous levels of competitiveness. For the same

reasons, both nominal and real wages in the United States would have to



                                      -2—
decline relative to those in Japan just to restore previous levels of

competitiveness.

     The paper is also concerned with productivity performance within the

manufacturing sector alone and its effects on relative prices within that

sector. The analysis shows that the differentials in productivity growth

between the United States and Japan at the industry level are highly

correlated with the rates at which relative prices change within these same

industries. Because these productivity changes have been so different across

industries within manufacturing, with Japanese productivity growth exceeding

U.S. growth by widely differing margins depending on the industry, the

relative competitiveness of individual industries has changed radically. This

would continue to be true even if the real exchange rate for manufactured

goods as a whole were restored to historical levels.

     The first section of the paper develops equations for real exchange rates

defined in terms of value added deflators, relative unit labor costs, and

general price indexes. These equations relate real exchange rates to

productivity differentials in the riontraded and traded sectors of each economy

and, in the case of general price indexes, to the real prices of raw

materials. The empirical section of the paper begins with an analysis of how

much real exchange rates based on the GDP deflator and consumer price index

must diverge from those based on the prices of traded goods in order for the

two economies to remain competitive. The next part exaniines the implications

of these movements in real exchange rates for relative wages in the two

countries. In the final part of the paper, disaggregated data for

manufacturing are used to examine the productivity and relative price behavior

of individual industries.




                                     —3—
SECTORAL PRODUCTION PATTERNS AND REAL EXCHANGE RATES

       Real exchange rates based on alternative price indexes can diverge

sharply when there are changes in productivity and relative prices within

national economies. This section develops expressions for several real

exchange rates to show how they are affected by such supply factors. The real

exchange rates range from one based on the value added deflator for traded

goods to a broader series based on the consumer price index.


Output and prices

       We begin by outlining a simple production structure which distinguishes

between gross output and value added and which divides output into traded and

nontraded sectors. The production and gross output in one sector is assumed

to be separable into value added and two types of inputs, raw materials and

the output of the other sector. For simplicity, all production functions are

assumed to be of the Cobb—Douglas form, although the expressions developed

below could be interpreted as linearizations of a CES production function.

Equations la (or ib) express value added in the traded (nontraded) sector, VT,

as a function of employment in that sector, LT, and capital, KT, as well as a

productivity factor represented by a time trend.


(la)                           (1 -           +          +
                          VT          cT)LT       cTKT       hTt

(ib)                      VN - (1
                                  —       +      +
                                    cN)LN   cNKN             hNt

(ic)          ZT = CT1VT + CT2ZNT + cT3IT                °Tl +     + CT3   1




(id)
              ZN    CN1VN + CN2ZTN + CN3IN               CN1 + CN2 + °N3   1




All variables are expressed in logs with their differences interpreted as

percentage changes in the underlying variables. Equation ic expresses gross
output in the traded sector, ZT, as a function of value added in that sector

as well as output in the nontraded sector used in the traded sector, ZNT, and

the input of raw materials, 1T Equation id expresses gross output in the

nontraded sector, ZN, in analogous fashion. This specification, which allows

the output of one sector to serve as an input in the other sector, is

especially necessary in the case of traded goods since (nontraded) services

often constitute a significant proportion of the final value of traded goods.

       Parallel to these production functions are a set of price equations which

implicitly define the value added deflators for each sector. The price of

gross output in the traded (nontraded) sector, T' is a function of the value

added deflator for that sector, the gross output price in the other sector,

and the price of raw materials.


(2a)                                                  +
                          T cT1PVT +          cT2PN       cT3PI

(2b)                      N r            +            +
                                cN1PVN        CN2PT


Because the price equations are dual to the production functions, the same

production parameters appear in the production and price equations. These

equations suggest that gross output prices can diverge from their value added

counterparts either because of price developments in the other sector or

changes in raw materials prices.

       We are also interested in the relationship between the value added

deflator, on the one hand, and wages and productivity, on the other hand. The

marginal productivity relationships derived from la and lb give such a

relationship, provided that we assume that the markups of prices over marginal

costs are constant:




                                             —5—
(3a)                             VT WT -          HT


                                 VN =         -
(3b)                                    WN



Equation (3a) relates VT to wages in the traded sector, WT, and to
productivity, HT, which is defined as



                       HT    VT - LT - cT(KT - LT) +        hTt

This productivity variable, HT, reflects not only the productivity factor in

the production function, hTt, but also the capital deepening factor,

KT — LT.    It is this measure of productivity which affects value added prices,

and hence the relative competitiveness of economies. Similarly, equation 3b

relates value added in the nontraded sector to wages and productivity in that

sector.

       The value added deflators in the two sectors together make up the value

added deflator for the economy as a whole, P, which is defined as follows:


(14)                              gP +       (1   —
                                                      g)P
We choose to define the value added deflator as a weighted average (a

geometric average in levels of the sectoral prices) of the sectoral deflators

for simplicity even though in practice this equation must be regarded as only

an approximation to the deflator series appearing in the national income

accounts.


Real exchange rates: GDP deflators

       The first series for the real exchange rate which are of interest are

those based on the GDP deflator as a whole and the deflator for traded goods

alone.




                                        —6—
                                        Rv =             +X    —



                                    R
                                        VT          VT
                                                         +X—P VT'

We define these two series for the yen—dollar exchange rate, X, where the

starred variables represent those of the United States and the unstarred

variables those of Japan. (Japan thus is the "home country"). Equation (5)

expresses the aggregate real exchange rate relative to the real exchange rate

for traded goods as the difference of two relative prices: the relative price

of nontraded to traded goods in the United States and the corresponding

relative price in Japan.


(5)                R —          -
                            RVT -            ' VN    —             —b'(p        — p
                    V                                     VT'              VN         VT


The coefficients, g and g*, represent the share of nontraded goods in total

value added. The equation shows that a rise in nontraded relative to traded

prices in Japan leads to a real appreciation of the yen in terms of the GDP

deflator as a whole relative to the traded goods deflator. Thus the yen has

to appreciate in terms of the aggregate index in order for U.S. traded goods

to remain competitive. We later provide estimates of' how large that

appreciation has to be.

      The real exchange rate for traded goods alone can be expressed in terms

of relative wages and relative productivity if we use equations 3a and its

counterpart for the foreign country (assuming as before that markups are

constant):


                        =               =            + X -            —          -
(6)
                            RULCT            [(w;               WT)        (H         HT)]

The expression in brackets on the right side of equation 6 represents relative

unit labor costs (in this case, in the traded sector alone), RULCT.



                                                         —7—
Substituting this expression into equation 5 along with the expressions for

the sectoral prices (3a, 3b), we obtain an equation for R in terms of the

production factors.


                                                                                  -
(7)        RULCT +    g*[(w
                              -
                                  W.)
                                        —
                                            (H
                                                 —   — g{(w   —
                                                                  WT)
                                                                        —
                                                                            (HN       HT)l

This equation states that the aggregate real exchange rate (that based on the

GDP deflator) is influenced by two factors: relative unit labor costs in the

traded sectors of the United States and Japan and unit labor costs in one

sector of each national economy relative to the other sector.                If unit labor

costs in the traded and nontraded sectors of each country move together, then

the real exchange rate will follow relative unit labor costs in the traded

sectors of the two countries. But if, for example, there is a faster rate of

growth of productivity in the traded sector of Japan, then the real exchange

rate of the yen will have to appreciate relative to RULCT in order to keep the

traded sector of the United States competitive. The relatively greater

productivity in the traded sector of Japan will induce higher wages in that

sector, and in the nontraded sector as well unless the labor market is

segmented. As a result, the relative price of nontraded goods will rise in

Japan, thus pushing up the GDP deflator relative to traded prices or unit

labor costs in the traded sector. If the yen depreciates in nominal terms

enough to keep the real exchange rate based on the GDP deflator constant,

Japanese traded goods will gain a price advantage. To keep U.S. traded goods

competitive, therefore, the yen has to appreciate in real terms when measured

relative to the GDP deflator (i.e., Rv has to fall relative to


Real exchange rates: final goods prices

      The real exchange rates that have received the most attention recently

are not those based on GDP deflators, but on final goods prices. The two most


                                             -8-
frequently cited are the real exchange rates based on the consumer price index

(CPI) and wholesale price index (WPI). In this section we develop expressions

for two real exchange rates, one defined in terms of the final price of traded

goods alone and another defined in terms of a general price index.

       We begin by defining general price indexes for final goods, F and

consisting of domestic traded and nontraded goods, traded goods originating

from the other country, and traded goods originating from third countries

(with a dollar price of


(8a)                     z                   +           +              +   X) +         a1(P     +   x)
                             a1PT                a2P         a3(P

(8b)                     P                           +
                                                         aP   +
                                                                   a(PT
                                                                             -   X) +      aP
where a1 + a2 + a3 +         a   =       1       and similarly for the foreign country

coefficients.       and P may be considered idealized forms of the consumer

price index (with geometric weighting). The real exchange rate defined in

terms of these general price indexes, RE r                                       + X —
                                                                                           F'         can be expressed in

terms of several relative prices as follows:


(9)         R -   (1 —
                         a       —
                                         a3
                                                 —
                                                     a4)(P
                                                              + X -                  +
                                                                                         (a   -
                                                                                                  a)(P - P)
                                                                  —
                                     +
                                             a(P — p)                 a2(PN
                                                                                 -




According to this equation, RE is affected by the relative prices of traded
goods originating from the United States and Japan, world prices relative to

U.S. prices (although only to the extent that the coefficients of third

country goods differ between the two countries),6 and by two terms

representing sectoral relative prices in the two countries.

       To see how RF varies relative to real exchange rates defined for traded

goods alone, we first express T and                                   in terms of value added deflators and



                                                                  —9—
the prices of raw materials by solving equations (2a) and (2b):


(lOa)                                          C1PVT +                     +
                                                                C12PVN             c13P1

                                                                           +
(lOb)                                      -
                                               C21PVT
                                                        +
                                                                c22P               c23P1

                                                                                                       C = 1 -            >
where c11 r CT1/C, c12 = (cT2cNl)/C, c13 r (cT3 + cT2cN3)/C,                                                     cT2cN?

0, and C11      + C12 ÷ c3            1.       The coefficients c2 (j                      =   1, 2, 3)    are defined

analogously. Using equation lOa and its counterpart for the foreign country,

we obtain an expression explaining the movement of RT relative to Ri, the

real exchange rate based on gross output prices for traded goods

(P +     X —       relative to that based on value added deflators for traded

goods.


(11                      RT -RVT_c*(P*
                                 - 12' VN ..P*...c
                                             VT'
                                                    (p —P VT
                                                  12' VN


                                  +                -            -                  -
                                      c3(P             VT           c3(P1              VT
According to this equation, there are two sets of influences on RT -                                                    the
                                                                                                                 Rvi:
relative price of nontraded to traded goods in each country, reflecting

primarily the bias in productivity growth between sectors, and the real price

of raw materials (in terms of traded goods) in both countries.

        We can now express the real exchange rate based on the general price

index in terms of that based on the value added deflator for traded goods

alone:


                              r cl(PN —                     —                  —                       —
(12)             R —    RVT                        VT           c2(PVN              VT     +
                                                                                               c3(P1       VT
                                                        —                              —
                              —
                                  c4(P1
                                               —
                                                   VT           c5RT
                                                                       +
                                                                           c6(P            p)
where c1 r (1 —
                        a)c2 + ac2
               z (1 -
                        a2)c12 + a2c22

                                                            -10—
       3
      c -    (1 —       a*)c*
                         2 13
                                   +    a*c*
                                         223'
             (1 -                  +
                        a2)c13          a2c23
         =
             (a     +
                         a3
                               +
                                   a)
                    —
         =
             (a          a1)
According to this equation, the gap between RF and RVT is influenced by

changes in the relative prices of nontraded to traded goods or in the real

prices of raw materials as well as by changes in the relative prices of traded

goods. The yen appreciates more in terms of the broader index if there is a

relatively greater rise in nontraded relative to traded prices in Japan. The

reasoning is the same as in the comparison between the real exchange rate

based on the GDP deflator and the narrower deflator for traded goods. In

order to keep the United States competitive in its traded sector, the yen must

have a real appreciation in terms of the broader general price index. A rise

in the real price of raw materials in Japan (for a given real price of raw

materials in the United States) also causes a greater appreciation in the

broader index than in that based on traded goods alone. Finally, the gap

between RF and RVT widens if there is an increase in the real exchange rate

for traded goods, RT. (The effects of a rise in third country prices are

indeterminate).

     In the next section, we will use these expressions for the various real

exchange rates to interpret the movements of the yen relative to the dollar

over the past twenty years. We begin by examining the GDP deflators derived

from the national income accounts.


REAL EXCHANGE RATES IN PRACTICE

     The OECD has published national accounts statistics defined on a

consistent basis for the years 19614 to 1983. We have used the real and

nominal GDP statistics disaggregated by type of activity to generate series


                                                -11-
for traded and nontraded goods. The corresponding employment figures

disaggregated by type of activity start in 1970, so the series we generate for

productivity by sector only extend back to that year.

        Finding operational counterparts to the traded and non-traded aggregates

in equation (1) is not an easy task. The national accounts statistics of the

OECD provides a breakdown of total value added into ten subsectors ranging

from manufacturing to wholesale and retail trade. We have designated two

subsectors as traded:

        manufacturing, and
        agriculture, hunting, fishing, and forestry.

P. third subsector, mining and quarrying, undoubtedly has a large traded

component, but this category includes energy products with prices very

sensitive to OPEC price policy. Since we are interested in the relative

impact of technological change on the traded and non—traded sectors, we chose

to exclude any energy—intensive subsectors. The non—traded sector includes

six of the remaining seven subsectors, but excludes one category, electricity,

gas and water, because of its energy content. The non-traded subsectors are:

        construction,
        wholesale and retail trade, restaurants and hotels,
        transport, storage and communication,
        finance, insurance, real estate and business services,
        community, social and personal services, and
        government services.

The division chosen is inevitably somewhat arbitrary. The manufacturing

subsector, for example, includes goods which never enter into international

trade. But this division is, in our judgement, the best available. The value

added deflators for traded and non-traded goods are weighted averages of the

subsector deflators, the weights being the relative size of value added in

1980.      These same weights are used for all series subsequently defined for

the traded and non-traded sectors.



                                        -12—
The real exchange rate based on the GDP deflator

     The GDP deflator is a broad based price series reflecting price movements

in both traded and nontraded sectors of an economy. Real exchange rates based

on this series might be expected to provide a fairly reliable guide to the

relative competitiveness of national economies.       In comparisons between Japan

and the United States, however, the GDP deflator offers a very distorted view

of relative competitiveness because the traded and nontraded sectors follow

quite divergent paths in one economy compared to the other. We begin by

examining broad trends in real exchange rates as well as trends in

productivity by sector.       In Table 1 below, we report percentage changes in

these series obtained by fitting each series to an exponential time trend over

the 1973—83 period. The year 1973 is chosen as the starting point for the

trend calculations because it is after the realignments associated with the

Smithsonian Agreement on exchange rates and coincides with the advent of

general floating in early 1973.8 The variables appearing in Table 1 are

defined as follows:

                     the rea.l exchange rate based on the GDP deflator,
      Rv

                     the real exchange rate based on the traded goods portion of
      RVT:

                     the GDP deflator,

      F1 -           productivity in the nontraded sector relative to the traded
               H.:
                     sector in the United States,

           —         productivity in the nontraded sector relative to the traded
               HT:
                     sector of Japan.




                                          -13-
              TABLE   1.   REAL EXCHANGE RATES BASED ON GDP DEFLATORS AND
                       P RODUCTIVITY  DIFFERENCES BETWEEN SECTORS
                            (Trend Movements from 1973 to 1983)

         Rv                       RVT              (Hj H)              (HN    NT)

       —0.3%                     26.7%              —13.2%              —73. 2%



The percentage changes in these series are quite revealing.

     (1) Over this period, the real exchange rate based on the GDP deflator

followed a much different path than the real exchange rate based on the

deflator for traded goods alone. From 1973 to 1983, the yen appreciated in

terms of the GDP deflator by 0.3%, while the real exchange rate defined in

terms of the deflator for traded goods alone rose by 26.7%, representing a

sizable real depreciation of the yen or real appreciation of the dollar over

the eleven year period. (This appreciation of the dollar is exceeded even

further by the rise of 35.1% in the real exchange rate based on the deflator

for manufacturing alone). If we were to focus exclusively on an aggregate

index like the GDP deflator, we would conclude that the dollar had not

appreciated much relative to the yen over the 1973-83 period.9 Focusing on

the traded sector, in contrast, leads to a very different conclusion. With a

real appreciation of the dollar by 26.7% (or a real appreciation in

manufacturing alone of 35.1%), it is evident that the realignment following

the Smithsonian Agreement has been undone by the strength of the dollar.

     (2) What accounts for this divergence between the real exchange rates

based on the GDP and traded goods deflators? The relatively small real

depreciation in terms of the GDP deflator is explained by relative

productivity movements in the traded and nontraded sectors of the United

States and Japan. As equation (5) indicates, the difference between Rv and

RVT is a function of relative prices or, given similar sectoral wage trends,
relative productivity movements in the traded and nontraded sectors of each

country.1° Productivity in the U.S. traded sector grew by 13.2% faster than

in the U.S. non—traded sector. But in Japan, productivity growth in the

traded sector was 73.2% greater than in the non-traded sector. We can use

equation (7) to calculate the trend differential between R and relative unit

labor costs in the traded sector, RULCT, based on these rates of productivity

growth. The shares of nontraded goods in total GDP in the United States and

Japan in 1980 were .733 and .657, respectively, giving a differential between

Rv and RULCT as follows:11


                                             +             -
            Rv — RULCT       .733[H -   HI       .657[HN       HT]
                                                                     38.14%



The markedly higher growth differential in Japan required a substantial real

appreciation of the yen in terms of' the GDP deflator, by 38.14% according to

this calculation, to keep U.S. traded goods competitive. This relative

appreciation, however, was accomplished not by Rv falling, but by RULCT

rising. Because     was nearly constant over the period, relative unit labor

costs in the traded sector, and hence the relative prices of U.S. traded

goods, rose significantly, by 38.1%. This sharply reduced the relative

competitiveness of U.S. exports.

     Movements in real exchange rates over time are influenced by numerous

short term demand factors in addition to the supply factors emphasized here.

The difference between two real exchange rates, however, should be strongly

influenced by supply factors. In the case of the value added deflators, these

factors include the relative productivity movements in the nontraded and

traded sectors of each economy. Below we report a regression for equation

(5), relating the difference between         and RVT to the price differential in

the nontraded and traded sectors of each country. All variables are expressed



                                         -15-
as first differences in the logs, so they can be interpreted as percentage

changes of the corresponding variables from one year to the next. The numbers

in parentheses below the coefficients are t—statistics.


Sample Period 1971—83


                                                                -        .679            —
              (Rv - RVT)
                                (3.72)
                                           VN — VT
                                                                        (_10.11)
                                                                                 VN           VT

                           .708,           DW =     1.97,               S.E.      .00891



According to this equation, a rise in nontraded relative to traded prices in
the United States leads to a rise in                    relative to RVT, while a rise in

nontraded relative to traded prices in Japan leads to a fall in R relative to

RVT. Both coefficients are statistically significant at the 1% level,

suggesting that annual movements in the real exchange rates relative to one

another are strongly influenced by sectoral relative prices.

      The annual movement of R relative to RULCT is also closely related to

supply factors as suggested by equation (7). The second equation relates (the

percentage change in) R to (the percentage changes in) relative unit labor

costs and sectoral productivity differentials in each country:12


Sample Period 1971—83


                    .8143 RULCT
                                       —    .9143
                                                    (H
                                                            —
                                                                    H)      +    .692 (RN      HT)
              Rv
                   (7.140)                 (—1.)40)                             (2.32)


                             .81414,       D.W.     =   1.55,             S.E.       .01411




In   this equation, (the percentage change in) RULCT should enter with a posi-

tive coefficient close to one, depending on the markup of prices over marginal

                                                                    -       and   HN - HT should have
costs, while (the percentage changes in)                                H

                                                    —16—
negative and positive coefficients, respectively. All of the coefficients,

therefore, are of the correct sign, although the coefficient of (H -             H)    is


not statistically significant. Fitting this equation to the trend movements

in the series reported in Table 1, we find that the gap between Rv and RULCT

grows by _L1.3% over the 1973—83 period, a little larger than in the calcula-

tion above based on sectoral shares.13 But the implications are similar: that

the yen must appreciate significantly in real terms when measured against the

GDP deflator as a whole if traded goods are to remain competitive.


Real exchange rates based on the prices of final goods

     The prices of final goods follow patterns similar to those of GDP

deflators, although in the case of the prices of final goods we have to take

into account the influence of raw materials prices and the prices of final

goods from third countries. We begin by examining trends in some of the key

series over the post—Smithsonian period as reported in Table 2. The variables

appearing in this table are defined as            follows:

                 real exchange rate based on the consumer price index,
      Rc

      Rpj: real exchange rate based on the wholesale price index,

                 real exchange rate based on the value added deflator for traded
      RVT:

                 goods,

             -
                          vN   -
                                   PVT):
                                            relative GDP deflators for nontraded and

                 traded goods in the United States and Japan,

      (P —       vT'   i -     PVT):
                                           real price of raw materials in the United

                 States and Japan (price of raw materials deflated by the value

                 added deflator for traded goods).




                                                 —17—
          TABLE 2. REAL EXCHANGE RATES BASED ON THE WPI AND CPI INDEXES
            AND RELATIVE PRICE CHANGES ACROSS SECTORS, U.S. AND JAPAN
                       (Trend Movements from 1973 to 1983)

                                           Rp1
                    -9.0%                                             26.7%


    (0*
    "VN —    0* \           (0
                            'VN —   0
                                    VT'           fp*I    —   p* \            (p I   —   pVT
             VT'                                  '
                                                                VT'           "




          12.3%               56.9%                      8.0%                     120.1%


Over this eleven year period, the real exchange rate based on the OPT fell by

9% (thus suggesting a real appreciation rather than depreciation of the yen),

while all other real exchange rates rose. The real exchange rate based on the

WPI rose only         however, a rate far below that based on the value added

deflator for traded goods. This pattern of much greater real depreciations of

the yen in the case of real exchange rates based on traded goods can be attri-

buted to the sharp changes in relative prices evident in the second row of the

table. The relative price of nontraded to traded goods rose much more in

Japan than in the United States. When real exchange rates for final goods are

being analyzed, the real prices of raw materials are also quite important. In

Table 2, we report a much larger increase in the real price of raw materials

in Japan than in the United States, the gap between the two countries being

112.1%. This larger increase can be attributed to two factors: the greater

increase in the local currency price of raw materials in Japan than in the

United States (greater by 146.7%),      and relatively greater productivity in the

traded sector of Japan which leads to a much smaller rise in the deflator for

Japan, accounting for the rest of the differential in real terms.15

     Equation (12) summarizes the different influences on the real exchange

rate based on a general price index such as the CPI. To illustrate the



                                           —18—
quantitative importance of these different influences, we assign values to the

parameters appearing in equation (12), then calculate the trend change in

RF — RVT consistent with the trend changes in the independent variables

appearing in Table 2. We have no estimates of RT, the real exchange rate

based on the traded prices of the United States and Japan. (Japan has an

export price series for the 1973—83 period, but the United States only has

series for individual commodities extending back that far). For this reason,

the calculations below are based on the assumption that relative traded prices

are constant. Thus in effect we are asking how much would RE have to vary

relative to RVT in order for traded prices to be held constant over the 1973-

83 period.16

     To simplify the analysis, we assume that the production and consumption

parameters are identical for the United States and Japan. The values we

assign to the parameters underlying those in (12) are as follows:17


         .6,                  .65,          cT2     .2,                 .15,
    a2                  CT1                                     CT3

                        CN1   .8,           cN2 =   .15,        cN3
                                                                        .05.



With these parameters and the actual trends in the relative prices appearing

in equation (12), we find that RE - RVT should have fallen by 37.1% over the

1973—83 period. This contrasts with an actual gap between the real exchange

rate based on the CPI and that based on the value added deflator for traded

goods of 357%•18 The actual gap was achieved not by a fall in RE, but

primarily by a rise in RVT.

     We cannot estimate equation (12) as written since we have no series for

RT, the real exchange rate based on the final prices of traded goods.

Instead, we estimate a modified version of (12) with RT omitted.19 All

variables in the equation are expressed as first differences of the logs; the



                                     —19—
GDP data are available beginning in 19611, so the sample period spans nineteen

years.


Sample Period 1965—83


            (R —   R        ) =   0.877 (p*   —        P* ) —     1.035    (P        — P
              C        VT                 \JM           VT                      VN         VT
                                  (l.O3)                         (-10.2)


                   +        0.082 (P -       P)
                                              V
                                                   +     0.015 (P —        VT
                        (1.78)                          (0.52)


                        =    .753,         D.W.    1.97,         S.E.      .01116



The coefficients of all variables with the exception of the last one have the

correct sign, although neither of the coefficients for materials prices are

statistically significant at the 5% level. The relative sectoral prices (the

ratio of nontraded to traded prices) play a major role in this equation. The

coefficients of these sectoral prices, in fact, may be larger than they should

be given reasonable values of the underlying behavioral parameters. (Given the

parameters assumed above, the first two coefficients in the regression should

be about .6 in absolute value). The equation as a whole predicts a larger gap

between    and RVT than occurred over the 1973—83 period analyzed in Tables 1

and 2. Given the trends in relative prices for the independent variables in

the estimated equation and the coefficients estimated above, there should have

been a real appreciation of Rc relative to RVT of 145.6%, whereas in fact the

relative appreciation was 35.7% (a sizable one, nonetheless). Despite the

likely overestimation of the effects of Japanese sectoral prices, the equation

reported explains a large proportion of the relative movement of the two real

exchange rates, especially considering the fact that equation 12 on which this

estimated equation is based abstracts from many short term influences on

relative prices.


                                                  -20-
Implications for relative wage growth

       The tremendous growth in productivity in Japan, even if largely confined

to the traded goods sector, has meant rising wages and standard of living in

that country. In this section we use the model developed earlier to study the

growth of wages in Japan relative to that in the United States implied by

productivity growth and other factors affecting the relative competitiveness

of traded goods in the two economies. We pose the following question: if

during the 1973-83 period exchange rates had adjusted to keep traded goods

competitive, what would have been the implications for relative wages in the

two countries? The answer to this question differs considerably depending on

whether we examine relative nominal wages or relative real wages.

        We first determine the percentage change in relative nominal wages

required to keep traded goods competitive. We substitute equations (6), (3a),

and (3b) relating value added deflators to unit labor costs into equation (11)

for RT to obtain:


                                     X - W)   -         -        -                -
(11')                 RT
                            (W* +
                                                  (H                  c2(H            H)
                               -                             -
                 +
                      c12(HN       HT)
                                         +
                                             c3(P
                                                    -
                                                        VT           c13(P1
                                                                              -
                                                                                      VT
If the real exchange rate for traded goods is held constant (for convenience

we set its log, RT, equal to zero), we can express relative nominal wages as

follows:

(13)                       (W*+X_W) (H_HT) +c2(H—H)
                                                    -                         -
                  -
                      c12(HN
                               -
                                   HT)
                                         -
                                             c3(P            + c13(P1                 VT
Nominal wages in the United States relative to Japan (both expressed in

dollars) are proportional to the following variables:




                                                  —21—
         H -          the gap between productivity in the traded sectors of the
               HT:
                     United States and Japan,

           -                      the intersectoral productivity gap in each country,
               H,    HN - HT.

                         —
           —
               VT            VT     the real price of raw materials in each country.

In Table 3, we list the trend changes in the five variables appearing in

equation (13) over the 1973-83 period.




          TABLE 3. TREND CHANGES IN PRODUCTIVITY AND RAW MATERIALS PRICES
                        (Trend movements from 1973 to 1983)

         H*_H
          T   T
                             H*_H*
                              N  T
                                             HN -HT         p*_p*
                                                             I  VT
                                                                           p
                                                                               I
                                                                                   -P VT
                             —13.2%           —73.2%          8.0%             120.1%



The most interesting figure in this table is the huge gap of 83.1 percent

between productivity growth in the traded sectors of the United States and

Japan.

     Using the figures for trend changes in Table 3, we can calculate the

change in relative nominal wages necessary to keep the relative prices of

traded goods constant over the 1973—83 period. With the same production

coefficients assumed in Section II b, the trend change in (W* + X - W) is

—55.0% (expressed as a total percentage change over the 1973—83 period). This

relative wage change could occur through a greater rise in Japanese wages than

U.S. wages when each is expressed in its own currency, or by a depreciation of

the dollar. The actual trend change in relative wages was _19.14%, which

suggests just how far U.S. wages must fall relative to Japanese wages, or more

realistically, how much the yen must appreciate relative to the dollar, to

keep the real exchange rate for traded goods constant over the 1973—83 period.

     The required growth of real wages is not as divergent as the growth of

nominal wages because the growth of real wages in Japan is held down by the


                                              -22-
slow productivity growth in the nontraded sector. To calculate the growth of'

real wages in one country relative to the other, we must first obtain an

estimate of the rate of change of the consumer price index consistent with the

real exchange rate for traded goods remaining constant. We substitute into

equation (9) expressions for the gross output prices of traded and nontraded

goods (ba and lOb) and use equations (3a) and (3b) to express relative value

added deflators in terms of productivity differentials. We then set the real

exchange rate for traded goods equal to zero (as well as the relative price of

third country goods) to obtain an expression for RE (or its empirical

counterpart, Rc).

                                                    —        +             —                 -
(114)
            RF       Rc —a(c2 -       c2)(H             H)       a2(c22            c12)(HN       HT)


                                        -           -             -                  -
                 +
                     a(c3
                            -
                                c3)(P       VT          a2(c23        c13)(P1            VT
Using the coefficients assumed earlier, we find that in order for the real

exchange rates for traded goods to remain constant, the real exchange rate for

the CPI (Rc) must fall by 17.7%.

        Real wages in the United States relative to that in Japan can be written

as follows:


                       (W* —         — (W —             (W* +     X — W)       —
(15)                            P)            Pc)

If   Rc falls by 17.7% over the 1973-83 period, then real wage growth in Japan

must exceed that of the United States by 37.3%, a sizable amount but

considerably smaller than the differential for nominal wages (55.0%). In both

countries, the slow rate of growth of productivity in the nontraded sector

holds down the growth of real wages. But the imbalance between productivity

growth in the two sectors of Japan is so great that the real exchange rate

based on the CPI must fall significantly in order to keep traded goods


                                                —23-
competitive. This dampens the growth of real wages in Japan relative to the

United States.


The manufacturing sector

     Since such a large proportion of the traded sector consists of

manufacturing goods, it is useful to examine manufacturing in more detail.

There is considerable variation in productivity growth and competitiveness

among the subsectors of manufacturing in the United States and Japan. This

variation is superimposed on the trends within the manufacturing sector as a

whole, so that some subsectors in the United States might fare well even in

recent times when the dollar has been overvalued while other subsectors might

suffer even during times of undervaluation.

     The most extensive data providing a breakdown of manufacturing into

subsectors are drawn from the GDP accounts of the United States and Japan.

These data give a nine—sector breakdown for nominal and real GDP as well as

employment, so we are able to construct real exchange rates based on value

added deflators and productivity measures on a disaggregated basis.2° The

nine subsectors are listed in Table 4 together with the weights in the U.S.

and Japanese GDP's. The third subsector, "Wood and wood products, including

furniture", is of negligible importance for Japan, so we have omitted this

subsector from our analysis. Subsector eight, "fabricated metal products,

machinery and equipment," represents Lt4% of U.S. manufacturing and 50.3% of

Japanese manufacturing, so the relative competitiveness of that subsector is

of particular importance.
                   TABLE 14. LIST OF SUBSECTORS FOR MANUFACTURING

       1: Food, beverages and tobacco
       2: Textile, wearing apparel and leather industries
       3: Wood and wood products, including furniture
       14: Paper and paper products, printing and publishing
       5: Chemicals and chemical petroleum, coal, rubber and plastic products
       6: Non—metallic mineral products except products of petroleum and coal
       7: Basic metal industries
       8: Fabricated metal products, machinery and equipment
       9: Other manufacturing industries

       M: Total for manufacturing

GDP weights for 1980:

Sector               1      2        3        14    5       6      7      8        9
U.S.                .113   .065     .0143   .087   .1140   .029   .069   •1414Q   .015
Japan               .081   .037     .000    .023   .096    .029   .104   .503     .126



        We begin by examining the real exchange rates or relative price for each

subsector of manufacturing. These are illustrated in Figure 1 for eight

subsectors as well as for manufacturing as a whole. In this figure, a rise in

the real exchange rate or relative value added deflator for a given subsector

represents a real depreciation of the yen or a gain in Japanese

competitiveness in that subsector. In manufacturing as a whole, the real

exchange rate based on the value added deflator rose by 35.1 (measured by

fitting the real exchange rate series to a trend between 1973 and 1983). As

Figure 1 illustrates, this trend for manufacturing masks a wide variation

across subsectors. At one extreme, subsector one representing food saw a real

appreciation of the yen by 30.8% over the 1973 to 1983 period. But at the

other extreme, subsector eight registered a real depreciation of 67.5%. This

pattern across subsectors reflects shifts in comparative advantage as Japan

increased its competitiveness in machinery and equipment, for example, at the

expense of food, textiles, and other less technologically advanced products.




                                            —25—
    These shifts in comparative advantage are most easily seen if we imagine

that the real exchange rate for manufacturing as a whole had remained constant

over the period; in that case, the real exchange rate for subsector 1 would

have fallen by over sixty percent, while that for subsector five, representing

chemicals and petroleum products, would have remained constant and that of

subsector eight would have increased by about thirty-five per cent.    In the

United States, these shifts in comparative advantage would have implied shifts

of employment within the manufacturing sector rather than necessitating net

shifts out of manufacturing into the nontraded sector. These shifts within

manufacturing would not necessarily have involved shifts in employment out of

subsector eight, since relative prices are only one determinant of employment

and since the United States could have maintained a price advantage relative

to other competitors.

     The pattern of real exchange rates across subsectors is closely related

to relative productivity growth in the two countries. Figure 2 shows

productivity growth in the United States and Japan measured as a trend over

the 19'T3-83 period for the eight subsectors as well as manufacturing as a

whole. In all but two subsectors, productivity growth in Japan exceeds that

of the United States in the same subsector, in several cases by large

percentages. But the magnitude of the gap varies widely. In subsector 9,

that gap is only 22% over the eleven year period, while in subsector 8 the gap

is 155% (productivity growth being 178% in Japan and 23% in the United

States). For manufacturing as a whole, the gap is 86%.

     The magnitude of the gap between productivity growth is important because

it helps to determine how much relative unit labor costs vary between the two

countries. The behavior of each sectoral real exchange rate, in turn, should

be influenced very strongly by relative unit labor costs in that sector, and



                                     —26—
thus indirectly by relative productivity growth. This influence is confirmed

by a comparison of the sectoral patterns in Figures 1 and 2. The two

subsectors where U.S. productivity growth exceeds that of Japan, food and non-

metallic mineral products (sectors 1 and 6), for example, are those where the

relative price of U.S. goods has fallen over the same period.                      Similarly, the

subsector where the gap between Japanese and U.S. productivity growth is

greatest,   subsector eight, is the one experiencing the greatest rise in U.S.

prices relative to those of Japan.

       Over the 1973—83 period, changes in real exchange rates reflected

macroeconomic factors in addition to the structural influences emphasized in

this paper. But the behavior of each sectoral real exchange rate relative to

the real exchange rate for manufacturing as a whole should be primarily

determined by differences in productivity growth. To examine this

relationship, we modify equation (3a) so that it explains the value added

deflator for manufacturing as a whole or, alternatively, each subsector of

manufacturing. Define RVM,             as the real exchange rates for manufacturing

and for subsector i, respectively. Then the difference between these real

exchange rates can be expressed as follows:


(16)     Rv. - RVM   [(W! —
                              W)
                                   -   (W. - wM)] —   [(H   -   H.)   -
                                                                          (H
                                                                               -
                                                                                   HM)I

Subsector i will experience a greater rise in its real exchange rate to the

extent the U.S. wages rise relatively faster in that subsector than in

manufacturing as a whole (or Japanese wages rise more slowly). Similarly, the

growth in       will exceed that of         to the extent that Japanese productivity

growth in that subsector exceeds that for manufacturing as a whole (or U.S.

productivity growth falls short in that subsector).




                                            —27—
         We have no reliable data for wages by subsector. But we can compare

productivity growth in subsector i with that for manufacturing as a whole as

well as the corresponding real exchange rates. Using the trend changes in

these variables calculated previously (and reflected in Figures 1 and 2), we

can determine the percentage changes in HVI -         and —[(H! — H.)   —

     -          over the 1973-83 period. The correlation between these two series
(H       HM)]
over the eleven year period is .906. This suggests that the pattern of

changes in relative sectoral real exchange rates is strongly influenced by the

pattern of productivity growth across sectors. The relative price changes

that have occurred in the manufacturing sectors of these two countries,

therefore, are longer term phenomena which will persist even if the current

misalignment of the dollar is corrected.


CONCLUSION

         This paper has provided estimates of the effects of relative productivity

growth on real exchange rates and relative wage growth in the United States

and Japan. With Japanese productivity growing 73.2% faster in its traded

sector than in its nontraded sector over the 1973-83 period, real exchange

rates based on broad price indexes needed to adjust sharply to keep U.S.

traded goods competitive. Since the adjustment of these real exchange rates

has been minimal at best, U.S. traded goods have become much more expensive

relative to Japanese goods. To maintain the competitiveness of the U.S.

traded sector, the real exchange rate based on the GDP     deflator   would have had

to fall by almost 140% relative to unit labor costs in the traded sector during

the 1973-83 period. Similar adjustments would have had to occur in the real

exchange rate based on the CPI and in relative nominal and real wages in the

two countries. The recent misalignment of the dollar has prevented such

adjustments. If U.S. traded goods are to regain their earlier competitiveness


                                         -28-
relative to Japanese traded goods, then the yen must appreciate considerably

(relative to 1983 levels) when measured in terms of any broad-based price

indexes.

     Even if such a major adjustment in relative prices occurs, we will be

left with equally large changes in competitiveness within the manufactured

sector due to productivity differentials between subsectors of

manufacturing. Japanese productivity growth in machinery production, for

example, is nothing short of phenomenal (150% above the United States over the

1973—83 period). These major shifts in relative prices taking place rJjthjfl

the manufacturing sector compound an already serious problem of relative price

adjustment.




                                     -29-
                                     FOOTNOTES


        *prepared for the Conference on Real-Financial Linkages in Open

Economies, American Enterprise Institute, Washington D.C., January 30-31,

1986.     I would like to thank the discussant of this paper, Rachel McCullough,

as well as William Branson, Barry Eichengreen, Koichi Haniada, Paul Krugman,

Robert Lipsey, and Charles Pigott for their helpful comments on an earlier

draft.     I would especially like to thank J. David Richardson for providing

many useful suggestions concerning both content and presentation.

        1Officer (1976b) provides a detailed description and critique of previous

empirical studies. For more general studies of PPP, see the survey by Officer

(1976a), Kravis et al. (1975), as well as the papers in the symposium on

purchasing power parity in the May 1978 issue of the Journal of International

Economics.

        2TJnlike Hsieh's study, most previous tests used cross-section data and

focused as much on the level of the exchange rate as on its rate of

depreciation.

        31n any case, with different cross—country relative price changes between

sectors, PPP cannot hold for more than one type of price index.

        Marston and Turnovsky (1985) develop a two—level production function

model in which value added has a Cobb—Douglas form and gross output a CES form

(so that the elasticity of substitution between value added and raw materials

can be below one).     A linearization of the CES function results in an equation

in the percentage changes of the variables very similar to those presented

here.

        5There is an interesting parallel between the traded-nontraded model and

a model of three traded goods developed by W. Arthur Lewis (1978). The three

traded goods in Lewis's model are primary commodities (produced by a


                                        -30-
developing country), manufactures (produced by a developed country), and an

agricultural good such as wheat (common to both countries). In both models,

productivity in producing the common good determines wages in the respective

economies and, indirectly, prices for the other good.                         I am indebted to

William Branson for pointing out this parallel.

       6We might also have allowed for different price indexes for world goods

imported into Japan and the United States, respectively.

       7To obtain equation (12), first substitute equations (9)                      and   (11) into

the expression RF — RVT             (RF - RT) + (RT -        RvT).        In the resulting equation,

                        and P —
replace PN -                      P     by their value added counterparts using equations

(ba) and (lob) (and the corresponding equations for the foreign country):

   -       = (c22   -
                         c12)(PVN
                                    -
                                        VT   +
                                                 (c23
                                                        -
                                                            c13)(P1
                                                                      -
                                                                           VT
       8We do not attempt to assess whether the yen and dollar were in

equilibrium in 1973, nor to measure the current equilibrium value of the yen—

dollar exchange rate. Artus and Knight (19814) and Williamson (1985) discuss

some of the conceptual problems involved in determining the equilibrium value

of an exchange rate.          In measuring trend changes in real exchange rates over

the 1973—83 period, we are instead trying to assess the impact of differential

productivity trends on movements in real exchange rates relative to one

another.

       9me corresponding figure of 149.3                over   the shorter period from 1978 to

1983 is more alarming, but that is measuring the appreciation of the dollar

from a period of unusual weakness.

       °There are no reliable data on wages in the nontraded sector of the

economy, so the growth in the wage differential between sectors is omitted

from the equations described below. If labor is mobile between sectors, or if

bargaining over wages is strongly influenced by wages in the other sector, any



                                                   —31—
growth in intersectoral wage differentials should be small compared with the

gap in productivity growth rates between sectors.

     11The share of nontraded goods in total GDP, represented by the

coefficients g* and g in equations (5) and (7), is likely to change through

time as relative productivity differentials reduce traded prices relative to

nontraded prices. Equation (7), therefore, will hold only as an approximation

even if the markup of prices over unit labor costs is constant over time.

     121n the measurement of relative unit labor costs, we employ U.S. Bureau

of Labor Statistics (BLS) data on hourly compensation in manufacturing which

are among the most reliable data available.

     13The coefficient of RULCT is not significantly different from one at the

5% level. If we set this coefficient equal to one, the implied change in

relative to RULCT is -38.3%, almost identical to the figures based on sectoral

shares.

     lI4The CPI and WPI indexes as well as the spot exchange rate (period

average) are taken from the IMF's International Financial Statistics. The

prices of raw materials, which include fuel as well as other materials for

processing, are taken from the disaggregated wholesale price statistics of

each country.

     15The smaller increase in raw materials prices in the United States can

be attributed in part to the price controls on petroleum products which were

maintained through much of the period, although it is doubtful that this

factor alone could account for such a large differential between the United

States and Japan.

     l6The relative prices of traded goods between third countries and the

United States are also assumed constant.




                                     —32—
     17The share of nontraded goods in GDP is about 0.7 in both countries, so

we assign a value of 0.6 to its share in gross output. We allow nontraded

goods to play a somewhat larger role in traded goods production than vice

versa to reflect the relatively larger service component of traded goods.

Notice also that the share of raw materials in gross output is larger in the

traded than in the nontraded sector.

     18The gap between the real exchange rate based on the wholesale price

index and that based on the value added deflator for traded goods is only

22.3%, but the WPI is heavily weighted toward manufacturing goods.

     19RT should have a relatively small effect on the differential,

Rc - RVT, since the coefficient c5 should be small. Its omission from the

equation, therefore, should not make much difference. The third country price

variable is even less likely to be important in an equation explaining

bilateral exchange rates. (See the coefficient     which is equal to the

difference between the country coefficients). When we proxied RT with RVT,

the real exchange rate based on the value added deflator for traded goods, the

coefficient of RVT (.022) was statistically insignificant (with a t—statistic

of .3)41) and the remainder of the equation remained almost unchanged. The

adjusted R-squared fell from .753 to .737.

     20The disaggregated GDP data are undoubtedly of less uniform quality than

the aggregate GDP data, but the broad trends in these data should be

instructive, nonetheless.




                                       —33—
                                 REFERENCES


Artus, Jacques R. and Malcolm D. Knight, 19814. Issues in the Assessment of
     the Exchange Rates of Industrial Countries, Occasional Paper No. 29.
     Washington: International Monetary Fund.

Balassa, Bela, 19614. The Purchasing Power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal.
     Journal of Political Economy. 72: 5814_96.

Balassa, Bela, 1973. Just How Misleading Are Official Exchange Rate
     Conversions: A Comment. Economic Journal. 83: 1258-67.

De Vries, Margaret G., 1968. Exchange Rate Depreciation in Developing
     Countries. International Monetary Fund Staff Papers. 15: 560—78.

Clague, Christopher, and Vito Tanzi, 1972. Human Capital, Natural Resources,
     and the Purchasing Power Parity Doctrine: Some Empirical Results.
     Economia Internazionale. 25: 3—18.

Hsieh, David A., 1982. The Determination of the Real Exchange Rate: The
     Productivity Approach. Journal of International Economics. 12: 355—62.

Kravis, Irving, Zoltan Kenessey, Alan W. Heston, and Robert Summers. A System
     of International Comparisons of Gross Product and Purchasing Power.
     Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.

Lewis, W. Arthur, 1978. The Evolution of the International Economic Order
     (Eliot Janeway Lecture, 1977). Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Marston, Richard C., and Stephen J. Turnovsky, 1985. Imported Materials
     Prices, Wage Policy, and Macroeconomic Stabilization. Canadian Journal
     of Economics. 18: 273-84.

Officer, Lawrence, 1976a. The Purchasing Power Parity Theory of Exchange
     Rates: A Review Article. International Monetary Fund Staff Papers.
     23: 1—60.

Officer, Lawrence, 1976b. Productivity Bias and Purchasing Power Parity: An
     Econometric Investigation. International Monetary Fund Staff Papers.
     23: 5145—79.

Williamson, John, 1985. The Exchange Rate System, Policy Analyses in
     International Economics 5, 2nd Edition. Washington: Institute for
     International Economics.




                                    -314-
           RELA1HVE VA DEFLATORS BY SECTOR
                         U.S. RELATIVE TO JAPANESE PRICES
     70-                                            ____
      60-
      50-
                                                    4           _
40-
o
F-
      30-               __
      20-
                         _____ 4/
0)
      10-        ___
zo
     —10-

                 KM
                        11_4/4/
                ________ ____   ________________ ____
     —30-
     —40-                                       I
            1      2      4       5     6      7        8   9
                              MANUFACTURINC SUBSECTOR
           RATES OF GROWTH OF PPODUCTVTY
                    TREND GROWTH BY SECTOR, 1973—83
     180
     170
     160
     150
     140
V)   130
     120
     110
0
F-   100
N     90
      80
LU    70
C
Iz
o     40
NO
      30
      20
      10
       0
     —10
     —20
            1   2    4      5     6      7        8   9
                     V/IMANUFACTURING_SUBSECTOR
                          U.S.      I\N JAPAN
