                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       RELIGION AND RISKY HEALTH BEHAVIORS AMONG U.S. ADOLESCENTS
                               AND ADULTS

                                               Jason Fletcher
                                               Sanjeev Kumar

                                           Working Paper 19225
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w19225


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        July 2013

Kumar thanks AHRQ for funding support from the T-32 Postdoctoral Training Grant in Health Services
Research (2T32HS017589-06). We would like to thank Elizabeth Bradley, Daniel Hungerman, Daniel
Chen, Adalbert Mayer, Joachim Marti, Justin Cook, Kiersten Strombotne, Michael Richards, Tisha
Hooks, and conference participants at NBER Religion and Culture conference (2013) and ASREC
(2013), Washington DC for their helpful comments and discussions.This research uses data from Add
Health, a program project directed by Kathleen Mullan Harris and designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter
S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and funded
by grant P01-HD31921 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, with cooperative funding from 23 other federal agencies and foundations. Special acknowledgment
is due Ronald R. Rindfuss and Barbara Entwisle for assistance in the original design. Information on
how to obtain the Add Health data files is available on the Add Health website (http://www.cpc.unc.edu/addhealth).
No direct support was received from grant P01-HD31921 for this analysis. Some of the variables use
restricted-use version of this data. Any interested researcher can apply for permission to use the data
at ICPSR. The authors will supply statistical code to replicate the results. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Jason Fletcher and Sanjeev Kumar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Religion and Risky Health Behaviors among U.S. Adolescents and Adults
Jason Fletcher and Sanjeev Kumar
NBER Working Paper No. 19225
July 2013
JEL No. Z12,Z18

                                               ABSTRACT

Recent studies analyzing the effects of religion on various economic, social, health and political outcomes
have been largely associational. Although some attempts have been made to establish causation using
instrument variable (IV) or difference-in-difference (DID) methods, the instruments and the spatial
and temporal variations used in these studies suffer from the usual issues that threaten the use of these
identification techniques—validity of exclusion restrictions, quality of counterfactuals in the presence
of spatial assortative sorting of people, and concern about omitted variable bias in the absence of information
on family level unobservables and child-specific investment by families. During the adolescent years,
religious participation might be a matter of limited choice for many individuals, as it is often heavily
reliant on parents and family background more generally. Moreover, the focus of most of the studies
has been on religious rites and rituals i.e., religious participation or on the intensity of participation.
Using the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, this paper analyzes the effects of a broad
set of measures of religiosity on substance use at different stages of the life course. In contrast to previous
studies, we find positive effects of religion on reducing all addictive substance use during adolescence,
but not in a consistent fashion during the later years for any other illicit drugs except for crystal meth
and marijuana.


Jason Fletcher
Yale School of Public Health
Department of Health Policy and Management
60 College Street, #303
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
jason.fletcher@yale.edu

Sanjeev Kumar
Yale School of Public Health
Department of Health Policy and Management
60 College Street, #312
New Haven, CT 06520
sanjeev.kumar@yale.edu
Introduction



Risky health behaviors among adolescents and adults, especially tobacco- and substance-use, has

been an active research area for health economists (Fletcher 2012; Cawley and Ruhm, 2011;

Clark and Loheac 2007). Economists have proposed a number of reasons for the continued high

rate of substance use among people of all age groups, ranging from the genetic to the

environmental. Yet one potentially influential factor which has received little attention in this

literature is the role of religion on risky health behaviors. In light of an increasing proportion of

single parent and dysfunctional families in the U.S. (Conti and Heckman, 2012), it is crucial to

examine the effect of other existing institutions on the mental and physical health of children and

youth. This paper is an attempt to re-evaluate the roles that one particularly crucial institution--

religion---plays in influencing risky health behaviors among U.S. adolescents.



There is hardly any aspect of a society that is untouched by religion (Guiso et al. 2003, p. 226). 1

However, it is not clear if religious belief is an ex post narrative or if it really is a causal factor in

shaping the ways individual and society function. 2 It would be appropriate to suggest, as Ulmer

et al. (2011) did, that the understanding of the ways religion and its institutions affect human

behaviors, in particular, risky health behaviors, is quite insufficient. To the best of our


1
  Americans are strikingly different from other First World nations in their attitudes to religion (Dannett 2006). It
also comes out very distinctly in the data that we use for this paper: 81.6% respondents in Wave 3 report that they
believe in God and always have.
2
 What sets human beings apart from animals is not the pursuit of happiness, which occurs all across the natural
world, but the pursuit of meaning, which is unique to humans (Baumeister 2013). Religion, by virtue of being a
sense-making institution, potentially assists people in forming a frame of reference for routine evaluation (i.e.,
endowing them with a sense of purpose) of the world around them (McCullough et al. 2009; Diamond, 2012). It is
the ability for such routine evaluation that endows an individual with the capability to regulate themselves. Thus, we
posit that one way religion, potentially, would protect individuals regarding substance use is to equip them with the
requisite psychological tools to control their urge to indulge in risky health behaviors.2 We are able to do this by
controlling for the religious affiliation of the respondents.

                                                          2
knowledge, there is no existing study which discusses the effects of religiosity and religious

participation on medium- and long-term risky health behaviors and other health-related outcomes

using sibling-fixed effects.




If—as scholars claim—religion protects people from self-harm (Desmond et al. 2013; Mellor

and Freeborn, 2011; McCullough and Willoughby 2009), then understanding the mechanism by

which religion provides such protection and the effects of religiosity more broadly, is crucial to

understanding how to reduce indulgence in risky health behaviors. Given the multidimensional

nature of religiosity, we expand on the existing measures—frequency of religious attendance and

prayers—to include a broad measure of religiosity, which captures the self-reported importance

of religion (Iannaccone 1998; Kendler et al. 1997). We suggest that an individual can choose to

participate under social and peers’ pressures; and hence can choose to pray under unavoidable

exigencies, yet not consider religion an important aspect of her life.


Only a handful of studies seek to evaluate the causal effect of religion on risky health behaviors.

A recent example, by Mellor and Freeborn (2011), uses the instrument variable (IV) method;

however, the instrument—a population-based county level measure of religious market density--

-may not satisfy the exclusion restriction, given that their specifications exclude variables that

can capture state, county, parental, and other individual level sources of unobserved

heterogeneity. Some studies have exploited policy variations across time and space to glean

causal effects using changes in the prices of secular activities (Gruber and Hungerman, 2008;

Hungerman, 2010). Evidence on spatial sorting of people, on the basis of their preferences for

rules and public goods, makes it difficult to impute causal interpretation to the estimates reported



                                                 3
in the extant literature (Ferreira and Gyourko, 2007; Tiebout, 1956). Furthermore, the focus of

most of these previous studies has been the role of rites and rituals (i.e., religious participation or

the intensity of such participation). For instance, an individual may not participate in religious

activities but still can have strong religious beliefs, or there can be non-believers who participate

only to take advantage of social networks and services that religious organizations provide. Thus,

one must also account for the role that religious belief, in the sense of the importance that an

individual attaches to religion, plays in influencing the usage of addictive substance.


Religion may not be a matter of choice for many individuals during their childhood and

adolescent years. Most children grow up practicing some form of religion as a direct result of

their parents, social networks and neighborhood characteristics (Iannaccone, 1998). Using the

National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (AddHealth), this paper analyzes the effects

of religious participation, intensity of participation, and religiosity or intensity of religious beliefs

(defined as self-reported importance of religion) on risky health behaviors for adolescents. In

contrast to previous studies, we use a sibling sample to parse out the effects of family level

unobserved heterogeneity of the effect of religion on risky health behaviors. And in contrast to

some of the previous studies, we find positive effects of religion on three specific outcomes:

tobacco use, alcohol use and illicit drug use.


We contribute in the literature along the following dimensions: In light of the usual issues

involved in the application of IV method to parse out causal effect in observational studies, we

use a sample of siblings to evaluate the effects of various measures of religion on not only

contemporaneous, but also the medium- as well as the long-term measures of risky health

behaviors: cigarette smoking, binge drinking, marijuana use, and other illicit drugs. We include

some additional covariates—PVT score, child-weight, urbanization, parental religiosity, county

                                                   4
level measures of religiosity directly relevant for a respondent---on the basis of recent advances

in molecular genetics and neuroscience. In addition, we show using Gelbach’s (2009) conditional

decomposition method the extent to which variation in family level unobserved heterogeneity

contributes in driving the estimates of the effects of religion on risky health behaviors.


Literature Review


Iannaccone (1998) introduced the framework of the rational choice model to explain religious

institutions and adherence of beliefs, and since then one finds continuous and sustained efforts in

building a better understanding of economics of religious institutions (see Iannaccone and

Bainbridge (2010), and references therein). Still the infancy of research analyzing the effects of

religion on risky healthy behaviors in economics is highlighted by the fact that neither of the two

recent handbooks of health economics (Pauly et al. 2012; Glied and Smith, 2011) contains the

word ‘religion’ in their index-sections. However, lately there has been more effort invested by

economists and other social scientists in evaluating the causal effects of religion on risky health

behaviors (Mellor and Freeborn, 2011; Gruber and Hungerman, 2008; Lillard and Price, 2007;

Gruber, 2005; Chatters, 2000).


The study closest in spirit to our paper is Mellor and Freeborn (2011). The authors follow Gruber

(2005) and use the proportion of the county population belonging to the same denomination as

the respondent as an instrument for religious participation variables. They report that religious

participation as defined by both religious attendance and prayer has a significant negative effect

on marijuana use. However, though they report negative estimated effects for smoking and binge

drinking, their estimates were found to be statistically imprecise. In addition, their study raises




                                                  5
concerns about the validity of exclusion restriction, especially in the absence of information on

family level unobservables.


Lillard and Price (2007) apply various estimation techniques using several nationally

representative surveys, namely the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics (PSID), the National

Longitudinal Surveys of Youth 1979 (NSLY79), the Children of the National Longitudinal

Surveys of Youth 1979 (CNLSY79), and Monitoring the Future (MTF) to show that youth who

attend church more often are less likely to show socially deviant behaviors and indulge in risky

health behaviors.


Gruber (2005) discusses many channels that may explain the positive effects of a higher level of

religiosity on various outcomes of interests, namely, religious participation, education, income,

marital status, and also substance use. Given the difficulty in finding instruments that satisfy the

exclusion restriction, Gruber and Hungerman (2008) and Hungerman (2010) have taken an

alternative approach by studying the response of individuals to the change in the price of secular

goods due to changes in the policy regimes. Gruber and Hungerman (2008) show that the repeal

of ‘blue laws’ across the US states in the 1970s and ‘80s led to a significant increase in

marijuana and cocaine consumption. They suggest that lowering the price of secular activities

would chip away at religious participation because of the higher opportunity cost of religious

participation. Consequently, if religion provides protection against the risky behaviors then they

suggest that the repeal of “blue laws” would lead individuals to indulge more in these risky

behaviors. However, findings for respondents between ages 5 and 30 by Lillard and Price (2007)

to some extent challenge this explanation; they find evidence of policy endogeneity: respondents

living in the states that repealed blue laws were less likely to initiate smoking. However,

individuals living in states without blue laws in which Sunday is treated as the day of obligation

                                                 6
were somewhat more likely to initiate smoking conditional religious affiliation. Crucially, none

of the studies we have reviewed control for parental religiosity or spatial sorting of individuals

on the basis of policy-framework (Tiebout, 1956), which casts doubt on the robustness and

validity of their causal estimates.


In this paper, we improve on the existing literature in a number of ways. First, we expand the

outcomes variables of interest to include: consumption of cocaine, methamphetamines, and other

illicit drugs. We also investigate the medium- and longer-term effects of religion on risky health

behaviors. Moreover, findings from behavioral genetics indicate the potential role that genes play

in predisposing a person to religion and religiosity (Sapolsky, 2011 3), as well as to the usage of

additive substance (Fletcher, 2012). If indeed the propensity to have faith is heritable to some

extent (Mohr and Huguelet, 2004) then using family-fixed effects, potentially would control for

genetic endowments shared among the family members. Also, a more religious household may

be more likely to adhere to religious proscription regarding addictive substances, have a higher

discount rate, bigger family size, working mother etc., all of which have been shown to affect the

demand for substance use (Iannaccone, 1998). The presence of these characteristics also affects

the incentives for the suppliers and the state agency to regulate the supply and demand of these

commodities. One needs to keep such models in mind when deriving predictions about the

propensity for substance use. 4




Empirical Strategy


3
 Based on Sapolsky’s lecture made available on the Internet: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4WwAQqWUkpI
4
 We control for family level unobservables through family fixed effects, which helps us to take care of many such
confounders.


                                                        7
There are clear reasons that much of the literature linking religion and risky outcomes is

descriptive. It is quite difficult to find adequate quasi-experimental variation in individuals’

religious beliefs and practices in observational data. This is particularly true for adolescents

because of their reliance on parental religious beliefs and practices. Indeed, we suggest that a

critical source of heterogeneity that is often unable to be controlled in research is the effect of

parents and family background on both religious and health outcomes (Chiswick 1988; Lehrer

1999). Thus, our primary strategy is to use a novel sample of siblings to employ family-fixed

effects to capture this specific set of potentially confounding influences, and to evaluate the

longer terms effects of religion on risky health behaviors. Since the goal of this paper is to

directly account for family-level unobservables rather than through IV methods, we implement

the following steps:


First, in contrast to some of the recent studies, we include all denominations as well as the

respondents reporting ‘no religion.’ 5 We extend the analysis by defining new groups namely,

other Christian group (Christian Science, Jehovah’s Witness, other Protestant, Eastern

Orthodox), other religions (Baha’ism, Islam, Hinduism, other Religions), those with no religious

group, and also to a group where members don’t know their religion. 6 In particular, our method

(that of family-fixed effects) is not constrained by the limitation posed by AddHealth data for

using the standard IV employed in the literature: county-level proportion of one’s own religious



5
  Dull and Skokan (1995, p. 51) put forward more nuanced views regarding religious behaviors: “People may
identify themselves as Baptists on a questionnaire because they have been raised in that faith, but not adhere to its
tenets for daily living nor attend many of the group’s religious functions. In contrast, another person may not
identify with any religious group but may still adopt a particular religious or spiritual belief system.”
6
  The idea behind including those who don’t know their religion is the age of the respondents. Adolescence is the
age of a number of changes; one of the siblings may report not knowing her religion when she does not participate in
any religious activities, while her other siblings might. Although when we restrict the sample to siblings cluster,
there remains just one family which reports not knowing its religion.

                                                         8
affiliates. 7 If our goal is to explore the potential protective effect of religion and its practices for

an average person, it is useful to make broader comparisons using information on all religions, as

well as those practicing no religion. Second, we use Gelbach (2009) to evaluate the extent to

which family-level unobserved heterogeneity drives the estimates.


Given the difficulty in satisfying the exclusion restriction in the case of a variable like religion,

which can potentially impact many institutions and behaviors, we felt a more suitable approach

is to control for as many confounding variables as we can in order to estimate the effect of

religion on risky health behaviors. Although the family fixed effects approach has certain

limitations, this approach is an advance over the current literature..


Additionally, we repeat the above analytical framework to understand the medium- and long-

terms effects of religion. Going beyond the contemporaneous effect gives us the latitude to

include other measures of risky health behaviors: cocaine use, meth use, and use of other illicit

drugs. 8 We briefly discuss the results about the effect of religion on other type of health related

behaviors and outcomes in the medium- and long-term; for instance, depression, preference for

risk, likelihood of not being in excellent health, etc.




Data and Estimation




7
  County level data available in the Add Health dataset, in the absence of geographical identifiers, does not have
information on the proportion of county level adherents belonging to other religions. In a sample restricted to Judeo-
Christian religious denominations, the IV estimates reported in the literature …..
8
  Given the age-cohorts (12-18) interviewed, there were only 1-2% users of illicit drugs besides marijuana in 1994-
1995


                                                          9
We used the restricted version of the National longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add

Health), a nationally representative study of 7th-12th grade students, their parents (or guardians),

and school administration surveyed in 1994-1995 (Wave 1; N=20,745); with longitudinal follow

up surveys of only students and administration in 1996 (Wave 2), in 2001-2002 (Wave 3;

N=15,701), and in 2007-2008 (Wave 4; N>14,000). We used data from Wave 1, 3 and 4 to

understand both the short run as well as long run effects of religion on risky health behaviors.

However, after limiting the sample to those who in Wave 1, 3, and 4 leaves us with around

12,000 individuals. There are over 5000 individuals who have a sibling or twin who also had

been surveyed. However, we were left with around 3,000 siblings who are found in all three

waves used for this study. We chose to impute missing values with county-level mean values (by

controlling for the corresponding dummy variables) for many of the variables to maximize

available sample size for the analysis. The Add Health sample follows a stratified sampling

design based on region, urbanization, school type, ethnic mix, and size. Moreover, the benefit in

using Add Health to analyze risky health behaviors comes with its careful approach to elicit

information on these behaviors, which makes it a more reliable source of data (Clark and

Loheac, 2007; Mellor and Freeborn, 2011).


Table 1 compares the summary statistics of the full Add Health sample and the siblings cluster

within it (respondents identified as twin pairs, full-siblings, half-siblings, or unrelated siblings

raised together). The siblings’ sample is demographically similar to the full sample. For three

measures of religion used in this paper, religious attendance, frequency of prayers, and

importance of religion, we found that only 59%, 48%, and 43% of siblings report the same

values. This allays the apprehension that one may not find much variation the measures of

religion in the siblings’ subsample


                                                10
We used three contemporaneous measures of risky health behaviors from Wave 1—cigarettes

smoking, binge drinking, and marijuana use. To bring focus on the medium- and long-term

effects on these measures, along with usages of other illicit drugs, we created various measures

from Wave 3 and Wave 4. Past research could not use information on other drugs in Wave 1 as a

very low percentage of the respondents reported using drugs other than marijuana (Mellor and

Freeborn, 2011). In Table 1 we report that 6% respondents reported taking meth, and 16%

reported using other illicit drugs in Wave 3; while the figure for the use of any illicit drugs is

10% in Wave 4. 9



To measure the long-term effects of religion, we analyzed information on the usage of other

drugs provided in Wave 4, besides the three measures used to measure contemporaneous risky

health behaviors: During the past 12 months, on how many days did you use {favorite drug}?

The list of favorite drugs included: ecstasy, inhalants, LSD, heroin, PCP, and other illegal drugs.

This survey question provided us with a composite measure of any illicit drug usage in the past

year to capture the long-term effects of religiosity & participation in religious rites and rituals

during the adolescent years.



We also used a measure of risk preference from Wave 3 and Wave 4 surveys along with a

measure of general well-being from Wave 4. In particular, from Wave 3 we used the following

question to measure the propensity to take risk, “Do you agree or disagree that when making a

decision, you go with your "gut feeling" and don't think much about the consequences of each
9
  In particular, for cocaine in Wave 3, we selected the question: “Since June 1995, have you used any kind of
cocaine—including crack, freebase, or powder?”; for meth, we used “Since June 1995, have you used crystal
meth?”; for the measure of other drugs use, we chose the question: “Since June 1995, have you used any other types
of illegal drugs, such as LSD, PCP, ecstasy, mushrooms, inhalants, ice, heroin, or prescription medicines not
prescribed for you?”


                                                       11
alternative?” And to measure the propensity to take risk from Wave 4, we use, “How much do

you agree with each statement about you as you generally are now, not as you wish to be in the

future?' I like to take risks.” We define a dummy variable that switches on when respondents

report: “strongly agree” and “agree” for both Wave 3 and Wave 4 questions. Additionally, from

Wave 4, we use the question, “In general, how is your health?” to measure the general well-

being of the respondents in the long-run. To create a health measure less prone to measurement

error, we created a dummy variable that switches on for those who self-report to be in excellent

health.



In our effort to account for the recent advances in our understanding of addictive behaviors and

religious inclinations, we included additional covariates in our regression models. In particular,

we controlled for the level of urbanization, which we define as the proportion of the population

of a county living in the urban areas. We also controlled for some neighborhood-level

characteristics: proportion of individuals of same race, age groups, religion living in the

respondents’ area. It has been consistently shown that living in a close proximity to those who

share the similar background has many health benefits (Egolf et al. 1992; Bruhn and Wolf,

1979).


The other additional set of confounding variables 10—parental religiosity, birth-weight, PVT

scores for associational intelligence—that we use in this paper all come from the survey

instruments used in Wave 1. Retrospective information on the birth-weight of adolescents and

their parents’ religiosity (an index created by using Principle Component Analysis) was collected

from parents interviewed in Wave 1. The reason for the inclusion of these additional variables is

10
  We also ran a separate set of regressions controlling for adherent based religious market density measure; we find
similar results.

                                                         12
not only to control for the unobserved heterogeneity in the parental investment across different

offspring, but also to factor in individual specific differences owing to complex interaction

between genes and environment in influencing both religiosity and substance use (Sapolsky,

2011). Datar, Kilburn, and Loughran (2010) report about differential parental investment based

on birth weight of babies, which becomes a matter for concerns as the family-level fixed effects

cannot control for such heterogeneity. A series of research has shown the deleterious effects of

adverse birth-weight on long-term adult outcomes (Almond et al. 2005; Fletcher 2011 and

references therein). We circumvent this issue by directly controlling for the birth-weight of

respondents retrospectively reported by their parents. Also, Burdette et al. (2012) suggested that

parental religiosity affects the birth-weights of their babies. Our decision to include a parental

religiosity variable helped us to control for the family and parental characteristics that may have

had an impact on both religiosity as well as the propensity for substance use. The inclusion of a

Picture Vocabulary Test (PVT) score allowed us to control for the heritable dimension of

religiosity that is reflected in a higher propensity to seek our loose associations (Mohr and

Huguelet, 2004; Sapolsky, 2011). One of the characteristic features of religiosity is to have an

inclination for metamagical thinking and seeing patterns where there might be none. Such

inclination potentially can lead to more responsivity to stress (Smith, 2010) and a higher

propensity for substance use (Sinha, 2000).


Other variables in the control set included: religious affiliation dummies (Catholic, Mod.

Protestants etc.), age, gender, race, household size, family income, parental education, parental

age, presence of biological mother and father, a cigarette tax at the county level, median income,

density measure of county, own race density measure, same-age density measures, regional




                                                13
dummies, school size and type dummies, school-level measure of proportional of smokers, and

drug and alcohol expulsion policies. 11


We used a series of OLS specifications that control for environmental (school, county, and state

level) as well as family level confounding variables, including the source of family-level

unobserved heterogeneity. We first ran the base-line regressions where the main explanatory

variables of interest are religious involvement (frequency of participation and prayer) and

religiosity. Then, we performed regressions where we controlled for family-fixed effects.

Finally, we conducted falsification tests with variable that could not be taken to be influenced by

religion.




Results


Table 2 displays the OLS estimates in the first row using exactly the same set of covariates as in

Mellor and Freeborn (2011) in Panel I. The second row in Panel I reports the OLS estimates that

include additional covariates--parental religiosity, birth-weight, PVT score, urbanization, and

county-level measures of the strength of religion-relevant social networks. For all the results that

we report in the rest of the paper, we included these additional covariates in all the specifications

that we estimate. The OLS estimates of the association between the two measures of religion—

attendance and frequency of prayers—match the ones reported in the literature. Religious

attendance is associated with anywhere between 4% to 5% reduction in smoking, a 3% to 4%

reduction in binge drinking, and 2% to 3.3% reduction in marijuana smoking. Prayer frequency


11
  Many of the confounding variables, which are invariant across siblings, will drop out in our family-fixed effects
specifications; however, they remain relevant variables in our OLS and IV specifications (see footnote 12).


                                                         14
has similar but smaller effects; while importance attached to religion has larger effects. The

associations that we find between the last measure of religion and the measures of risky health

behaviors are bigger in magnitude than the associations reported for other measures of religion

by anywhere between 30-50%. This indicates the importance of religious belief in developing a

better understanding of the correlates and determinants of substance (ab)use. 12 Panel II of Table

2 displays the estimates when all the religious denominations, as well as those reporting being

atheist are included in the sample. The reported estimates follow a similar pattern as the ones

shown in Panel I.




Family-Fixed Effects


In Table 3, we move our focus to siblings subsample to introduce family-fixed effects; our focus

for the remainder of the paper will be on this sample. Additionally, in contrast to Mellor and

Freeborn (2011) and Lillard and Price (2007), we analyze the medium- (6 years later) and long-

term (13 years later) measures of risky health behaviors as the outcome variables.


Table 3 displays the associations of all three measures of religion on risky health behaviors. The

effect of extrinsic religiosity (religious service attendance) is more pronounced during late

adolescence and young adulthood period, then goes down again during the mid-20s and early

30s’. However, once we account for family-level unobserved heterogeneity in our fixed effects


12
   We also carried out IV estimation using the proportion of the county-level population belonging to the same
religious denomination as the respondent as an instrument for the two measures of religion emphasized in the
literature (Mellor and Freeborn, 2011; Gruber, 2005). In the presence of the issues around the validity of exclusion
restrictions, and for the sake of brevity, we focus on family-fixed effects estimates, Gelbach’s decomposition
analyses, and the longer terms effects of religion. Although our estimates for effect on marijuana use were similar to
the ones found in the literature, we found very imprecise IV estimates for the smoking and binge drinking variables.


                                                         15
specifications, the association of religious attendance and cigarette smoking over the six-year

periods, from the time when the religion variables were measured, went down from -0.034 to -

0.017, and it further went down to -0.005, when the respondents were in mid-20s to early 30s.

This suggests that family level unobservables play a crucial role in mediating the effect of

religion on risky health behaviors as time goes by: if family-level unobservables invariant across

siblings make respondents more likely to smoke, they also are more likely to be less religious in

terms of the number of times that they attend their respective religious institutions.


An intriguing trend was discovered for binge drinking: the contemporaneous effect of religious

attendance became more pronounced after controlling for family-fixed effects, in contrast to its

contemporaneous effect in the case of cigarette smoking (see Table 3). The intriguing result is

the association when respondents are at or near college age. The magnitudes of the estimates

suggest that those who report a higher frequency of religious attendance are more likely to

indulge in binge drinking. This estimate, in particular, captures the rebel-like propensities during

the adolescence years. By the time respondents are in their late 20s or early 30s, religious

attendance once again reverses its value in the expected direction (though one that is statistically

insignificant).


Once again, after controlling for family-fixed effects, the associations of all three measures of

religion with marijuana use become significantly smaller, and are never found to be statistically

significant at the conventional level of significance. This illustrates the important role that family

plays in influencing both religiosity and the usage of additive substance. However, controlling

for family-level unobservables does not overturn the effects of prayer on marijuana use;

estimates are of similar magnitude but with higher variance. Also, a similar trend is observed in

the case of the importance of religion variable for the medium term outcome (Wave 3) (see Panel

                                                 16
II & III in Table 3). The effects of prayer and religiosity both go up and then come down in the

case of marijuana use: (-0.013, -0.022, -0.010) for prayers & (-0.009, -0.023, -0.011) for the

degree of religiosity. Though estimates are not statistically significant, they are still economically

meaningful and in expected directions. The estimates hint towards the fact that religion does

provide some kind of protective psychological support at times when adolescents are most

vulnerable to the external influences: during their late teen and early adulthood years, when they

venture out on their own (Blackmore and Choudhury, 2006).


The most encouraging aspect of our findings concerns the strong and persistent associations of

the variable importance of religion with regard to smoking. In light of the recent findings that the

demand for cigarettes is very price inelastic, and also quite impervious to the regulatory arms of

the government because of the environmentally modulated genetic propensity for nicotine

dependence (Fletcher, 2012), this result becomes quite important. Interestingly, the

contemporaneous association of religious participation gets bigger in the opposite direction after

we control for family-level unobservables (indicating that those who are more likely to indulge

in substance use are also less likely to be religious). In addition, the estimate of long-term

associations continues to remain economically meaningful and statistically significant at the

conventional level of significance. This captures the rebellious attitude of adolescents trying to

go against the familial environment (Finkel et al. 2009 13): family unobservables which make

adolescents become more religious also drive them to smoking, which seems to fit the

observation that during their teen years adolescents try to build their own independent identity.

Or, as pointed by Mellor and Freeborn (2011), religion becomes more important as it allows


13
  During adolescence we are primed to commit ourselves to belonging to certain groups and not belonging to others
(Finkel et al. 2009)


                                                       17
them to deal with the same pressures and problems that lead them to engage in drug use. This

suggests that even after accounting for important confounding variables, religion continues to

have a strong association with the propensity to use addictive substances.




Other Illicit Drugs


We also conducted analyses of the effects of different measures of religion on cocaine, meth, and

other illicit drugs (which include, LCD, ecstasy etc.). The OLS estimates, without siblings fixed

effects, suggest that all three measures of religion reduce the propensity to use the illicit drugs

both in the medium as well as in the long term (see Cols. 1-5, Table 4). However, once we

controlled for the family-level unobservables, the effect remained only for meth usages, after six

years from the interview date, when respondents were in their late teen and early 20s for all three

measures of religion. We found no statistically significant associations for any other illicit drug

usages in Wave 4. The negative and statistically significant association of ‘importance of

religion’ variable with the measure of general wellbeing and health in Wave 4 suggests that

religiosity during adolescence continues to influence young adults’ lives (see Col. 6, Panel III in

Table 4). Furthermore, religion seems to make individuals more risk averse during their early-

and mid-20s; but, interestingly, ends up leaving those who hold religion in high regard more risk

loving.


It is quite interesting to find that religious attendance and activities during adolescence years

cease their association in the long term, when adolescents’ brains’ executive control area (PFC)

becomes fully mature (Blakemore and Choudhury, 2006). This time period also coincides with




                                                18
adolescents becoming financially more independent and also more integrated into the labor

market.




Falsification Tests


To further explore the nature of the relationship between religion and risky health behaviors, we

conducted a series of falsification tests. Table 5 displays results from the falsification tests. We

used self-reported incidents of a headache and cold sweat in Wave 1, as well as respondents’

adult height measured in Wave 4 as the outcome variables. We concluded that all three measures

of religion are not statistically related to these outcome variables. In all family-fixed effects

specifications, none of the variables measuring religion has any statistically significant impact on

the any of the outcome variables. This is consistent with the correlations we report between

various measures of religion and different measures of risky health behaviors not being spurious.


Given that except in the case of headache, other three outcome variables mentioned above are

not significant even in the OLS specification make these variables not very relevant in our efforts

to use them in falsification tests for our preferred family-fixed effects specifications. Therefore,

in parallel with that, while keeping in mind that we are not able to provide full control for genes

and their interactions with environment, we ran a separate set of regressions with many

personality traits that are used to measure neuroticism and conscientiousness as the outcome

variables (Young et al. 2011). We used 10 different factors reported in Wave 1 to check if our

measures of religion, after controlling for family-fixed effects, predicted any of these factors. All

four factors that are employed to define conscientiousness measures showed positive and

significant associations with the broad measures of religiosity, and also to some extent with the


                                                 19
frequency of prayer. This casts doubt to some extent on our previous results; however, it is

difficult to discern if it is perhaps the religiosity that is influencing these personality measures.

Keeping that in mind, we ran all our specifications with two of the factors (results not reported

here) which show strong associations with risky health behaviors—“You feel wanted and loved

(Col.6) ” and “Propensity for more deliberate thinking (Col. 8)”--and we found no substantive

change in our estimates.


Limitations


The sample we used for this study was conditional on subjects being in school during 1994-1995,

which potentially limits the external validity of the associations reported here for other cohorts.

The extent to which genetic endowment in association with environment creates a predilection

for religious matters and propensity for substance use can only be partially controlled by a

family-fixed effects specification. Keeping that in mind, we carried out an estimation exercise

(reported in Appendix 1) using a sample of monozygotic twins to better control for the roles of

genetic propensity for religiosity and substance use. We ended up having a very small sample,

and the estimates turned out to be very noisy, except for the estimate of the effect of religious

participation on binge drinking and the estimate of the effect of religiosity on smoking. It is

somewhat encouraging to find the negative association (see Col.1, Panel III in Appendix 1) of

religious belief with an individual’s propensity for cigarette smoking, especially in the presence

of high persistence in the proportion of adults addicted to cigarette smoking as reported in

Fletcher (2012).


Although we have controlled for variables that potentially could capture the heterogeneous

treatment of children within a family, we were unable to control for direct measures for many


                                                 20
more variables that could confound our estimates, such as, individuals’ response to stress,

parental behaviors, respondents’ social network, etc. Although not emphasized here, we ran a set

of separate regressions with county-level adherents-based religion density measure that

controlled for the effects of being in close proximity to people of the same faith and

denominations. We did not find any substantial changes in the results reported above.

Furthermore, given the recent study on the linked genes and phenotypic manifestations,

incorporation of some of the variables capturing individual heterogeneity should be able to

control for some of the genetic sources of such phenotypic variation. As we get a better and more

nuanced understanding of the biological pathways, it will gradually become clearer how the

environment interacts with biological pathways to differentially impact individuals in their

religiosity and their propensity for substance use. We will then be able to better control for the

many variables that could potentially be inducing the observed relationship between religion and

risky health behaviors.




Conclusions


While providing methodological critiques of the previous work delineating the association

(effects) of religion to various measures of risky health behaviors, this paper makes both

substantive and methodological contributions. The structure of the data allowed us to control for

sibling-fixed effects (and also to conduct analyses of longer-term effects). Thus, it helped us

account for many potential sources of omitted variable bias—family-level covariates, which

includes a significant part of genetic endowment. As pointed by De Neve and Oswald (2012), it

is the sibling-fixed effects that allowed us to make inferences about the lagged effects of


                                               21
religious rites and rituals on risky health behaviors (which could not have been possible with

individual-fixed effects).


In particular, we estimated the contemporaneous as well as the longer term effects of religion on

risky healthy behaviors. Our measures of the risky behaviors include usage of both licit and illicit

substance—cigarettes, binge drinking, marijuana, cocaine, meth, ecstasy, inhalants, LSD, heroin,

PCP, and other illegal drugs.


Findings from a number of studies suggest that it is the rites and rituals which hold the key to

understand the positive effects that religion has consistently been shown to have (Luhrmann,

2012). Our findings corroborate the importance of extrinsic aspects of religion, but point to a

more important role for the beliefs and intrinsic aspect of religion (captured by both prayer and

the importance of religion measures. Our findings suggest that the positive effect of religion is

driven both by the extrinsic (in the form of frequency of religious attendance and public prayer)

as well as by the intrinsic (the belief system that goes with being religious). Furthermore, we find

that family as an institution plays a very significant role in moderating the effects of religion on

risky health behaviors. [When controlling for family effects] The intrinsic aspect becomes more

salient as the extrinsic aspect loses its effect in the longer term, especially in the case of binge

drinking and marijuana use. 14 ). It seems religion provides the focal point for societies and

families where secular focal points have not been created to coordinate the activities of the

members, or where they would take time to establish and find wide acceptance.


14
  We also conducted the conditional decomposition of the changes in the estimates of the effect of various measures
of religion on risky health behaviors using Gelbach’s (2009) method. Surprisingly, we found that though the
variations in the family level unobserved heterogeneity do contribute to the changes in the estimates of the effects of
religion, they were never found to be statistically significant. We report our findings in Appendix 2 just for one of
the outcome variables, cigarette smoking in Wave 1, for the effect of religious attendance; and we found similar
effects for most of the outcome and explanatory variables that are the focus of this paper.

                                                          22
Given how critical adolescence is for determining long-term health and well-being of the

individual and for society as a whole (Call et al. 2003), our study suggests that we need to build a

more nuanced understanding of the ways religion brings about positive health outcomes.


If it is indeed the case, as we report, that religion provides protection against indulgence in risky

health behavior, then it indeed is a very striking finding. In light of the research showing the

positive effects of education on health and risky health behaviors (Grossman and Kaestner,

1997), and given the high cost of education in the US, bringing in a familiar non-market

institution as a prevention strategy seems promising. More specifically, Cutler and Lleras-Muney

(2010), using the National Health Interview Survey data, report that an additional year of

education is associated with a 3% lower probability of being a current smoker, a 1.4% lower

probability of being a heavy drinker, and a 0.1% probability of using marijuana in the past month

(Cawley and Ruhm, 2011). In comparison, in our family-fixed effects specification, we show a

stronger association for smoking and drinking (-5.8%, -4.8%). It is these two substances that

pose a greater risk than the marijuana and other illicit drug use (Cawley and Ruhm, 2011).


Additionally, given the usually low price elasticity of addictive substances (Kenkel and Sindelar,

2011), the risk of the emergence of an underground illegal market owing to regulation

(especially the failed policy of quantity/supply regulation of the illicit drugs), and high

deadweight loss involved in price-based regulation of alcohol (Glied and Smith, 2011), religion

could potentially complement the existing prevention efforts to rein in a persistently high level of

smoking, high alcohol consumption, and illicit drug usage.




                                                 23
References
Adamczyk, Amy and Felson, J. (2012), "The Effect of Religion-Supported Programs on Health-
Related Behaviors in Adolescence,” Review of Religious Research: The Official Journal of the
Religious Research Association 1-29.

Barnes, K. and Gibson, N. J. (2013), “Supernatural Agency: Individual Difference Predictors and
Situational Correlates,” International Journal for the Psychology of Religion, 23(1), 42-62.

Benjamin, D. J., Choi, J. J., & Fisher, G. W. (2010), “Religious identity and economic behavior,”
(No. w15925), National Bureau of Economic Research

Berman, M. G., Jonides, J., and Kaplan, S. (2008), “The cognitive benefits of interacting with
nature,” Psychological science, 19(12), 1207-1212.

Blakemore, S. J. and Choudhury, S. (2006), “Development of the adolescent brain: implications
for executive function and social cognition,” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 47(3‐
4), 296-312Bonelli, R. M., & Koenig, H. G. (2013). Mental Disorders, Religion and Spirituality
1990 to 2010: A Systematic Evidence-Based Review. Journal of religion and health.

Borders, T. F., Curran, G. M., Mattox, R. , and Booth, B. M., (2010), “Religiousness among at-
risk drinkers: is it prospectively associated with the development or maintenance of an alcohol-
use disorder?" Journal of studies on alcohol and drugs 71, no. 1 (2010): 136.

Bruhn, J. G. (1988), “Life-style and health behavior,” Health behavior: Emerging research
perspectives, 71-86.

Bruhn J.G. and Wolf S., (1979), “The Roseto Story: An Anatomy of Health,” Norman,
Oklahoma University of Oklahoma Press.

Burdette, A. M., Weeks, J., Hill, T. D., & Eberstein, I. W. (2012), “Maternal religious attendance
and low birth weight,” Social Science & Medicine

Call, K. T., Riedel, A. A., Hein, K., McLoyd, V., Petersen, A., & Kipke, M. (2003), “Adolescent
health and well‐being in the twenty‐first century: a global perspective,” Journal of Research on
Adolescence, 12(1), 69-98

Cawley, J., and Ruhm, C. J. (2011), “ The Economics of Risky Health Behaviors,” Handbook of
Health Economics, 2, 95.

Chatters, L. M. (2000), “ Religion and health: public health research and practice,” Annual
review of public health, 21(1), 335-367.

Conti, G., and Heckman, J. J. (2012), “The Developmental Approach to Child and Adult
Health,” (No. w18664), National Bureau of Economic Research.



                                               24
Cutler, D. M, and Lleras-Muney, A. (2010), “Understanding Differences in Health Behavior by
Education,” Journal of Health Economics, 29, no. 1: 1-28.

De Neve, J. E. and Oswald, A. J. (2012), “Estimating the influence of life satisfaction and
positive effect on later income using sibling fixed effects,” Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 109(49), 19953-19958.

Diamond, J. (2013), “The World Until Yesterday: What Can We Learn from Traditional
Societies?” Penguin Books Limited.

Dohmen, Thomas, et al. "The intergenerational transmission of risk and trust attitudes." The
Review of Economic Studies 79.2 (2012): 645-677.

Duhigg, C. (2012). The Power of Habit: Why we do What we do in Life and Business. Doubleday
Canada.
Dull, V. T. and Skokan, L. A. (1995), “A cognitive model of religion's influence on health,”
Journal of Social Issues, 51(2), 49-64.

Egolf, B., Lasker, J., Wolf, S., and Potvin, L. (1992), “The Roseto effect: a 50-year comparison
of mortality rates,” American Journal of Public Health, 82(8), 1089-1092.

Ferreira, F. and Gyourko, J. (2007), “Do political parties matter? evidence from us cities,” (No.
w13535), National Bureau of Economic Research.

Finkel, D. N., Swartwout, P., and Sosis, R. (2010), “The Socio-religious Brain: A Developmental
Model,” In Proceedings of the British Academy (Vol. 158, p. 283).

Finke, R. and Stark, R. (2005), “The Churching of America, 1776-2005,” Winners and Losers in
Our Religious Economy.

Fletcher, J. M. (2011), “The medium term schooling and health effects of low birth weight:
Evidence from siblings,” Economics of Education Review, 30(3), 517-527.

Fletcher, J. M. (2012), “Why Have Tobacco Control Policies Stalled? Using Genetic Moderation
to Examine Policy Impacts,” PloS one, 7(12), e50576.

Foer, J. Safran (2009), “Eating Animals,” New York: Back Bay Books.

Freeman, R. B. (1985), “Who Escapes? The Relation of Church-Going & Other Background
Factors to the Socio-Economic Performance of Blk. Male Yths. from Inner-City Poverty Tracts,”
National Bureau of Economic Research Cambridge, Mass., USA.

Gelbach, J. B. (2009), “When do covariates matter? And which ones, and how much?” Available
at SSRN.



                                                25
Glied, S. and Smith P. C. (Eds.). (2011). The Oxford Handbook of Health Economics. OUP
Oxford.

Gladwell, M. (2008). Outliers: The story of success. Little, Brown.

Grossman, M. and Kaestner, R. (1997), “EIfects of Education on Health,” The Social Benefits of
Education, 12, 69.

Guiso, L.,Sapienza, P., and Zingales, L.(2003), “People's opium? Religion and economic
attitudes,” Journal of Monetary Economics 50.1 (2003): 225-282.

Gruber, J. (2005), “Religious market structure, religious participation, and outcomes: Is religion
good for you?,” (No. w11377). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gruber, J. and Hungerman, D. M. (2006), “The Church vs. the Mall: What Happens When
Religion Faces Increased Secular Competition?,” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Harris, S., Kaplan, J.T., Curiel, A., Bookheimer, S.Y., and Iacoboni M, et al. (2009), “The
Neural Correlates of Religious and Nonreligious Belief,” PLoS ONE 4(10): e7272.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0007272.

Iannaccone, L. R. (1998), “Introduction to the Economics of Religion,” Journal of economic
literature, 36(3), 1465-1495.

Iannaccone, L. R. and Bainbridge, W. S. (2010), “Economics of religion,” The Routledge
companion to the study of religion [electronic resource], 461.

Hungerman, D. (2010), "Does Religious Proscription Cause People to Act Differently? Evidence
from a Theory-Based Test." NBER Working paper 16973.

Kendler, K. S., Gardner, C. O., and Prescott, C. A. (1997), “ Religion, psychopathology, and
substance use and abuse: A multimeasure, genetic-epidemiologic study,” American Journal of
Psychiatry, 154(3), 322-329.

Kenkel, D. and Sindelar J. (2011), “Economics of Health Behaviors and Addictions:
Contemporary Issues and Policy Implications,” The Oxford Handbook of Health Economics.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 206-31
Lechner, F.J.(2007), Rational choice and religious economies Sage, 2007
Luhrmann, T. M. (2012). When God talks back: Understanding the American evangelical
relationship with God. Vintage Books.

Lillard D. and Price J. (2007), “The impact of religion on youth in disadvantaged families,”
Manuscript, Cornell University Department of Economics.



                                                26
McCullough, M. E. and Willoughby, B. L. (2009), “Religion, self-regulation, and self-control:
Associations, explanations, and implications,” Psychological bulletin, 135(1), 69.

Mellor, J. M. and Freeborn, B.A., (2011), “"Religious participation and risky health behaviors
among adolescents,” Health Economics 20, no. 10 (2011): 1226-1240.

Moghaddam, B., Bolinao, M. L., Stein-Behrens, B., and Sapolsky, R. (1994), “Glucocortcoids
mediate the stress-induced extracellular accumulation of glutamate,” Brain research, 655(1),
251-254.

Mohr, S. and Huguelet, P. (2004), “The relationship between schizophrenia and religion and its
implications for care,” Swiss Medical Weekly, 134, 369-376.

Owen A.D., Hayward R.D., Koenig H.G., Steffens D.C., and Payne M.E. (2011), “Religious
Factors and Hippocampal Atrophy in Late Life,” PLoS ONE 6(3): e17006.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0017006
Pauly, M. V., McGuire, T. G., and Barros, P. P. (Eds.). (2011). Handbook of Health Economics
(Vol. 2). North Holland.

Sinha, R. (2001), “How does stress increase risk of drug abuse and relapse?”
Psychopharmacology, 158(4), 343-359.

Smith, N. T. (2010), “Increased stress responsivity in schizotypy leads to diminished spatial
working memory performance,” STATE UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK AT BINGHAMTON.

Tiebout, C. (1956), "A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures", Journal of Political Economy 64
(5): 416–424, doi:10.1086/257839

Ulmer, J.T., Desmond, S. A., Jang, S.J., and Johnson, B.R. (2012), “Religious Involvement and
Dynamics of Marijuana Use: Initiation, Persistence, and Desistence,” Deviant Behavior, 33(6),
448-468.

Young, J. K. and Beaujean, A. A. (2011), “Measuring personality in wave I of the national
longitudinal study of adolescent health,” Frontiers in Psychology, 2.




                                               27
                          Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
                                      Full Sample              Siblings Sample
Variable                         N     Mean Std. Dev.        N   Mean Std. Dev.
Adolescent Risk Behaviors
Smoking (W1)                    15258 0.24        0.43      3651   0.25    0.44
Binge Drinking (W1)             15320 0.25        0.43      3663   0.25    0.43
Marijuana Use (W1)              15354 0.15        0.35      3669   0.14    0.34
Smoking (W3)                    11236 0.30        0.46      2968   0.31    0.46
Binge Drinking (W3)             11225 0.47        0.50      2956   0.44    0.50
Marijuana Use (W3)              11263 0.30        0.46      2973   0.29    0.45
Cocaine (W3)                    11124 0.10        0.29      2938   0.09    0.28
Meth (W3)                       11121 0.06        0.23      2936   0.05    0.22
Other Illicit Drugs (W3)        11112 0.16        0.36      2933   0.13    0.34
Smoking (W4)                    11592 0.34        0.47      3018   0.36    0.48
Binge Drinking (W4)             11634 0.46        0.50      3031   0.44    0.50
Marijuana Use (W4)              11669 0.21        0.41      3041   0.21    0.41
Any Illicit Drugs (W4)          11673 0.10        0.30      3042   0.09    0.30
Depression (W3)                 11258 0.10        0.30      2971   0.10    0.30
Propensity to like risk (W3)    11275 0.32        0.47      2975   0.34    0.47
Propensity to seek novel
Experience (W3)                 11275 0.25        0.43      2975   0.24    0.43
Not in Excellent Health (W4)    11680 0.80        0.40      3044   0.80    0.40
Depression (W4)                 11678 0.15        0.36      3043   0.15    0.35
Panic Attack (W4)               11679 0.11        0.32      3044   0.11    0.32
Propensity to get angry (W4)    11664 0.20        0.40      3039   0.20    0.40
Propensity to like risk (W4)    11661 0.35        0.48      3036   0.36    0.48
Adolescent-level Explanatory Variables
Religious Attendance (W1)       13337 3.01        1.07      3159    3.04    1.07
Some Attendance (W1)            15354 0.76        0.43      3669    0.76    0.43
Weekly Attendance (W1)          15354 0.39        0.49      3669    0.40    0.49
Freq. of Prayers (W1)           13339 2.98        1.28      3161    3.00    1.27
Urbanization                    15283 0.64        0.40      3669    0.60    0.40
PVT Score                       14631 100.44     14.84      3669   99.20   14.27
Birth Weight (kg)               11661 3.32        0.57      3669    3.21    0.54
No Religion                     15354 0.11        0.32      3669    0.12    0.33
Other Christians                15354 0.05        0.22      3669    0.05    0.21
Other Religions                 15354 0.04        0.19      3669    0.04    0.20
Don't Know My Religion          15354 0.01        0.11      3669    0.01    0.12
Catholic                        15354 0.25        0.44      3669    0.23    0.42
Moderate Protestant (W1)        15354 0.14        0.34      3669    0.15    0.35
Lib. Protestant                 15354 0.09        0.28      3669    0.09    0.28
Con. Protestant                 15354 0.30        0.46      3669    0.31    0.46
Jewish                          15091 0.01        0.08      3603    0.01    0.08
Age                             15345 16.12       1.68      3668   16.14    1.64
Female                          15354 0.51        0.50      3669    0.50    0.50
Hispanic                        15311 0.16        0.37      3660    0.13    0.34

                                       28
Black                                15331 0.24           0.43    3666 0.25        0.43
Asian                                15331 0.08           0.27    3666 0.08        0.27
Other Race                           15331 0.09           0.29    3666 0.08        0.27
Parent and Household level Explanatory Variables
Parent Age                           15354 42.54          6.36    3669 42.02       6.08
High School                          15354 0.25           0.43    3669 0.27        0.44
Some College                         15354 0.25           0.43    3669 0.26        0.44
College Grad                         15354 0.12           0.33    3669 0.13        0.33
Graduate degree                      15354 0.08           0.27    3669 0.07        0.25
Income refused                       15354 0.09           0.29    3669 0.08        0.28
Income 2                             15354 0.12           0.33    3669 0.13        0.33
Income 3                             15354 0.18           0.38    3669 0.19        0.39
Income 4                             15354 0.36           0.48    3669 0.35        0.48
Income 5                             15354 0.10           0.30    3669 0.10        0.30
Income 6                             15354 0.09           0.28    3669 0.08        0.27
Household size                       15354 4.39           1.14    3669 4.85        0.99
Mother present                       15354 0.76           0.43    3669 0.76        0.43
Father present                       15354 0.45           0.50    3669 0.45        0.50
Mother works                         15354 0.74           0.45    3669 0.74        0.46
Mother work missing                  15354 0.06           0.23    3669 0.05        0.22
Area-level Explanatory Variables
Cigarette tax                        15354 32.09         16.26    3669 31.05      16.50
Median income ('000)                 15354 30.24          8.00    3669 29.73       7.82
Age-sex density                      15283 0.07           0.01    3651 0.07        0.01
Religious density                    15022 0.19           0.17    3586 0.19        0.17
Area density                         15354 0.59           1.56    3669 0.45        1.16
Race density                         15224 0.64           0.35    3640 0.65        0.34
Pr (Hispanic)                        15283 0.10           0.14    3651 0.09        0.13
South                                15354 0.40           0.49    3669 0.39        0.49
Midwest                              15354 0.22           0.42    3669 0.27        0.44
West                                 15354 0.22           0.41    3669 0.21        0.41
Northeast                            15354 0.16           0.36    3669 0.12        0.33
School-level Explanatory Variables
Religious school                     15303 0.05           0.21    3662 0.04        0.21
Small School                         15354 0.14           0.34    3669 0.16        0.36
Medium school                        15354 0.38           0.49    3669 0.37        0.48
Large school                         15354 0.48           0.50    3669 0.47        0.50
Pr (Smokers)                         15354 0.33           0.10    3669 0.34        0.11
Drug Expulsion                       14908 0.30           0.46    3603 0.31        0.46
Alcohol Expulsion                    15042 0.16           0.37    3624 0.18        0.39
Drug abuse program                   15354 0.47           0.50    3669 0.51        0.50
Notes: Descriptive statistics are not weighted by the survey provided sampling weights as
weights are not available for the siblings sub-sample.




                                           29
                      Table 2: OLS
                                           Religious Attendance               Freq. of Prayers           Importance of Religion
                                     Smoking Binge Marijuana Smoking Binge Marijuana Smoking Binge Marijuana
                      I. OLS estimates excluding atheists and non-Christian religions
                      S-OLS           -0.049‡ -0.031‡       -0.033‡   -0.036‡ -0.028‡        -0.025‡ -0.057‡ -0.045‡       -0.038‡
                                      (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)   (0.004)     (0.004)    (0.003) (0.007)   (0.006)     (0.007)
                      X-OLS           -0.043‡ -0.041‡       -0.022‡   -0.037‡ -0.024‡        -0.022‡ -0.058‡ -0.045‡       -0.037‡
                                      (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.005)   (0.004)     (0.005)    (0.003) (0.007)   (0.006)     (0.007)
                      N                10,802     10,844     10,866    10,805     10,848      10,870  10,813   10,856       10,878
                      II. All Religion & no religion
                      X-OLS            -0.039‡     -0.042‡       -0.024‡       -0.033‡  -0.023‡     -0.022‡        -0.054‡ -0.048‡            -0.036‡
                                       (0.006)     (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.004)  (0.004)     (0.003)        (-0.178) (-0.154)          (-0.145)
                    N                   12,005      12,049        12,075        12,005   12,050      12,076         13,562       13,612        13,641
Note: R-OLS indicates the sample and covariates used in Mellor and Freeborn (2011) paper. X-OLS indicates for extra covariates: birth-weight, parental religiosity, county level
urbanization, and PVT score. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level are in parentheses. Linear probability regression models are used with the sampling weights
provided in the survey. All models include the full set of adolescent, parent, household, area, and school level explanatory variables. ‡1%, †5%, *10%. Xs: religious affiliation
dummies (Catholic, Mod. Protestants etc.), age, gender, race, household size, family income, parental education, parental age, presence of biological mother and father, Cigarette
tax at the county level, median income, density measure of county, own race density measure, same age density measures, regional dummies, school size and type dummies, school
level measure of proportional of smokers, and drug and alcohol expulsion policies. The last panel provides results which include all those who belong to non-Judeo-Christian
religious denominations as well as those who report to not belonging to any religion.




                                                                                         30
                            Table 3: OLS and Family Fixed Effects Estimates of the Effects of Religion on
                            Risky Health Behaviors at Different Stages of Young Adults since their
                            Adolescence
                                                 Smoking                              Binge Drinking                      Marijuana Use
                            Variable      W1        W3                W4           W1      W3        W4                W1      W3       W4
                            I. Religious Attendance
                            X-OLS         -0.039‡      -0.044‡      -0.030‡      -0.034‡      -0.016    -0.024†      -0.021‡      -0.036‡      -0.026‡
                                          (0.008)      (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.008)      (0.010)   (0.010)      (0.006)      (0.010)      (0.008)
                            FFE           -0.034*       -0.017       -0.005      -0.053‡      0.038*     -0.011       -0.013       0.002        -0.009
                                          (0.017)      (0.021)      (0.024)      (0.018)      (0.021)   (0.026)      (0.014)      (0.021)      (0.019)

                            II. Frequency of Prayers
                            X-OLS       -0.026‡    -0.037‡          -0.035‡      -0.029‡      -0.008    -0.021†      -0.014‡      -0.018†      -0.013*
                                        (0.007)    (0.008)          (0.008)      (0.007)      (0.008)   (0.009)      (0.006)      (0.008)      (0.007)
                            FFE         -0.033‡    -0.043‡          -0.050‡      -0.040‡      -0.019    -0.034*       -0.013       -0.022       -0.010
                                        (0.012)    (0.016)          (0.019)      (0.013)      (0.017)   (0.018)      (0.011)      (0.016)      (0.015)
                            N            3,066      2,516            2,540        3,076        2,505     2,548         3,081        2,520        2,558
                            III. Importance of Religion
                            X-OLS         -0.048‡      -0.053‡      -0.042‡      -0.048‡      -0.015    -0.033‡      -0.023‡      -0.023†      -0.035‡
                                          (0.009)      (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.009)      (0.010)   (0.010)      (0.007)      (0.010)      (0.009)
                            FFE           -0.058‡      -0.049†      -0.036*      -0.048‡      -0.026     -0.014       -0.009       -0.023       -0.011
                                          (0.015)      (0.020)      (0.021)      (0.015)      (0.020)   (0.021)      (0.013)      (0.021)      (0.019)
                            N              3,066        2,516        2,540        3,076        2,505      2,548        3,081        2,520        2,558
Note: All specifications include a set of extra covariates: birth-weight, parental religiosity, county level urbanization and own religion adherent-based density measures, and PVT
score. Robust standard errors clustered at the family level are in parentheses. Linear probability regression models are used with the sampling weights provided in the survey. FFE
stands for family fixed effects. All models include the full set of adolescent, parent, household, area, and school level explanatory variables. ‡1%, †5%, *10%. Xs: religious
affiliation dummies (Catholic, Mod. Protestants etc.), age, gender, race, household size, family income, parental education, parental age, presence of biological mother and father,
Cigarette tax at the county level, median income, density measure of county, own race density measure, same age density measures, regional dummies, school size and type
dummies, school level measure of proportional of smokers, and drug and alcohol expulsion policies. The last panel provides results with Importance of religiosity, a self-reported
measure of degree of religiosity.




                                                                                         31
                                                       Table 4: Illicit Drug Use in Wave 3 and Wave 4
                                                                     Wave 3                                         Wave 4
                                       variable      (1)          (2)       (3)            (4)          (5)            (6)             (7)
                                                   Cocaine       Meth    Other            Risk         Any           Not in           Risk
                                                                          drugs           pref.       illicit       excellent         pref.
                                                                                                      drugs          health
                                       I. Religious Attendance
                                       X-OLS        -0.013†     -0.014‡     -0.023‡     -0.017*      -0.017‡          -0.006         -0.007
                                                    (0.006)     (0.005)     (0.007)     (0.010)      (0.006)          (0.009)        (0.010)
                                       FFE           0.008      -0.020†      -0.007      -0.038       -0.005          -0.012         -0.006
                                                    (0.013)     (0.009)     (0.014)     (0.025)      (0.014)          (0.022)        (0.025)
                                       II. Frequency of Prayers
                                       X-OLS      -0.003     -0.005         -0.009      -0.016†       -0.005         -0.014*         -0.001
                                                  (0.005) (0.004)           (0.006)     (0.008)       (0.005)        (0.007)         (0.008)
                                       FFE        -0.001    -0.022‡         -0.003       -0.001       -0.005         -0.030*          0.022
                                                  (0.010) (0.007)           (0.013)     (0.017)       (0.012)        (0.016)         (0.019)
                                       III. Importance of Religion
                                       X-OLS        -0.014†     -0.018‡     -0.025‡     -0.019*       -0.006          -0.013          0.002
                                                    (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.009)     (0.010)       (0.006)        (0.009)         (0.010)
                                       FFE           0.004      -0.014*      -0.010      -0.029       -0.000         -0.039†         0.048†
                                                    (0.011)     (0.008)     (0.014)     (0.019)       (0.015)        (0.017)         (0.020)
                                       N             2,825       2,823        2,820       2,860        2,917           2,919          2,911
Note: All specifications include a set of extra covariates: birth-weight, parental religiosity, county level urbanization and own religion adherent-based density measures, and PVT
score. Robust standard errors clustered at the family level are in parentheses. Linear probability regression models are used with the sampling weights provided in the survey. FFE
stands for family fixed effects. All models include the full set of adolescent, parent, household, area, and school level explanatory variables. ‡1%, †5%, *10%. Xs: religious
affiliation dummies (Catholic, Mod. Protestants etc.), age, gender, race, household size, family income, parental education, parental age, presence of biological mother and father,
Cigarette tax at the county level, median income, density measure of county, own race density measure, same age density measures, regional dummies, school size and type
dummies, school level measure of proportional of smokers, and drug and alcohol expulsion policies. Cols. 1-4 belongs to measures from Wave 3; while 5-7 from Wave 4. The last
panel provides results with Importance of religiosity, a self-reported measure of degree of religiosity.




                                                                                         32
                                                         Table 5: Falsification Tests I
                                                         Variable Headache             Cold          Birth         Height
                                                                    (W1)               Sweat         Weight        (W4)
                                                                                       (W1)          (W1)
                                                         I. Religious Attendance
                                                         X-OLS       -0.012*       0.003             -14.461        0.045
                                                                     (0.007)      (0.008)            (10.851)      (0.168)
                                                         FFE          0.012       -0.019             -15.454        0.012
                                                                     (0.015)      (0.019)            (17.690)      (0.335)
                                                         II. Frequency of Prayers
                                                         X-OLS        -0.003       0.007              -9.103        0.136
                                                                     (0.006)      (0.006)             (9.217)      (0.131)
                                                         FFE           0.015       0.005              -2.396        0.186
                                                                     (0.011)      (0.014)            (13.486)      (0.223)
                                                         III. Importance of Religion
                                                         X-OLS         -0.010          0.000         -10.678       -0.116
                                                                       (0.007)        (0.008)        (11.239)      (0.172)
                                                         FFE           -0.001         -0.018          -4.909        0.283
                                                                       (0.012)        (0.016)        (13.889)      (0.343)
                                                         N              3,510          3,509           3,510        2,900

Note: All specifications include a set of extra covariates: birth-weight, parental religiosity, county level urbanization and own religion adherent-based density measures, and PVT
score. Robust standard errors clustered at the family level are in parentheses. Linear probability regression models are used with the sampling weights provided in the survey. FFE
stands for family fixed effects. All models include the full set of adolescent, parent, household, area, and school level explanatory variables. ‡1%, †5%, *10%. Xs: religious
affiliation dummies (Catholic, Mod. Protestants etc.), age, gender, race, household size, family income, parental education, parental age, presence of biological mother and father,
Cigarette tax at the county level, median income, density measure of county, own race density measure, same age density measures, regional dummies, school size and type
dummies, school level measure of proportional of smokers, and drug and alcohol expulsion policies. The last panel provides results with Importance of religiosity, a self-reported
measure of degree of religiosity.




                                                                                         33
                        Table 6: Falsification Tests II
                                                        Neuroticism (Wave 1 )                                      Conscientiousness (Wave 1)
                                   (1)      (2)            (3)        (4)             (5)         (6)          (7)       (8)        (9)       (10)
                        I. Religious Attendance
                        OLS      0.031†       0.032†      0.042†        0.021      0.046‡       0.039‡       0.025        0.014      0.042†        0.014
                                 (0.013)      (0.014)     (0.018)      (0.017)     (0.015)      (0.014)     (0.017)      (0.015)     (0.017)      (0.016)
                        FFE       0.013        0.009       0.029        0.047      0.087‡        0.023       0.058       0.059*      0.114‡       0.056*
                                 (0.030)      (0.030)     (0.043)      (0.039)     (0.031)      (0.028)     (0.037)      (0.032)     (0.038)      (0.032)
                        II. Frequency of Prayers
                        OLS      0.044‡       0.056‡      0.026*       0.034†      0.039‡       0.051‡      0.066‡       0.049‡      0.042‡       0.053‡
                                 (0.010)      (0.012)     (0.015)      (0.014)     (0.012)      (0.012)     (0.014)      (0.013)     (0.014)      (0.013)
                        FFE      0.043†       0.047†      -0.052        0.025      -0.003        0.025      0.066†        0.032       0.036       0.044*
                                 (0.020)      (0.024)     (0.033)      (0.028)     (0.022)      (0.025)     (0.027)      (0.027)     (0.028)      (0.024)
                        III. Importance of Religion
                        OLS      0.055‡       0.073‡      0.060‡       0.061‡      0.055‡       0.078‡      0.088‡       0.075‡      0.095‡       0.077‡
                                 (0.013)      (0.014)     (0.018)      (0.017)     (0.014)      (0.015)     (0.017)      (0.016)     (0.018)      (0.016)
                        FFE      0.056†       0.054†       0.028        0.051       0.045       0.051*      0.058*       0.091‡      0.086‡       0.080‡
                                 (0.022)      (0.026)     (0.036)      (0.031)     (0.028)      (0.029)     (0.032)      (0.030)     (0.032)      (0.027)
                        N         3,077        3,078       3,079        3,080       3,077        3,077       3,069        3,068       3,065        3,073
Note: All specifications include a set of extra covariates: birth-weight, parental religiosity, county level urbanization and own religion adherent-based density measures, and PVT
score. Robust standard errors clustered at the family level are in parentheses. Linear probability regression models are used with the sampling weights provided in the survey. FFE
stands for family fixed effects. All models include the full set of adolescent, parent, household, area, and school level explanatory variables. ‡1%, †5%, *10%. Xs: religious
affiliation dummies (Catholic, Mod. Protestants etc.), age, gender, race, household size, family income, parental education, parental age, presence of biological mother and father,
Cigarette tax at the county level, median income, density measure of county, own race density measure, same age density measures, regional dummies, school size and type
dummies, school level measure of proportional of smokers, and drug and alcohol expulsion policies. Columns 1-6 include factors that go into measures of Neuroticism; Columns
7-10 include factors that go into measuring Conscientiousness. The last panel provides results with Importance of religiosity, a self-reported measure of degree of religiosity.




                                                                                        34
Appendix 1: Monozygotic Twins Subsample

                        (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)            (7)             (8)            (9)
                    smokew1     smokew3 smokew4 bingew1 bingew3 bingew4 marijuanaw1 marijuanaw3 marijuanaw4
IA. Religious Attendance: OLS
X-OLS                -0.064†     -0.086‡       -0.045       -0.037     -0.031      0.006         -0.075‡         -0.064†         -0.004
                     (0.026)     (0.032)      (0.028)      (0.024)    (0.031)     (0.031)        (0.022)         (0.030)        (0.023)
IB. Religious Attendance: Family Fixed Effects
FE                    -0.012       0.012        0.058      -0.083*     0.065       0.075          0.040           0.101          -0.003
                     (0.038)     (0.037)      (0.059)      (0.048)    (0.063)     (0.073)        (0.033)         (0.068)        (0.028)
Observations           324          270          273         325        269         275            326             270            275
IIA. Frequency of Prayers: OLS
X-OLS                -0.061‡     -0.103‡      -0.062‡       -0.025     -0.020      0.025         -0.046†          -0.017         0.009
                     (0.022)     (0.022)      (0.021)      (0.020)    (0.023)     (0.023)        (0.019)         (0.024)        (0.022)
IIB. Frequency of Prayers: Family Fixed Effects
FE                    -0.030       0.018       -0.058       0.049      -0.050      0.018          0.014           -0.064         -0.034
                     (0.037)     (0.043)      (0.043)      (0.039)    (0.060)     (0.067)        (0.013)         (0.067)        (0.023)
                       324          270          273         325        269         275            326             270            275
IIIA. Religiosity: OLS
X-OLS                -0.061‡     -0.094‡      -0.060‡      -0.049‡     -0.033      -0.004        -0.071‡         -0.051†         0.000
                     (0.019)     (0.021)      (0.022)      (0.018)    (0.022)     (0.023)        (0.016)         (0.022)        (0.018)
IIIB. Religiosity: Family Fixed Effects
FE                   -0.062*      -0.021       -0.040       -0.034     0.039       0.029          0.028           -0.067         -0.027
                     (0.036)     (0.056)      (0.062)      (0.030)    (0.055)     (0.070)        (0.027)         (0.060)        (0.028)
                       368          308          310         369        306         312            370             308            312
Note: All specifications include a set of extra covariates: birth-weight, parental religiosity, county level urbanization and own religion
adherent-based density measures, and PVT score. Robust standard errors clustered at the family level are in parentheses. Linear
probability regression models are used with the sampling weights provided in the survey. FFE stands for family fixed effects. All
models include the full set of adolescent, parent, household, area, and school level explanatory variables. ‡1%, †5%, *10%. Xs:
religious affiliation dummies (Catholic, Mod. Protestants etc.), age, gender, race, household size, family income, parental education,
parental age, presence of biological mother and father, Cigarette tax at the county level, median income, density measure of county,
own race density measure, same age density measures, regional dummies, school size and type dummies, school level measure of
proportional of smokers, and drug and alcohol expulsion policies. Columns 1-6 include factors that go into measures of Neuroticism;
Columns 7-10 include factors that go into measuring Conscientiousness. The last panel provides results with Importance of
religiosity, a self-reported measure of degree of religiosity.




                                                                   35
                                                    Appendix 2: Gelbach’s (2009) decomposition of
                                                    the effects of religiosity Into Standard
                                                    Covariates, Additional Covariates, and Family
                                                    Components
                                                                                                 Full Specification
                                                                                                         Standard
                                                    Smoking in Wave 1                         Explained Error
                                                    Changes in the Effect of
                                                                                                -0.02225         0.067069
                                                    Religiosity

                                                    Covariates
                                                    Standard Covariates                        -0.00756          0.051581
                                                    Additional Covariates                      0.003621          0.097048
                                                    Family Components                          -0.01831          0.026983
Base model contains no exogenous covariates. Full model covariates are religious affiliation dummies (Catholic, Mod. Protestants etc.), age, gender, race, household size, family
income, parental education, parental age, presence of biological mother and father, Cigarette tax at the county level, median income, density measure of county, own race density
measure, same age density measures, regional dummies, school size and type dummies, school level measure of proportional of smokers, and drug and alcohol expulsion policies,
and dummies for each family. Standard Covariates include the variables in included in Mellor and Freeborn (2011); Additional Covariates includes Child-weight, PVT score,
Proportion of adherents in a county belonging to the same religion as the respondent, Parental Religiosity, Proportion of Urban Population.




                                                                                       36
