                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE, LABOR SUPPLY, AND EMPLOYMENT LOCK

                                        Craig Garthwaite
                                           Tal Gross
                                     Matthew J. Notowidigdo

                                       Working Paper 19220
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19220


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2013




We thank David Autor, Jen Brown, Eric Budish, Meghan Busse, Phil Ellis, Sherry Glied, John Graves,
Jon Gruber, Amy Finkelstein, Matt Gentzkow, Nathan Hendren, Larry Katz, Lee Lockwood, Enrico
Moretti, Casey Mulligan, Emily Oster, Karl Scholz, Jesse Shapiro, Jon Skinner, Ann Stevens, Heidi
Williams, and seminar participants at the Kellogg School of Management, the University of Chicago
Booth School of Business, and the University of Illinois for helpful comments. We also thank Gordon
Bonnyman of the Tennessee Justice Center for providing important insight into institutional details
of the TennCare expansion. Mark He and Angela Li provided helpful research assistance. Notowidigdo
gratefully acknowledges the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School
of Business and the James S. Kemper Foundation Faculty Research Fund at the University of Chicago
Booth School of Business for generous financial support. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Craig Garthwaite, Tal Gross, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Public Health Insurance, Labor Supply, and Employment Lock
Craig Garthwaite, Tal Gross, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo
NBER Working Paper No. 19220
July 2013
JEL No. I13,J20

                                              ABSTRACT

We study the effect of public health insurance eligibility on labor supply by exploiting the largest public
health insurance disenrollment in the history of the United States. In 2005, approximately 170,000
Tennessee residents abruptly lost public health insurance coverage. Using both across- and within-state
variation in exposure to the disenrollment, we estimate large increases in labor supply, primarily along
the extensive margin. The increased employment is concentrated among individuals working at least
20 hours per week and receiving private, employer-provided health insurance. We explore the dynamic
effects of the disenrollment and find an immediate increase in job search behavior and a steady rise
in both employment and health insurance coverage following the disenrollment. Our results suggest
a significant degree of “employment lock” – workers employed primarily in order to secure private
health insurance coverage. The results also suggest that the Affordable Care Act – which similarly
affects adults not traditionally eligible for public health insurance – may cause large reductions in
the labor supply of low-income adults.


Craig Garthwaite                                     Matthew J. Notowidigdo
Department of Management and Strategy                University of Chicago
Kellogg School of Management                         Booth School of Business
Northwestern University                              5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
2001 Sheridan Road                                   Chicago, IL 60637
Evanston, IL 60208                                   and NBER
and NBER                                             noto@chicagobooth.edu
c-garthwaite@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Tal Gross
Department of Health Policy and Management
School of Public Health
Columbia University
600 West 168th Street, Sixth Floor
New York, NY 10032
and NBER
tg2370@columbia.edu
1. INTRODUCTION
The United States is unique among industrialized countries in its tight linkage between health

insurance and employment. Government health insurance programs cover the disabled, low-income

parents, and those older than 65, but few other adults qualify for public coverage. Americans without

access to public or employer-provided insurance can purchase health insurance through the

individual, non-group market, but that market is believed to face adverse-selection pressures

(Hackman, et al., 2013; Hendren, 2013). As a result, many Americans can only access affordable

health insurance through their employer, and thus expansions of public health insurance can have

large effects on the labor market.

    The 2010 Affordable Care Act (ACA) is the largest public health insurance expansion since the

creation of the “Great Society” programs in the 1960s. The ACA will weaken the link between

employment and health insurance through the creation of a series of state-based individual insurance

exchanges. An individual mandate will require that nearly all individuals purchase health insurance,

which may relieve adverse-selection pressures. Additionally, low-income individuals participating in

the exchanges will receive large tax subsidies, and those earning less than 138 percent of the poverty

line regardless of their family or disability status are expected to receive public health insurance

through a large Medicaid expansion.

    Few empirical estimates exist that can help policymakers and economists predict the labor market

impacts of a reform such as the ACA. 1 Previous studies focus primarily on the disincentives for work

created by Medicaid’s strict earnings limits, restrictions that are effectively removed under the ACA

(Yelowitz, 1995; Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2000). Other studies focus on the relationship between

health insurance and job mobility or retirement but are unable to examine how the availability of

heavily subsidized health insurance might affect these outcomes (Madrian, 1994; Gruber and

Madrian, 1997). Additionally, previous studies of public health insurance focus (by necessity) on

1 Currie and Madrian (1999) and Gruber and Madrian (2004) summarize the existing research on employment and health
insurance.


                                                        1
traditional Medicaid beneficiaries such as pregnant women, women receiving cash welfare, and

children in low-income families (Dave et al., 2013). By contrast, the ACA will primarily affect non-

disabled, childless adults and relatively higher-income families (Kenney et al., 2012). Very little is

known about how this distinct sub-population will react to changes in public health insurance

eligibility.

    In this paper, we exploit a unique policy reform in Tennessee to estimate the effect of public

health insurance eligibility on the labor supply of childless adults. In 2005, Tennessee discontinued its

expansion of TennCare, the state’s Medicaid system. The TennCare disenrollment was the largest

public health insurance disenrollment in the history of the United States. Approximately 170,000

adults (roughly 4 percent of the state’s non-elderly, adult population) abruptly lost public health

insurance coverage over a three-month period.

    We exploit both across- and within-state variation in exposure to the disenrollment. First, we use

the sharp change in eligibility in Tennessee to estimate difference-in-difference models, which

compare outcomes in Tennessee after the disenrollment to outcomes in Tennessee before the

disenrollment and to other states in the American south. Second, we note that the disenrollment

disproportionately affected a particular sub-population – childless adults – which was unaffected by

policy changes in other states. We exploit this fact to estimate triple-difference models which

compare outcomes among childless adults in Tennessee to other adults in Tennessee before and after

the disenrollment. The disproportionate effect of the disenrollment on childless adults allows us to

focus on a policy-relevant sub-population that has received little attention in the existing literature on

public health insurance eligibility. Relative to previous work, we believe that the sudden policy change

and large scale of the policy reform leads to especially transparent results. In particular, most of our

results are plainly evident in aggregate time-series data.

    We find that the TennCare disenrollment caused a large and immediate labor supply increase.

The increased employment is concentrated among individuals working more than 20 hours per week



                                                     2
and who report having private, employer-provided health insurance. Indeed, we find a similarly large

increase in private health insurance following the disenrollment, suggesting that public health

insurance had been “crowding out” private health insurance (Cutler and Gruber, 1996). When we

explore the dynamic effects of the disenrollment, we find an immediate increase in job search

behavior and a steady rise in both employment and health insurance coverage. The pattern of

changes in labor supply and the crowdout behavior suggest that disenrollees entered the labor market

and gained employment in order to procure health insurance. This finding is consistent with both

large valuations of health insurance as well as strong work disincentives from public health insurance

that are unrelated to strict income-based eligibility limits.

    Overall, our results demonstrate that public health insurance eligibility can have large effects on

the labor market. Additionally, our estimates may provide useful guidance regarding the likely labor

supply impacts of the ACA. As discussed above, both TennCare and the ACA target demographic

groups not traditionally eligible for public health insurance, such as adults without dependents and

with incomes above the federal poverty line. Additionally, unlike traditional Medicaid programs, as

beneficiaries in the TennCare expansion program earned additional income, their insurance

premiums and copayments increased, but they did not lose coverage. 2 Similarly, under the ACA,

individuals in health insurance exchanges will experience decreased subsidies as their income

increases. Appendix Table A1 presents TennCare premiums in 2004 and estimated ACA exchange

premiums. These premiums are very similar across the programs.

    Because of the broad similarities between the two programs, in the final section of this paper we

extrapolate from our estimates in order to assess the likely labor market impacts of the ACA.

Applying our labor supply estimates nationally, we estimate that the ACA may have significant effects

on the labor supply of low-income workers with employer-provided insurance who are not currently


2 In addition, to remain eligible for TennCare, individuals in the expansion population had to be ineligible for group
health coverage from another source. Again, this is similar to the ACA, where in order to qualify for tax subsidies in the
non-group insurance exchanges, individuals have to be ineligible for affordable coverage (less than 9.5 percent of income)
from their employer.


                                                            3
eligible for free or heavily subsidized health insurance. Our results suggest that ACA-related

decreases in labor supply among this group of low-income workers could reduce the aggregate

employment rate by between 0.3 and 0.6 percentage points. Importantly, this predicted reduction

would be driven by changes in labor supply and therefore would not necessarily imply a welfare loss

for individuals choosing to exit the labor force. Additionally, considerable caution should be

exercised in interpreting these predictions, and we provide a number of important caveats below.

However, our findings suggest that institutional features of health insurance in the US can cause a

phenomenon we call “employment lock.” 3 This occurs when individuals supply labor primarily to

secure private health insurance through an employer. If such individuals could instead acquire

affordable health insurance apart from their employer, many of them would exit the labor force

entirely. As a result of employment lock, policies that expand access to health insurance apart from

employers (such as the ACA) may have large labor market effects.

    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes Tennessee’s Medicaid

program and the particular policy change that we study. Section 3 discusses the previous literature.

Section 4 describes the data sources we use in our analysis. Section 5 describes the effects of the

disenrollment on labor supply and health insurance coverage. Finally, Section 6 uses our results to

assess the likely consequences of the ACA on labor markets and concludes.



2. TENNESSEE’S HEALTH CARE REFORM
In the late 1980s, Tennessee, like many other states, expanded its Medicaid program to include low-

income pregnant women and their children. Those expansions, and rising healthcare costs more

generally, resulted in dramatic growth in Tennessee’s Medicaid spending. From 1988 to 1994,




3We use the term “employment lock” rather than “job lock”, since a large literature uses the latter to indicate the role of
employer-provided health insurance on reduced job mobility. By contrast, we focus on the role of employer-provided
health insurance on the decision to work at all.


                                                             4
Medicaid expenditures in Tennessee increased from approximately $692 million to nearly $2.7 billion

(Chang and Steinberg, 2009).

    In 1994, facing a primarily Medicaid-driven budget deficit of approximately $250 million,

Tennessee enacted health care reform designed to simultaneously control costs and expand coverage

(Wright, 2001). Under a waiver from the US Department of Health and Human Services, Tennessee

enrolled all existing Medicaid recipients in managed care insurance plans. The state used the planned

savings from these managed care contracts to fund a novel public health insurance expansion aimed

at individuals, regardless of income, that were either “uninsured” or “uninsurable.” 4

    The lack of a specific income requirement makes this reform particularly unique. To our

knowledge, all previous expansions of public health insurance have placed strict limits on the total

income qualified beneficiaries can earn. As a result, many TennCare expansion program enrollees had

unusually high incomes for adults receiving public health insurance. In 1995, approximately 40

percent of enrollees in the TennCare expansion program had incomes above 100 percent of the

poverty line, with 6.3 percent having incomes between 200 and 400 percent and 1.3 percent have

incomes above 400 percent of the poverty line (Wooldridge et al., 1996).

    The demographics of the TennCare expansion population were also markedly different from

traditional Medicaid beneficiaries in Tennessee. Individuals in the expansion program were far more

likely to be white and between the ages of 21 and 64 than traditional Medicaid enrollees. Reflecting

back on the purposes of the program, the Executive Director of the Kaiser Commission on Medicaid

and the Uninsured said “TennCare was bold, it was comprehensive, it looked at the whole low-

income population and was seen by many as a model for how we might provide coverage to the low-

income population, especially by bringing in childless adults who historically have never been eligible




4In order to avoid gaming of the system, the state required that individuals attempting to qualify for the coverage as
“uninsured” on January 1, 1994, had to be uninsured as of March 1, 1993. To qualify as “uninsurable,” individuals had to
submit documentation demonstrating that they were previously denied private health insurance coverage (Moreno and
Hoag, 2001).


                                                           5
for Medicaid” (Rowland, 2005). Similarly, Wooldridge et al. (1996) said that the TennCare expansion

opened Medicaid up to “able-bodied” adults regardless of family status.

    The 1994 TennCare expansion faced financial difficulties that foreshadowed its ultimate

unraveling. By 2001, the system faced a budget shortfall of over $300 million (Chang and Steinberg,

2009). In 2002, Phil Bredesen, a former managed care executive, was elected as the Governor of

Tennessee on a platform of reforming TennCare. At the time he said, “[e]verybody in the state of

Tennessee knows somebody on TennCare they don’t think should be on TennCare. It needs to be

the bronze package, not the platinum package” (National Journal, 2010).

    In 2002, a modified TennCare waiver changed the eligibility of the uninsurable category to

require a medical review of “insurability” rather than just a letter stating that private coverage had

been previously denied. The Bureau of TennCare also began a process of “re-verification” in which

all TennCare enrollees were required to schedule appointments to determine if they remained eligible

for benefits (Kaiser Health News, 2002). The vast majority of individuals who responded to the

request retained coverage. However, nearly 200,000 individuals did not respond and were

immediately removed from the Medicaid rolls (TennCare Quarterly Report, 2003). As part of a court

settlement, these individuals received an extended grace period to demonstrate eligibility that resulted

in many re-qualifying for benefits (Ruble, 2003).

    Figure 1 presents quarterly enrollment counts for both the entire TennCare system and the

Uninsured and Uninsurable category from 2002 through 2009. Two primary impacts of the 2002 re-

verification process can be seen during the earliest quarters in the graph. First, in early 2003,

approximately 100,000 people were removed from the Medicaid rolls. Most of these individuals had

not responded to repeated requests for re-verification despite the threat of lost coverage. Thus it is

unlikely that these individuals were frequent users of TennCare-covered medical services. 5 Second,

5
  Suggestive evidence of this lack of medical expenditures can be found in TennCare enrollment and expenditure data. In
the last quarter of 2002 TennCare Spending was approximately $890 million for 1.4 million enrollees. In the last quarter
of 2003, there were 1.3 million remaining enrollees but spending increased to $1.1 billion. In stark contrast on July 15,
2005 there were 1.35 million enrollees and quarterly expenditures were $1.3 billion. By July 15, 2006, enrollments fell to


                                                            6
the distribution of enrollees by category shifted. Approximately 20 percent of TennCare enrollees

moved from the expansion population to traditional Medicaid. Following re-verification, overall

TennCare enrollments remained fairly stable at approximately 1.3 million, with everyone in the

expansion category being unable to qualify for traditional Medicaid coverage either as a result of their

income level or categorical restrictions such as being a childless adult. Appendix Figure A1 presents

annual enrollment levels by eligibility category from 1996 through 2009.

    In November 2004, Governor Bredesen announced that TennCare would cease to cover adults

over the age of 19 who didn’t qualify for traditional Medicaid (Chang and Steinberg, 2009). 6 Over the

next several months there was great debate in the press and courts about whether the disenrollment

would actually occur. Beginning in the late July 2005, Tennessee disenrolled individuals over the age

of 19 who only qualified for coverage in an expansion category. On January 15, 2005, TennCare had

approximately 1,337,000 enrollees, on January 15, 2006 enrollment was reduced to approximately

1,200,000 and on January 15, 2007 there were approximately 1,170,000 TennCare beneficiaries. These

reductions came almost entirely from the expansion population, which fell from approximately

223,000 enrollees to 35,000 over this period. Given the earlier re-verification process, few of these

individuals were able to re-qualify for traditional Medicaid and permanently lost public health

insurance coverage. On January 15, 2009 the TennCare population remained at approximately

1,170,000.

    As a result of the disenrollment, approximately 4 percent of the non-elderly adult population of

Tennessee lost insurance coverage over a period of several months. The disenrollment changed the



1.2 million and quarterly expenditures fell to $950 million, a 30 percent decrease. Provider payments excluding
pharmaceutical expenditures fell by 14 percent over that time period.
6 At the same time, there was also a reduction in certain services for the remaining enrollees. Perhaps the most significant

reduction in benefits for those retaining coverage affected the generosity of prescription drug coverage. In 2004, these
drugs accounted for 33 percent of overall TennCare spending. Effective August 1, 2005, TennCare beneficiaries retaining
coverage were limited to 5 prescription drug refills per month of which no more than 2 could be brand name medications
(Blue Cross Blue Shield, 2005). From 2005 to 2006, total TennCare spending fell by approximately $1.7 billion, with
nearly $1.23 billion of this reduction coming from reduced pharmacy payments. After the reform, prescription drugs
accounted for only 21 percent of overall TennCare expenditures (TennCare Annual Report, 2005).



                                                             7
ability of certain categories of enrollees to receive coverage at any income level. According to the

Tennessee Justice Center, which organized many of the legal challenges to the disenrollment, “most

working adults cannot qualify [for TennCare]. Non-disabled childless adults under 65 cannot get

TennCare, no matter how poor they are. Many parents whose children have turned 18 are also unable

to get TennCare” (Tennessee Justice Center, 2012).

    The 2005 TennCare disenrollment was the largest decrease in publicly provided insurance

coverage in American history. 7 A similar decrease in insurance coverage for the entire United States

would have involved approximately 8.4 million people. By comparison, 5.5 million Americans lost

insurance coverage during the “Great Recession” (DeNavas-Walt et al., 2012).

    Despite the size of the TennCare disenrollment, it remains a relatively understudied

phenomenon. In the economics literature, to our knowledge, no authors have examined this policy

change. Outside of economics, Emerson et al. (2012) examine the impact of the disenrollment on

emergency room utilization in Davidson County. They find an increase in the use of emergency room

services by uninsured patients after the disenrollment compared to prior to the policy change. The

authors also document an increase in bad debt write-offs for these facilities. Similarly, Hearvin et al.

(2011) find a small decrease in the total number of emergency room visits before and after the

disenrollment. Along with this small decrease, there was a large shift in the payer-mix of emergency

department visits in favor of uninsured patients.

    Finally, Farrar et al. (2007) conduct focus groups and examine health care utilization for a sample

of providers before and after the TennCare cuts. From 2004 to 2005, there was a 1.5 percent

decrease in the percentage of uninsured patients in the emergency department at these facilities. By


7
  Two other contractions were relatively large but still smaller than the policy change examined in this paper. In 2005,
Missouri implemented a large cutback that affected approximately 100,000 enrollees or 1.6 percent of the state
population. Importantly, this involved the reduction of generosity from a more traditional Medicaid program. Family
eligibility for Medicaid was reduced from 75 percent of the poverty line to the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
income levels of 17 – 22 percent of income after accounting for disregards (Zuckerman et al., 2009). In 2002, as
TennCare re-verified the eligibility of enrollees there was a short-term disenrollment of approximately 128,000
individuals. Unlike the permanent disenrollment studied in this paper, the following year over half of these individuals
were back on Medicaid. These patterns are depicted in Appendix Figure A1.


                                                            8
contrast, from 2005 to 2006, there was a 25 percent increase in the number of uninsured patients

treated in the emergency room. In a focus group of health care providers, one respondent reported:

“[i]t’s not that we’re seeing more people, I believe it’s the same people who used to be insured and

now are not.”

    In contrast to the TennCare disenrollment, two other recent changes in public health insurance

have received more attention in the economics literature: the 2006 Massachusetts Health Reform and

the 2008 Oregon Medicaid Expansion. In 2006, Massachusetts enacted a broad health reform

intended to achieve universal coverage. This included an individual mandate, an employer mandate, a

Medicaid expansion, a state-based insurance exchange, and tax subsidies for low-income individuals.

These reforms increased the percentage of the population insured from 88.2 percent in 2004–2005 to

93.8 percent in 2008–2009 (Kolstad and Kowalski, 2012a). A series of authors have examined the

impacts of these reforms on health outcomes and the use of medical services (Kolstad and Kowalski,

2012a; Miller, 2012; Courtemanche and Zapata, 2012). More closely related to this work is that of

Kolstad and Kowalski (2012b), who examine the effect of the reform on wages and find reductions

in wages that are approximately equal to the value of employer-provided health insurance.

    In 2008, Oregon initiated a period of open enrollment in their Medicaid expansion program for

non-categorically eligible individuals aged 19–64 with incomes below 100 percent of the poverty line

and assets below $2,000. Given that the demand for the Oregon expansion would likely exceed

supply, state officials created a lottery for enrollees. Finkelstein et al. (2012) and Baicker et al. (2013)

use this lottery to identify the causal effect of health insurance on both self-reported and objective

outcomes. To date, these authors have not systematically examined the impact of this reform on

labor market outcomes.

    Relative to these other reforms, the TennCare disenrollment affected a different population.

Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the populations affected by the reforms in Tennessee,

Massachusetts, Oregon, as well as predictions for the likely beneficiaries of the ACA Medicaid



                                                     9
expansions. 8 As would be expected, childless adults were disproportionately affected by the

TennCare disenrollment. Similarly, approximately 82 percent of those newly eligible for Medicaid

under the ACA are expected to be adults without children. By contrast, those newly on public

insurance in Massachusetts were roughly evenly split by childless status.

    Those affected by the TennCare disenrollment were generally older than the beneficiaries of the

ACA and the Massachusetts health reform. The age distribution in Tennessee was similar to those

affected by the Oregon Medicaid lottery. 9 In Tennessee, Oregon, and Massachusetts, the affected

individuals were slightly more likely to be female while those predicted to receive insurance under the

ACA are more likely to be male. Examining the racial breakdown of the affected population, those

affected in Tennessee, Massachusetts, and the ACA are similarly likely to be black. As a result of state

demographics, relatively few participants in the Oregon lottery were black. Similarly, there were very

few Hispanic individuals affected by the TennCare disenrollment.

    Taken together, these demographics suggest that the TennCare disenrollment can provide

information about the behavior of a group that is demographically similar to the individuals newly

eligible for Medicaid under the ACA. On some dimensions – particularly the presence of children in

the home – this empirical setting is more similar to the ACA than other previously studied reforms.



3. EXISTING LITERATURE ON THE IMPACT OF PUBLIC HEALTH
   INSURANCE ON LABOR SUPPLY
Most studies that examine the relationship between public health insurance eligibility and labor

supply find, at most, a weak relationship. Moffitt and Wolfe (1992) estimate that changes in Medicaid

availability alter the labor supply of female heads of household with the highest valuation of


8 The estimates for Tennessee and Massachusetts come from our calculations in the CPS based on changes in the publicly
insured population before and after the reform, while those for Oregon come from Finkelstein et al. (2012). The ACA
estimates are taken from Kenney et al. (2012).
9 The differences in ages likely result from the individual mandate to purchase insurance that was part of the

Massachusetts reform and the ACA. We explore the role of age in more detail below in our analysis of heterogeneous
treatment effects.


                                                         10
Medicaid. Similarly, Yelowitz (1995) examines the labor supply impact of Medicaid earnings eligibility

limits and finds small changes in labor supply caused by changes in Medicaid availability. Meyer and

Rosenbaum (2000) recalculate the AFDC income thresholds used in this earlier study and claim that

the labor supply effect is driven by AFDC and not Medicaid. In a survey article, Gruber and Madrian

(2004) argue that the literature has found, at most, a weak relationship between public health

insurance eligibility and labor supply. However, these authors also state that “the last word has clearly

not been written on this topic,” and suggest that new sources of variation may provide more insight

into the relationship.

    Previous work examining public health insurance and labor supply focused on settings in which

traditional Medicaid enrollees suffer a complete loss of coverage once they earn more than a

particular income threshold. This creates a “Medicaid notch” in enrollees’ budget sets. For example,

contemporaneous work by Dave et al. (2013) examines the labor supply decision of pregnant women

after the Medicaid expansions of the late 1980s and 1990s. Following these expansions, low-income

pregnant women had access to public health insurance as long as their income remained below

certain thresholds. Following the Medicaid expansion, these authors find decreased labor supply for

women who gave birth within the past year, with the largest effects for unmarried women with less

than a high school education.

    To our knowledge, all past expansions of Medicaid have involved an income-based criterion for

eligibility. As a result, previous studies have focused on the effect of Medicaid notches. And yet, large

notches are not created by more recent expansions, such as TennCare and the ACA. Under

TennCare, enrollees in the expansion population were exempt from Medicaid’s income thresholds. If

enrollees earned more than 100 percent of the poverty line, they retained their coverage and were

required to pay premiums on a sliding scale based on their earnings. Once enrollees earned more than

400 percent of the poverty line, their premium was unsubsidized, but was much less costly than

insurance purchased in the non-group market. In 1995, over 40 percent of the expansion population



                                                   11
was paying some premiums (Wooldridge et al., 1996). Similarly, under the ACA, as individuals earn

more than 138 percent of the poverty line, they must purchase heavily subsidized insurance coverage

through state-based exchanges. These subsidies continue until 400 percent of the poverty line, after

which coverage is unsubsidized

   Given that TennCare did not involve a Medicaid notch, the disenrollment isolates the effect of

access to health insurance rather than the effect of notch-related work disincentives. In this way, our

analysis also relates to the literature on health-insurance-driven “job lock.” Madrian (1994) finds that

access to employer-provided health insurance decreases the voluntary turnover rate by 25 percent.

Gruber and Madrian (1997) find that regulations allowing separated workers continued access to

health insurance increases the number of employment separations and the length of time spent

without employment. Similar to our results, these studies document a strong relationship between

overall access to health insurance and a variety of labor market outcomes.

   Public health insurance eligibility may affect labor supply if those who lose eligibility for public

insurance enter the labor market so that they can find private health insurance. In this sense, changes

in labor supply can partially explain how public health insurance crowds out private health insurance.

Beginning with Cutler and Gruber (1996), economists have debated the degree to which such

crowdout exists. Cutler and Gruber, along with a number of subsequent studies, found crowdout

estimates of roughly 50 percent, suggesting that half of the individuals who benefit from a public

health insurance expansion would otherwise have been covered in the private market (e.g. Cutler and

Gruber, 1996; LoSasso and Buchmueller, 2004; Gruber and Simon, 2008). Other studies have found

little evidence of crowdout (e.g. Card and Shore-Sheppard, 2004; Ham and Shore-Sheppard, 2005;

Levine, McKnight, and Heep, 2011). Gruber and Simon (2008) summarize this literature, which

contains crowdout estimates ranging from 0 to 60 percent, and demonstrate that previous crowdout

estimates are sensitive to the sample population and time period. Within this expansive literature, our




                                                  12
analysis is most closely related to recent work examining crowdout in the context of the

Massachusetts health reform by Kolstad and Kowalski (2012a).

    The uncertainty in the literature over crowdout has made it difficult to estimate the effects of

large policy changes such as the ACA. For example, a report by the Center for Budget and Policy

Priorities said, “[c]ontrary to claims by some critics, the Medicaid expansion in the new health reform

law will overwhelmingly provide coverage to people who otherwise would be uninsured, rather than

shift people who already have private coverage to Medicaid” (Broaddus and Angeles, 2010). In

contrast, an analysis for the State of Indiana by the Milliman consulting firm assumed crowdout rates

ranging from 50 to 100 percent (Damler, 2010). Given the demonstrated importance of the sample

and time period for estimating crowdout, few empirical estimates exist that can be used to evaluate

the behavior of the population receiving new public coverage under the ACA.

    To our knowledge, all pervious crowd-out studies, except for contemporaneous work by Dave et

al. (2013), ignore labor supply as a potential underlying mechanism for crowdout. For example,

Cutler and Gruber (1996) focus their analysis exclusively on the private health insurance status of

workers. Our results suggest that public health insurance expansions affect who works and therefore,

changes in labor supply are critical to fully understanding crowdout.



4. DATA
Our primary data on health insurance coverage and labor market outcomes come from the Current

Population Survey (CPS). The CPS is a monthly survey of approximately 50,000 households and it is

the primary data set for labor force characteristics of the US civilian, non-institutionalized population.

We use data from the March Annual Social and Economic Supplement of the CPS which contains

additional questions on the income, poverty, and health insurance status of respondents. We restrict

the CPS sample to individuals between ages 21 and 64 without an advanced degree. We use this




                                                   13
sample to determine whether an individual was insured, what form of health insurance coverage they

possessed, whether they were working, and the number of hours worked.

   Table 2 presents summary statistics from 2004 for Tennessee and all other Southern states. In

general, Tennessee is similar to the rest of the South. A notable and unsurprising exception is the

much larger share of the Tennessee population covered by public health insurance. This is likely a

result of the generosity of the TennCare expansion. Overall employment rates are also broadly

similar, with Tennessee having a slightly lower overall employment rate, more people working less

than 35 hours and fewer people working more than 35 hours a week. Childless adults compose a

similar share of the population in Tennessee versus the rest of the South. Racial composition and

education is also broadly similar between Tennessee and the rest of the South, with Tennessee’s

population being slightly less educated and more likely to be white.



5. THE EFFECT OF THE TENNCARE CUTS ON HEALTH INSURANCE
   COVERAGE AND LABOR SUPPLY

This section presents our main empirical results. We first study how the TennCare disenrollment

affected public health insurance coverage. We then examine changes in labor supply. In Section 5.3

we demonstrate how a preference for health insurance coverage partially explains the change in labor

supply, and in Section 5.4 we estimate the dynamics of the response. Finally, in Section 5.5 we

examine how changes in insurance coverage and labor supply varied by demographic group.


5.1. THE EFFECT OF THE TENNCARE DISENROLLMENT ON PUBLIC HEALTH
INSURANCE COVERAGE
To identify the causal effect of the disenrollment on public health insurance coverage, we first

estimate state-by-year difference-in-difference regressions of the following form:

                              yst  αs  δt  βI {s  TN } I {t  2006}  εst .                  (1)




                                                     14
The variable yst represents an outcome for state s and year t, such as the share of the population with

public health insurance coverage. The model includes state fixed effects (α), year fixed effects (δ), and

an error term (ε) that is assumed to be uncorrelated with other unobserved determinants of the

outcome variable.

     The key coefficient of interest is β, which is the difference-in-difference estimate of the effect of

the TennCare disenrollment. This coefficient is identified by comparing outcomes in Tennessee after

the disenrollment to outcomes in Tennessee before the disenrollment and to other Southern states. 10

The key identifying assumption is that outcomes in Tennessee would not have evolved differently to

other Southern states in the absence of the disenrollment. Below, we probe the validity of this

assumption by studying pre-existing time trends in the outcomes of interest.

     One concern with all cross-state analyses is that the results may be driven by large shocks such as

recessions or contemporaneous national policy changes that differentially affect some states. To

address such concerns, we restrict our analysis to the years between 2000 and 2007. This time period

provides two full years of data after the TennCare disenrollment, but avoids potential confounding

effects arising from the 2008 recession, which began in December of 2007 (National Bureau of

Economic Research, 2008).

     We begin by examining unadjusted sample means. Figure 2 presents the share of residents who

report having public health insurance in Tennessee and in other Southern states. Given the small cell

sizes arising from this disaggregation, we group CPS respondents into two-year bins. 11 From 2000–

2005, the percent of the population with public health insurance in Tennessee and other Southern

states were evolving similarly. In 2006, however, we observe a sudden break in trend for Tennessee,

with the share of Tennessee residents who report being publicly insured dropping by roughly 4


10 We use the United States Census Bureau definition of Southern states which includes Alabama, Arkansas, Delaware,
the District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, North Carolina, Oklahoma,
Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, South Carolina, and West Virginia. Panel B of Appendix Table A2 presents regression
estimates when the sample includes all states. These results are very similar to our baseline estimates.
11 The figure presents means by two-year bins for illustrative purposes. In the regression results that follow, the sample

always consists of annual observations.


                                                             15
percentage points. By contrast, there was little change in the share of publicly insured residents in

other Southern states.

     Panel A of Table 3 presents regression estimates of equation (1). The first column presents

regression estimates with the state-by-year mean public insurance coverage rate as the outcome of

interest. Following the TennCare disenrollment, public coverage rates in Tennessee decreased by a

statistically significant 4.6 percentage points compared to other Southern states. 12

     Such a pattern could be driven by Tennessee-specific shocks other than the 2005 TennCare

disenrollment. To examine the robustness of our results to such possible confounding factors, we

next exploit the fact that the disenrollment primarily targeted childless adults. 13 We would expect the

changes in coverage to be concentrated among these childless adults. This suggests a “triple-

difference” analysis, which compares childless adults in Tennessee to other adults in Tennessee

before and after the disenrollment. The triple-difference regression model we estimate takes the

following form:

             yist  γi  αs  γi  δt  αs  δt  βI {i  childless} I {s  TN } I {t  2006}  εst .                    (2)

The variable yist represents the outcome of interest for state s, in year t, and for demographic group i

(either childless adults or other adults). Additionally, the triple-difference model includes a full set of

state (α), year (δ), and demographic group (γ) fixed effects, and all of the two-way interactions

between each of the three sets of fixed effects. This specification controls for any unobservable

common shocks that affected all childless adults across the country in a given year as well as

unobservable shocks that affected all adults in Tennessee in a given year. For example, shocks to



12 The statistical inference in all of the tables that follow is based on standard errors that are robust to auto-correlation
between observations in the same state. Such standard errors raise two important concerns. First, the regressions are
based on a relatively small number of clusters, 17 states. Second, the regressions have only one treated cluster, Tennessee.
We have explored alternative strategies for inference, including non-parametric block bootstrap and wild block bootstrap
methods, and we have found broadly similar results. Even these procedures, however, may not perform well with only a
single treated cluster. This is an important additional motivation for the triple-difference specification, which is robust to
arbitrary state-by-year shocks.
13 Consistent with the eligibility rules, the CPS data, as well as the prior literature, we use the term “childless adults” to

indicate adults between the ages of 21 and 64 who do not have children under the age of 18 living with them.


                                                             16
labor demand that differ across states (but not differentially by childless status) would not lead to bias

in this specification.

     As above, the key coefficient of interest is the estimate of β, which is the triple-difference

estimate of the effect of the TennCare disenrollment on childless adults relative to other adults. This

model relies on different assumptions than the difference-in-difference model above. In particular, by

controlling for state-by-year fixed effects, the triple-difference model is identified by comparing

childless adults to other adults in Tennessee before and after the disenrollment. These results

therefore address the concern that Tennessee would have evolved differently than other Southern

states even in the absence of the TennCare disenrollment. Instead, the model is based on the

identifying assumption that, within Tennessee, the two demographic groups would have evolved

similarly in the absence of the disenrollment. 14

     While our main estimates use other Southern states as the comparison group during the time

period 2000–2007, our results are not sensitive to this sample selection. To demonstrate this point,

Appendix Figures A2 to A7 and Appendix Table A2 present estimates from samples of both

different length (extending to 2011) and composition (extending to the entire US). All of these

estimates are fairly similar in size and precision to our main estimates.

     As above, we again begin with a comparison of unadjusted sample means. Figure 3 presents the

share of CPS respondents who report public coverage for four groups: respondents with children in

Tennessee, respondents without children in Tennessee, and then the same sub-groups in other

Southern states. The figure depicts a striking pattern. Childless Tennessee adult residents experienced

a sudden drop in public coverage in 2006 and 2007. That drop was roughly 6 percentage points in

magnitude and was a clear break in the group’s pre-existing trend. By contrast, Tennessee residents

with children experienced no such trend break. Moreover, we do not observe such a pattern in other

14Our triple-difference estimates are based on state-by-year-by-childless-status cell means. However, there may be
concerns that demographic shifts caused by other factors could confound these aggregate results. Appendix Table A3
presents regressions using individual-level CPS data. Panel A presents estimates without any demographic controls. Panel
B includes covariates for gender, age, education and interactions between the three. These estimates are remarkably
similar, which demonstrates that changes in demographic composition cannot account for our results.


                                                           17
Southern states for either group of adults. In this way, Figure 3 summarizes our “triple-difference”

strategy. The results strongly suggest that the drop in public coverage occurred precisely for the sub-

group disproportionately affected by the TennCare disenrollment, with no evidence of a similar

change among adults with children.

   Panel B of Table 3 presents results based on estimates of the triple-difference model in equation

(2). The sample consists of coverage rates by state, year, and childless status. Column (1) presents

estimates with mean public health insurance as the dependent variable. The results suggest a 7.3

percentage-point drop in public coverage for childless Tennessee residents after the TennCare

disenrollment. In 2004, childless adults represented approximately 48 percent of all adults aged 21 to

64. The triple-difference estimates thus imply an aggregate decline in public health insurance coverage

of 3.6 percentage points, which is similar (though somewhat below) the baseline difference-in-

difference estimate of 4.6 percentage points.


5.2. THE EFFECT OF THE TENNCARE DISENROLLMENT ON LABOR SUPPLY
The estimates above demonstrate that the TennCare disenrollment caused a sudden decrease in

public health insurance. That decrease was concentrated among childless adults. We next examine

whether this loss of insurance affected labor supply.

   Figure 4 presents employment rates by state and year from 2000 to 2007. Between 2000 and

2005, employment fell in both Tennessee and the rest of the south. After 2005, employment rose

slightly in both groups of states. However, beginning in 2005, Tennessee experienced a sudden

employment increase that the rest of the south did not experience.

   Figure 5 presents trends in employment across Tennessee and other Southern states, with the

CPS sample split based on whether the respondent is a childless adult. The figure demonstrates that

the employment increase seen in Figure 4 is driven by a sudden break in trend for childless residents

of Tennessee after the TennCare disenrollment. By contrast, Tennessee residents with children did




                                                  18
not experience such a change. Moreover, we do not see a similar pattern in other Southern states for

either group of adults. 15

     The magnitude of changes in public health insurance coverage and employment among childless

adults in Tennessee following the disenrollment are extremely unusual and highly unlikely to be

simply an artifact of the relatively small cell sizes in the CPS. 16 To highlight this, we compute two-

year changes in public health insurance coverage and employment over time for childless adults

within each state during the 2000–2011 time period. In Figures 6, we plot the histogram of changes

for the full sample of Southern states. The vertical line in the figure indicates the decline in public

health insurance coverage for childless adults in Tennessee between 2004 and 2006, which was

approximately 6.9 percentage points. This decline is larger than any other two-year decline for any of

the other state during the 2000–2011 time period. We repeat this same exercise for employment in

Figure 7 and similarly find that the increase in employment among childless adults in Tennessee is

extremely unusual. The increase in employment rate of 5.7 percentage points for childless adults in

Tennessee is larger than any other two-year increase for any of the other observations (including

changes for childless adults in Tennessee in other years). Appendix Tables A8 and A9 contain

histograms for a sample containing all states. For both public insurance and employment, the change

in Tennessee is larger than any other two-year change in any state in the US.

     We next quantify the changes in employment demonstrated by Figures 4 and 5 with a regression

analysis. Column (2) of Table 3 presents regressions estimating the impact of the TennCare

disenrollment on employment. Panel A presents difference-in-difference estimates of equation (1), in

which state-year employment rates are the outcome of interest. We find a statistically significant 2.5

percentage-point increase in employment rates following the disenrollment. Panel B presents triple-

difference estimates of equation (2) for employment. The estimates suggest a 4.6 percentage-point

15 Appendix Figure A3 presents similar estimates to Figure 5 for the longer time period of 2000–2011. The figure shows a
large and persistent increase in employment for childless adults in Tennessee compared to other adults in Tennessee and
childless adults in other Southern states.
16 Additionally, the cell sizes themselves are not particularly small. Roughly 800–1,200 childless adults in Tennessee meet

our sample selection criteria for each year.


                                                            19
increase in employment for childless adults in Tennessee. The employment rate in our sample is 71

percent, suggesting that the TennCare disenrollment resulted in an approximately 6 percent increase

in employment over the following two years. 17

     Columns (3) to (5) of Table 3 present estimates of the employment changes based on the number

of hours worked in the previous week. The triple-difference results in Panel B suggest that almost all

of the employment increase was concentrated among individuals working more than 20 hours per

week. Column (4) presents the estimated change in employment for individuals working less than 20

hours per week. This estimate is both small in magnitude and statistically insignificant at conventional

levels. By contrast, column (4) suggests an increase in employment between 20 and 34 hours per

week. Finally, column (5) suggests that the majority of the employment response is among childless

adults working 35 or more hours per week.

     Given the details of the reform, we interpret the increase in employment to be a change in labor

supply rather than labor demand. We evaluate this indirectly by studying changes in average wages,

since an increase in labor supply suggests that we should observe a decrease in wages. Table 4

estimates the effect of the disenrollment on average wages. The first column suggests a 2.3 percent

decrease in wages. The second column presents estimates when the outcome of interest is a

“residualized” wage measure that accounts for age, gender, education, and their interactions. We find

a 1.8 percent decrease in wages with this measure.

     The remaining columns of Table 4 test whether the increase in employment comes from people

who are out of the labor force and not simply those who were unemployed. These estimates suggest

that the employment increase following the disenrollment comes primarily from people entering the

labor force. Taken together, these wage and labor force participation estimates suggest that the




17Appendix Table A4 presents the full set of interactions for this triple-difference specification. These results
demonstrate that the employment changes for TennCare exist almost entirely among childless adults, with no
confounding trends for other groups.


                                                             20
employment increase after the TennCare disenrollment is primarily driven by an increase in aggregate

labor supply.

       As a final robustness check, we examine the effect of the disenrollment on CPS respondents who

are older than 65. Those older than 65 are nearly all on Medicare, and thus the disenrollment should

have had a limited effect on their labor supply and public health insurance coverage. The first two

columns of Table 5 present the public health insurance and employment difference-in-differences

estimates for individuals under age 65, and the last two columns present those estimates for those

older than age 65. 18 Reassuringly, the estimates for the over-65 sample are small in magnitude and

statistically insignificant.

       These substantial labor supply increases suggest that some disenrollees may have entered the

labor market once they lost coverage. If this is true, we should also observe a change in job search

behavior. To investigate this directly, we use a proxy for aggregate job search behavior using data

from Google Trends. Figures 8 and 9 present a graphical analysis of Google Trends data for the time

period surrounding the TennCare disenrollment. These data are derived from searches on

google.com and represent the relative prevalence of particular search terms over time. We normalize

these data to their initial value in January of 2004. Figure 8 presents the relative prevalence of the

term “TennCare” among internet users in Tennessee. If individuals affected by the disenrollment

were actively using google.com for information, we should see a change in search behavior for this

term around prominent dates for changes in the program. Accordingly, there are two prominent

peaks: in November of 2004 and then in July of 2005. The first peak corresponds to the first date

when Governor Bredesen announced the TennCare disenrollment, while the second peak

corresponds to the date when the disenrollment actually began. Between these two dates, substantial

uncertainty existed regarding whether the state would actually follow through on the announced

disenrollment. The pattern of search behavior in Figure 8 provides suggestive evidence that


18   Very few seniors have children at home, and so we do not estimate our triple-difference specification using this sample.


                                                              21
google.com was a source of information for people interested in information about TennCare during

the disenrollment.

     We now turn our attention explicitly to job search behavior. Figure 9 presents Google Trends

data for the search term “job openings” in Tennessee and in other Southern states. In Tennessee,

Google searches for “job openings” rose sharply in July 2005 and peaked in August of 2005, when

the TennCare disenrollment began. There is no similar change in search behavior among residents of

other Southern states. We interpret these results as strong evidence of an aggregate increase in job

search behavior, which is consistent with an increase in aggregate labor supply in response to the

disenrollment.


5.3. LABOR SUPPLY AND ACCESS TO PRIVATE HEALTH INSURANCE
The TennCare expansion program, like the ACA, did not involve income eligibility thresholds.

Instead, as TennCare enrollees earned more income, they simply paid higher premiums. As a result,

the employment estimates above are not a consequence of discontinuities in enrollees’ budget sets.

Instead, the change in employment suggests that the loss of access to health insurance itself pushed

disenrollees into the labor market. Disenrollees who wanted to remain insured may have found that

securing employment was the only way to do so. This mechanism for labor supply changes is further

supported by the concentration in employment increases for individuals working more than 20 hours

a week. While health benefits are more common among full-time employees, a large number of

employers also offer health insurance benefits to part-time employees working at least 20 hours per

week. 19

     To directly explore this point, we next examine whether the disenrollment affected rates of

private health insurance coverage. An increase in private insurance coverage would partly explain the

19For example, Starbucks offers its “partners” health benefits after they work 160 hours over a two month period, and
employees retain benefits if they work 240 hours a quarter.
http://assets.starbucks.com/assets/7343fbbdc87845ff9a000ee009707893.pdf . Similarly, Costco offers a “Choice Plus”
plan for hourly part time employees working an average of 20 hours per week.
http://custom.aetna.com/costco/WhoIsEligible.shtml. Kim (2011) details 5 additional large national employers offering
benefits for part-time employees.


                                                         22
employment increase we observe above. It would also suggest that the childless adults affected by the

disenrollment exhibited substantial crowdout. Figure 10 presents the share of residents with private

health insurance coverage and finds the opposite pattern relative to the trend in public insurance

coverage in Figure 2. In 2006, the share of Tennessee residents reporting private coverage sharply

increased. By contrast, there was no change in the share of residents of other Southern states

reporting private coverage. Figures 2 and 10 together suggest substantial crowdout.

     Figure 11 presents private coverage rates with the CPS sample split based on childless status.

Childless adults in Tennessee experienced a sudden increase in private coverage in 2006 and 2007.

This was a break from the group’s pre-existing time trend as, until the TennCare disenrollment,

private coverage had been becoming rarer with each passing year. By contrast, Tennessee residents

with children in their household experienced no increase in private coverage in 2006 and 2007. There

was also no sharp change for either group in other Southern states.

     Figures 3 and 11 thus show that childless adults – the sub-population disproportionately affected

by the TennCare disenrollment and the future ACA expansion – were especially likely to report a loss

of public coverage and a gain of private coverage in the years following the disenrollment. 20 These

changes were a sharp, sudden break from pre-existing trends, and the changes in coverage after the

disenrollment were large relative to previous year-over-year changes. These figures present strong

visual evidence that the TennCare disenrollment both sharply reduced public health insurance

coverage but also sharply increased private health insurance coverage.

     To further explore access to private health insurance as the mechanism underlying our labor

supply results, we now estimate equation (1) with the outcome of interest being an indicator function

for whether CPS respondents are working and have private health insurance through an employer.

Column (3) of Table 6 presents those estimates, and suggests that a majority of the estimated increase

20One might be concerned that the pattern in such figures is an artifact of the relatively short time period after the
disenrollment. Appendix Figures A4 and A5 are similar to Figures 3 and 7, but present data for 2000 through 2011. These
appendix figures suggest that, while the post-2007 trend is volatile, the overall pattern is qualitatively similar to the results
from 2000–2007. Similarly, Panel C of Appendix Table A3 presents triple-difference regression estimates for this longer
time period. These results are similar to the main estimates.


                                                               23
in employment following the TennCare disenrollment is accounted for by increases in employment

among workers with employer-provided health insurance.

    Appendix Table A5 provides estimates for other categories of employment responses and

insurance coverage. Column (1) presents the change in adults without children reporting insurance

from an employer. The estimate in Column (2) demonstrates that the disenrollment caused a decrease

in individuals working without employer-provided insurance. This could occur either from

individuals moving to a job offering insurance or taking up a previously declined offer for health

benefits. Column (3) suggests that there was little change in the share of people employed but

without insurance from any source, suggesting that the individuals leaving employment without

employer-provided insurance in Column (3) likely had insurance from another source. Finally,

column (4) suggests little change in the number of individuals who were covered by the individual

market. The lack of an increase for this type of insurance should not be surprising given that

enrollees in the TennCare expansion program were intended to be ineligible for individual insurance.

    The large labor supply increase suggests TennCare disenrollees may place a large value on health

insurance. We gauge the magnitude of this valuation by calculating the wage increase that would be

necessary to generate a similar change in labor supply. In Table 3, we observe a 6.5 percent (95-

percent confidence interval: 5.1 – 8.0 percent) increase in labor supply for childless adults following

the TennCare disenrollment. Chetty et al. (2011) survey the labor supply literature and find a mean

Hicksian extensive margin labor supply elasticity of 0.25. Based on this elasticity, it would take a 26.2

percent increase in wages (95 percent confidence interval: 20.5 – 31.8 percent) to generate a similar

change in extensive-margin labor supply.

    To understand whether this implied wage increase is reasonable, we consider both the average

incomes of the disenrollees and the average premium for employer-provided insurance. The vast

majority of enrollees in the TennCare expansion group had incomes below 200 percent of the




                                                   24
poverty line, which in 2004 was $9,310 for a single adult. At 75, 100, and 200 percent of the federal

poverty line, a 26.2 percent wage increase is approximately $1,830, $2,400, and $4,900, respectively.

     In 2006, the average price of employer-provided insurance in Tennessee was approximately

$3,700 per year (AHRQ, 2006). Furthermore, given the high rate of insurance denials in the non-

group market, some of these disenrollees may not have been able to obtain non-group coverage at

any price (Hendren, 2013). These individuals might place an even larger value on access to coverage

than would be implied by the premium for group coverage. Thus this calculation suggests both that

the TennCare disenrollees placed a large value on health insurance and that the labor supply increase

is of a reasonable magnitude, given the actual price of health insurance.

     Many Americans find health insurance not through Medicaid or an employer, but through other

federal programs such as the Social Security Disability Insurance program (SSDI). Many of those

targeted by the TennCare expansion program – low-income adults in poor health – are especially

likely to apply for SSDI, which may in turn affect their labor market behavior (Autor and Duggan,

2003). SSDI beneficiaries are eligible for Medicare benefits after a 24-month waiting period. During

the waiting period (and throughout their time in the program) SSDI enrollees cannot engage in

substantial gainful activity (SGA), which was defined in 2005 for a non-blind individual to be earning

more than $830 per month. This requirement likely precludes many job opportunities offering private

insurance. Therefore, following the disenrollment, many applicants to SSDI may be no longer have

been able to use TennCare as a health insurance source during their waiting period for Medicare. This

would create a large gap in health insurance coverage for these individuals and might make SSDI less

attractive as a source of insurance as compared to labor force participation. Appendix Figure A10

plots the relative number of SSDI applicants from Tennessee versus the rest of the south. 21 The

number of applicants from Tennessee sharply decreased after 2005 relative to the rest of the south,



21We are restricted to state-year analysis because data on SSDI applications below the state level are not publicly
available.


                                                             25
although the rates converge during the Great Recession. This suggests that reductions in the

generosity of Medicaid may in turn decrease the attractiveness of SSDI for some individuals.

     The large changes in private insurance in Figures 10 and 11 also suggest potentially large

crowdout from the TennCare disenrollment. We now turn to a regression analysis to estimate the

magnitude of the crowdout. Column (4) of Table 6 presents regression estimates with any private

health insurance coverage as the outcome of interest. Panel A presents the difference-in-difference

estimates from equation (1) and suggests that private coverage rates in Tennessee increased by 1.6

percentage points after the disenrollment. Based on these regressions, we estimate crowdout as the

ratio of the decrease in public coverage to the increase in private coverage. The results in Panel A

lead to a crowdout estimate of 34.6 percent (standard error: 9.1). 22 Panel B presents triple-difference

estimates. Childless adults in Tennessee exhibited a 3.4 percentage-point increase in private coverage.

The associated crowdout estimate for childless adults is thus 47.2 percent (standard error: 8.6).

     The point estimates based on the triple-difference specification in Panel B are not identical to the

difference-in-difference estimates in Panel A. The triple-difference estimates involve the sub-

population most likely to have lost TennCare coverage, and thus we should expect the changes in

both public and private health insurance coverage to be larger in Panel B relative to Panel A.

However, the crowdout estimates across the two panels are also of different magnitudes. Though the

differences are not statistically significant at conventional levels, these differences could arise for a

number of reasons. First, the difference-in-difference estimates could be biased due to unobserved

state-by-year shocks. Alternatively, these results could suggest heterogeneity in crowdout among

different socioeconomic groups. As a result, we explore this heterogeneity in greater detail below.

     Despite the fact that the disenrollment was a contraction of public health insurance generosity, our

crowdout estimates are remarkably similar to earlier estimates based on expansions in public insurance


22We calculate standard errors for our crowdout estimates using the delta method. The standard errors from this
procedure should be a reliable approximation to the true standard errors because the denominator is always far from zero
and estimated very precisely in all of our specifications. We find very similar standard errors when using a nonparametric
block bootstrap, re-sampling states with replacement.


                                                           26
programs (Cutler and Gruber, 1996; LoSasso and Buchmueller, 2007; Gruber and Simon, 2008). This

symmetry in the magnitude of crowdout is interesting and provides some suggestive evidence that

our labor supply estimates may also display a similar symmetry. 23 This seems particularly likely in our

setting, because our observed labor supply increase appears to be a primary mechanism for securing

private health coverage.


5.4. THE DYNAMICS OF LABOR SUPPLY AND HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE
RESPONSES
The estimates above demonstrate that a large fraction of TennCare disenrollees secured both

employment and private health insurance coverage following the disenrollment. In this section, we

investigate the speed with which the disenrollees were able to secure employment and insurance

coverage. Since we interpret our main labor supply results as reflecting a demand for access to private

health insurance, the speed with which individuals are able to enter the labor force and secure

employment likely plays an important role in these individuals’ ability to secure private health

insurance coverage quickly.

     To investigate monthly changes in employment, we use data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics

Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS). State-level LAUS data are employment estimates

produced through a joint federal and state cooperative and incorporate information from the CPS,

Current Employment Statistics, and state unemployment insurance records. By combining multiple

sources, LAUS data provide a monthly, state-level employment estimate with less variation than any

of the individual component data sources. 24 Because of the unique reliability of these estimates, they



23 We cannot estimate the impact of the initial expansion of TennCare on labor supply for several reasons. In 1994, the
expansion did not have as large of a differential effect on health insurance for individuals with and without children.
Medicaid expansions occurring after 1994 created more categorical eligibility and take-up for adults with children. Given
this fact, our triple-difference strategy is not applicable to this earlier setting. Additionally, the enrollment following the
1994 expansion was less abrupt than the 2005 disenrollment, making it less ideal for a purely cross-state (difference-in-
difference) analysis.
24 More specifically, the LAUS is developed using a signal-plus-noise methodology that accounts for actual changes in the

labor force beyond time trends and seasonality. More information is available at:
http://www.bls.gov/lau/laumthd.htm#states.


                                                              27
are used for many government tasks such as the determination of budgetary allocations for Federal

programs.

     Figure 12 presents the monthly LAUS data from 2004 to 2007 for Tennessee and all other

Southern states. 25 Prior to the middle of 2005, the estimated employment rates in the two groups of

states follow very similar trends. 26 However, at approximately the same time as the TennCare

disenrollment, the estimated Tennessee employment rate surged and, over the course of the next

year, increased by approximately 2 percentage points. This increase in employment is very similar to

the difference-in-differences estimate in Table 3.

     Given the sudden changes in labor supply in the LAUS, we would expect a similarly quick change

in health insurance coverage. Unfortunately, the CPS data only measures the health insurance

outcomes of interest at an annual frequency and does not allow estimation of within-year changes in

coverage. Therefore, to explore the dynamics of health insurance coverage, we supplement our CPS

results with data from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS). The BRFSS is an

annual, state-based telephone survey designed to measure the health and health habits of the US

population. The survey is administered by individual states and data is then aggregated into a single

annual file by the Centers for Disease Control. We construct a sample of individuals aged 21–64 who

do not have a college degree. 27 Unfortunately, the BRFSS contains only a single question about health

insurance: whether respondents are covered by insurance from any source. As a result, we cannot

separately identify the changes in private and public coverage using these data. However, an

advantage of the BRFSS over the March CPS is that the survey is fielded in each month and can




25 In order to ease the comparison to our earlier estimates, these data are converted to employment rates using population
estimates from the CPS.
26 There appears to be a very slight increase in employment in Tennessee in the months just before the disenrollment.

Given that the disenrollment was announced in advance, it is not surprising that there may have been some anticipatory
behavior among disenrollees.
27 Given the demographic questions in the BRFSS, we cannot exactly replicate our preferred CPS sample, which contains

no respondents with an advanced degree but does include those with a college degree. In the BRFSS, we can only identify
if individuals are college graduates but not if they have a post-graduate degree.


                                                           28
therefore be used to explore the dynamics of overall health insurance coverage before and after the

disenrollment.

   Figure 13 presents the average insurance coverage rates by month for Tennessee and all other

Southern states from 2004 to 2007. From 2000 until the middle of 2005 the two sets of states

followed similar trends. In the last quarter of 2005, immediately following the TennCare

disenrollment, the percentage of individuals reporting any insurance coverage was 8.0 percentage

points below the pre-treatment mean. Over the next two quarters, the percentage insured recovered

and the post-treatment mean was 4.9 percentage points higher than the nadir, implying a crowdout

rate of approximately 61 percent. Beyond verifying the CPS crowdout estimates, these results

demonstrate that TennCare disenrollees secured private insurance fairly quickly.

   The results from the LAUS and BRFSS data suggest that TennCare disenrollees secured both

employment and health insurance coverage several months, not years, after the disenrollment. To our

knowledge, previous work on crowdout has not examined the speed with which individuals make

labor and private health insurance market adjustments in response to such policy changes. As such,

we view this as an important area for future work.


5.5. HETEROGENEITY IN LABOR SUPPLY AND CROWDOUT
Both the labor supply responses and the amount of crowdout of private health insurance are likely a

function of preferences for health insurance coverage, access to the private health insurance market,

and the extent to which access to public health insurance provides a strong work disincentive. As a

result, the observed labor supply response and crowdout are both likely to vary by socioeconomic

group. Thus we next investigate how the labor supply and crowdout effects vary across the

population. Overall, we find broadly similar labor supply and crowdout estimates across demographic

groups, with a few exceptions. We also find that groups which exhibit large labor supply responses

also exhibit large crowdout, which we interpret as strong evidence that changes in labor supply are

the primary channel driving crowdout in our setting.


                                                 29
     Panel A of Table 7 presents labor supply and crowdout estimates by age. 28 We divide CPS

respondents into two age groups: 21 to 39 and 40 to 64. Both age groups experienced a large decline

in public health insurance coverage. Interestingly, we find no statistically significant increase in private

insurance coverage for the younger age group. By contrast, we observe a large increase in private

insurance among 40 to 64 year olds, resulting in a crowdout rate of 48 percent. Older adults also

appear to have increased their labor supply to a greater degree than younger adults (although this

difference is not statistically different at conventional levels). Overall, this pattern suggests that older

adults value health insurance more than the young, and that they are more likely to enter the labor

force in order to maintain access to health insurance. Such a contrast might be driven by expected

medical costs. Average medical expenditures are strongly positively associated with age (Hartman et

al., 2008). In 2002, individuals aged 19–44 accounted for 43 percent of the bottom half of medical

spenders and only 19 percent of the top 5 percent of medical spenders. By contrast, individuals aged

44–64 make up 16 percent of the bottom half of medical spenders and 33 percent of the top 5

percent (Conwell and Cohen, 2005). Older adults are also more likely to be insured. While 65 percent

of the young childless adults had health coverage, nearly 74 percent of the older individuals had

private coverage.

     Panel B of Table 7 presents the impact of the TennCare disenrollment by education. We divide

the sample by whether respondents were high school dropouts as opposed to high school graduates.

Even though TennCare did not have traditional earnings eligibility limits, its beneficiaries had low

incomes. As would be expected, less-educated adults in Tennessee experienced a large decline in

public health insurance coverage after the disenrollment. Approximately half of the less-educated

adults who lost public coverage were able to find private coverage. This suggests that even the least-


28 Appendix Table A6 Panel A presents the triple-difference crowdout estimates by gender. Both men and women exhibit
a large and similarly sized decrease in public insurance after the policy change. Women experience a slightly larger increase
in private coverage after the disenrollment. However, that difference is not statistically significant; the p-value for a test of
equality of the crowdout estimates is 23 percent. Both men and women exhibited large labor supply increases after the
disenrollment.



                                                               30
educated adults on public health insurance still had access to private health insurance. By contrast,

more-educated adults experienced small changes in both public and private coverage. Less-educated

childless adults in Tennessee also saw large increases in employment.

       Finally, Panel C of Table 7 examines the effect of the disenrollment by self-reported health status.

Individuals in relatively poor health had a much larger decline in public health insurance than

individuals in good health. This is unsurprising; those in poor health had much higher rates of public

health insurance, and the uninsurable category of the TennCare expansion was aimed at individuals

who had been denied coverage in the non-group insurance market. Those in poor health had a larger

absolute increase in both labor supply and private insurance coverage but their crowdout rate was

lower than for those reporting good health. 29

       Overall, the results in Table 7 are as expected. Those who lost coverage were not concentrated in

one age group or gender, but were more likely to be high school dropouts. In addition, older adults

appear to have been more likely to increase employment and gain private health insurance coverage.

Otherwise, all groups exhibited broadly similar labor supply responses and crowdout.



6. CONCLUSION
This paper studies the largest reduction of Medicaid eligibility in the history of the United States. We

find strong evidence that public health insurance affects labor supply decisions. The changes in labor

supply appear to be a means of securing access to private health insurance. Taken together, our

results suggest both a strong work disincentive from public health insurance eligibility and a high

valuation of health insurance among the individuals exposed to the disenrollment.

       Our results are potentially informative about the likely consequences of the ACA, because those

who lost TennCare coverage were unlike typical Medicaid beneficiaries but very similar to individuals




29   The crowdout rate for individuals reporting good health is not statistically different from 1.


                                                                31
targeted by the ACA. 30 Our results suggest a far larger increase in Medicaid enrollments from the

ACA than is currently estimated. In 2011, approximately 8.9 million Americans with incomes below

139 percent of the poverty line were covered by employer-provided health insurance. If all states

implement the Medicaid expansion, our estimates suggest that approximately 4.2 million of these

privately insured individuals will move into public coverage. To place this number in perspective, the

Congressional Budget Office estimated that if all states implemented the ACA Medicaid expansion,

there would be 16 million additional Medicaid enrollees (CBO, 2010a). In an earlier analysis, the CBO

estimated that only 10 percent of the new Medicaid enrollees will previously have had private

coverage (CBO, 2009). Our results suggest much larger crowdout among childless adults, which may

result in a 16 percent increase in public health insurance enrollees under the ACA. 31

     Our results also speak to the potential for the ACA to decrease aggregate labor supply. In a 2010

Budgetary Outlook, the CBO estimated that all of the combined features of the ACA will result in an

approximately 0.5 percentage-point decline in the aggregate employment rate (CBO, 2010b). This

amounts to approximately 800,000 individuals leaving employment. The CBO based this estimate on

a number of different factors, but the empirical evidence available to the CBO could not fully

account for how lower-income Americans without children would respond to the availability of free

or heavily subsidized health insurance.

     Our estimates suggest that the labor supply consequences for this population could be

substantial. In particular, our estimates demonstrate substantial “employment lock” – that is,

individuals working primarily to secure private health insurance through an employer. Using CPS

data, we estimate that between 840,000 and 1.5 million childless adults in the US currently earn less

30 It is important to recognize that this paper studies a large contraction in eligibility for public health insurance, but that the
ACA is an expansion of eligibility. We cannot be certain that the effects of expansions are simply symmetric to the effects
of contractions. At the same time, as discussed above, we emphasize that our estimates of crowdout are very similar to
many previous estimates in the literature that are based on expansions of eligibility, which suggests that our labor supply
estimates may also be relevant for future expansions, as well.
31 The magnitude of the potential crowdout onto heavily subsidized insurance exchanges is even greater. Approximately

15.3 million individuals between 139 and 250 percent of the federal poverty line have employer-provided insurance with
an additional 2.4 million having individual coverage. The subsidy cost for these individuals is paid in full by the federal
government.


                                                                32
than 200 percent of the poverty line, have employer-provided insurance, and are not eligible for

public health insurance. 32 Applying our labor supply estimates directly to this population, we predict a

decline in employment of between 530,000 and 940,000 in response to this group of individuals being

made newly eligible for free or heavily subsidized health insurance. This would represent a decline in

the aggregate employment rate of between 0.3 and 0.6 percentage points from this single component

of the ACA. One must exercise considerable caution when directly applying our results to the ACA,

but our results appear to indicate that the soon-to-be-enacted health care reform may cause

substantial declines in aggregate employment. 33

    We also emphasize that our predicted employment declines arise from changes in labor supply

and not labor demand. Therefore, the effects do not necessarily imply a welfare loss for individuals

choosing to leave the labor force after receiving access to non-employer provided health insurance.

Changes in labor demand from the ACA may be important, as well, but they are well beyond the

scope of our analysis.

    Lastly, apart from contributing to the analysis of the likely effects of the ACA, we believe that our

empirical estimates inform recent theoretical work that extends models of optimal social insurance to

capture realistic features of health insurance markets. For example, Chetty and Saez (2010) augment

the classic framework of Baily (1978) to show how the magnitude of crowdout affects the optimal


32 This population is estimated as follows. First, we impose the same sample restrictions on the national CPS sample that

we impose in our empirical analysis, focusing on childless adults aged 21–64 without an advanced degree. Second, within
this sample, we focus on adults who are currently working at least 20 hours per week and have private, employer-
provided health insurance. For 2012, we estimate the size of this population to be 3.6 million adults. In order to compute
the share of this population eligible for public health insurance, we compute the share of this population that is enrolled
in public health insurance and then we scale this estimate using a range of take-up estimates (52 and 68 percent) from a
recent meta-analysis by Sommers et al. (2012). We subtract these estimates from 3.6 million to arrive at the estimates in
the main text.
33 For example, employment lock could exist for individuals earning more than 200 percent of the poverty line who

cannot obtain insurance in the individual market at any price. Given that a small fraction of the TennCare population
earned incomes above 200 percent of the poverty line, it is not appropriate to directly apply our estimates to this
population. Future work should examine the degree to which individuals in these income brackets are also suffering
employment lock. Additionally, the labor market in Tennessee during the reform in 2005 was very different from the
national labor market in the aftermath of the Great Recession. To the extent that labor market tightness affects the extent
to which labor supply responds to changes public health insurance eligibility, this will cause the labor supply
consequences of TennCare and ACA to diverge. Finally, other features of the ACA such as the increased expenditure of
federal funds could increase aggregate economic activity.


                                                            33
generosity of public health insurance. In this paper, we document spillovers onto the labor market

that are not captured by existing theoretical models and yet are likely also important determinants of

optimal public health insurance eligibility and generosity.




                                                   34
REFERENCES

Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 2006. “Premium distributions (in dollars) for private-
sector employees enrolled in single coverage at the 10th, 25th, 50th(median), 75th and 90th
percentiles, by State; United States. Available at:
http://meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/data_stats/summ_tables/insr/state/series_10/2006/txc.htm

Autor, David and Mark Duggan. 2003. “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline
Unemployment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1): 157-206.
Baicker, Katherine, Sarah Taubman, Heidi Allen, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph
Newhouse, Eric Schneider, Bill Wright, Alan Zaslavsky and Amy Finkelstein, 2013. “The Oregon
Experiment – The Effect of Medicaid on Clinical Outcomes,” New England Journal of Medicine, 368:
1713-1722.

Baily, Martin N. 1978. “Some Aspects of Optimal Unemployment Insurance”, Journal of Public
Economics, 10(December): 379-402.

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Tennessee. 2005. “Important TennCare Eligibility and Benefit Changes.”
Jul 1 2005.

Broaddus, Matt and January Angeles. 2010. “Medicaid Expansion in Health Reform Not Likely to
‘Crowd Out’ Private Insurance,” Center for Budget and Policy Priorities, Jun 22, 2010.

Card, D., Shore-Sheppard, L., 2004. “Using discontinuous eligibility rules to identify the effects of the
federal Medicaid expansions on low income-children.” Review of Economics and Statistics 86(3), 752–766.

Chang, Cyril and Stephanie Steinberg. 2009. “TennCare Timeline: Major Events and Milestones from
1992 to 2009.” Methodist LeBonheur Center for Healthcare Economics, the University of Memphis,
Nov. 2008. (online) http://healthecon.memphis.edu/

Chetty, Raj and Emmanuel Saez. 2010. “Optimal Taxation and Social Insurance with Endogenous
Private Insurance”, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2(2): 85-114.

Chetty, Raj, Adam Guren, Day Manoli, and Andre Weber. 2011. “Are Micro and Macro Labor
Supply Elasticities Consistent? A Review of the Evidence on the Intensive and Extensive Margins,”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 101(3): 471-75.

Congressional Budget Office. 2010a. “Cost Estimate of H.R. 4872, the Reconciliation Act of 2010,”
March 20, 2010.

Congressional Budget Office. 2010b. “The Budget and Economic Outlook: An Update,” August
2010.

Congressional Budget Office. 2009. “Additional Information Regarding the Effects of Specifications
in the America’s Affordable Health Choices Act Pertaining to Health Insurance Coverage,” July 26,
2009.



                                                   35
Conwell, Leslie and Joel Cohen. 2005. “Characteristics of Persons with High Medical Expenditures in
the U.S. Civilian Noninstitutionalized Population, 2002.” MEPS Statistical Brief #3.

Courtemanche, Charles and Daniela Zapata. 2012. “Does Universal Coverage Improve Health? The
Massachusetts Experience,” NBER Working Paper #17893.

Currie, Janet and Brigitte Madrian. 1999. “Health, health insurance and the labor market,” in O.
Ashenfelter and D. Card (ed.), Handbook of Labor Economics, 1(3): 3309-3416.

Cutler, David and Jon Gruber, 1996. “Does public health insurance crowdout private insurance?”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 391–430.

Damler, Robert. 2010. “Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act with House Reconciliation –
Financial Analysis – Budget Committee Request.” Milliman Inc, May 21, 2010.

Dave, Dhaval, Sandra Decker, Robert Kaestner, Kosali Simon. 2013. “The Effect of Medicaid
Expansions in the Late 1980s and Early 1990s on the Labor Supply of Pregnant Women,” NBER
Working Paper #19161.

DeNavas-Walt, Carmen, Bernadette Proctor and Jessica Smith. 2012. “Income, Poverty, and Health
Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2011,” United State Census Bureau, Sept. 2012.

Doyle, Joseph. 2005. “Health insurance, Treatment, and Outcomes: Using Auto Accidents as Health
Shocks,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(2): 256-270.

Dranove, David, Craig Garthwaite and Christopher Ody. 2013. “How Do Hospitals Respond to
Negative Financial Shocks? The Impact of the 2008 Stock Market Crash,” NBER Working Papger
#18853.

Emerson, Janice, Pamela Hull, Van Cain, Meggan Novotny. 2012. “TennCare Disenrollment and
Avoidable Hospital Visits in Davidson County, Tennessee,” Journal of Health Care for the Poor and
Underserved, 23(1): 425-445.

Farrar, Ione, David Eichenthal, Chad Reese, and Benjamin Coleman. 2007. “TennCare Reform, One
Year Later: An Assessment of the Impact of the 2005-2006 Changes in the TennCare Program.”
Community Research Council mimeo.

Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph P.
Newhouse, Heidi Allen, Katherine Baicker, and the Oregon Health Study Group. 2012. “The Oregon
Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First Year” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3).

Gruber, Jonathan. 1994. “The incidence of mandated maternity benefits,” American Economic Review,
84(3): 622-641.

Gruber, Jonathan and Kosali Simon. 2008. “Crowd out 10 years later: Have recent public insurance
expansions crowded out private health insurance?.” Journal of Health Economics, 27: 201:217.




                                                 36
Gruber, Jonathan and Brigitte Madrian. 1997. “Employment Separation and Health Insurance
Coverage,” Journal of Public Economics, 66(3): 349-382.

Gruber, Jonathan and Brigitte Madrian. 2004. “Health Insurance, Labor Supply, and Job Mobility: A
Critical Review,” in Catherine McLaughlin ed. Health Policy and the Uninsured, Washington, D.C.:
Urban University Press: 97-178.

Ham, Jon and Lara Shore-Sheppard,2005. The effect of Medicaid expansions for low-income
children on Medicaid participation and private insurance coverage: evidence from the SIPP. Journal of
Public Economics 89, 57–83.

Hackman, Martin, Jonathan Kolstad, and Amanda Kowalski. 2012. “Health Reform, Health
Insurance, and Selection: Estimating Selection into Health Insurance Using the Massachusetts Health
Reform,” American Economic Review, 102(3): 498-501.

Hackman, Martin, Jonathan Kolstad, and Amanda Kowalski. 2013. “Adverse Selection and an
Individual Mandate: When Theory Meets Practice,” working paper available at:
http://assets.wharton.upenn.edu/~jkolstad/adverse_latest_version.pdf

Hartman, Micah, Aaron Catlin, David Lassman, Jonathan Cylus and Stephen Heffler. 2008. “U.S.
Health Spending By Age, Selected Years Through 2004,” Health Affairs, 27(1): w1-w12.

Hearvin, Benjamin, Rongwei Fu, Jin Han, Allan Storrow, and Robert Lowe. 2011. “An Evaluation of
Statewide Emergency Department Utilization Following Tennessee Medicaid Disenrollment,”
Academic Emergency Medicine, 18(11): 1121-1128.

Heberlein, Martha, Jocelyn Guyer, and Robin Rudowitz. 2010. “Financing New Medicaid Coverage
Under Health Reform: The Role of the Federal Government and States,” Kaiser Family Foundation
#8072.

Hendren, Nathaniel. 2013. “Private Information and Insurance Rejections,” Econometrica, forthcoming.

Kaiser Health News. 2002. “Tennessee Governor-Elect ‘Vows’ to Restore Benefits to Eligible
Beneficiaries Removed from Tenncare,” Kaiser Health News, Dec 09, 2002: accessed online June 19,
2013 at http://www.kaiserhealthnews.org/Daily-
Reports/2002/December/09/dr00014997.aspx?p=1

Kenney, Genevieve, Stephen Zuckerman, Lisa Dubay, Michael Huntress, Victoria Lynch, Jennifer
Haley, Nathaniel Anderson. 2012. “Opting in to the Medicaid Expansion under the ACA: Who Are
the Uninsured Adults Who Could Gain Health Insurance Coverage?,” Urban Institute, Timely Analysis
of Immediate Health Policy Issues, accessed online on April 4, 2013 at:
http://www.urban.org/UploadedPDF/412630-opting-in-medicaid.pdf

Kim, Susanna. 2011. “7 Companies Offering Health Care Benefits to Part-Time Workers,”
abcnews.com, Oct 25 2011.

Kolstad, Jonathan and Amanda Kowalski. 2012a. “The Impact of Health Care Reform on Hospital
and Preventive Care: Evidence from Massachusetts,” Journal of Public Economics, 96 (11): 909-929

                                                 37
Kolstad, Jonathan and Amanda Kowalski. 2012b. “Mandate- Based Health Reform and the Labor
Market: Evidence from the Massachusetts Reform,” NBER Working Paper 17933.

Levine, Phillip B., Robin McKnight, and Samantha Heep. 2011. “How Effective Are Public Policies
to Increase Health Insurance Coverage among Young Adults?” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 3(1): 129-56.

LoSasso, Anthony T. and Thomas Buchmueller, 2004. “The effect of the state children’s health
insurance program on health insurance coverage.” Journal of Health Economics 23, 1059–1082.

Madrian, Brigitte. 1994. “Employment-Based Health Insurance and Job Mobility: Is There Evidence
of Job-Lock?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(1): 27-54.

McKinsey and Company. 2003. “Achieving a Critical Mission in Difficult Times – TennCare’s
Financial Viability,” December 11, 2003.

Meyer, Bruce and Dan Rosenbaum. 2000. “Medicaid, Private Health Insurance, and the Labor Supply
of Single Mothers,” unpublished paper.

Miller, Sarah. 2012. “The Effect of Insurance on Emergency Room Visits: An Analysis of the 2006
Massachusetts Health Reform,” Journal of Public Economics, 96(11): 893-908.

Moreno, Lorenzo and Sheila Hoag. 2001. “Covering the Uninsured Through TennCare: Does it
Make Difference?” Health Affairs, 20(1): 231-239.

Moffitt, Robert and Barbara L. Wolfe. 1992. “The Effect of the Medicaid Program on Welfare
Participation and Labor Supply,” Review of Economics and Statistics 74(4): 615-626.

National Bureau of Economic Research. 2008. “Determination of the December 2007 Peak in
Economic Activity,” National Bureau of Economic Research, accessed online on June 19, 2013 at:
http://www.nber.org/cycles/dec2008.html.

National Journal. 2010. “Governor Phil Bredesen (D-TN),” Almanac of American Politics, accessed
online on March 24, 2013 at: http://www.nationaljournal.com/almanac/2010/person/phil-
bredesen-tn/

Rowland, Diane. 2005. PBS Newshour Interview, accessed online:
http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/health/jan-june05/rowland.html on March 24, 2013.

Ruble, Drew. 2003. “State reaches agreements on TennCare-related lawsuits,” Nasheville Post, Aug 26,
2003.

Sommers, Ben, Rick Kronick, Kenneth Finegold, Rosa Po, Karyn Schwartz, and Sherry Glied. 2012.
“Understanding Participation Rates in Medicaid: Implications for the Affordable Care Act,” ASPE
Issue Brief, Department of Health & Human Services.




                                                 38
TennCare Quarterly Report. 2003. Accessed online on March 24, 2013 at:
http://www.tn.gov/tenncare/forms/leg0403.pdf.

TennCare Annual Report. 2005. Accessed online on March 24, 2013 at:
http://www.tn.gov/tenncare/forms/annual05.pdf

Tennessee Justice Center. 2012. “The Moral Implications of Medicaid Expansion for Tennessee,”
Tennessee Justice Center.

Wooldridge, Judith, Leighton Ku, Teresa Coughlin, Lisa Dubay, Marilyn Ellwood, Shruti Rajan, and
Sheila Hoag. 1996. “Implementing State Health Care Reform: What Have We Learned from the First
Year? The First Annual Report of the Evaluation of Health Reform in Five States.” Mathmatica Policy
Research.

Wright, Douglas. 2001. “TennCare A Closer Look,” Tennessee Comptroller of the Treasury
Legislative Briefing Paper.

Yelowitz, Aaron. 1995. “The Medicaid Notch, Labor Supply, and Welfare Participation: Evidence
from Eligibility Expansions,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(4): 909-39.

Zuckerman, Stephen, Dawn Miller and Emily Shelton Paper. 2009. “Missouri’s 2005 Medicaid Cuts:
How Did They Affect Enrollees and Providers,” Health Affairs, 28(2): w335-w345.




                                                39
                        Figure 1. Quarterly Medicaid Enrollment in Tennessee

                                                TennCare
               1,400                            Disenrollment
                                                                                           400

               1,350                                                                       350
                                                                  Total
               1,300                                                                       300
                                                                  Medicaid
               1,250                                                                       250
                                                                                                 Uninsured
Total          1,200                                                                       200   and
TennCare                                                                                         Uninsurable
Enrollment     1,150    Uninsured                                                          150   Program
in thousands            and Uninsurable
               1,100                                                                       100   Enrollment
                                                                                                 in thousands
               1,050                                                                       50

               1,000                                                                       0
                         2003q3        2005q1        2006q3         2008q1        2009q3
               Note: This figure presents enrollment numbers reported in TennCare quarterly
               reports. Tennessee disenrolled most of those in the Uninsured and Uninsurable
               program in the last quarter of 2005.




                                                      40
                                         Figure 2. Share Publicly Insured

                                                                                       TennCare
                 .18                                                                                    .24
                                                                                       Disenrollment



                 .16                                                                                    .22

 Share                       Tennessee                                                                     Share
 covered by                                                                                                covered by
 public health  .14                                                                                     .2 public health
 insurance,                                                                                                insurance,
 other Southern                                                                                            Tennessee
 states
                 .12                                                                                    .18
                           Other
                           Southern
                           States
                  .1                                                                                    .16
                 2000-2001                   2002-2003                   2004-2005            2006-2007
                       Note: This figure presents the share of CPS respondents ages 21–64 without an
                       advanced degree who report being covered by public health insurance in
                       Tennessee versus other Southern states. The figure presents means by
                       two-year cells. See text for details.


                            Figure 3. Share Publicly Insured, Triple Difference
                                                                                        TennCare
                                                                                        Disenrollment
            .2


           .18
                  Tennessee,                                                                 Tennessee,
                  No Children                                                                Has Children
Share
covered by .16
public health     Other Southern
insurance         States, No Children
           .14


           .12
                                                         Other Southern
                                                         States, Has Children
            .1
            2000-2001                     2002-2003                     2004-2005                 2006-07

                 Note: This figure presents the share of CPS respondents ages 21–64 without an
                 advanced degree who report being covered by public health insurance in
                 Tennessee versus other Southern states. The figure presents means by
                 two-year cells. See text for details.



                                                            41
                                          Figure 4. Share Employed

                                                                                   TennCare
              .78                                                                  Disenrollment
                                                                                                     .76


              .76                                                                                    .74
                        Tennessee
Share         .74                                                                                    .72
employed,                                                                                               Share
other                                                                                                   employed,
Sourthern     .72                                                                                    .7 Tennessee
states
                      Other
               .7     Southern                                                                       .68
                      States

              .68                                                                                    .66


              .66                                                                                    .64
               2000-2001                 2002-2003                   2004-2005            2006-2007
                    Note: This figure presents the share of CPS respondents ages 21–64 without an
                    advanced degree who report being employed in Tennessee versus other Southern
                    states. The figure presents means by two-year cells. See text for details.



                              Figure 5. Share Employed, Triple Difference
                                                                                      TennCare
        .75                                                                           Disenrollment
                                                    Other Southern
                                                    States, Has Children



                Other Southern
                States, No Children             Tennessee,
                                                Has Children
Share    .7
employed




                     Tennessee,
        .65          No Children



            2000-2001                   2002-2003                      2004-2005                   2006-07
                    Note: This figure presents the share of CPS respondents ages 21–64 without an
                    advanced degree who report being employed in Tennessee versus other Southern
                    states. The figure presents means by two-year cells. See text for details.




                                                          42
                   Figure 6. The Distribution of Changes in the Public Insurance Rate
                   15


                                            Change for childless adults in Tennessee,
                                            2004–2005 to 2006–2007


                   10
Number of
state-year cells
with given
change in public
insurance rate for
childless adults   5




                    0
                        -.08       -.06        -.04        -.02            0          .02         .04         .06        .08
                                              Change in fraction public insured
  Note: This figure presents a histogram of two-year changes in the share of adults ages 21–64 without an advanced degree
  having public health insurance for each state in the south. The changes are computed separately for each state-year for adults
  without children in the household. The two-year changes are computed across means of two-year cells. The vertical line
  indicates the change for childless adults in Tennessee before and after the TennCare disenrollment.


                            Figure 7. The Distribution of Changes in the Employment Rate
                     15
                                                                       Change for childless adults in Tennessee,
                                                                       2004–2005 to 2006–2007



                     10
    Number of
    state-year cells
    with given
    change in
    employment
    rate for         5
    childless adults




                        0
                            -.08     -.06        -.04        -.02              0         .02        .04            .06     .08
                                                 Change in fraction employed
    Note: This figure presents a histogram of two-year changes in the employment rate of adults, ages 21–64, without an
    advanced degree. The changes are computed separately for each state-year for adults without children in the
    household. The two-year changes are computed across means of two-year cells. The vertical line indicates the change
    for childless adults in Tennessee before and after the TennCare disenrollment.


                                                                  43
                      Figure 8. Searches on Google in Tennessee for Word “TennCare”
                                           Announcment         TennCare
         1.2                                                   Disenrollment




           1


Search
Volume .8
Relative to
January,
2004
           .6




           .4
                2004                          2005                         2006
                 Note: This figure presents Google search volume for the word “TennCare.” The
                 numbers are normalized by Google to represent relative changes in search volume
                 over time, but not the absolute magnitude. We then divide each month’s number by
                 the value in January of 2004. In November of 2004, Governor Bredesen announced
                 the process that ultimately led to the disenrollments. The disenrollments then began
                 in July of 2005.


                               Figure 9. Searches on Google for Phrase “Job Openings”
                                                   TennCare
                2                                  Disenrollment


                                                                          Tennessee



Search      1.5
Volume
Relative to
January,
2004
                1


                            Other
                            Southern
                            States
                .5
                     2004                      2005                            2006
                      Note: This figure presents Google search volume for the phrase “job openings.” The
                      numbers are normalized by Google to represent relative changes in search volume
                      over time, but not the absolute magnitude. We then divide each month’s number by
                      the value in January of 2004.


                                                      44
                                         Figure 10. Share Privately Insured

                   .74                                                                         TennCare      .72
                                                                                               Disenrollment



                   .72                                 Tennessee                                               .7

Share                                                                                                                  Share
covered by                                                                                                             covered by
private health      .7                                                                                         .68     private health
insurance, other                                                                                                       insurance,
Southern states                             Other
                                                                                                                       Tennessee
                                            Southern
                   .68                      States                                                             .66



                   .66                                                                                         .64
                   2000-2001                     2002-2003                 2004-2005                 2006-2007
                         Note: This figure presents the share of CPS respondents ages 21–64 without an
                         advanced degree who report being privately insured in Tennessee versus other
                         Southern states. The figure presents means by two-year cells. See text for details.




                                       Figure 11. Share Privately Insured, Triple Difference
                                                                                                      TennCare
                   .74                                                                                Disenrollment
                                                   Other Southern
                                                   States, No Children

                   .72



 Share
 covered by         .7                                                       Other Southern
                                                                             States, Has Children
 private health
 insurance
                   .68

                                                Tennessee,
                                                Has Children
                   .66                                       Tennessee,
                                                             No Children

                    2000-2001                       2002-2003                    2004-2005                          2006-07
                         Note: This figure presents the share of CPS respondents ages 21–64 without an
                         advanced degree who report being privately insured in Tennessee versus other
                         Southern states. The figure presents means by two-year cells. See text for details.



                                                                   45
                                    Figure 12. Share Employed By Month, LAUS

             0.765                                              TennCare                                  0.740
                                                                Disenrollment


             0.755                                                                                        0.730


Share
             0.745                                                                                        0.720 Share
employed
                                                                                                                   employed
in rest of
                                     Tennessee                                                                     in Tennessee
South
             0.735                                                                                        0.710


             0.725                   Other                                                                0.700
                                     Southern
                                     States
             0.715                                                                                        0.690
                     2004                        2005                    2006                      2007

                      Note: This figure presents the estimated monthly employment rate using data from
                      the Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS) for Tennessee versus other
                      Southern states. See text for details.



                                       Figure 13. Share Insured By Month, BRFSS
                 0.90                                                 TennCare
                                                                      Disenrollment

                 0.88          Tennessee


                 0.86
   Share
   covered by 0.84
   health
   insurance                     Other
                 0.82            Southern
                                 States


                 0.80


                 0.78
                        2004                            2005                     2006                         2007
                            Note: This figure presents the share of respondents to the Behavioral Risk Factor
                            Surveillance System ages 21–64 who report being insured each month for Tennessee
                            versus other Southern states. Both lines are trailing 8-month moving averages, and
                            for Tennesse the trailing moving average is computed separately for the time periods
                            before and after August 2005. See text for details.


                                                               46
                       Table 1. Descriptive Statistics of Individuals Affected by Four
                                      Recent Health Reform Efforts

                                TennCare          Affordable Care       MA Health        Oregon Medicaid
                               Disenrollment            Act              Reform              Lottery

Children
 Child in the Household             8.9%               17.6%               49.4%          Not Available
 No Child in Household             91.1%               82.4%               50.7%          Not Available

Age
 19 to 24                          15.0%               26.1%               29.4%
 25 to 34                          15.1%               26.0%               34.3%             73.3%
 35 to 54                          40.6%               34.5%               31.6%
 55 to 64                          29.3%               13.4%               16.6%             26.7%

Sex
  Male                             41.9%               53.0%               44.3%             44.3%
 Female                            58.2%               47.0%               55.7%             55.7%

Race
 White                             75.9%               54.9%               77.2%             82.0%
 Black                             22.8%               18.7%               19.5%             3.8%
 Other                              1.3%               25.7%                3.3%             14.2%

Education
  High School Drop Out                33.8%           Not Available         25.7%                17.7%
  High School Graduate                52.9%           Not Available         36.5%                49.1%
  Any College Attendance              13.3%           Not Available         37.8%                33.2%
Note: Numbers for the TennCare Disenrollment are based on the change in public health insurance amongst
CPS respondents from 2004–2005 to 2006–2007. Numbers for the ACA come from Kenny et al. (2012). The
numbers for the Massachusetts health reform are based on the change in public health insurance amongst
CPS respondents from 2004–2006 to 2008–2009. Numbers for the Oregon Medicaid lottery come from
Finkelstein et al. (2012). The only available age breakdown for the Oregon lottery population is 20–50 and
55–64.




                                                     47
          Table 2. Summary Statistics for Tennessee and All Other Southern States

                                                 Tennessee          Other Southern States

Any Public Coverage                                23.0%                    15.3%
Any Private Coverage                               64.5%                    65.4%

Working                                            67.8%                    68.9%
Working < 20 hours per week                        6.8%                      6.1%
Working 20-35 hours per week                       10.5%                    10.0%
Working > 35 hours per week                        50.4%                    52.7%

Has Children                                       44.3%                    45.3%

High School Dropout                                16.1%                    15.8%
High School Graduate                               37.5%                    34.9%
Some College                                       46.4%                    49.3%

White                                          81.2%                     76.6%
Black                                          16.8%                     19.6%
Other                                          2.1%                       3.8%
Note: Coverage and employment numbers come from authors’ tabulation of CPS.




                                            48
                            Table 3. The Effect of TennCare Disenrollment on Employment
                      Dependent Variable: The share of CPS respondents reporting the given outcome

                                         (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)                  (5)

                                       Has            Employed          Employed and        Employed and         Employed and
                              Public Health                              Working <20       Working 20-35          Working >35
                                 Insurance                             hours per week      hours per week       hours per week

                                                                    A. Difference-in-Difference Estimates
Tennessee × Post                    - 0.046                0.025               - 0.001               0.001               0.025
2005                                 (0.004)              (0.004)               (0.002)            (0.002)              (0.004)
                                     [0.000]              [0.000]               [0.396]             [0.643]             [0.000]

R2                                    0.871                0.867                 0.392               0.418                0.819

                                                                       B. Triple-Difference Estimates
Tennessee × Post                    - 0.073                0.046                0.002               0.018                0.026
2005 × No Children                   (0.006)              (0.010)              (0.006)            (0.005)               (0.010)
                                     [0.000]              [0.000]              [0.757]             [0.002]              [0.018]

R2                                    0.952                0.941                 0.665               0.824                0.918

Mean of dep. variable                    0.139                  0.705                0.037              0.097              0.572
Note: For Panel A, N = 136; the sample consists of state-by-year means; state and year fixed effects not shown. For Panel B,
N = 272; the sample consists of means for each state, year, and childless status; state fixed effects, year fixed effects,
childless fixed effects, and fixed effects for all possible pairwise interaction terms not shown. The standard errors in
parenthesis are robust to autocorrelation between observations from the same state; associated p -values in brackets. We
restrict the sample to southern states from 2000 through 2007.




                                                              49
       Table 4. The Effect of TennCare Disenrollment on Wages, Unemployment, and Labor Force Participation
                       Dependent Variable: Mean of the given variable among CPS respondents

                                               (1)                        (2)                     (3)                      (4)

                                        Log Wage Residualized Log Wage                  Unemployed            In Labor Force

Tennessee × Post 2005                     - 0.023                    - 0.018                 - 0.012                   0.044
× No Children                              (0.016)                    (0.012)                 (0.003)                 (0.010)
                                           [0.174]                    [0.174]                 [0.000]                 [0.000]

R2                                             0.963                       0.970                   0.772                 0.949
Note: N = 272; the sample consists of means for each state, year, and childless status; state fixed effects, year fixed
effects, childless fixed effects, and fixed effects for all possible pairwise interaction terms not shown. The standard errors
in parenthesis are robust to autocorrelation between observations from the same state; associated p -values in brackets.
We restrict the sample to southern states from 2000 through 2007. To calculate the residual wage, we regress the
logarithm of wages on a fifth-degree polynomial of age, an indicator function for gender, an indicator function for high
school dropout, high school graduate, some college, and a college degree; and all two-way interactions between age,
gender, and education variables.




                                                             50
 Table 5. The Effect of TennCare Disenrollment on Public Insurance and Employment for Those Older
                                              Than 65
            Dependent Variable: The share of CPS respondents reporting the given outcome

                                      (1)                    (2)                    (3)                 (4)

                               A. Younger than 65                             B. Older than 65
                              Has Public         Employed                  Has Public          Employed
                        Health Insurance                             Health Insurance

Tennessee × Post                 - 0.046                  0.025                 0.001                0.002
2005                              (0.004)                (0.004)               (0.004)              (0.006)
                                  [0.000]                [0.000]               [0.855]              [0.712]

R2                                 0.871                 0.867                    0.701               0.455
Note: N = 272. The sample consists of means for each state and year. State fixed effects and year fixed
effects not shown. The standard errors in parenthesis are robust to autocorrelation between observations
from the same state.




                                                    51
                             Table 6. The Effect of the TennCare Disenrollment on Private Insurance
                          Dependent Variable: The share of CPS respondents reporting the given outcome

                                          (1)                    (2)                   (3)                    (4)                   (5)

                                        Has              Employed         Employed with                     Has            Crowdout:
                               Public Health                            Private Insurance                Private           ∆ Private /
                                  Insurance                            through Employer        Health Insurance              ∆ Public

                                                            A. Difference-in-Difference Estimates
Tennessee × Post                     - 0.046                 0.025                 0.015                  0.016                - 0.346
2005                                   0.004                (0.004)               (0.004)                (0.004)                (0.091)
                                       0.000                [0.000]               [0.005]                [0.001]                [0.002]

R2                                     0.871                  0.867                 0.916                  0.927

                                                                B. Triple-Difference Estimates
Tennessee × Post                     - 0.073                  0.046                 0.042                 0.034                - 0.472
2005 × No Children                    (0.006)                (0.010)               (0.011)               (0.010)                (0.086)
                                      [0.000]                [0.000]               [0.001]               [0.004]                [0.000]

R2                                      0.952                 0.941                 0.942                  0.948

Mean of dep. variable                      0.139                  0.705                 0.515                  0.694
Note: For Panel A, N = 136; the sample consists of state-by-year means; state and year fixed effects not shown. For Panel B, N =
272; the sample consists of means for each state, year, and childless status; state fixed effects, year fixed effects, childless fixed
effects, and fixed effects for all possible pairwise interaction terms not shown. The standard errors in parenthesis are robust to
autocorrelation between observations from the same state; associated p-values in brackets. We restrict the sample to southern states
from 2000 through 2007.




                                                                  52
                                            Table 7: Heterogeneity in the Degree of Crowdout
                               Dependent Variable: The share of CPS respondents reporting the given outcome
                                                             (1)                 (2)                  (3)               (4)                 (5)
                                                        Public             Employed       Employed with             Private          Crowdout
                                                      Coverage                          Private Insurance         Coverage            Estimate
                                                                                       through Employer

                                                                                  A. Heterogeneity by Age
Triple-difference estimate for ages 21-39               - 0.070               0.010           - 0.003                0.013             - 0.180
                                                         (0.009)             (0.013)           (0.018)              (0.016)             (0.141)
                                                         [0.000]             [0.451]           [0.881]              [0.425]             [0.203]
Mean for ages 21-39                                       0.107               0.739                0.495              0.650
Triple-difference estimate for ages 40-64               - 0.083               0.060                0.058             0.040             - 0.484
                                                         (0.009)             (0.014)              (0.012)           (0.009)             (0.059)
                                                         [0.000]             [0.000]              [0.000]           [0.000]             [0.000]
Mean for ages 40-64                                       0.155               0.691                0.543              0.735
p -value of test for equality across rows                [0.345]             [0.013]              [0.007]           [0.142]             [0.021]

R2                                                        0.947               0.930                0.914              0.934
                                                                               B. Heterogeneity by Education
Triple-difference estimate for high school              - 0.289               0.125              0.087               0.153             - 0.531
dropouts                                                 (0.019)             (0.025)            (0.022)             (0.025)             (0.050)
                                                         [0.000]             [0.000]            [0.000]             [0.000]             [0.000]
Mean for high school dropouts                             0.257               0.533                0.246              0.377
Triple-difference estimate for those with a             - 0.034               0.034                0.036             0.014             - 0.419
high school diploma                                      (0.008)             (0.009)              (0.012)           (0.012)             (0.206)
                                                         [0.000]             [0.001]              [0.006]           [0.227]             [0.042]
Mean for high school graduates                            0.118               0.736                0.563              0.750
p -value of test for equality across rows                [0.000]             [0.002]              [0.054]           [0.000]             [0.588]
R2                                                        0.948               0.956                0.979              0.980
                                                                             C. Heterogeneity by Health Status
Triple-difference estimate for those who                - 0.018               0.020            - 0.014               0.028             - 1.566
report good health                                       (0.010)             (0.014)            (0.016)             (0.014)             (0.607)
                                                         [0.086]             [0.143]            [0.387]             [0.053]             [0.010]
Mean for good health                                      0.065               0.791                0.608              0.797
Triple-difference estimate for those who                - 0.091               0.053                0.061             0.039             - 0.426
report poor health                                       (0.006)             (0.011)              (0.011)           (0.011)             (0.078)
                                                         [0.000]             [0.000]              [0.000]           [0.002]             [0.000]
Mean for poor health                                      0.165               0.675                0.483              0.657
p -value of test for equality across rows                [0.000]             [0.070]              [0.001]           [0.547]             [0.047]

R2                                                            0.955               0.951            0.943               0.954
Note: N = 544. The sample consists of means for each state, year, childless status, and group. State fixed effects, year fixed effects, group
fixed effects, and fixed effects for all possible pairwise interaction terms not shown. The standard errors in parenthesis are robust to
autocorrelation between observations from the same state. We restrict the sample to southern states from 2000 through 2007. “Good
health” corresponds to respondents who report “excellent” health, and “poor health” corresponds to respondents who give any other
response.




                                                                      53
              Appendix Figure A1. Long-Term Trends in Tennessee Medicaid Enrollment

               1,500,000                                                    Overall TennCare Enrollment




               1,000,000
Number of
Tennessee                                                               Traditional Medicaid Enrollment
residents
enrolled
in Medicaid     500,000
                                                                                Enrollment in Uninsured and
                                                                                Uninsurable Programs




                      0
                           1996           1999              2002              2005               2008

                    Note: The data for this figure come from quarterly reports for TennCare.




                                                   A-1
        Appendix Figure A2. Share Publicly Insured, Triple Difference, Long-Term Trends
                                                                       TennCare
           .24                                                         Disenrollment

           .22         Tennessee,
                       No Children

            .2
                                                                              Tennessee,
Share                                                                         Has Children
covered by .18
public health
insurance
           .16

                   Other Southern
           .14     States, No Children

                                                                            Other Southern
           .12                                                              States, Has Children


            1998-1999       2000-2001       2002-2003     2004-2005     2006-2007        2008-2009       2010-11
                   Note: This figure presents the share of CPS respondents ages 21–64 without an
                   advanced degree who report being publicly insured in Tennessee versus other
                   Southern states. The figure presents means by two-year cells. See text for details.




           Appendix Figure A3. Share Employed, Triple Difference, Long-Term Trend
             .78                                                         TennCare
                                                                         Disenrollment

             .76
                                                                                         Other Southern
                                                   Tennessee,                            States, Has Children
             .74                                   Has Children

             .72
   Share
   employed .7

             .68
                      Other Southern
                      States, No Children
             .66
                              Tennessee,
                              No Children


             1998-1999        2000-2001      2002-2003     2004-2005      2006-2007       2008-2009        2010-11

                    Note: This figure presents the share of CPS respondents ages 21–64 without an
                    advanced degree who report being employed in Tennessee versus other Southern
                    states. The figure presents means by two-year cells. See text for details.



                                                    A-2
           Appendix Figure A4. Share Privately Insured, Triple Difference, Long-Term Trends

               .74                                                      TennCare
                                                Other Southern
                                                                        Disenrollment
                                                States, No Children

               .72
                                                                                        Tennessee,
                                                                                        No Children
                .7

Share          .68
covered by
private health
insurance      .66
                                      Tennessee,
                                      Has Children
               .64
                                                Other Southern
                                                States, Has Children
               .62


                1998-1999    2000-2001      2002-2003      2004-2005     2006-2007        2008-2009        2010-11

                     Note: This figure presents the share of CPS respondents ages 21–64 without an
                     advanced degree who report being privately insured in Tennessee versus other
                     Southern states. The figure presents means by two-year cells. See text for details.




                                                     A-3
             Appendix Figure A5. Share Publicly Insured, Triple Difference for Entire US
                                                                                            TennCare
                                                                                            Disenrollment

            .2


           .18         Tennessee,                                                                  Tennessee,
                       No Children                                                                 Has Children

Share
covered by .16
public health                          Other Southern
insurance                              States, Has Children
           .14


           .12
                                                                   Other Southern
                                                                   States, No Children
            .1
            2000-2001                      2002-2003                         2004-2005               2006-07
                      Note: This figure presents the share of CPS respondents ages 21–64 without an
                      advanced degree who report being covered by public health insurance in
                      Tennessee versus all other states. The figure presents means by
                      two-year cells. See text for details.

                  Appendix Figure A6. Share Employed, Triple Difference for Entire US

                 .8                                                                           TennCare
                                                                                              Disenrollment

                                                              Other Southern
                                                              States, Has Children

             .75

                                                      Tennessee,
     Share                                            Has Children
     employed
                 .7
                                            Other Southern
                                            States, No Children


                         Tennessee,
                         No Children
             .65


                 2000-2001                    2002-2003                         2004-2005               2006-07
                       Note: This figure presents the share of CPS respondents ages 21–64 without an
                       advanced degree who report being employed in Tennessee versus all other states. The
                       figure presents means by two-year cells. See text for details.



                                                       A-4
                       Appendix Figure A7. Share Privately Insured, Triple Difference for Entire US
                                                                                                TennCare
                  .8                                                                            Disenrollment


                                             Other Southern
                                             States, No Children
                                                                         Other Southern
                 .75                                                     States, Has Children
Share
covered by
private health
insurance
                  .7


                          Tennessee,
                          Has Children
                                                     Tennessee,
                                                     No Children
                 .65
                 2000-2001                     2002-2003                   2004-2005                     2006-07
                         Note: This figure presents the share of CPS respondents ages 21–64 without an
                         advanced degree who report being privately insured in Tennessee versus all other
                         states. The figure presents means by two-year cells. See text for details.




                                                         A-5
          Appendix Figure A8. The Distribution of Changes in the Public Insurance Rate, Entire US
                   40                    Change for childless adults in Tennessee,
                                         2004–2005 to 2006–2007
                   35

                   30
Number of
state-year cells 25
with given
change in public 20
insurance rate for
childless adults
                   15

                   10

                   5

                   0
                        -.08    -.06       -.04        -.02          0          .02         .04            .06   .08
                                             Change in fraction public insured
     Note: This figure presents a histogram of two-year changes in the share of adults ages 21–64 without an advanced degree
     having public health insurance for each state. The changes are computed separately for each state-year for adults without
     children in the household. The two-year changes are computed across means of two-year cells. The vertical line indicates the
     change for childless adults in Tennessee before and after the TennCare disenrollment.

               Appendix Figure A9. The Distribution of Changes in the Employment Rate, Entire US
                   40                                          Change for childless adults in Tennessee,
                                                               2004–2005 to 2006–2007
                   35

                   30
Number of
state-year cells   25
with given
change in
                   20
employment
rate for
childless adults   15

                   10

                    5

                    0
                        -.08     -.06       -.04        -.02          0          .02         .04           .06   .08
                                                   Change in fraction employed
      Note: This figure presents a histogram of two-year changes in the employment rate of adults, ages 21–64, without an
      advanced degree. The changes are computed separately for each state-year for adults without children in the household. The
      two-year changes are computed across means of two-year cells. The vertical line indicates the change for childless adults in
      Tennessee before and after the TennCare disenrollment.

                                                                A-6
                               Appendix Figure A10. Applications to SSDI

            150                                        TennCare
                                                       Disenrollment


            140


Number of
applications 130
relative to                Other
2001                       Southern
                           States
            120                                                                             Tennessee



            110



            100
                   2001            2003             2005               2007          2009               2011
                     Note: This figure presents the number of applications to the Social Security
                     Disability Insurance Program for each year. The numbers are normalized so that
                     applications in 2001 are equal to 100. See text for details.




                                                   A-7
        Appendix Table A1. Estimated Premiums for TennCare and the ACA in 2004

                                               TennCare                   Estimated ACA

Under 100%                                   No Premium                    No Premium
138%                                                $24                    No Premium
150%                                                $42                          $47
200%                                               $120                          $98
250%                                               $180                         $157
300%                                               $240                         $221
400%                                               $350                         $295
Note: This table reports estimated premiums for TennCare and the ACA as a function of
household income relative to the federal poverty line. To maximize comparability, the 2004
federal poverty line is used when computing premiums in both columns.




                                             A-8
                                      Appendix Table A2. Alternative Samples
                    Dependent Variable: The share of CPS respondents reporting the given outcome

                                   (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)

                               Public     Employed       Working     Working           Working          Private    Crowdout
                                                        <20 hours 20-35 hours         >35 hours                     Estimate
                                                         per week    per week          per week

                                                              A. 2000-2007, South Only
Tennessee × Post              - 0.073         0.046          0.002        0.018         0.026            0.034        - 0.472
2005 × No Children             (0.006)       (0.010)        (0.006)      (0.005)       (0.010)          (0.010)         0.086
                               [0.000]       [0.000]        [0.757]      [0.002]       [0.018]          [0.004]         0.000

R2                              0.952         0.941          0.665         0.824          0.918           0.948

                                                               B. 2000-2007, All States
Tennessee × Post              - 0.066         0.043          0.002         0.014         0.027           0.036        - 0.555
2005 × No Children             (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.003)      (0.003)        (0.005)         (0.005)         0.051
                               [0.000]       [0.000]        [0.526]       [0.000]       [0.000]         [0.000]         0.000

R2                              0.947         0.948          0.826         0.889          0.906           0.960

                                                              C. 2000-2011, South Only
Tennessee × Post              - 0.053         0.044        - 0.004        0.014         0.034            0.027        - 0.517
2005 × No Children             (0.009)       (0.008)        (0.003)      (0.005)       (0.008)          (0.012)         0.100
                               [0.000]       [0.000]        [0.156]      [0.008]       [0.001]          [0.033]         0.000

R2                              0.939         0.941          0.689         0.783          0.917           0.941

                                                             D. 2003-2007, South Only
Tennessee × Post              - 0.093         0.052        - 0.005       0.008         0.049             0.040        - 0.425
2005 × No Children             (0.009)       (0.010)        (0.007)     (0.005)       (0.011)           (0.012)         0.076
                               [0.000]       [0.000]        [0.475]     [0.114]       [0.001]           [0.004]         0.000

R2                               0.958        0.951         0.692           0.838          0.924           0.943
Note: For Panel A, N = 272; for Panel B, N = 816; for Panel C, N = 408; for Panel D, N = 170. The sample consists
of means for each state, year, and group. State fixed effects, year fixed effects, group fixed effects, and fixed effects for
all possible pairwise interaction terms not shown. The standard errors in parenthesis are robust to autocorrelation
between observations from the same state.




                                                             A-9
                Appendix Table A3. The Effect of TennCare Disenrollment on Employment Using Individual-Level Data
                  Dependent Variable: An indicator equal to one for CPS respondents who report the given outcome

                                             (1)                     (2)                     (3)                      (4)                     (5)

                                           Has               Employed           Employed and       Employed and                 Employed and
                                  Public Health                             Working <20 hours Working 20-35 hours           Working >35 hours
                                     Insurance                                       per week            per week                    per week

                                                                     A. Triple-Difference Estimates
Tennessee × Post                        - 0.073                   0.046                   0.002                   0.018                   0.026
2005 × No Children                       (0.004)                 (0.006)                (0.004)                  (0.003)                 (0.006)
                                         [0.000]                 [0.000]                 [0.630]                 [0.000]                 [0.001]

R2                                        0.016                   0.010                   0.002                   0.002                   0.007
N                                       233,549                 247,980                 247,980                 247,980                 247,980

                                            B. Triple-Difference Estimates with Controls for Demographic Characteristics
Tennessee × Post                        - 0.071                  0.048                 0.001                0.016                         0.030
2005 × No Children                       (0.004)                (0.006)               (0.004)              (0.003)                       (0.006)
                                         [0.000]                [0.000]               [0.834]              [0.000]                       [0.000]

R2                                        0.077                   0.111                   0.012                    0.013                    0.121
N                                       233,549                247,980                 247,980                   247,980                 247,980
Note: The sample consists of individual-level CPS data. State fixed effects, year fixed effects, childless fixed effects, and fixed effects for
all possible pairwise interaction terms not shown. The standard errors in parenthesis are robust to autocorrelation between observations
from the same state; associated p -values in brackets. We restrict the sample to southern states from 2000 through 2007. The controls
added to regressions in Panel B are: a fourth-order polynomial in age; gender; an indicator function for whether the respondent reports
being a high school graduate, attended some college, has an associate’s degree, or has a college degree; and all two-way interactions
between age, gender, and education variables.




                                                                     A-10
        Appendix Table A4. Other Triple-Difference Fixed Effects Estimates
               Dependent Variable: The share of CPS respondents
                          reporting the given outcome

                                          (1)                     (2)                     (3)

                                  Has Public             Has Private           Employed
                                      Health                 Health
                                   Insurance              Insurance


Tennessee × Post 2005                - 0.073                   0.034               0.046
× No Children                         (0.004)                 (0.007)             (0.006)
                                      [0.000]                 [0.000]             [0.000]

Tennessee × Post 2005                - 0.004                 - 0.003              - 0.002
                                      (0.004)                 (0.005)              (0.005)
                                      [0.417]                 [0.464]              [0.650]

Tennessee × No                       - 0.014                 - 0.013              - 0.007
Children                              (0.012)                 (0.010)              (0.008)
                                      [0.272]                 [0.198]              [0.405]

Post 2005 × No                         0.011                   0.008              - 0.001
Children                              (0.004)                 (0.007)              (0.006)
                                      [0.018]                 [0.266]              [0.898]

    2
R                                      0.644                   0.797                0.752

Note: N = 272; the sample consists of means for each state, year, and childless
status; state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and childless-status fixed effects not
shown. The standard errors in parenthesis are robust to autocorrelation between
observations from the same state. Standard errors for crowdout calculated via the
delta method.




                                          A-11
              Appendix Table A5. The Effect of TennCare Disenrollment on Source of Private Insurance
               Dependent Variable: The share of CPS respondents reporting the given type of insurance

                                               (1)                     (2)                      (3)                      (4)

                                Has Employer-          Employed but No              Employed and                 Individual
                             Provided Insurance       Employer-Provided               Uninsured                  Insurance
                                                              Insurance


Tennessee × Post 2005                      0.049                  - 0.013                    0.007                 - 0.008
× No Children                             (0.009)                  (0.005)                  (0.005)                 (0.007)
                                          [0.000]                  [0.017]                  [0.206]                 [0.278]

R2                                          0.950                    0.924                   0.938                    0.812

Mean of dep. variable                          0.641                     0.186                   0.127                 0.063
Note: N = 272; the sample consists of means for each state, year, and childless status; state fixed effects, year fixed
effects, childless fixed effects, and fixed effects for all possible pairwise interaction terms not shown. The standard
errors in parenthesis are robust to autocorrelation between observations from the same state; associated p -values in
brackets. We restrict the sample to southern states from 2000 through 2007.




                                                           A-12
                                   Appendix Table A6. Heterogeneity in the Degree of Crowdout By Gender
                                 Dependent Variable: The share of CPS respondents reporting the given outcome
                                            (1)                   (2)                                         (3)                   (4)
                                                 Public            Employed           Employed with               Private             Crowdout
                                               Coverage                             Private Insurance           Coverage               Estimate
                                                                                   through Employer

Triple-difference estimate for                    - 0.068                0.072                 0.064                 0.029                - 0.433
men                                                (0.007)              (0.015)               (0.012)               (0.013)                (0.118)
                                                   [0.000]              [0.000]               [0.000]               [0.034]                [0.000]
Mean for men                                        0.115                 0.778                0.560                 0.690
Triple-difference estimate for                    - 0.078                0.025                 0.018                 0.040                - 0.508
women                                              (0.007)              (0.009)               (0.012)               (0.009)                (0.075)
                                                   [0.000]              [0.006]               [0.141]               [0.000]                [0.000]
Mean for women                                      0.157                 0.643                0.481                 0.703
p -value of test for equality                     [0.329]                [0.009]              [0.012]               [0.534]               [0.449]

R2                                                   0.948                 0.970                0.954                 0.942
Note: N = 544. The sample consists of means for each state, year, childless status, and group. State fixed effects, year fixed effects, group
fixed effects, and fixed effects for all possible pairwise interaction terms not shown. The standard errors in parenthesis are robust to
autocorrelation between observations from the same state. We restrict the sample to southern states from 2000 through 2007.




                                                                        A-13
