                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 SLOW MOVING DEBT CRISES

                                          Guido Lorenzoni
                                           Ivan Werning

                                        Working Paper 19228
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19228


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2013




We thank comments and suggestions from Fernando Broner, Emmanuel Farhi, Pablo Kurlat and Hugo
Hopenhayn. Greg Howard provided valuable research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Guido Lorenzoni and Ivan Werning. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Slow Moving Debt Crises
Guido Lorenzoni and Ivan Werning
NBER Working Paper No. 19228
July 2013
JEL No. E6,F3,F34

                                             ABSTRACT

What circumstances or policies leave sovereign borrowers at the mercy of self-fulfilling increases
in interest rates? To answer this question, we study the dynamics of debt and interest rates in a model
where default is driven by insolvency. Fiscal deficits and surpluses are subject to shocks but influenced
by a fiscal policy rule. Whenever possible the government issues debt to meet its current obligations
and defaults otherwise. We show that low and high interest rate equilibria may coexist. Higher interest
rates, prompted by fears of default, lead to faster debt accumulation, validating default fears. We call
such an equilibrium a slow moving crisis, in contrast to rollover crises where investor runs precipitate
immediate default. We investigate how the existence of multiple equilibria is affected by the fiscal
policy rule, the maturity of debt, and the level of debt.


Guido Lorenzoni
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
guido.lorenzoni@northwestern.edu

Ivan Werning
MIT Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive, E51-251a
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
iwerning@mit.edu
                         Slow Moving Debt Crises∗
                         Guido Lorenzoni                        Iván Werning
                    Northwestern University                            MIT

                                             June 2013


                                               Abstract
       What circumstances or policies leave sovereign borrowers at the mercy of self-fulfilling
       increases in interest rates? To answer this question, we study the dynamics of debt
       and interest rates in a model where default is driven by insolvency. Fiscal deficits
       and surpluses are subject to shocks but influenced by a fiscal policy rule. Whenever
       possible the government issues debt to meet its current obligations and defaults other-
       wise. We show that low and high interest rate equilibria may coexist. Higher interest
       rates, prompted by fears of default, lead to faster debt accumulation, validating de-
       fault fears. We call such an equilibrium a slow moving crisis, in contrast to rollover
       crises where investor runs precipitate immediate default. We investigate how the ex-
       istence of multiple equilibria is affected by the fiscal policy rule, the maturity of debt,
       and the level of debt.



1     Introduction
Yields on sovereign bonds for Italy, Spain and Portugal shot up dramatically in late 2010
with nervous investors suddenly casting the sustainability of debt in these countries into
doubt. An important concern for policy makers was the possibility that higher interest
rates were self fulfilling. High interest rates, the argument goes, contribute to the rise
in debt over time, eventually driving countries into insolvency, thus, justifying higher
interest rates in the first place.
    Yields subsided in the late summer of 2012 after the European Central Bank’s presi-
dent, Mario Draghi, unveiled plans to purchase sovereign bonds to help sustain their mar-
ket price. A view based on self-fulfilling crises can help justify such lender-of-last-resort
    ∗ We
      thank comments and suggestions from Fernando Broner, Emmanuel Farhi, Pablo Kurlat and Hugo
Hopenhayn. Greg Howard provided valuable research assistance.

                                                   1
interventions to rule out bad equilibria. Indeed, this view was articulated by Draghi dur-
ing the news conference (September 6th, 2012) announcing the OMT bond-purchasing
program,

       “The assessment of the Governing Council is that we are in a situation now
       where you have large parts of the Euro Area in what we call a bad equilibrium,
       namely an equilibrium where you have self-fulfilling expectations. You may
       have self-fulfilling expectations that generate, that feed upon themselves, and
       generate adverse, very adverse scenarios. So there is a case for intervening to,
       in a sense, break these expectations [...]”

If this view is correct, a credible announcement is all it takes to rule out bad equilibria,
no bond purchases need to be carried out. To date, this is exactly how it seems to have
played out. There have been no purchases by the ECB and no countries have applied to
the OMT program.
    In this paper we investigate the possibility of self-fulfilling crises of this nature using
a simple dynamic model of sovereign debt. Calvo (1988) first formalized the feedback
between interest rates and debt sustainability, showing that it opens the door to multiple
equilibria.1 Our contribution is to cast this feedback mechanism in a dynamic setting, fo-
cusing on the conditions for multiple equilibria. A distinguishing feature of our approach
is to take the government’s fiscal policy as given and focus on the coordination problem
among investors. In our model, default is driven by insolvency, not strategic considera-
tions. Default occurs only when the government is unable to finance debt payments. The
fiscal policy rules we adopt follows the literature studying debt sustainability (e.g. Bohn,
2005; Ghosh et al., 2011) and the interaction of fiscal and monetary policy (e.g. Leeper,
1991).
    In the model, the government faces a fluctuating path of fiscal surpluses or deficits,
that are affected by shocks and the current debt level. Each period, it attempts to meet
these obligations by visiting a credit market, issuing bonds to a large group of risk-neutral
investors. The capacity to borrow is limited endogenously by the prospect of future re-
payment and default occurs when a government’s need for funds exceeds this borrowing
capacity. In equilibrium, bond prices incorporate the probability of default.
    We consider, in turn, both the cases with short-term and long-term bonds. In the case
of short-term debt, we show that the equilibrium bond price function (mapping the state
of the economy into bond prices) is uniquely determined. However, this does not imply
   1 For
       recent extensions of this framework applied to the European crisis see Corsetti and Dedola (2011)
and Corsetti and Dedola (2013).


                                                   2
that the equilibrium is unique. Multiplicity arises from what we call a Laffer curve effect:
revenue from a bond auction is non-monotone in the amount of bonds issued. If the
borrower targets a given level of revenue, then there are multiple bond prices consistent
with an equilibrium.
    With long-term bonds the price function is no longer uniquely determined, because a
bad equilibrium with lower bond prices in the future now feeds back into current bond
prices. In addition, the existence of a good and bad equilibrium may be temporary. For
example, if we follow the bad equilibrium path for a sufficiently long period of time,
the debt level may reach a level for which there exists a unique continuation equilibrium
with high interest rates; the bad equilibrium may set in. In the context of examples, we
show that our analysis can be used to identify a “safe” region of parameters, for which
the equilibrium is unique. In particular, the safe region corresponds to a low initial debt
level and to high responsiveness of the surplus to debt in the fiscal policy rule.
    We label a high interest rate equilibrium a “slow moving crisis” to capture the fact
that it develops over time through the accumulation of debt. The label distinguishes
the type of crises we study here from liquidity or rollover debt crises, which have been
studied by Giavazzi and Pagano (1989), Alesina et al. (1992), Cole and Kehoe (1996) and
many others. A liquidity crisis is due to a coordination failure between current investors,
who pull out of the market entirely, leading to a failed bond auction; complete lack of
credit then triggers default, analogous to depositors running on banks.2 Interestingly,
in our model with long term debt, a slow moving crisis, by its very nature is due to a
breakdown in the coordination of investors at different dates. As a result, it cannot be
averted by coordinating investors meeting in a given market at a certain moment of time.
    If, instead, the borrower could commit to a certain bond issuance, this would elim-
inate the multiplicity problem. This is the assumption implicitly or explicitly adopted
by virtually all sovereign debt models following the seminal paper by Eaton and Gerso-
vitz (1981). Of course, this can be viewed as a selection criterion, useful for sidestepping
issues of multiplicity, or for exploring other sources of multiplicity, such as the rollover
crises introduced in Cole and Kehoe (2000). In contrast we assume that the borrower can-
not commit to a certain bond issuance, because it cannot adjust its spending needs. Thus,
it will issue the bonds needed to finance its obligations.
    It may seem at first reasonable to assume that borrowers can control the amount of
bonds issued. In fact, this is certainly the case in the very short run, during any given
market transaction or offer. However, this is not the relevant question. To see why, con-
   2 Chamon (2007) argues that this coordination problem can be and is solved in practice by the manner in
which bonds are underwritten and offered for purchase to investors by investment banks.


                                                    3
sider a borrower showing up to market with some given amount of bonds to sell. If the
price turns out to be lower than expected the borrower may quickly return to offer addi-
tional bonds for sale to make up the difference in funding. The important point is that the
overall size of the bond issuance remains endogenous to the bond price.
    To formalize this idea, we provide a simple optimizing model where a government
can actually choose bond issuance, but lacks commitment. Preferences are not additively
separable: lower funds acquired in the market today increasing the desire for greater
funds tomorrow. We also assume a preference for early funding.3 We show that there are
multiple subgame-perfect equilibria, with different bond prices. In all these equilibria,
the government issues bonds only in the first period, financing a given level of spending.
Thus, the model provides a microfoundation for the assumption we maintain throughout
in the rest of the paper.


2     Solvency, Default and Debt Dynamics
In this section we introduce the basic sovereign debt model that we build on in later
sections. Our environment is closest to Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), Arellano (2008) and
Ghosh et al. (2011), except that these contributions, implicitly or explicitly, select a unique
equilibrium. Another important feature of our approach is to treat government policy as
given. This allows us to focus on investors in sovereign credit markets. Multiple self-
fulfilling interest rates arise due to the coordination problem these investors play.
    We start by assuming that all borrowing is short term, that the primary surplus is
completely exogenous and that there is zero recovery after default. All these assumptions
are relaxed later.


2.1     Borrowers and Investors
Time is discrete with periods t = 1, 2, . . . , T. A finite horizon is not crucial, but makes
arguments simpler and ensures that multiplicity is not driven by an infinite horizon.


Government. The government generates a sequence of primary fiscal surpluses {st },
representing total taxes collected minus total outlays on government purchases and trans-
fers (st is negative in the case of a deficit). We take the stochastic process {st } as exoge-
    3 Both assumptions seem reasonable. For example, investment spending on infrastructure requires some
total outlay over an extended time horizon, but with a preference for early completion. As another example
consider the payment of government wages. Suppose payment can be delayed, if needed, but at a cost,
because workers are impatient and demand compensation.


                                                    4
nously given and assume it is bounded above by s̄ < ∞. Let st = (s1 , s2 , . . . , st ) denote a
history up to period t. In period t, st is drawn from a continuous c.d.f. F st |st−1 .4
                                                                                       

    The government attempts to finance {st } by selling non-contingent debt to a contin-
uum of investors in competitive credit markets. Absent default, the government budget
constraint in period t < T is

                                     q t ( s t ) · bt + 1 ( s t ) = bt ( s t − 1 ) − s t ,                   (1)

where bt represents debt due in period t and qt is the price of a bond issued at t that is
due at t + 1. In the last period, bT +1 (s T ) = 0 and avoiding default requires

                                                  s T ≥ b T ( s T −1 ).

We write this last period constraint as an inequality, instead of an equality, to allow larger
surpluses than those needed to service the debt. Of course, the resulting slack would be
redirected towards lower taxes or increased spending and transfers, but we abstain from
describing such a process.5
    We assume that the government honors its debts whenever possible, so that default
occurs only if the surplus and potential borrowing are insufficient to refinance outstand-
ing debt. For now, we assume that if a default does occur bond holders lose everything;
this assumption will be relaxed later. Let χ(st ) = 1 record full repayment and χ(st ) = 0
denote a default episode.
    Our focus is on the debt dynamics during normal times or during crises leading up
to a default. Consequently, we characterize the outcome up to the first default episode
and abstain from describing the post-default outcomes. Specifically, for any realization of
surpluses {st }tT=0 we only specify the outcome for debt and prices bt+1 (st ) and qt (st ) in
period t if χ(sτ ) = 1 for all τ ≤ t.6 Similarly, one can interpret st as the surplus in periods
t prior to default; default may alter future surpluses, but we need not model this fact to
solve for the evolution of debt before default.7
   4 In  applications it will be convenient to make the Markov assumption and write F (st | st−1 ), but at this
point nothing is gained by this restriction.
   5 It is best not to interpret the finite horizon literally. One can imagine, instead, that the last “period” T

represents a an infinite continuation of periods. As long as all uncertainty is realized by T one can collapse
the remaining periods from T onwards into the last period.
   6 This is possible because we abstract from modeling government welfare. In models where default is

the result of an optimizing government, future variables enter its decision.
   7 Perhaps default alters future primary surpluses—for example, if creditors punish debtors or if default-

ing debtors adjust taxes and spending to the new financial circumstances.




                                                              5
Investors and Bond Prices. Each period there is a group of wealthy risk-neutral in-
vestors that compete in the credit market and ensure that the equilibrium price of a short
term debt equals
                               qt (st ) = βE[χt+1 (st+1 ) | st ].


2.2   Equilibrium in Debt Markets
An equilibrium specifies {bt+1 (st ),qt (st ),χt (st )} such that for all histories st with no cur-
rent χt (st ) = 1 or prior default χτ (sτ ) = 1 for all sτ the government budget constraint
(1) must hold and the price of the bond must satisfy qt (st ) = βE[χt+1 (st+1 ) | st ]. In ad-
dition, the government attempts to repay and we stipulate that default occurs only when
inevitable, a notion formalized by the following backward-induction argument.
    In the last period the government repays if and only if s T ≥ bT . The price of debt
equals                                              
                       q T −1 = β 1 − F b T | s T −1     ≡ Q T −1 ( b T , s T −1 ).

Define the maximal debt capacity by8

                              m T −1 (s T −1 ) ≡ max Q T −1 (b0 , s T −1 )b0 ,
                                                   b0

where b0 represents next period’s debt, bT in this case.
  The government seeks to finance bT −1 − s T −1 in period T − 1 by accessing the bond
market. This is possible if and only if

                                   b T −1 − s T −1 ≤ m T −1 ( s T −1 ).

We assume that whenever this condition is met the government does indeed manage to
finance its needs and avoid default; otherwise, when bT −1 − s T −1 > m T −1 (s T −1 ), the
government defaults on its debt.
    Turning to period T − 2, investors anticipate that the government will default in the
next period whenever s T −1 < bT −1 − m T −1 (s T −1 ). Thus, the bond price equals
                                                                
           q T −2 = β Pr s T −1 ≥ bT −1 − m T −1 (s T −1 )|s T −2 ≡ Q T −2 (bT −1 , s T −2 ).
  8 Themaximum is well defined because the function involved is continuous and we can restrict the
maximization to 0 ≤ b ≤ s, since b < 0 yields negative values and b > s̄ yields zero.




                                                     6
The maximal debt capacity in period T − 2 is then

                             m T −2 (s T −2 ) ≡ max Q T −2 (b0 , s T −2 )b0 .
                                                  b0


Again, default is avoided if and only if bT −2 − s T −2 ≤ m T −2 (s T −2 ). The probability of this
event determines bond prices in period T − 3.
   Continuing in this way we can solve for the debt limits and price functions in all earlier
periods by the recursion
                                                                     
                     mt (st ) = max β Pr st+1 ≥ b0 − mt+1 (st+1 ) | st · b0
                                  b0

and the associated price functions
                                                                         
                        Qt (b0 , st ) ≡ β Pr st+1 ≥ b0 − mt+1 (st+1 ) | st .

   Returning to the conditions for an equilibrium sequence {bt+1 (st ),qt (st ),χt (st )}, we
require that for all histories st where bt (st−1 ) − st ≤ mt (st ) that χt (st ) = 1 and bt+1 (st )
solve
                          Q t ( bt + 1 ( s t ) , s t ) · bt + 1 ( s t ) = bt ( s t − 1 ) − s t . (2)

   Interestingly, both the maximal debt capacity function {m} and the price functions
{ Q} are uniquely determined. As we show next, this does not imply that the equilibrium
path for debt is unique.


3     Self-Fulfilling Debt Crisis
In this section we study the model laid out in the previous section. We first show that
there are multiple equilibria, with different self-fulfilling interest rates and debt dynamics.
We then extend the model by including a recovery value and by allowing surpluses to
react to debt levels.


3.1   Multiple Equilibria in the Basic Model
Define the correspondence

                             Bt (b, st ) = {b0 | Qt (b0 , st )b0 = b − st }.




                                                    7
Note that Bt (b, st ) is nonempty for all b ≤ mt st + st and empty for b > mt st + st .
                                                                                           

When b < mt st + st the set Bt (b, st ) contains at least two values, since Qt (b0 , st )b0 attains
                  

a strictly positive maximum mt st for some b0 ∈ [0, T s̄] and Qt (b0 , st )b0 → 0 as both
                                     

b0 → 0 and b0 → ∞.
    Define the policy function with the lowest debt

                                       Bt (b, st ) = min Bt (b, st ),

and let {bt+1 (st )} to be the path generated by

                                     b t ( s t −1 ) = B t ( b t +1 ( s t ), s t ).

Eaton and Gersovitz (1981) and much of the subsequent literature on sovereign debt pro-
ceeds by selecting this low debt equilibrium outcome. Here we are concerned with the
possibility of other outcomes with higher debt.

Proposition 1 (Multiplicity). Any sequence for debt {bt+1 } satisfying

                                       bt+1 (st ) ∈ Bt (b(st−1 ), st )

until Bt (b(st−1 ), st ) is empty is part of an equilibrium. If b1 − s1 < m1 (s1 ) or T ≥ 3 then there
are at least two equilibrium paths. In any equilibrium

                                 bt + 1 ( s t ) ≥ b t + 1 ( s t )       for all st .

     Figure 1 plots two possibilities for the revenue acquired in the credit market Qt (b0 , st )b0
as a function of b0 . This function achieves a maximum at an interior debt level because
higher debt increases the probability of default, which destroys bond holder value. We
sometimes refer to the revenue curve as a Laffer curve. The “good side” of the Laffer
curve is the increasing section with lowest debt issuance and interest rates. The left panel
shows a case with a unique local maximum; the right panel shows another possibility
with several local maxima.
     The government needs to finance bt (st−1 ) − st . In the figure, this level is represented
by the dashed horizontal line. In the case depicted, there are two equilibrium values for
bt+1 (st ). The low-debt equilibrium features a lower interest rate, i.e. a higher bond price
qt (st ) (rays through the origin in the figure). As discussed earlier, most of the sovereign
debt models in the Eaton and Gersovitz (1981) tradition select this good side of the Laffer
curve.

                                                           8
      q · b0                                          q · b0




                                             b0                                         b0


Figure 1: The revenue function without recovery value. Left panel shows a case with 2
equilibria; right panel shows a case with 4 equilibria.


    The high-debt equilibrium, on the bad side of the Laffer curve is sustained by a higher
interest rate that is self fulfilling: a lower bond price forces the government to sell more
bonds to meet its financial obligations; this higher debt leads to a higher probability of
default, lowering the price of the bond and justifying the pessimistic outlook. This two-
way feedback between high interest rates and debt sustains multiple equilibria.
    The possibility of being on the wrong side of the Laffer curve is reminiscent of Calvo
(1988). His paper highlighted a two-way feedback between higher interest and lower
repayment on domestic debt in a model with an optimizing government choosing the
haircut in a partial default and facing convex costs of taxation. Although the models
are quite different the presence of a feedback between interest rates and indebtedness is
similar.
    In Figure 1 we show two cases. The first panel displays a case with two equilibrium
interest rates for any given level of financial needs, bt (st−1 ) − st . Along this good side
of the Laffer curve, higher current debt bt (st−1 ) raises the equilibrium interest rate, i.e. it
lowers qt (st ). This comparative static is intuitive. In contrast, on the bad side of the Laffer
curve the interest rate is lower if the government need for funds is higher. This compara-
tive static is counterintuitive and constitute one argument against the plausibility of these
equilibria. Relatedly, on the bad side of the Laffer curve, equilibria may be seen as “unsta-
ble” in the Walrasian sense that any small increase in the price of bonds would (mechani-
cally) reduce the supply of bonds issued by the government, and increase the demand by
investors (to infinity, because investors are risk neutral). They are also unlikely to be sta-
ble with respect to most formalizations of learning dynamics. Moreover, Frankel, Morris
and Pauzner (2003) show that global games would not select such equilibria. Adopting
such refinements, the case in the left panel leaves us with a unique candidate equilibrium.
    However, as the right panel illustrates, the Laffer curve Qt (b0 , st )b0 may display mul-
tiple peaks. This implies the existence of three or more equilibria for high enough values


                                                  9
of bt (st−1 ) − st . Equilibria on upward portions of the Laffer curve are “stable” and posses
intuitive comparative statics; a refinement criterion based on stability does not discard
them.
    Interestingly, even in a case such as the one depicted in the right panel, a selection
criterion based on stability does imply uniqueness for low enough levels of bt (st−1 ) − st .
Thus, high debt bt (st−1 ) makes the borrower vulnerable to a self-fulfilling high interest
rate equilibrium, while low debt makes the borrower safe from such a fate. A similar con-
clusion is reached in models focusing on liquidity or rollover crises Giavazzi and Pagano
(1989), Alesina et al. (1992), Cole and Kehoe (1996), although the reason there has to do
with the willingness to adjust spending to pay bond holders.
    Although stability does not rule out multiplicity, it does require primitives that lead
to a Laffer curve that is not single peaked. As we shall see, in the model with long term
debt this is no longer the case and multiple stable equilibria are possible, even when the
analog of Qt (b0 , st )b0 is single peaked.
    Prior to default an equilibrium makes a selection from the correspondence Bt in each
period. The entire set of equilibria is generated by considering all the permutations of
these selections for t = 1, 2, . . . , T − 1. Note that the current period’s correspondence Bt ,
maximum debt capacity mt (st ), and the Laffer curve Qt (b0 , st )b0 are all independent of
the equilibrium that is selected in past or future periods. This implies that expectations
of a “bad” equilibrium arising in the future has no consequence on the ability of the
government to raise funds today. As we shall see, this property rests on the assumption
of short term debt and no longer holds in Section 4 when we introduce longer term debt.
However, even in the setting with short-term debt, past interest rates have an effect on
current interest rates through inherited debt. Thus, if the the bad equilibrium interest rate
was selected yesterday this raises the interest rate today, even if the good equilibrium is
being played today.


3.2   Recovery Value
We now generalize the model by adding a recovery value for debt. We assume that if the
government defaults debtors seize a fraction φ ∈ [0, 1) of the available surplus, so that
                                                                             ˆ   bT
                               T −1
                                                 
                                                           T −1
                                                                      β                               
            Q T −1 ( b T , s          ) = β 1 − F bT | s               + φ            s T dF s T |s T −1
                                                                        bT   0




                                                       10
       q · b0                                                                q · b0




                                                                   b0                                                               b0
                      (a) A case with 2 equilibria.                                    (b) A case with 4 equilibria.


 Figure 2: The revenue function with recovery value displaying two equilibrium points.

Defining the revenue function

                                                                                                           ˆ   bT                     
               T −1                          T −1                                     T −1
  G ( bT , s          ) ≡ Q T −1 ( b T , s          ) bT = β 1 − F bT | s                         bT + βφ               s T dF s T |s T −1
                                                                                                               0

note that

                   ∂                                                                  
                      G ( b T , s T −1 ) = β 1 − F b T | s T −1 − β (1 − φ ) f b T | s T −1 b T
                  ∂bT

may be positive or negative. However,

                                          lim G (bT , s T −1 ) = βE[s T |s T −1 ] > 0,
                                        bT → ∞


implying that there is a region of low current debt with a unique equilibrium. The same
is true in earlier periods.

Proposition 2. Suppose the recovery value from default is positive, φ > 0. Given any history st ,
then for low enough current debt bt (st−1 ) there exists a unique value for bt+1 (st ) satisfying

                                      Q t ( bt + 1 ( s t ) , s t ) · bt + 1 ( s t ) = bt ( s t − 1 ) − s t .

Multiple solutions may exist for high enough levels of current debt bt (st−1 ).

    Figure 2 illustrates the situation. In both panels, for high debt there may still be mul-
tiple equilibria, but for sufficiently small debt only the good side of the Laffer curve is
available. Once again, two panels are displayed. In the first, the Laffer curve is single
peaked, and in the the second panel, the Laffer curve has multiple peaks. The impor-
tant point is that, in both cases, for low enough debt levels of bt (st−1 ) − st , there exists a
unique equilibrium—even without invoking a refinement based on stability.

                                                                        11
3.3   Fiscal Rules
When debt is high, governments tend to make efforts to increase surpluses in order to
stabilize debt. To capture this we make surpluses partially endogenous, by assuming a
dependence with the current debt level.
    The distribution of fiscal surplus now depends on the current level of debt, in addition
to the past history,
                                     s t ∼ F ( s t | s t − 1 , bt ) .

Fiscal policy rules of this kind are commonly adopted in the literature studying solvency
(e.g. Bohn, 2005; Ghosh et al., 2011) as well as the literature studying the interaction of
monetary and fiscal policy (e.g. Leeper, 1991).
    The recursion defining an equilibrium is similar
                                                                                 
                        t                         0          t +1      t      0
                   mt (s ) = max β Pr st+1 ≥ b − mt+1 (s            )|s , b           b0 ,
                                    b0
                                                                                 
                            0   t                 0          t +1      t      0
                     Qt (b , s ) ≡ β Pr st+1 ≥ b − mt+1 (s          )|s , b           .

Fiscal rules may have an important impact on debt limits mt (st ) as well as on the existence
of multiple equilibria. Rather than explore this idea in the present context, we will do so
in the model with long-term bonds in Section 4.


3.4   Discussion
An important departure in our modeling strategy, relative to virtually all the existing dy-
namic sovereign debt literature, is to assume that the government cannot commit to issue
a fixed amount of bonds in a given period. Instead, following Calvo (1988), the govern-
ment only determines its net borrowing needs for the period. The amount of bonds issued
and their price are both determined by the market. We believe this assumption is both
realistic and worth pursuing, since it opens the door to a different and interesting kind of
“slow moving” bad equilibrium that needs to play out over time by the accumulation of
debt. Section 5 provides a simple microfoundation for this assumption.
    We have assumed that whenever there exists a bond price that can prevents default,
then one such price is selected. Given this, we have constructed a unique bond price func-
tion. Another possibility, at the heart of the multiplicity in Giavazzi and Pagano (1989),
Alesina et al. (1992) and Cole and Kehoe (2000), is a liquidity crisis, interpreted as a run
by investors, leading to qt = 0 and default. In our model, with additional assumptions,



                                             12
which we will not elaborate on, liquidity crises leading to qt = 0 may exist.9 However,
we purposefully exclude these equilibria to focus on a different source of multiplicity.


4      Long Term Debt and Slow Moving Crises
We now generalize the model to allow for bonds of longer maturity. This is important for
a number of reasons. First of all, short term debt is not a realistic assumption for most
advanced economies (e.g. Arellano and Ramanarayanan, 2012). For example, the average
maturity from 2000-2009 for Greece, Spain, Portugal and Italy was 5-7 years. Second, a
common concern with short term debt is that it makes the government more susceptible
to debt crises. Cole and Kehoe (1996) discuss this idea, in the context of roll-over runs.
Since the source of multiplicity is different in our model, it is of interest to understand
whether long term debt reduces the potential for multiplicity. Third, as we showed, in
our model with short term debt the current equilibria are unaffected by the selection of
future equilibria. Thus, the expectation of a bad equilibrium being selected in the future
does nothing to current borrowing limits or interest rates. We shall see that this conclusion
is special to the short term debt assumption. Finally, long-term debt creates the possibility
of multiple stable equilibria for a different reason than what was discussed in the case of
short term debt.


4.1        Adding Long Term Bonds to the Basic Model
We assume that the government issues bonds with geometrically decreasing coupons: a
bond issued at t promises to pay a sequence of coupons κ, (1 − δ) κ, (1 − δ)2 κ, ... where
δ ∈ (0, 1) and κ > 0 are fixed parameters. Of course, these payments are made only in the
absence of default. This well-known formulation of long-term bonds is useful because
it avoids having to carry the entire distribution of past vintages of long-term bonds (see
Hatchondo and Martinez, 2009). A bond of this kind issued at time t − j is equivalent to
(1 − δ) j bonds issued at time t. As a result, there is a unique state variable for the entire
distribution of past bonds; likewise, we need only keep track of one (normalized) price.
    The entire issuance of past bonds can be summarized by the level of current bond
    9 Tojustify such a run equilibrium, additional assumptions are required to describe what happens after
a default. Suppose default entailed no direct punishment or exclusion. Supposing momentarily that qt = 0
occurs and triggers default on past debt that come due, the remaining question is whether the government
can issue bonds and command a positive price for them. Cole and Kehoe assume that a default on current
debt implies exclusion in the next period. In our model, especially when we include a recovery value from
debt, then the answer may depend on the details of the modeling assumption.



                                                   13
equivalents which we denote by bt with budget constraint

                       qt (st ) · (bt+1 (st ) − (1 − δ) bt (st−1 )) = κbt (st−1 ) − st .

One can interpret this as follows. Current bond equivalents pay a coupon κ but depreciate
at rate δ. As a result, if bt+1 (st ) = (1 − δ) bt (st−1 ) this corresponds to the situation where
no new bond issuances are taking place.
    We assume that the current surplus is affected by last period’s surplus and the level of
current debt
                                         s t ∼ F ( s t | s t −1 , bt ) ;

to simplify, this drops the potential dependence on the past history st−2 .
    We allow for some positive recovery in the event of default. Namely, we assume that if
default occurs the value of debt is negotiated down to a recovery value v (st ). The pricing
condition now takes the form

  qt = βEt [1 + (1 − δ) qt+1 |No default at t + 1] Pr [No default at t + 1]
                                             + Et [v (st+1 ) |Default at t + 1] Pr [Default at t + 1] .

   Since bonds are eternal, we cannot assume a finite horizon. Instead, we assume that
the horizon is infinite, but that all uncertainty is resolved after a finite horizon T: in all
periods t ≥ T the surplus is constant at the value s T . This effectively allows us to start
our analysis at time T and solve for an equilibrium backwards, as before.
   The no-default price of long term bonds at date T is

                                                     βκ
                                         q∗ ≡                  = 1.
                                                1 − β (1 − δ )

where we have adopted the normalization κ = 1/β − 1 + δ to ensure that q∗ = 1.
   From period T onwards, the country is able to repay the coupons due and keep debt
constant whenever
                               s T ≥ κbT − δbT = rbT ,
                        1
where r = κ − δ =       β   − 1.10 In period T − 1, the price of long term bonds is then

                                                                         ˆ   rbT
     Q T −1 (bT , s T −1 ) = β (κ + 1) (1 − F (rbT |s T −1 , bT )) + β             v (s T ) dF (s T |s T −1 , bT ) .
                                                                             −∞
  10 Once again, the budget constraint is written as an inequality in the last period.
                                                                                     Of course, if the inequal-
ity holds with slack we can interpret the true surplus as adjusting to reach equality.


                                                      14
Using this function we define the maximal revenue from debt issuance at T − 1 by

                  m T −1 (bT −1 , s T −1 ) ≡ max { Q T −1 (bT , s T −1 ) (bT − (1 − δ)bT −1 )} .
                                                      bT


We assume that no default occurs at T − 1 whenever the government needs to issue less
than the maximal possible so that

                                             b T −1 ≤ m T −1 ( b T −1 , s T −1 ) + s T −1 .

Let R T −1 denote the subset of pairs (bT −1 , s T −1 ) where this inequality holds, so that the
government is able to meet its financial obligations; we assume that default occurs other-
wise.
    Unlike the case with short-term date, before proceeding to earlier periods we need to
select an equilibrium at T − 1, picking a value for bT that satisfies

                             Q T −1 (bT , s T −1 ) (bT − (1 − δ) bT −1 ) = κbT −1 − s T −1 ,                         (3)

for each bT −1 and s T −1 . Let BT (bT −1 , s T −1 ) denote any such selection. The domain of the
function BT is precisely R T −1 , all situations where default is avoidable.
    We now describe the recursion for earlier periods t ≤ T − 2. Given Qt+1 , mt+1 , Rt+1 ,
Bt+2 , we can compute the price
                             ˆ
  Q t ( bt + 1 , s t ) = β                1 + Qt+1 ( Bt+2 (bt+1 , st+1 ) , st+1 ) dF (st+1 | st , bt+1 )
                                                                                 
                                 R t +1
                                                                               ˆ
                                                                          +β        v (st+1 ) dF (st+1 | st , bt+1 ) ,
                                                                                     Rct+1


the debt limit
                                  mt (bt , st ) ≡ max Qt (bt+1 , st ) · (bt+1 − (1 − δ)bt )
                                                    bt +1

the set Rt = {(bt , st ) | bt < mt (bt , st ) + st } of repayment and a new selection Bt+1 (bt , st )
function defined over the domain Rt solving

                        Qt ( Bt+1 (bt , st ), st ) · ( Bt+1 (bt , st ) − (1 − δ) bt ) = κbt − st .

Proceeding in the same way we can compute { Qt , mt , Rt , Bt+1 }.




                                                                  15
   The dynamics for debt can now be computed by iterating

                                 bt+1 (st ) = Bt+1 (bt (st−1 ), st )

until
                                              ( bt , s t ) ∈
                                                           / Rt

at which point default occurs.
    The introduction of long-term bonds produces important differences with the model
of Section 2. With long-term bonds it is no longer possible to define the maximal revenue
m without having a rule for selecting equilibria in the future. A simple approach is to
assume that whenever multiple solutions to (3) are possible, we select the one with the
lowest level of bt . But other selections are possible, leaving to different paths for the
maximal debt revenue m. This means that by selecting equilibria in different ways, one
obtains a range of maximal debt revenues. This also means that a country’s debt capacity
at time t is influenced by investors’ expectations about the potential for multiple equilibria
in the future. This introduces the possibility of slow moving crises, which we explore in
the next section.


Laffer Curves.          When long-term bonds are present, we can distinguish two different
types of coordination failure among investors. The first is the case in which the country
could reduce the amount of bonds issued and still be able to cover its financing needs
κbt − st , if all the investors who are purchasing bonds at date t bid a higher price for these
bonds. This is the case in which the expression

                               Q t ( bt + 1 , s t ) · ( bt + 1 − ( 1 − δ ) bt )               (4)

is a decreasing function of bt+1 at bt+1 (st ). The second is the case in which all the investors
who are purchasing bonds at date t and all the investors who purchased bonds in the past
would get a higher expected repayment if they coordinated on reducing the face value of
the debt bt+1 . This is the case in which the expression

                                         Q t ( bt + 1 , s t ) · bt + 1                        (5)

is a decreasing function of bt+1 at bt+1 (st ). We call the expression (4) the “issuance Laffer
curve” and expression (5) the “stock Laffer curve”. Notice that a country can very well
be on the decreasing side of the stock Laffer curve and yet still be on the increasing side
of the issuance Laffer curve.

                                                     16
4.2   An Application Motivated by Italy
We now study a continuous-time version of the model with long-term bonds, under a
deterministic, linear fiscal rule. The adaptation to continuous time is convenient numeri-
cally, but is of no substantive consequence.
    The first objective of this section is to illustrate the dynamics of a slow moving crisis
with long-term bonds where multiplicity appears during the build-up phase of the crisis;
there is a good equilibrium with a high price for the bond and a bad one with a low price.
At some point in time the continuation equilibrium becomes unique: the bad equilibrium
path features a high probability of default because of the high debt accumulated, but there
is no other equilibrium. Likewise, along good equilibrium debt is low and eventually
the only equilibrium features a low probability of default. The second objective is to
show how the fiscal rule, the initial debt level, and debt maturity affect the presence of
multiplicity.
    Time is continuous. Investors are risk neutral and have discount factor r. Bonds issued
at time t pay a coupon κe−δ(τ −t) in each τ > t, which is the continuous time equivalent of
the long-term bonds introduced in the previous sections. Similarly, we assume κ = r + δ,
so the bond price under no default is equal to 1.
    Between times 0 and T, the country surplus evolves deterministically following the
differential equation
                                    ṡ = −λ (s − α (b − b∗ )) .                           (6)

The country has some target debt level b∗ , when current debt exceeds the target the coun-
try adjusts its fiscal surplus towards the value α (b − b∗ ). The speed of adjustment to the
target surplus is determined by the parameter λ. A larger coefficient α implies a more
aggressive response to high debt. After time T, the country’s long-run surplus is constant
at s (t) = rS, where S is the long-run present value of surplus which is drawn randomly
at time T from a continuous distribution with c.d.f. F (S).
    At time T, if the stock of accumulated debt b ( T ) is smaller than S there is no default
and the bond price is 1. If S < b ( T ), the bond holders share equally the recovery value φS,
with φ < 1. Therefore, the bond price immediately before the resolution of uncertainty at
time T is given by
                                                        ˆ b( T )
                                                                   S
                          q ( T ) = 1 − F (b ( T )) + φ                 dF (S).            (7)
                                                         0       b (T )
   We focus on cases in which default never occurs before time T. Therefore, the bond
price satisfies the differential equation



                                             17
                                         (r + δ) q = κ + q̇,                                            (8)

and the government’s budget constraint is

                                       q ḃ + δb = κb − s.                                              (9)
                                                


    To characterize the equilibria, we proceed as follows. The initial values for the debt
stock and for the surplus, b (0) and s (0), are given. Choosing an initial value q (0) we
can then solve forward the system of ODEs in s, q, b given by (6), (8) and (9) and find
the terminal values b ( T ) and q ( T ). If these values satisfy (7) we have an equilibrium.
It is convenient to represent this construction graphically in terms of two loci for the
terminal value of debt b ( T ) and the terminal value of debt q ( T ) b ( T ). In Figure 3 we
plot two curves. The curve with an interior maximum is a Laffer curve similar to the one
analyzed in Section 3, showing the relation between b ( T ) and q ( T ) b ( T ) implied by the
bond pricing equation (7), namely
                                                                  ˆ   b( T )
                      q ( T ) b ( T ) = (1 − F (b (t)))b(t) + φ                S dF (S).               (10)
                                                                  0

The downward sloping curve plots the values of b ( T ) and q ( T ) b ( T ) that come from
solving the ODEs (6), (8) and (9) for different values of the initial price q (0). The curves
are plotted for a numerical example with the following parameters:
                                                                                              
                                                                                           2
            T = 10,     δ = 1/7,      r = 0.02,    φ = 0.7,       log S ∼ N 0.3, 0.1               .

Taking the time period as a year, we consider a country in which uncertainty will be
resolved in 10 years and the average debt maturity is 7 years. The risk-free interest rate is
2% and the recovery rate in case of default is 70%. The distribution of the present value of
surplus, after uncertainty is resolved has mean 1.357 and standard deviation 0.136. The
initial conditions are
                                 s (0) = −0.1, b (0) = 1,

and the fiscal policy parameters are

                                   λ = 1,    α = 0.02,     b∗ = 0.

   Figure 3 shows the presence of three equilibria. Note that both the first and third
equilibrium are “stable”, under various notions of stability discussed earlier. Thus, the


                                                  18
                     1.2


                    1.15


                     1.1
     q( T )b( T )




                    1.05


                      1

                    0.95


                     0.9
                           1   1.1   1.2   1.3   1.4   1.5     1.6 1.7   1.8   1.9   2   2.1   2.2
                                                              b( T )


                                 Figure 3: Three equilibria in example economy.


model with long-term debt features multiple stable equilibria even when the Laffer curve
is singled peaked. Figure 4 shows the dynamics of the primary surplus, debt and bond
prices for the two stable equilibria, which we term “good” (solid lines) and the “bad”
(dashed lines).
    The model captures various features of recent episodes of sovereign market turbu-
lence. Sovereign bond spreads experience a sudden and unexpected jump, in moving
from the good to the bad equilibrium. The debt-to-GDP ratio increases slowly but steadily.
Auctions of new debt issues do not show particular signs of illiquidity, yet, interest rates
climb along with the level of debt. Large differences in debt dynamics appears gradually,
as bond prices diverge and a larger fraction of debt is issued at crisis prices.
    A characteristic feature of a slow moving crisis is that multiplicity plays out in the
early phase of a crisis. This is unlike the case of liquidity crises, where multiplicity in the
rollover crisis occurs in the terminal phase that ultimately triggers default. In our model,
instead, along either equilibrium path, multiplicity eventually disappears.
    Figure 5 illustrates this point. It overlays Figure 3, with four new dashed lines. Each
dashed line corresponds to a different time horizon and initial debt condition. In par-
ticular, we plot them for t = 1.2, and t = 2.9 and use as initial conditions the values of
s (t) and b (t) reached under the good and the bad equilibrium paths shown in Figure


                                                         19
                                                 Primary Surplus s
           0.1
          0.05
            0
        −0.05
         −0.1
                     0    1        2       3       4      5        6        7       8       9       10
                                                        Debt b
            2.5

                 2

            1.5

                 1
                     0    1        2       3       4     5      6           7       8       9       10
                                                    Bond Price q

                 1
            0.8
            0.6
            0.4
                     0    1        2       3       4        5      6        7       8       9       10


Figure 4: Dynamics of surplus, debt and bond price in good (solid line) and bad (dashed
line) equilibrium.


4 (which coincide at t = 0). Notice that at t = 1.2 multiplicity is still present, so it is
possible, for example, for the economy to follow the bad path between t = 0 and t = 1.2
and then to switch to a good path.11 However, at t = 2.9 a switch is no longer possible.
There are two reason multiplicity disappears as we approach T. First, the remaining time
horizon shrinks, leaving less time to accumulate or decumulate debt. Second, debt may
have reached a high enough level to ensure the bad equilibrium, or viceversa.


Fiscal Rules. How does the fiscal policy rule affect the equilibrium or the existence of
multiple equilibria? In Figure 6, we look at the effects of increasing α. To better illustrate
the power of a more responsive fiscal policy, we adjust the debt target b∗ so that for each
of the three values of α the country reaches a good equilibrium with the same q ( T ) and
b ( T ). A sufficiently high value of α rules out the bad equilibrium, because as the investors
  11 Clearly,   the switch needs to be unexpected for prices to be in equilibrium between t = 0 and t = 1.2.


                                                       20
                     1.2


                    1.15


                     1.1
     q( T )b( T )




                    1.05


                      1

                    0.95


                     0.9
                           1   1.1   1.2   1.3   1.4   1.5     1.6 1.7   1.8   1.9   2   2.1   2.2
                                                              b( T )


Figure 5: Solid green line shows t = 0, dashed green line t = 1.2, dotted green line t = 2.9.


contemplate the effect of lower bond prices they realize that the government would react
more aggressively to a faster increase in b and thus eventually reach a lower level of b ( T ).
   A different way to look at policy rules is to ask how aggressive does the policy rule
need to be to make a given initial debt level immune to bad equilibria. In particular, in
Figure 7 we look at the parameter space (α, b0 ) and divide it into four regions, making no
adjustments to b∗ . In the red region there is a single equilibrium, in the bottom portion
debt is low and on the good side of the Laffer curve, while in the upper portion (above
pink region) the unique equilibrium lies on the bad side of the Laffer curve. There are
three equilibria in the pink region, just as in our calibrated example. In the yellow region
no equilibrium with debt exists, implying immediate default at t = 0.
   Consider for example, the case α = 0.01 in the graph, in which four cases are possible.
For low levels of b0 , we get a unique equilibrium on the increasing portion of the Laffer
curve (lower portion of the red region). For higher levels of b0 , we have three equilibria,
as depicted in Figure 3 (pink region). For even higher levels of b0 , we have a unique
equilibrium again, but this time on the decreasing portion of the Laffer curve. Finally, for
very high values of b0 , there is no equilibrium without default.




                                                         21
                     1.2


                    1.15


                     1.1
     q( T )b( T )




                    1.05


                      1

                    0.95


                     0.9
                           1   1.1   1.2   1.3   1.4   1.5     1.6 1.7   1.8   1.9   2   2.1   2.2
                                                              b( T )


Figure 6: Solid green line α = 0.02, dashed green line α = 0.03, dotted green line α = 0.05.


Debt Maturity.         Consider next the impact of debt maturity, captured by δ. Figure 8
shows the effects of varying δ around our benchmark value, while adjusting b∗ to keep the
same low-debt equilibrium. A longer maturity, with a low enough value for δ, leads to a
unique equilibrium. Intuitively, shorter maturities require greater refinancing, increasing
the exposure to self-fulfilling high interest rates. The debt burden of longer maturities, in
contrast, is less sensitive to the interest rate.
     Figure 9 is similar to Figure 7, but over the parameter space (δ, b0 ) instead of (α, b0 ).
Again, we divide the figure into four regions. There are three equilibria in the pink region,
just as in our calibrated example. In the red region there is a single equilibrium. In the
bottom portion of the red region the equilibrium lies on the good side of the Laffer curve,
while in the upper portion (above the pink region) it is on the bad side of the Laffer curve.
In the yellow region no equilibrium exists, implying immediate default at t = 0.
     In the figure, for given δ, the good equilibrium is unique for low enough levels of debt
b0 . For a given initial debt b0 , a longer maturity for debt, a lower value for δ, also leads to a
unique good equilibrium (lower red region). Shorter maturities, higher values for δ, may
place the economy in the intermediate “danger zone” (pink region) with 3 equilibrium
values for the interest rate. Still higher values for δ may lead to a unique bad equilibrium
(upper red region) or to non-existence prompting immediate default (upper right, yellow


                                                         22
              1.2

              1.1

               1

              0.9
         b0




              0.8

              0.7

              0.6

              0.5
                    0    0.005      0.01      0.015     0.02      0.025      0.03
                                                α


Figure 7: Regions with unique equilibrium (red), three equilibria (pink) or immediate
default (yellow).


region).
   We conclude that according to Figure 7, shorter maturities place the borrower in dan-
ger: in some cases vulnerable to a possible bad equilibrium, in others certain of a bad
equilibrium and in still others in an immediate situation of default.


Slow Moving Crises and Liquidity Crises. It is interesting to compare the slow mov-
ing crisis in our model to liquidity induced crises featured in Cole and Kehoe (2000) and
related work, such as Cole and Kehoe, 1996 and Conesa and Kehoe, 2012. In these mod-
els, when debt is high enough borrowers become vulnerable to a run by investors, who
may decide not to rollover debt, prompting default. If this run comes unexpectedly, there
would be no rise in interest rates, just a sudden crisis, a zero price for bonds and default
as in Giavazzi and Pagano, 1989 and Alesina et al., 1992. Cole and Kehoe (2000) extended
these models by studying sunspot equilibria with a constant arrival probability for the
liquidity crisis. When this probability is not zero, the interest rate rises and the govern-
ment makes an effort to reduce debt to a safe level that excludes investor runs and lowers
the interest rate. Thus, high interest rates in liquidity crisis models may be present even


                                            23
                       1.2


                      1.15


                       1.1
       q( T )b( T )




                      1.05


                        1

                      0.95


                       0.9
                             1   1.1   1.2   1.3   1.4   1.5     1.6 1.7   1.8   1.9   2   2.1   2.2
                                                                b( T )


Figure 8: Solid green line δ = 1/7, dashed green line δ = 1/5, dotted green line δ = 1/10.


with a decreasing path for debt.12 In contrast, in our model debt rises along the bad, high
interest equilibrium path. Indeed, the rising path for debt and higher interest rates are
intimately related, the one implying the other.
    Another interesting distinction is that the multiplicity from liquidity crises is broader
and more pervasive than the multiplicity due to slow moving crises. In the example
above, we found three equilibrium interest rates. However, only two of these can be
considered part of a stable equilibrium. In contrast, liquidity crises open the door to a
continuum of sunspot equilibria, indexed by the constant arrival probability of the run.


5      Commitment and Multiplicity
In the previous sections, we have assumed that whenever the government budget con-
straint can be satisfied at multiple bond prices, all these prices constitute potential equilib-
ria. That is, we have assumed that the government cannot commit to the amount of bonds
issued in a given period. In this section, we consider a model in which the government
    12 Conesa
           and Kehoe (2012) extend liquidity crisis models to include uncertainty in income and find that
debt may be increasing in some cases. Nevertheless, high interest rates are not driven by the accumulation
of debt.



                                                           24
                1.1

               1.08

               1.06

               1.04

               1.02

                 1
          b0




               0.98

               0.96

               0.94

               0.92

                0.9
                  0.1    0.12     0.14    0.16     0.18    0.2     0.22    0.24
                                                  δ


Figure 9: Regions with unique equilibrium (red), three equilibria (pink) or immediate
default (yellow).


can commit to bond issuance in the very short run and yet multiple equilibria arise. The
idea is to split a period of the models in the previous sections into shorter subperiods and
to assume that the government can only commit to bond issuances in a subperiod. For a
concrete example, a period in the model of the previous sections could be interpreted as
a month, in which the government borrowing needs are determined by fiscal policy de-
cisions that adjust slowly, while the subperiods may be different days in which auctions
of Treasury bonds can take place. The government can commit to sell a fixed amount of
bonds in each auction, but cannot commit to run future auctions if it hasn’t reached its
objective in terms of resources raised.
    For simplicity, we focus on a simple three-period model. Our results show that the
possibility to raise funds in future rounds of issuance can jeopardize the borrower’s at-
tempt to stay away from the wrong side of the Laffer curve. Given the purposes of this
section, it is useful to have a fully specified game in which the government’s behavior is
derived explicitly from maximization.




                                            25
5.1       The game
There are three periods, t = 0, 1, 2. Debt is long-term and is a promise to pay 1 at date 2.
In period 0, the government chooses how many bonds b1 to sell. Next, an auction takes
place and risk neutral investors bid q0 for the bonds, the government receives q0 b1 from
the investors and uses it to finance spending13

                                               g0 = q0 b1 .

In period 1, the government chooses b2 , the investors bid q1 , the government raises q1 (b2 − b1 )
and uses it to finance spending
                                   g1 = q1 (b2 − b1 ) .

Finally, in period 2 the surplus s is randomly drawn from an exponential distribution
with CDF F (s) = 1 − e−λs on [0, ∞). The government repays if s ≥ b2 , defaults otherwise
and there is no recovery.
   The government objective is to maximize
                                                                ˆ    ∞
                    α min { g0 , g} + θ min { g0 + g1 , g} +             (s − b2 ) dF (s) ,
                                                                    b2

that is, the government needs to finance a target level of spending g and has a preference
for early spending. The parameter θ > 1 captures the loss from not meeting the target
g, α captures the gain from early spending, g0 and g1 are restricted to be non-negative.
Investors are risk neutral and do not discount future payoffs.


5.2       Strategies and Equilibrium
The government’s strategy is given by a b1 and a function B2 (b1 , q0 ) that gives b2 for
each past history (b1 , q0 ). The investors’ strategy is given by two functions Q0 (b1 ) and
Q1 (b1 , q0 , b2 ).
    We analyze subgame perfect equilibria moving backward in time, starting from period
1. In period 1, investors are willing to pay

                                     Q1 (b1 , q0 , b2 ) = 1 − F (b2 ) ,
  13 Infollowing the timing of the game, one could find a bit confusing the fact that the government first
chooses the issuance b1 and then the investors choose the price q0 . But we stick to the subscripts to keep
the notation consistent throughout the paper.




                                                    26
given the stock b2 of government bonds. In period 1, given the stock of bonds b1 and the
price q0 , the government solves
                                                               ˆ    ∞
                              max θ min { g0 + g1 , g} +                (s − b2 ) dF (s)               (11)
                               g1 ,b2                              b2

subject to
                                           g1 = (1 − F (b2 )) (b2 − b1 )

and g0 = q0 b1 . The solution to this problem gives us the best response B2 (b1 , q0 ). Going
back to period 0, investors’ optimality requires

                                            q0 = 1 − F ( B2 (b1 , q0 )) .                              (12)

We will construct equilibria in which a solution to (12) always exists. However, depend-
ing on the value of b1 , there may be multiple values of q0 that solve (12). Let Q0 (b1 ) be
a map that selects a solution of (12) for each b1 and let B2 (b1 ) = B2 (b1 , Q0 (b1 )) denote
the associated value of b2 .14 To check that the choice of b1 at date 0 is optimal, we need to
check that it maximizes
                                                                              ˆ ∞
α min {[1 − F (B2 (b1 ))] b1 , g} + θ min {[1 − F (B2 (b1 ))] B2 (b1 ) , g} +     (s − B2 (b1 )) dF (s) .
                                                                                            B2 (b1 )


5.3       Multiple equilibria
We now proceed to show that multiple equilibria are possible under some parametric
assumptions. We begin by characterizing the government optimal behavior B2 (b1 , q0 ) at
t = 1, for given values of b1 and q0 .

Lemma 1. Given q0 and b1 , the optimal choice of b2 must satisfy either

                                        q0 b1 + (1 − F (b2 )) (b2 − b1 ) < g

and
                                             θ (1 − λ (b2 − b1 )) = 1

or
                                        q0 b1 + (1 − F (b2 )) (b2 − b1 ) = g
  14 We   could easily extend the analysis to allow a stochastic selection of equilibria.




                                                         27
and
                                   θ (1 − λ (b2 − b1 )) ≥ 1.

Proof. It is easy to show that in equilibrium we always have q0 b1 ≤ g. Therefore, the
marginal benefit of increasing b2 is

                      θ (1 − F (b2 ) − f (b2 ) (b2 − b1 )) − (1 − F (b2 )) =
                           (1 − F (b2 )) [θ (1 − λ (b2 − b1 )) − 1]

if g0 + (1 − F (b2 )) (b2 − b1 ) < g and 0 otherwise. The statement follows immediately.

   The Laffer curve for total debt issued in this game is given by

                                    (1 − F (b)) b = e−λb b.

We assume
                                  g < max e−λb b = (λe)−1                                  (13)
                                         b

so in equilibrium the government can reach the target g. Under assumption (13) there are
two solutions to
                                      e−λb b = g,

which we label b and b. The two solutions satisfy b < 1/λ < b. Assume also that

                                        θ (1 − λb) > 1,                                    (14)

which implies that the government has a sufficiently strong incentive to spend in periods
0 and 1. Define the cutoff

                                       1      1
                                                 
                             b̂1 = b −     1−     ∈ 0, b ,                            (15)
                                       λ      θ

where the inequalities follows from b > 1/λ and θ > 1 (from (14)).
   We can now characterize the continuation equilibria that arise after the choice of b1 by
the government at date 0, that is, we look for candidates for the equilibrium selections
Q0 (b1 ) and B2 (b1 ). We first consider the case in which b1 is below the cutoff b̂1 .

Lemma 2. If b1 < b̂1 there is a unique continuation equilibrium, with b2 = b.

Proof. The equilibrium exists because (1 − F (b2 )) b2 = g at b2 = b and assumption (14)
implies θ (1 − λ (b2 − b1 )) > 1 for any b1 ≥ 0. To prove uniqueness notice that we cannot

                                               28
have b2 ∈ (b, b) in equilibrium, otherwise e−λb2 b2 > g, we cannot have b2 ≥ b, other-
wise θ (1 − λ (b2 − b1 )) < 1, and we cannot have b2 < b, otherwise e−λb2 b2 < g and
θ (1 − λ (b2 − b1 )) > 1 (always using Lemma 1).

Lemma 3. If b1 ≥ b̂1 there are two continuation equilibria, one with b2 = b and one with b2 = b.

Proof. The good equilibrium exists as in the previous claim. The second equilibrium exists
because b1 ≥ b̂1 is equivalent to
                                                 
                                    θ 1 − λ b − b1    ≥ 1.



    The previous two lemmas imply that the following is a possible selection for continu-
ation equilibria                        
                                        b if b ≤ b̂
                                                1    1
                             B2 (b1 ) =                .                             (16)
                                        b if b > b̂
                                                1    1

Now we can go back to period 0 and study the government optimization problem when
the continuation equilibria are selected as in (16). The government chooses b1 to maximize
                                         n                        o 1
                  αe−λB2 (b1 ) b1 + θ min e−λB2 (b1 ) B2 (b1 ) , g + e−λB2 (b1 ) .
                                                                    λ

The government faces a trade-off here. If it chooses b1 ≤ b̂1 it ensures that in the contin-
uation game investors will expect low issuance of bonds in period 1 and so only b bonds
will be eventually be issued, keeping the government on the good side of the Laffer curve.
However, to keep b1 low the government foregoes the benefits from early spending α. In
particular, choosing 0 ≤ b1 ≤ b̂1 we have

                                                       1 −λb
                                     αe−λb b1 + θg +     e   .
                                                       λ

While choosing b̂1 < b1 ≤ b we have

                                                       1 −λb
                                     αe−λb b1 + θg +     e   .
                                                       λ

Clearly, the only possible optimal choices are b1 = b̂1 and b1 = b. It is optimal to choose
b1 = b if
                                     1                    1
                           αe−λb b + e−λb > αe−λb b̂1 + e−λb .
                                     λ                    λ

                                                29
Using (15) to substitute for b̂1 in this inequality we obtain the following proposition. De-
fine the cutoff
                                     1       e−λb − e−λb
                               α̂ ≡                        
                                    λ g − e−λb b − 1 1 − 1
                                                                λ       θ

if the expression at the denominator is positive and let α̂ = ∞ otherwise.15

Proposition 3. If α > α̂ there is an equilibrium in which the stock of bonds is constant at b1 =
b2 = b, on the wrong side of the Laffer curve.

    The game also admits a good equilibrium in which B2 (b1 ) = b for all b1 . Notice that
also in this good equilibrium all bonds are issued at date 0, and we have b1 = b2 = b.
Therefore, bond issuance in period 1 only matters for off-the-equilibrium-path dynam-
ics. However, off-the-equilibrium-path dynamics are crucial to determine the amount of
bonds the government issues in the first period.
    The government can commit not to issue more bonds than b2 in period 2, given that it
is the final date before the resolution of uncertainty. So the government will never reach a
b2 such that a reduction in b2 can increase current revenues, in other words, it will always
be on the increasing side of the issuance Laffer curve:

                                               1 − λ (b2 − b1 ) ≥ 0.                       (17)

However, this condition is not enough to rule out an equilibrium with total debt on the
wrong side of the Laffer curve, because the slope of the stock Laffer curve is 1 − λb2 ,
which can be negative in spite of (17) if b2 − b1 is small. Moreover, the government at date
0 cannot try to move away from the bad equilibrium by reducing b1 below b, because, if
it does, the market expects the government to issue b − b1 > 0 at date 1, and therefore the
pricing function Q0 (b1 ) is flat for b1 near b. The only option is to reduce b1 all the way
to b̂1 , which is enough to eliminate the bad equilibrium. But this is too costly in terms of
delayed spending.


6           Concluding Remarks
Based on our analysis it seems difficult to dismiss the concern that a country may find
itself in a self-fulfilling “bad equilibrium” with high interest rates. In our model, bad
equilibria are not driven by the fear of a sudden rollover crisis, as commonly modeled
in the literature following Giavazzi and Pagano (1989), Alesina et al. (1992) and Cole
    15 It   is easy to find combinations of model parameters that ensure α̂ < ∞.

                                                         30
and Kehoe (1996) and others. Thus, the problems these “bad equilibria” present are not
resolved by attempts to rule out such investor runs. Instead, high interest rates can be self
fulfilling because they imply a slow but perverse debt dynamic. Our results highlight the
importance of fiscal policy rules and debt maturity in determining whether the economy
is safe from the threat of these slow moving crises.


References
Alesina, Alberto, Mark De Broeck, Alessandro Prati, Guido Tabellini, Maurice Obst-
  feld, and Sergio Rebelo, “Default risk on government debt in OECD countries,” Eco-
  nomic Policy, 1992, pp. 428–463.

Arellano, Cristina, “Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging Economies,”
  American Economic Review, June 2008, 98 (3), 690–712.

   and Ananth Ramanarayanan, “Default and the Maturity Structure in Sovereign
  Bonds,” Journal of Political Economy, 2012, 120 (2), 187 – 232.

Bohn, Henning, “The Sustainability of Fiscal Policy in the United States,” CESifo Work-
  ing Paper Series 1446, CESifo Group Munich 2005.

Calvo, Guillermo A, “Servicing the Public Debt: The Role of Expectations,” American
  Economic Review, September 1988, 78 (4), 647–61.

Chamon, Marcos, “Can debt crises be self-fulfilling?,” Journal of Development Economics,
 January 2007, 82 (1), 234–244.

Cole, Harold L. and Timothy J. Kehoe, “A self-fulfilling model of Mexico’s 1994-95 debt
 crisis,” Staff Report 210, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 1996.

Cole, Harold L and Timothy J Kehoe, “Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises,” Review of Economic
 Studies, January 2000, 67 (1), 91–116.

Conesa, Juan Carlos and Timothy J. Kehoe, “Gambling for redemption and self-fulfilling
 debt crises,” Staff Report 465, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 2012.

Corsetti, Giancarlo and Luca Dedola, “Fiscal Crises, Confidence and Default. A Bare-
 bones Model with Lessons for the Euro Area,” unpublished, Cambridge, 2011.




                                             31
   and , “The Mystery of the Printing Press. Self-fulfilling Debt Crises and Monetary
  Sovereignty,” CEPR Discussion Paper DP9358, Center for Economic Policy Research
  February 2013.

Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz, “Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and
  Empirical Analysis,” Review of Economic Studies, April 1981, 48 (2), 289–309.

Frankel, David M., Stephen Morris, and Ady Pauzner, “Equilibrium selection in global
  games with strategic complementarities,” Journal of Economic Theory, January 2003, 108
  (1), 1–44.

Ghosh, Atish R., Jun I. Kim, Enrique G. Mendoza, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Mah-
 vash S. Qureshi, “Fiscal Fatigue, Fiscal Space and Debt Sustainability in Advanced
 Economies,” NBER Working Papers 16782, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc
 February 2011.

Giavazzi, Francesco and Marco Pagano, “Confidence Crises and Public Debt Manage-
 ment,” NBER Working Papers 2926, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc April
 1989.

Hatchondo, Juan Carlos and Leonardo Martinez, “Long-duration bonds and sovereign
 defaults,” Journal of International Economics, September 2009, 79 (1), 117–125.

Leeper, Eric M., “Equilibria under ’active’ and ’passive’ monetary and fiscal policies,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, February 1991, 27 (1), 129–147.




                                          32
