NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NECESSITY AS THE MOTHER OF INVENTION:
INNOVATIVE RESPONSES TO NATURAL DISASTERS
Qing Miao
David Popp
Working Paper 19223
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19223
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2013

This work was supported by DOE grant #DE-SC0005171. We thank Stephane Hallegatte and seminar
participants at Carnegie Mellon and the Oslo Centre for Research on Environmentally friendly Energy
for helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Qing Miao and David Popp. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Necessity as the Mother of Invention: Innovative Responses to Natural Disasters
Qing Miao and David Popp
NBER Working Paper No. 19223
July 2013
JEL No. O3,Q54,Q55
ABSTRACT
How do innovators respond to the shock of a natural disaster? Do natural disasters spur technical
innovations that can reduce the risk of future hazards? This paper examines the impact of three types
of natural disasters including earthquakes, droughts and flooding on the innovation of their respective
mitigation technologies. Using patent and disaster data, our study is the first to relate natural disasters
to technology innovation, and also presents the first attempt to empirically examine adaptation responses
to climate change across multiple sectors at the country level. Overall, we show that natural disasters
lead to more risk-mitigating innovations, while the degree of influence varies across different types
of disasters and technologies.
Qing Miao
Ph.D. student
Department of Public Administration
Syracuse University
qmiao@syr.edu
David Popp
Department of Public Administration
and International Affairs
Syracuse University
The Maxwell School
426 Eggers Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
and NBER
dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu

1. Introduction
How people cope with natural disasters is a question that has for long concerned both
policy makers and researchers. This issue is gaining renewed attention nowadays, given the
increasingly evident threats of climate change. Many climate scientists warn that global warming
will likely increase the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events, thereby substantially
raising the risk of disasters such as droughts, heat waves, floods and tropical cyclones (e.g., Van
Aals, 2006). A recent report released by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC,
2012) confirms the link between climate change and natural disasters.1 Moreover, it calls for
policy makers to integrate disaster risks reduction into their efforts of climate change adaptation.
In this paper, we ask whether natural disasters lead to innovations of risk-mitigation
technologies. Such technologies are analogous to those that may aid adaptation to climate change.
A term initially used to explain biological evolution, adaptation is now more often applied to
human society and regarded as an important strategy to address climate change (for a review on
the concept, see Smit and Wandel, 2006). The IPCC defines adaptation as “adjustment in natural
or human system in response to actual or expected climatic stimuli or their effects, which
moderates harm or exploits beneficial opportunities” (IPCC TAR, 2001: 72). In a broad sense,
adaption takes form of various actions and measures, which often depend on the characteristics
of local environment, particularly the natural hazards associated with climate change. Adaptation
can be either proactive or reactive (Fankhauser et al, 1999). The former occurs when people
anticipate the risks and take measures to forestall disasters or mitigate their risks, while the latter
refers to the actions taken only after the disaster events happened.

1

The report explicitly concludes “(A) changing climate leads to change in the frequency, intensity, spatial extent, duration, and
timing of extreme weather and climate events, and can result in unprecedented extreme weather and climate events” (IPCC 2012:
7). The report also highlights the impacts of those climatic or weather-related disasters: they have resulted in increased economic
losses worldwide since 1980, and particularly tremendous deaths in developing countries.

Within the context of climate change adaptation, we coin the term “risk-mitigating
innovation”, referring to the development of new and more effective technologies that assist
people in better coping with natural disasters and building resilience to future shocks.
Innovation is an important form of adaptation because it provides the technical methods for
people to use in the process of adaption. While adaptation in some cases can be just behavioral
changes, such as relocation, people more often have to employ certain technologies, which take
either hard form (e.g., equipment and infrastructure such as building levees) or soft form (e.g.,
science, technical know-how, and skills such as emergency management) (UNFCC, 2006). As
an example of how technology can affect adaptation, consider how the advent of air conditioning
changed the development of regions in warmer climates. Moving forward, other innovations,
such as developing new breeds of crops more resistant to drought, have the potential to change
the world’s ability to adapt to climate change. Innovation also includes improvement and
commercialization of existing technologies, such as using new materials or new designs to make
them more cost-effective in combating one or multiple types of hazards. As Ausubel notes in his
1991 article, technical innovation and diffusion related to climate change “occur in all societies
and sectors and in many forms”. The importance of science and technology for climate
adaptation has received increased attention in the international policy world (e.g., UNISDR,
2009; UNFCC, 2006), though this issue is often ignored in the research community. Our study
contributes to a better understanding of the role of technologies in climate change adaptation.
Research on innovation has important implications for policymaking related to climate
adaptation and disaster risk management. While adaptation is generally a local activity,
innovation produces new knowledge and technologies that can often serve as a public good or
even a global good. New technologies can be transferred and adopted by non-inventors and

2

eventually benefit people and communities who face similar disaster risks. Therefore,
introducing the concept of risk-mitigating innovation expands the conventional view on the
highly localized nature of adaptation. From the policy perspective, encouraging risk-mitigating
innovation and the transfer of these technologies can not only save the cost of repeated R&D
elsewhere and improve the global equity in disaster risk reduction, but also can facilitate the
knowledge spillovers and provide building blocks for persistent future innovations.2
This paper presents the first study to relate natural disaster impacts to technology
innovation. In particular, we focus on three types of natural disasters, earthquakes, droughts and
floods, and match each of them with one or two kinds of mitigation technologies including
earthquake-proof building and earthquake detection technology, drought-resistant crop, and flood
control technology.3 Our analysis, using a panel of up to 30 countries over a period of 25 years,
shows that all three types of natural disasters have a significant and positive impact on the patent
counts of their corresponding technologies. Moreover, given the relative newness of adaptation
as a climate change strategy, there has been very limited data and analyses done so far
concerning the implementation of adaptation at a country or regional level. By using riskmitigating innovation as an outcome of adaptation, our study also presents the first attempt to
examine systematically the adaptation responses across multiple sectors at the country level.
Another contribution of this paper is to explore the motivation and ability for adaptation
responses, which is an under-researched issue in the adaptation literature. Notably, a majority of
the current adaptation studies focus on estimating costs or cost-effectiveness of adaptation
2

Given the fact that most innovation activities are conducted in industrialized countries, their advanced technologies, if
transferred properly, can benefit the developing countries, which not only lack the innovative capacity but also are more
vulnerable to natural disasters relative to their developed counterparts.
3
It should be noted that earthquake is normally classified as a geological hazard and regarded with a weak link to climate change.
However, given that catastrophic climate impacts have not yet been observed, we consider not only disasters directly relevant for
climate change such as drought and floods, but also include responses to other natural disasters like earthquake. Moreover, as
researchers expect the probabilities of earthquakes to rise in certain regions (such as California) due to the crust movement, we
believe earthquake fits neatly into the context of adaptation.

3

measures, at either the global level or at the country level, and many climate models simply treat
adaptation as autonomous. For instance, recent examples of climate policy models incorporating
adaptation are the AD-DICE model (deBruin et al. 2009), the WITCH model (Bosello, Carraro,
and De Cian, 2009), which assesses the optimal mix of mitigation and adaptation measures, and
the FUND model, which has been used to analyze the tradeoff between mitigation and adaptation
for protecting coastlines (Tol, 2007). None of these models consider the possibility that the
tendency and ability to adapt are endogenous. Our empirical evidence of reactive risk-mitigating
innovations can inform the current endeavors in integrated assessment modeling of climate
change, and more specifically, suggests the possibility of treating adaptation as a function of
previous disaster losses. Finally, this paper also contributes to the literature of endogenous
technological change by testing the impact of natural disasters as a stimulus for innovation.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a review of the
relevant literature. Section 3 discusses a conceptual framework and lays out our key hypotheses.
Section 4 describe the data sources and present some descriptive statistics. Section 5 discusses
the empirical model and our results. Section 6 concludes.

2. Literature review
This paper is part of a growing literature on the economics of natural disasters (for a
survey of the literature, see Cavallo and Noy, 2010 and Kellenberg and Mobarak, 2011). This
literature primarily consists of two bodies of research, one concerning the economic effects of
natural disasters, and the other assessing the determinants of natural disaster impacts (i.e.,
treating disaster damages as a function of natural and social factors). While our research falls
into the first category, since we consider natural disasters as an explanatory variable, we also
base our conceptual and empirical models partly on the second line of research which suggests

4

that disaster impacts are endogenous.
Most empirical studies concerning the economic impacts of natural disasters (the first
category) focus on assessing the costs of disasters or the impact of disaster shocks on output
growth using macroeconomic indicators and sector-specific measures (e.g., Benson and Clay,
2004). This literature involves a subset of research that looks into the behavioral changes induced
by natural disasters (e.g., how countries cope with the aftermath of disasters). Two recent studies
of relevance in this aspect are Cuaresma et al. (2008) and Yang (2008). The first study tests the
Shumpeterian theory of creative destruction (i.e., natural disasters that destroy capital stocks
provide an incentive to update capital and employ newer technologies, thereby leading to higher
productivities) by examining the relationship between disaster frequency and the R&D stocks
embodied in the imports of developing countries. Using both cross-country and panel data
regressions, they don’t find any systematic evidence supporting such a positive link, except for
high-GDP countries.4 Yang (2008) examines the impact of hurricanes on a variety of types of
international financial flows to developing countries. He finds that hurricanes lead to a
significant increase in foreign aid as well as in migrants’ remittances to the affected countries.
In this paper, we examine the incentivizing effect of natural disasters on the innovation of
risk-mitigation technologies. Our research question implies at least two hypotheses: first,
technological innovation can be driven by external factors and is thus endogenous; and second,
disaster shocks can induce precautionary behaviors. To illustrate the two statements, we draw on
and connect two separate strands of literature. First, the theory of induced innovation posits that
changes in the relative price of an input of production leads to innovations that enable reducing

4

Although Cuaresma et al (2008) also focuses on the link between natural disasters and technology, it should be noted that our
research question is fundamentally different from theirs. While their study asks whether natural disasters make developing
countries more likely to import and absorb new technologies to improve their productivity, our focus is a on a specific group of
technologies that can mitigate the risks of natural disasters.

5

use of the relatively more expensive factor (Hicks, 1932). Over the past decade, this theory has
been increasingly applied to the field of environmental economics, as researchers try to
understand the relationship between energy prices, environmental regulations and energy related
innovations (for an overview of this topic see Popp, Newell, and Jaffe 2010). Using U.S. patent
data from 1970 to 1994, Popp (2002) finds that both demand-side influences (e.g. energy prices)
and supply-side influences (e.g. the existing knowledge base) determine energy-efficient
innovation. Similar empirical evidence on the responsiveness of innovations to energy prices and
environmental regulations has been found by other researchers using other modeling techniques
(e.g., Newell et al, 1999) and conducting cross-national analyses (e.g., Johnstone et al. 2010,
Verdolini and Galeotti, 2011). Our study adds to this literature on induced innovation by making
the first attempt to link innovative activities to natural disaster events.
We also draw on the literature on risk perceptions and protection motivation to consider
how disaster shocks encourage people to develop and adopt precautionary measures. One key
theoretical contribution in this field is the Roger’s Protection Motivation Theory (Roger, 1983),
which posits that people adjust their protective behavior based on their appraisal of external risks
and appraisal of their own competence in coping with the threat. More specifically, the risk
appraisal, or risk perception, involves the perceived probability of the occurrence of a
threatening event occurrence and perceived severity of the threat. More recently, this theory has
been used by environmental researchers to study individuals or households’ adaptation
motivation and behaviors. For example, Grothmann and Patt (2005) survey residents who face
flooding risk in the city of Cologne, Germany and find that risk perception and perceived
adaptive capacity play a more important role than socio-economic factors in explaining
individuals’ adaption decisions. With regard to the factors that affect risk perception, many

6

researchers identify the prior disaster experiences/impacts as an important one. In a review of
the natural hazards literature, Weinstein (1989) concludes that past experiences with natural
disasters generally increase people’s perception of risk and their preparedness, though such
effects might be short-lived sometimes. Earlier studies (e.g., Perry & Lindell, 1986) find that
prior disaster experiences involving only minor damages have little effect on risk perception and
preparedness. This suggests that it is the severity of disaster impacts more than the disaster itself
that determines people’s risk perception.
Finally, we come back to the adaptation literature, which is a fast growing subfield of the
contemporary natural disaster studies. The actual impact of a disaster falling on a community
depends on the nature of the hazard as well as on local people’s adaptation measures or their
adaptive capacity (Yohe and Tol, 2002; Brooks et al, 2005; IPCC, 2012). In fact, increased
attention has been focused on the term of adaptive capacity, an umbrella concept referring to a
country/community’s capability to undertake or develop adaptation (OECD, 2006; IPCC TAR,
2001). While there seems no clear consensus on the definition of the term, most researchers use
“adaptive capacity” to summaries a set of social, economic and political characteristics that
enable a society to mobilize its available resources to carry out adaptation.
In line with the notion of adaptive capacity is a series of empirical studies examining the
determinants and heterogeneity of natural disaster impacts. By using a global cross-national data
set on human mortalities from multiple types of natural disasters, Kahn (2005) shows that
nations with higher income and more democratic institutions suffer fewer deaths from these
disasters. His argument is that economic development and good institutions lead to better
infrastructure and preventive technologies, more effective regulations and emergency
management, which provide “implicit insurance” against natural disasters. Following Kahn’s

7

work, subsequent researchers use similar theoretical models and various measures of institution
(e.g., inequality, corruption, political regime) to account for the cross-country heterogeneity in
the impact of natural disasters. (Anbarci et al, 2005; Escaleras et al, 2006; Keefer et al, 2010). All
of them offer strong evidence that good institutions can buffer natural disaster losses. The
relationship between disaster losses and economic development was further examined by Toya
and Skidmore (2007), Rashky (2008), Kellenberg and Mobarak (2008), Schumacher and Strobl
(2011) and Hallegatte (2012). Rather than disaster losses decreasing monotonically with income,
these studies show that the damage-income relationship also depends on the squared income
level (Kellenberg and Mobarak, 2008), hazard exposure (Schumacher and Strobl , 2011) or the
density of capital as risk (Hallegatte, 2012). In addition to income and institution, hazard
exposure is another driving force for countries to adapt. For example, Hsiang and Narita (2012)
find that countries with more intense tropical cyclones (TC) climates have lower marginal losses
from an actual TC event, which provides direct evidence of adaptation. To sum up, this line of
research reflects a consensus view that disaster impact is determined by both the exogenous
natural hazards and local socioeconomic conditions. The implication for our study is that a
disaster’s impact (as an independent variable in our research) is influenced by any existing
adaptation efforts, including a country’s current adaptive capacity.

3. Conceptual framework
Drawing on the three lines of literature discussed above, we develop a conceptual
framework for examining the effects of natural disaster on risk-mitigating innovations. Under
this framework, the impact of a disaster shock potentially raises the perceived risks, and thereby
leads to a higher demand for adaptive technologies. The anticipation of higher demand motivates
the private sector to develop newer and more cost-effective technologies for mitigating disaster

8

risks. To be consistent with the risk literature, we expect risk perceptions to depend on the
severity of disaster impacts (e.g., human and economic losses from natural disasters) rather than
simple counts or physical properties of disasters. The rationale is simple: if a natural disaster of
extremely high magnitude occurs in an uninhabited area and results in little damage, it may not
substantially affect people’s risk perception. Our research question is essentially whether
individuals react to these new events or whether the risks of natural disasters are properly
perceived, so that new events do not change expectations.
We begin by modeling perceived risk R*it, which is unobserved, as a function of country
i’s baseline hazard H (e.g. does the country have a fault line?), the country’s capacity Cit to cope
with a disaster in year t, and the impact of current events Dit (measured by death tolls or
damages). The disaster impact in turn depends simultaneously on the magnitude of the
exogenous disaster shock Mit and the country’s adaptive capacity Cit.
(1)

R*it = f {Hi, Cit, Dit (Mit, Cit)}

The baseline hazard is important for perceived risk, because people living in a region
known to be at risk for certain hazards are more likely to possess some level of risk perception.
For example, 81% of all earthquakes occur in countries located along the “Ring of Fire” in the
Pacific Ocean.5 People living in these quake-prone countries presumably perceive stronger risks
of earthquakes. Adaptive capacity may affect the perceived risk in different channels: first,
previous investments to reduce vulnerability, such as sea walls or earthquake-resistant buildings,
reduce the risk that significant damages will follow a disaster event. In such cases, the perceived
need for additional innovation will be lower. Also, perceiving a strong adaptive capacity may
cause over-confidence and then lower the perceived risks.6

5
6

http://earthquake.usgs.gov/learn/faq/?faqID=95, accessed April 24, 2012.
An analogy is the theory of “levee effect”(Stefanovic, 2003), which posits that people may excessively rely on the existing

9

Because capacity is not directly observed, we model capacity as a function of the
following observed variables:
(2)

C*it = f(Hi, Ki,t-1, Yit, Iit ).

As suggested by our literature review, both income, Yit, and the quality of institutions, Iit,
influence the coping capacity of a country. Ki,t-1, represents the current knowledge and
technologies available to cope with the disaster in question. To the extent that previous events led
to new innovations, there will be less need for additional innovation after a subsequent shock.
Finally, innovation itself depends on the perceived risk R*it (and thus the demand for
better technologies to cope with disasters), the existing knowledge base on which inventors can
build Ki,t-1, income Yit, and science policy Sit.
(3)

PATit = f(R*it, Ki,t-1, Yit, Sit)

We use the count of patent applications pertaining to a given technology, PATit, to
measure the outcome of innovative activities. Science policy includes the availability of qualified
engineers to work on disaster-related research and patent policy, which determines the likelihood
that inventors will seek patent protection for new innovations. We control for these by using the
total number of patents by country and year.
Combining equations (1), (2), and (3) summarizes this reduced form relationship:
(4)

PATit = f(Dit, Hi,, Ki,t-1, Yit, Iit, Sit).

Note that the effect of both economic development Yit and knowledge, Ki,t-1, are
ambiguous. Equations (1) and (2) suggest that a greater existing knowledge stock and higher
income increase adaptive capacity, thus reducing the need for additional innovation (because

protective measures knowing their existence. For example, people may think the construction of levees can fully protect
themselves against all future floods.

10

perceived risk is lower).7 At the same time, equation (3) suggests that existing knowledge serves
as a building block for future innovation. While we expect a positive relationship between
existing knowledge and innovation, it may also be the case that a strong existing stock may
constrain technological opportunities and make future breakthroughs more difficult. Similarly, as
innovation is primarily carried out in industrialized countries, and people from higher-income
countries may have a higher demand for mitigation technologies, a positive correlation between
GDP and patenting activity is also possible.
Equation (4) raises two issues for estimation. First, we consider potential lags between
disaster events and patents. Innovation is a gradual process. Research projects take multiple
years, and staff may not be easily shifted to a new project just because a new profitable
opportunity arises. Similarly, adjustments to perceived risk may also be gradual. For example, a
drought in one year may be perceived as a random event. Persistent drought over multiple years
may be perceived as changing climate. As such, we consider multiple lags when estimating our
model.
Second, we must also consider how globalization renders countries increasingly
interdependent with each other, so that a salient foreign disaster shock may generate a global
effect in that it may raise the risk perception of the hazard in other countries.8 One anecdotal
example is that the Netherlands launched a full re-assessment of its risk management policy soon
after Hurricane Katrina hit Louisiana, US in 2005. The global impact also includes technology
spillovers, as advanced technologies developed in one country can be employed by the rest of the
world to cope with their own disaster risks. In our baseline specification, year effects capture

7

This suggests a learning-by-doing phenomenon, which we test in another paper which examines the effect of knowledge stocks
in mitigating disaster risks.
8
This “contagious effect” hypothesis has actually received some support in micro-level studies, as researchers find that indirect
disaster experiences, which people obtain from observing disasters that happen to others, can also influence risk perception of
those unaffected.

11

both the effect of these disasters on perceived risk and on the accumulation of global knowledge
that may serve as a building block for domestic innovation. Later, we also directly assess the
effect of foreign shocks and foreign knowledge stocks on domestic innovation by replacing the
year fixed effects by such variables in our empirical analysis.

4. Data and Descriptive Statistics
In this study our dependent variable is the flow of risk-mitigating innovations, which is
measured by the number of successful patent applications filed in a country in a given year. All
our patent data is taken from an online global patent database Delphion.com and is identified
through either International Patent Code (IPC) or key word searches (For a more detailed
description of our patent search strategy, please see appendix 1). Given the issue of cross-country
patenting (i.e., inventors can patent the same technology in multiple countries where they desire
protection), we take a set of procedures in cleaning the data to ensure that 1) one patent
represents one unique innovation and is counted only once in our sample; and 2) each patent is
assigned to only one country where the first inventor indicated in the patent document is located.
It is important to acknowledge that a patent, as a common measure of invention used in
the innovation literature, is not a perfect measurement. Issues regarding using patent statistics to
measure innovations were discussed by Griliches (1990) and Motohashi and Goto (2010). There
are two major disadvantages of using patent data: first, the number of patent applications in a
country is highly subject to its patent system. Thus, we control for country heterogeneity by
including the overall number of patents in each country in our regression. Second, not all
inventions get patented. Inventors have the right to hide or reveal their inventions. Since the
propensity to patent varies by technology, we do separate regressions for each technology, so that
our identification strategy focuses on patenting changes within a single technology.

12

We construct a country’s stock of knowledge in a specific technology field using patent
counts based on the perpetual inventory model, which assumes that the knowledge stock depends
on a distributed lag of the current and past flows of innovations.
(5) Kit = PATit + (1- ) Kit-1
where ρ is the rate of stock depreciation, which we assume to be 15 percent following the
conventional innovation literature. Using a depreciation rate implies that the patent/knowledge
produced earlier become less valueable and relevant for today’s innovations. For the first year’s
knowledge stock, we simply equate the patent counts in the first year to knowledge stock, since
most countries have zero patents in their first year of our estimation period.9 For the ease of
interpreting the effect of knowledge stock, we normalize this variable by taking log of the value
of knowledge stock plus 1.
We measure disaster impacts, our key independent variable, using both human mortalities
and economic losses from the natural disasters. Our disaster data on the three types of natural
disasters (earthquake, drought and flood) is taken from two sources. We use the drought and
flooding data from the Emergency Event Database (EM-DAT) maintained by the Centre for
Research on the Epidemiology of Disaster. Most current studies involving cross-country and
multi-hazard analyses use the EM-DAT database. While this database is publically assessable,
the accuracy of its data has been questioned given its humanitarian focus and specific thresholds
for events to be included. 10 While we can identify no better alternative for information on
flooding and droughts, we collect data on earthquakes from the National Geophysical Data

9

In most applications of perpetual inventory model, the starting stock is calculated by dividing the first year’s flow by average
annual logarithmic growth plus the depreciation rate (e.g., Coe and Helpman 1995). This method cannot be applied in our case,
since a lot of countries in our sample have zero patents during the years. We feel safe to do so also because many countries have
zero patents in their first year in our data set. Moreover, as our regressions begin in 1984 but our patent data begin in 1974, we
have 10 years of historical data for most countries to construct the initial knowledge stock.
10
EM-DAT includes events with either more than 10 fatalities, over 100 people affected, a declaration of a state of emergency, or
a call for international assistance. It contains information on disaster events from 1900.

13

Center (NGDC) Significant Earthquake Database. This database is preferred to EM-DAT since it
contains richer information on earthquake physics (e.g., magnitude and Modified Mercalli
Intensity), much longer timespan and more small-impact events that do not meet the EM-DAT
threshold. The economic losses are adjusted by the World Bank GDP deflator index.
In addition to the disaster impacts data, we also collect data to measure the magnitude of
the exogenous disaster shocks, in order to instrument for potentially endogenous disaster impacts
and knowledge stocks. For earthquakes, the NGDC database provides information such as the
Richter scale of individual earthquake events. For drought, we use the Standardized Precipitation
Evapotranspiration Index (Vicente-Serrano et al, 2010), which is a multi-scalar drought index
that is calculated using precipitation and temperature data11 and presented in a global gridded
dataset at a spatial resolution of 0.5 degree (approximately 56 km x 56 km at the equator)
covering the period of 1901 to 2009. This index is claimed to be “particularly suited to detecting,
monitoring, and exploring the consequences of global warming on drought conditions” (VicenteSerrano et al, 2010: p1698). Considering that drought is most likely to affect agriculture, we
focus on the drought events occurring on cropland, and match the SPEI data with a global
cropland coverage data set which is also at 0.5 spatial degree resolution.12 Since out data is a
panel structure of country by year, we use geospatial software to create a new country-year
aggregate drought measure: we take the mean of the SPEI values which are under 0 (indicating
dryness) with their feature points (defined by longitude and latitude) located on cropland.13 For
flood, we use the area-weighted-precipitation data from Dell et al (2012) and assume that

11

Their original weather data is taken from the Global Historical Climatology Network database.
The global cropland dataset, which spans from 1700 to 2007, is produced by Navin Ramankutty at the Land Use and the
Global Environment lab of Mcgill University.
The data is retrieved from http://www.geog.mcgill.ca/~nramankutty/Datasets/Datasets.html
13
In the original global cropland data, for each feature point cropland is identified by a crop coverage percentage. To simplify our
definition of cropland, we calculate the mean cropland coverage ratio by country-year and treat all feature points which exceed
the country mean in the same year as cropland.
12

14

excessive rainfall is often an exogenous shock causing flooding.14
For data on country characteristics, we use the data on real GDP per capita and
population from Penn World Table (7.0 version). To measure institutional quality, we use the
polity variable from POLITY IV project, which takes on the value from -10 to 10 and indicates a
country’s openness of political institution (higher values suggest a more democratic and open
political institution). As discussed above, countries are different in terms of their science bases,
patent systems and general propensity to patent innovations. Thus we use the total number of
patent applications filed by a country’s residents to control for this country characteristic. This
data comes from the World Bank World Development Indicators and the database of the World
Intellectual Property Organization.
In this study, we look at three types of natural disasters and four different types of
technologies. For each technology, we construct a sample of countries with the selection criteria
that the country should have at least five patents in a given technology field between 1974 and
2009. We begin in 1974 because patent data for many countries first appears in the Delphion
database in the mid-1970s. Therefore, our sample size varies according to different technology
types. Appendix 2 lists the countries included for each technology.
Table 1 provides national summary statistics reporting the average deaths and damages
from natural disasters per year by disaster type, and total patent counts by technology type for a
period 1970-2009. A large majority of our sample countries are industrialized countries. This is
consistent with the notion that most of the global R&D activities are carried out by developed
countries (National Science Board, 2010), since they have higher demand and more resources for
science, technology and innovation. In particular, United States, Germany and Japan appear to
14
The precipitation data in Dell et al (2012) have also been aggregated to the country-year level. The original data is taken from
the Terrestrial Air Temperature and Precipitation: 1900-2006 Gridded Monthly Time Series, Version 1.01(Matsurra and Willmott
2007).

15

play leading roles in patenting on these mitigating technologies. Notably, China seems to be most
severely impacted by all three types of disasters among all sample countries, while it also has a
large number of patents on these technologies. To compare across disaster types, earthquakes and
floods cause much larger losses on our sample countries than droughts. This suggests that two
possibilities. First, while droughts will typically affect a larger geographic area than earthquakes
or floods, their impact is primarily on a single sector (agriculture), rather than the entire economy
of the affected area. Second, given that most of our sample countries are developed countries,
they already have good technologies and infrastructure such as irrigation systems which make
them less vulnerable to drought. In fact, the statistics of global drought impacts by country
(based on the EM-DAT data) shows that most of the severe drought events in the past forty years
have occurred in developing nations, in particular the least developed countries in Africa.15 This
fact further confirms that the impact of drought highly depends on an area’s vulnerability or
adaptive capacity.
Figures 1-3 illustrate trends in patenting behavior for selected countries, with major
disaster events also highlighted. Figure 1 shows earthquake mitigation patenting trends for the
United States and Japan. In both cases, patenting activity increases after major earthquakes, such
as the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake in the U.S. and the 1995 earthquake in Kobe, Japan. Figure
2 shows similar trends for flood control technology in the Unites States and United Kingdom. In
contrast, a visual inspection of drought-resistant crop technologies suggests a more gradual
increase in patenting activity over time. Possible explanations include increased awareness of
drought risks from climate change or increased patenting due to advances in agricultural

15

We rank countries that are most often hit by drought from 1970 to 2010 using the drought data from EM-DAT. Only five
countries in the top 15 (China, Brazil, Australia, India, United States) are included in our sample. The other countries are
Mozambique, Ethiopia, Kenya, Bolivia, Somalia, Honduras, Indonesia, Mauritania, Philippines, and Sudan, which have no
patents in either of the drought-mitigating technologies.

16

biotechnology. Year effects in the regression analysis allow us to control for both possibilities.
Table 2 presents the descriptive statistics of main variables in the analysis. It should be
noted that though our patent data generally becomes available in 1974, we deliberately choose to
start our estimation period at least 10 years later because we have the knowledge stock, which is
also a function of patent counts, on the right hand side. In this way, we allow the stock to
accumulate for ten years before it enters into the estimation equation.

5. Empirical model and main results
5.1 Domestic disaster impacts
To examine the relationship between disaster shocks and risk-mitigating innovations, we
estimate a reduced-form empirical model based on our proposed conceptual framework:
5

(6) PATjit = f ( Dit  n , Yit, Iit, Kjit-1, Sit, ηi, t )
n 0

where the innovation flow (PATjit) is the total number of successful patents in the technology
field j applied by the residents in country i in year t. It is the function of contemporary and
lagged impact of natural disasters that occurred in country i and a set of country characteristics
including real GDP per capita Yit, political institutions Iit, existing domestic knowledge stock
relevant to the specific technology type in question, Kjit-1, and general patent application quantity
Sit. The reason for using a distributed lag of disaster impacts is that we are reluctant to impose a
structure on the effects of recent year’s disasters on innovation. 16 Country fixed effects ηi,
control for time-invariant heterogeneity across country (e.g., the baseline hazard risks,

16

As we discussed earlier, innovation takes time. Whether the most recent disasters have bigger impacts on innovative activities
is an empirical question. To determine the number of year lags to be included in the regression, we first conduct a sensitivity test
by gradually increasing the lags. We find the coefficients on lagged values of disaster effects generally become insignificant
beyond five years ago. Further sensitivity analysis of the lags is available in Appendices 3 and 4.

17

innovation capacity, and other unobserved country specific characteristics), and also helps to
address the potential endogeneity of the disaster impact variables. Year fixed effects t control
for time-varying factors common to all countries (e.g., the global technology advancement,
salient disaster shocks which occurred in one country but affect the global risk perception).
Given the count-data nature of our dependent variable (i.e., patent counts) and panel
nature of our data structure, we use Poisson fixed-effects model with robust standard errors to
address possible over-dispersion in the data (Cameron and Trivedi, 2005). Standard errors are
clustered by country.17 We use the fixed-effects model because the unobserved heterogeneity
across countries as discussed above is very likely to exist and correlate with the explanatory
variables.18
We estimate our empirical model by using the Generalized Methods of Moments (GMM)
technique (Hansen, 1982).

While this estimation equation allows the individual effects to

correlate with the other regressors, the consistency of the estimators rely on the assumption of
strict exogeneity of explanatory variables (E(xituit) = 0). In other words, the regressors must not
correlate with any of the past, current and future error terms. However, this assumption seems
difficult to justify in our model for two reasons. First, our lagged knowledge stock variable is
constructed using a distributed lag of previous patent counts, and therefore has the similar
character of a lagged dependent variable, which is predetermined. Second, the disaster impacts
may also be predetermined in the sense that the earlier efforts of innovating as a response to past
disaster shocks may help alleviate the human mortalities and economic losses of the subsequent
similar events. It should also be noted that the inclusion of country fixed effects is to capture the
17
Because of the panel nature of the data, we do not use a negative binomial model, as the negative binomial fixed effect model
does not truly control for unobserved fixed effects (Alison and Waterman, 2002; Cameron and Trividi 2005; Paulo 2008).
18
Unless we can find proper measures for the country specific heterogeneity and include them in the regression, the potential
correlation between the observed fixed components ηi with the other regressors would make a standard random effects estimator
inconsistent.

18

time-invariant individual effects that may affect innovation motivation and patenting. If the
time-varying elements of a country’s adaptive capacity that may affect disaster outcomes are not
fully accounted for, this might also induce the endogeneity issue of our disaster variables.
To address these issues, we estimate two specifications. First, we replace the Kjit-1 in the
estimation equation (6) with Kjit-6, so that the knowledge stock is no longer a function of the
lagged disaster impact variables in our regression and can be treated as exogenous to today’s
innovation flows. Using this specification we essentially assess the effect of disaster events that
occurred in the present year as well as in the last five years on risk-mitigating innovation,
considering that they may both induce innovation today to do lagged reactions and may reduce
the need for innovation due to earlier improvements to adaptive capacity in the past five years in
reaction to lagged disasters. One caveat is that the reduced form specification does not address
the issue of strict exogeneity. Given the long time frame of our sample, such concerns are
unlikely to cause significant bias, and this specification does not suffer if potential instruments,
described below, are weak (Wooldridge 2010).19
Second, we use the instrumental variable approach, using the magnitude measures of
shock events that have induced natural disasters as instruments. Our argument is that the
“natural destructiveness” of a disaster correlates directly with the disaster outcomes such as
human and economic losses and should be exogenous. Moreover, since our theory posits that
disasters induce innovation and subsequent accumulation of the specific technical knowledge to
cope with disasters, the magnitude measures should also exert a positive effect on the knowledge
stock. Therefore, in addition to using the disaster magnitude that corresponds to each year’s
disaster impact, we instrument for knowledge stock using the magnitude information over a

19

When strict exogeneity is violated, the bias is a function of 1/T. Our regressions include 24-26 years of data, so that any
potential bias is scaled by a factor of approximately 0.04.

19

longer period of 25 years, given the availability of rich pre-sample data. By instrumenting for the
lagged knowledge stock, the second specification allows us to directly interpret the effect of the
existing knowledge base on upcoming innovations. For some types of technology (e.g.,
earthquake mitigating innovations), we also use a country’s population as an instrument for
disaster impacts because a high density of population is presumably more subject to human and
economic losses when being hit by a disaster shock.20 One complication for earthquake is that
our unit of analysis is country-year instead of events. We use two variables to measure the
severity of earthquakes, the maximum earthquake magnitude if any occurs in a country-year and
the total number of earthquakes with a magnitude six or large in a country-year. As for drought,
we use the aggregated Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI) at countryyear level as well as population to instrument for drought damages and lagged knowledge stocks.
The instrument we use in the case of flooding is area-weighted precipitation (Dell et al, 2012) for
country-year. In all cases, the instrumental variable approach provides consistent estimates of
our parameters as long as the quality of our instruments is good. However, the results suffer if
the instruments are not strong predictors of disaster impacts and lagged knowledge.
Table 3 presents the estimation results for both specifications using death tolls as the
measure of disaster impact. Note that for droughts we focus on only economic damage because a
majority of our sample countries have zero deaths over the estimation period. Income and total
patent applications are in logs, so that the coefficients can be interpreted as elasticities. The
results show that human mortalities from recent disasters generally have a significant and
positive effect on the domestic patent flows for all technologies concerned. Such evidence
20

To address the predetermined and endogenous regressor issue, we have also tried other approaches following the literature on
panel count-data models. For example Chamberlain (1992), Wooldridge (1997), and Windmeijer (2000) have suggested a quasidifferencing GMM estimator using the lagged xit as instruments. This approach can not only allow the unobserved heterogeneity
to correlate with regressors but no longer rests on the strict exogeneity assumption. But the precision of the estimator may be
hampered if the regressors are highly persistent over time, which thus have less relevance for the differenced terms (weak
instrument problem). We have found the same problem when we applied this approach to our data.

20

supports our principal hypothesis that natural disasters lead to risk-mitigating innovations, and
the amount of successful patent applications following disaster events increase with the severity
of disaster impacts. Specifically, in the case of earthquakes, the coefficients on the current-year’s
death (measured in thousand) suggest that an additional 1,000 deaths increases the expected
counts of patents of earthquake-proof building and detection technology applied for in same year
by 1.3% - 1.5%, respectively.21 Comparing the two types of earthquake-mitigating technologies,
we find that earthquake impacts seem to have a long-term effect on quake-resistant building
patents while its effect on detection patents seems more immediate (i.e., only the coefficients on
the present year and last year’s death are statistically significant). The row “sum of death”
presents the joint significance of all current and lagged impacts. For quake-proof buildings, one
thousand deaths from earthquakes can increase the expected counts of patents filed in the next
five years by about 18.6 – 23.8%, while such impact on the detection patents are insignificant
over the five-year period. It is somehow surprising to see the lagged effect does not become
smaller with the increase of year lags, as reflected in the magnitude of the coefficients. One
possible explanation is that the innovation of earthquake-proof buildings is not only stimulated
by the disaster events but also subject to the changes in regulations (e.g., building codes may be
revised following severe events, thereby providing a long-term motive for innovation). By
comparing the two different specifications, we notice that the significance of most coefficients
does not change much, and the coefficient magnitudes of those highly significant variables are
largely similar.22

21

As we use Poisson model for estimation, we are able to interpret the coefficients in a semi-elasticity form.
However, recall that we should be cautious about the difference in how to interpret these coefficients, since we are controlling
for two different levels of lagged knowledge stock in the two models. In specification (1), we estimate the effect of recent
disasters conditioning on the six-year lagged knowledge stock (that had been established before these events actually happened);
and in specification (2), we estimate the effect of a distributed lag of disasters controlling for last year’s knowledge stock, so the
effect of earlier disaster events (e.g., year t-5) on existing knowledge will already be captured in the knowledge stock variable. In
Appendix 5, we demonstrate that this has little impact on the magnitude of the individual coefficients.
22

21

As for flood-control technology, we only show the results for specification 1 because the
instrument (i.e., area-weighted precipitation) is weakly correlated with the death variables.23 The
results shows that the cumulative effects of recent flooding events on the innovation of floodcontrol technologies in particularly prominent: an additional 1,000 deaths from floods that have
occurred in the past five years plus the present year would lead to an increase of patent
application in this field by 88%. Also, the six-year lagged knowledge stock is statistically
significant and positive for patent counts: a ten percent increase in the knowledge stock of six
years ago is associated with 2.5% increase in today’s patent applications. This suggests that the
earlier knowledge stock serves as a building block for future innovations even after considering
its possible competing effects on risk-mitigating innovations as part of a country’s existing
adaptive capacity.
Table 4 reports the estimation results using economic losses as a measure of disaster
impact for both specifications. The results are largely consistent with what we have found using
human losses, that is, economic damages from recent disasters generally have a statistically
significant and positive effect on the innovation of risk-mitigation technologies. As for
earthquakes, the pattern of the disasters-innovation relationship is somewhat similar with that in
Table 3: patenting in earthquake-proof building technology seem to be more affected by the
earlier events (though it should be noted that in specification 2, the coefficient on current year’s
damage turns significant with a much large magnitude compared to that in specification 1), while
patenting of earthquake detection technology is more responsive to the most recent events. We
also notice that when instrumenting for disaster impacts (specification 2), the coefficients on
one-year lagged knowledge stock for both two technologies are positive and significant at 5%
level, which suggests that the supply-side effect of the existing knowledge base on upcoming
23

Appendix 6 provides information on the fit of the instruments for each of our technologies and endogenous variables.

22

innovations may play a dominant role. As for flooding, the stimulating effect of disasters on
patenting seems to come more from recent years, and both specifications show that the
magnitude of such impact is biggest for the current year’s flooding: an additional $1 billion
economic loss would increases the expected number of flood-control patent applications filed in
the same year by 4.8% - 11%. The effect of the lagged knowledge stock seems ambiguous in this
case: although both two have positive coefficients, neither is significant at 5% level. As for the
drought-resistant crop technology, the effect of drought on patenting activities is also positive
and statistically significant in most lagged years (except year t-1 and t-3) in the specification 1. It
is estimated that an additional $1 billion economic losses from drought that occurred no earlier
than five years ago would increase the expected number of patent applications filed at the present
year by approximately 20%. When we instrument for drought damage using aggregated drought
index, the coefficient of the present year’s damage has been substantially inflated to 0.244 (this
suggests the immediate innovation response is even larger than the long-term responses in the
specification 1), while coefficients on other lagged years turn insignificant. It is also surprising to
see that the coefficients on other country controls, such as GDP, institution quality and general
patent applications, are very different from those in specification 1. In particular, the control for
total patent applications has an unexpected negative sign in this specification. We suspect these
problems are the results of the relatively weak link between our instruments and the damage
variables, as discussed in Appendix 6. Given that there are few differences between
specifications 1 and 2 for other technologies, we place more faith in specification 1 for droughtresistant crops.

23

5.2 Do foreign shocks matter?
So far we have examined the effect of domestic disaster shocks on domestic innovation
of risk-mitigating technologies. Here we consider whether innovators also respond to salient
foreign disaster shocks and whether they could benefit from the adaptive knowledge that has
been created abroad (i.e., knowledge spillover effects). To answer this question, we create
variables measuring the impact of foreign shocks as well as foreign knowledge stocks and use
them to replace the year fixed effects to avoid multicollinearity.24 Specifically, we estimate the
following model:25
5

(7)

PATjit = f (  DDit  n ,
n0

5

 FD
n0

it  n ,

DKjit-6 , FKjit-6 , Yit , Iit , Sit , ηi )

in which DDit denotes the human mortality or economic losses resulting from natural disasters
that occurred in country i in year t, while FDit is the human or economic losses from disasters
that occurred outside country i in year t. DKjit-6 denotes the domestic knowledge stock in
technology field j in country i by year t-6. FKit-6 denotes the foreign knowledge stock constructed
by the patents filed outside country i up until year t-6.
Table 5 reports the estimation results. First, removing the year fixed effects and adding
controls for foreign disasters and knowledge increases the significance of some coefficients on
the distributed lag of domestic disasters. But this does not affect the cumulative effect of
domestic shocks much, which suggests the robustness of our estimation. In terms of foreign
impact, we find foreign disasters that have occurred between year t and year t-5 together exert a

24

To create the foreign impact variables, we first calculate the total global impacts by aggregating the human or economic losses
from all countries in the database (not limited to our sample countries) and subtract each country’s own losses from the total
global losses. We construct the foreign knowledge stock in the same way as we create the domestic knowledge stock (using the
perpetual inventory model). We aggregate the total number of patents filed in the world in a year and then subtract each country’s
own patents from the global pool to obtain the foreign patent counts by country-year.
25
Note that model (7) is largely based on specification (1), which uses country fixed effects and no instrument variables. We
choose this to derive our foreign model due to the small difference between this approach and the instrument approach.

24

statistically significant and positive effect on the domestic innovation of flood control and
drought-resistant crop technology, though the magnitude of such effect is much smaller
compared to the domestic disasters. Surprising, the patent counts of quake-proof technology
decrease with the severity of foreign earthquakes, and this effect is statistically significant at 1%
level for most lagged-year coefficients when severity is measured by deaths. While it may simply
be that innovation of building technology might be primarily driven by domestic demand and
institutions (e.g., building codes) and less subject to the foreign disaster shocks, we cannot rule
out that the lack of year fixed effects may imply an omitted variable correlated with foreign
disasters. For detection technology, the innovative response to foreign earthquakes seems more
immediate and only significant in the current year. This pattern is consistent with the response to
domestic earthquakes, while the magnitude of foreign effects is also very small. In terms of the
knowledge spillover effects, we find that for earthquake detection and drought-resistant crop,
foreign knowledge stocks lagged by six years have a significant and positive effect on domestic
innovation, which suggests the potential spillovers across countries.
In addition to not controlling for year effects, the previous model also assumes that all
global disasters have a similar impact on innovation. We next relax this assumption, asking
whether disaster shocks that occur in nearby foreign countries would more likely induce
domestic innovation of risk-mitigating technologies. The rationale is that geographic proximity
leads countries to share some similar geophysical characteristics, thereby causing risk perception
to be influenced by the incidence of one another. Moreover, geographic proximity might imply a
potential same market and make it easy for foreign technologies to diffuse and profit. To test this
hypothesis, we group countries by continent and create variables of foreign disaster impact based
on the same continent external to country i. By adding more cross-country variation to foreign

25

disasters, we are also able to once again include year fixed effects, so that year dummies can
capture global technological progress, salient global shocks, and any potential omitted variables
correlated with such shocks. Other variables remain the same.
Table 6 reports the estimation results using this approach. Again, the coefficients on the
distributed lag of domestic disaster impact largely stay the same as compared to the original
domestic model. Foreign disasters that occurred between year t and t-5 on the same continent
external to a country have a positive cumulative effect on its domestic innovation of detection
and flood control technology, and such effect is statistically significant when foreign impact is
measured by death for detection and damage for flood control. For quake-proof building
technology, using this new measure makes some originally negative coefficients on foreign
shocks in model (7) no longer significant. But we still see no evidence on the link between
foreign disasters and domestic innovation for this technology. Finally, unlike when controlling
for all foreign damages, foreign disaster impacts generally are now insignificant for droughtresistant crop technology. One possible explanation is the presence of the global crop market and
the concentration of innovative activities by a few biotech multinational corporations. To
summarize, we do find some evidence suggesting the impact of foreign shocks and foreign
knowledge spillovers on domestic innovation, though such evidence is not pervasive across all
technology types.

6. Conclusion
Natural disasters cause tremendous human causalities, as well as significant economic
losses worldwide. But apart from this, what do people learn from suffering natural disasters? Do
they improve their coping capacity every time after being hit by a disaster shock? These are

26

meaningful questions for both researchers and policy makers to consider. Until now, there has
been no systematic study of the role of technology and innovation in climate change adaptation.
This paper fills this gap, linking three types of natural disasters (earthquakes, droughts, and
flooding) to a set of mitigation technologies.
By introducing the idea of “risk-mitigating innovation”, we conceptualize innovation as
an important form of adaptation. We bring together two lines of research on induced innovation
and adaptation to develop a conceptual framework for assessing the effects of natural disasters
on risk-mitigating innovation. Our empirical analysis, using a panel of up to 30 countries
covering a period of about 25 years, reveals a consistent stimulating effect of natural disasters on
patent flows of the technologies that can mitigate similar disaster risks. For all types of
technologies concerned here, we find evidence that the amount of risk-mitigating innovation in a
country increases with the severity of its recent natural disasters. This finding suggests that
people are constantly learning from their disaster experiences, though they adapt to natural
disasters in a reactive manner. This has important implications for both policymakers and
modelers of climate policy, as it suggests that innovations that facilitate adaptation to climate
change are unlikely to come from the private sector until after climate damages have been
experienced. The potential role of public R&D support to facilitate earlier improvements in riskmitigating technologies thus deserves investigation in future research.
Moreover, our study also shows that innovators not only respond to domestic shocks but
also respond to natural disasters occurring in other countries, although the magnitude of the latter
is much smaller and the link is not pervasive across all technology types. We also find that the
growing pool of global knowledge on disaster mitigation exerts a stimulating effect on domestic
risk-mitigating innovation (e.g., for earthquake detection and drought-resistant crop technology).

27

This finding has important implication for global adaptation policy making. Since most of the
innovative activities are currently taking place in industrialized countries, their risk-mitigating
innovation can generate positive externalities to the developing world and could be translated
into useful local knowledge to cope with natural disasters and reduce vulnerability. Policies are
needed to facilitate the transfer of more risk-mitigating technologies to countries with limited
technological resource and capacity and deployment of these technologies.
As the first study integrating technology innovation and adaptation, we believe that this
line of research can be further extended in at least two directions. First, in this study we construct
the measure of foreign disaster shocks and foreign knowledge stocks in a relatively coarse way.
In fact, not all natural disasters that have occurred elsewhere in the world or foreign knowledge
available are relevant for a country. More detailed analyses could be done in this regard, for
example, weighing the foreign impacts by geographic distance between countries and measuring
the existing foreign knowledge stock using the patent family and patent citation information.
Second, more research could be done to assess the role of technological change in facilitating
adaptation to climate change. In this study we mainly focus on how natural disasters induce riskmitigating innovation, but we have little to say about the effectiveness of these new innovations
in reducing disaster risks (e.g., saving lives and preventing economic losses). Particularly, given
the public good nature of knowledge, it is an important policy and research question to gauge the
potential benefits of diffusion of risk-mitigating technologies in the global context.

28

References
Allison, P. D. and R. P. Waterman (2002). "Fixed-Effects Negative Binomial Regression
Models." Sociological Methodology 32: 247-265.
Anbarci, N., Escaleras, M., and Register C.A.(2005). Earthquake fatalities: the interaction of
nature and political economy. Journal of Public Economics. 89, 1907-1933.
Ausubel, J.H., (1991). Does climate still matter? Nature, 350, 649–652.
Benson, C. and E.J.Clay (2004) Understanding the Economic and financial impacts of natural
disasters. Disaster risk Management Series, No. 4 (Washington, D.C.: World Bank).
Bosello, F., C. Carraro, and E. De Cian (2009), “An Analysis of Adaptation as a Response to
Climate Change,” Copenhagen Consensus Center, Copenhagen Business School.
Brooks, N., Adger, W., and Kelly, P. (2005) The determinants of vulnerability and adaptive
capacity at the national level and the implications for adaption. Global Environmental
Change, 15 151-163
Cameron, A. C. and P. K. Trivedi (2005). Microeconometrics: Methods and Applications.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Cavallo, E., and Noy, I.(2010). The economics of natural disasters. A survey. Inter-American
Development Bank working paper series No. IDB-WP-124
Coe, D.T., & Helpman, E.(1995). International R&D spillovers. European Economic Review, 39,
859-887.
Cuaresma, J.C., Hlouskova, J., and Obersteiner, M (2008). Natural disasters as creative
destruction? Evidence from developing countries. Economic Inquiry. 46, 2.
de Bruin, Kelly C., Rob B. Dellink, and Richard S.J. Tol (2009), “AD-DICE: an implementation
of adaptation in the DICE model,” Climatic Change, 95: 63-81.
Dell, M., Jones, B., Olken, B (2012). “Temperature shocks and economic growth: evidence from
the last half century.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics. 4(3): 66-95
Escaleras, M., Anbarci, N., and Register, C.(2006) Public sector corruption and natural disasters:
A potentially dead interaction. No 6005, Working Papers from Department of Economics,
College of Business, Florida Atlantic University
Fankhauser, S., Smith, J.B., and Tol, R. S.J.(1999) Weathering climate change: some simple rules
to guide adaptation decisions. Ecological Economics 30: 67-78.
Grothmann, T., and Patt, A. (2005) Adaptive capacity and human cognition: the process of
individual adaptation to climate change. Global Environmental Change 15. 199-213.

29

Hansen, L. P. 1982. Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estimators.
Econometrica 50:1029-1054.
Hicks, J.R. (1932). The theory of wages, Macmillan, London.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) TAR (2001) Climate change 2001: Impacts,
Adaptation and Vulnerability. IPCC, Third Assessment Report, Cambridge University
Press.
IPCC (2012) Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change
Adaptation [Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D.
Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)].
A Special Report of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, and New York, NY, USA.
Johnstone, N., Hascic, I., Popp, D., 2010. Renewable energy policies and technological
innovation: evidence based on patent counts. Environmental and Resource Economics 45
(1), 133-155.
Kahn, M. (2005). The death toll from natural disasters: the role of income, geography, and
institutions. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(2): 271-284.
Kellenberg, D.K., and Mobarak., A.M., (2008). Does rising income increase or decrease damage
risk from natural disasters? Journal of Urban Economics 63, 788-802
Kellenberg, D., and Mobarak, A.M. (2011) The economics of natural disasters. Annu. Rev.
Resour. Econ. 3: 297-312.
Keefer, P., Neumayer, E., and Plumper, T (2010) Earthquake propensity and the politics of
mortality prevention. Policy Research Working Paper 5182.
Hallegatte, S.(2012) An exploration of the link between development, economic growth and
natural risk. Policy research working paper 6216. The World Bank.
Hsiang, S.M., Narita, D (2012). Adaptation to Cyclone Risk: Evidence from the Global CrossSection, Climate Change Economics, Vol. 3, No.2.
Levina, E., and Tirpak, D. (2006) Key adaptation concepts and terms. Organization for Economic
Co-operation and development.
Martin, W.E., Martin, I.M., and Kent, B. (2009). The role of risk perception in the risk mitigation
process: the case of wildfire in high risk communities. Journal of Environmental
Management, 91. 489-498.
National Science Board (2010). Science and Engineering Indicators 2010, Arlington, VA:
National Science Foundation.
Paulo, G. (2008). "The fixed effects negative binomial model revisited." Economics Letters 99

30

(1): 63-66.
Perry, R.W., & lindell, M.K., (1986). Twentieth century volcanicity at Mt.St. Helens: The
routinization of life near an active volcano (Final report of National Science Foundation
Grant CEE-8322868). Tempe: Arizona State University, School of Public Affairs.
Popp. D. (2002). Induced innovation and energy prices. American Economic Review, 92(1): 160180.
Popp, D., Newell, R, & Jaffe, A. (2010) “Energy, the Environment, and Technological Change,”
Handbook of the Economics of Innovation: vol. 2, Bronwyn Hall and Nathan Rosenberg,
eds., Academic Press/Elsevier, 873-937.
Rashky, P.(2008). Institutions and the losses from natural disasters. Natural Hazards and Earth
System Sciences 8, 627–634.
Rogers, R.W.(1983). Cognitive and physiological processes in fear appeals and attitude change: a
revised theory of protection motivation. In: Cacioppo, B.L., Petty, L.L (Eds.), Social
Psychophysiology: A Sourcebook. Guilford, London, UK, PP 153-176.
Schumacher, I., Strobl, E.(2011). Economic development and losses due to natural disasters: The
role of hazard exposure. Ecological Economics, 72, 97–105.
Stefanovic, I.L.(2003). The contribution of philosophy to hazards assessment and decision
making. Natural Hazards, 28, 229-247.
Smit, B and Wandel, J. (2006). Adaptation, adaptive capacity and vulnerability. Global
Environmental Change, 16: 282-292.
Tol, Richard S.J. (2007), “The double trade-off between adaptation and mitigation for sea level
rise: an application of FUND,” Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change,
12, 741-753.
Toya, H., Skidmore, M.(2007). Economic development and the impact of natural disasters.
Economics Letters 94, 20–25.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (2006) Technologies for adaptation
to climate change.
http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/publications/tech_for_adaptation_06.pdf
United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (2009) Reducing disaster risks
through science: issue and actions, the full report of the ISDR Scientific and Technical
Committee 2009. http://www.unisdr.org/files/11543_STCReportlibrary.pdf
Van Aalst, M. (2006) The impacts of climate change on the risk of natural disasters. Disasters.
Special Issue: climate change and disasters. Volume 30, Issue 5-18.
Verdolini, E and Galeotti, M. (2011). At home and abroad: an empirical analysis of innovation

31

and diffusion in energy technologies. Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, 61, 119-134
Vincente-Serrano, S.M., Begueria, S., and Lopez-Moreno, J.I. (2009) A multiscalar drought
index sensitive to global warming: the Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration
Index. Journal of Climate. 23. 1696-1718
Weinstein, N.D. (1989) Effects of personal experience on self-protective behavior. Psychological
Bulletin 103 (1), 31-50
Wooldridge, J.M. (2010). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data: Second
Edition, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Yang, D(2008). Coping with disaster: the impact of hurricanes on international financial flow,
1970-2002. The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy. Vol. 8, No. 1 (Advances),
Article 13.
Yohe G., and Tol, R. (2002) Indicators for social and economic coping capacity-moving toward a
working definition of adaptive capacity, Global Environmental Change, 12, 25-40

32

Table 1- Natural Disaster and Patent Statistics for Sample Nations, 1970-2009
Disasters

Earthquake

Drought

Flood

Technology

Quake-proof Building
Detection
Drought-resistant
Flood Control
Average
Average
Average
Average
Average
Average
Total patent
Total patent
Total patent
Total patent
Country
deaths per damages per
deaths per damages per
deaths
damages
counts
counts
counts
counts
year
year
year
year
per year
per year
1.93
5.50
10
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Argentina
Australia
0.30
0.17
12
.
0
405.93
39
5.08
116.28
10
Austria
0.03
0
7
.
0
0
6
0.975
96.13
5
Belarus
0
0
8
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Belgium
0.05
2.17
8
.
0
0
22
.
.
.
Brazil
.
.
.
.
0.5
214.86
5
.
.
.
Bulgaria
0.08
0.2
8
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Canada
0
0
35
12
0
270.53
39
0.925
64.22
16
China
9055.73
3347.25
291
748
88.35
685.72
636
949.33
4140.81
305
Czech Republic
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2.18
150.59
46
.
.
.
.
0
0
12
.
.
.
East Germany
Denmark
0
0
6
.
0
24.53
.
.
.
.
France
0.23
0
134
28
0
57.78
46
4.75
157.69
34
Germany
0
9.28
149
20
0
0
182
1.08
375.95
227
Greece
6.78
107.88
31
12
.
.
.
.
.
.
0
0
11
.
0
35.03
10
7.73
21.173
10
Hungary
India
.
.
.
.
8.8889
78.36
7
.
.
.
Israel
0
0
.
8
0
2.16
23
.
.
.
Italy
152.75
1520.69
42
6
0
0.0263
.
14.43
634.39
9
Japan
154.73
4211.90
9928
1344
0
0
93
28.15
329.41
415
Mexico
266.00
175.51
10
.
0
47.71
5
.
.
.
Netherlands, The
0.03
3.26
11
.
0
0
18
0.03
18.07
8
Norway
.
.
.
.
0
0
.
.
.
.
New Zealand
0.08
8.10
29
.
0
3.13
12
.
.
.
Poland
0
0
13
.
.
.
.
2.35
146.64
22
0
0
217
27
0
0
48
57.1
91.14
187
Republic of Korea
Romania
39.98
82.73
23
.
.
.
.
16.7
105.69
7
Russia
100.93
753.50
79
126
0
0
16
13.58
68.50
61
Saudi Arabia
.
.
.
.
0
0
.
.
.
.
Singapore
.
.
.
.
0
0
.
.
.
.
South Africa
.
.
.
.
0
33.41
.
.
.
.
Soviet Union (Former)
1126.95
1229.65
385
47
0
0
60
6.73
214.86
11
Spain
0
1.27
25
.
0
396.07
8
.
.
.
Sweden
0
0
6
.
0
0
.
0.28
11.49
10
Switzerland
0
0
12
.
0
0
13
0.25
72.26
13
Taiwan
58.60
403.05
97
27
0
0
.
2.7
6.71
18
Ukraine
0
0
217
5
.
.
.
.
.
.
United Kingdom
0
0
33
7
0
0
15
1.23
415.47
89
United States
5.68
1406.02
323
125
0
203.80
864
35.5
1356.8
91
All the economic losses are in million US dollars (2005 level). According to our sample selection criteria, countries with less than five patents in the given technology are not
included in the sample and are thus indicated as “.” in the table. For these excluded countries, we don’t indicate their disaster impact information. But this by no means implies
that these countries have never been hit by any disasters.

33

Table 2 - Descriptive Statistics
Disaster Type
Technology Type

Earthquake
Quake-proof building

Earthquake Detection

Drought

Flood

Drought-resistant Crop

Flood Control

Dependent variable

Mean

Std. Dev.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Patent counts

15.21

72.74

6.57

19.80

4.21

14.03

3.14

6.55

Deaths (thousand)

0.18

3.33

0.34

4.74

0.01

0.10

0.06

0.34

Foreign deaths (thousand)

14.63

23.70

23.21

46.88

0.30

0.53

7.10

6.10

Damages (2005 US$, billion)
Foreign damages (2005 US$,
billion)

0.56

7.47

1.12

10.66

0.11

0.86

0.66

2.72

18.67

37.95

17.99

37.11

3.06

3.92

18.47

12.00

Log domestic knowledge stock
Log foreign knowledge stock

1.99
7.54

1.58
0.65

1.87
5.75

1.60
0.66

1.34
5.02

1.38
1.14

1.60
5.21

1.37
0.91

Real GDP per capita (2005 US$,
thousand)

21.42

10.75

22.44

11.09

22.44

11.03

23.67

10.62

Independent variables

Institution index (-10~10)
Patent application counts
(thousand)

7.33

5.18

7.81

4.68

7.69

4.85

7.78

4.80

27.20

69.87

34.84

78.86

34.54

78.26

39.42

82.57

Population (million)

88.54

223.77

161.11

312.42

160.14

310.31

114.33

264.70

Maximum Earthquake Magnitude

1.63

2.83

2.48

3.19

Count of earthquakes (>=6)

0.32

0.88

0.55

1.15
0.73

0.60
67.86

34.61

Aggregated Drought Impact Index
Area-weighted Precipitation (mm)
Number of countries
Timespan

30

15

23

21

1984-2009

1984-2009

1984-2009

1986-2009
34

Technology
Death
L1.death
L2.death
L3.death
L4.death
L5.death
Sum of deaths
L6. Log stock

Table 3. Regression Results in Response to Deaths
Quake-proof building
Earthquake detection
(1)
0.0149***
(0.00540)
0.00821
(0.00653)
0.0242*
(0.0130)
0.0123
(0.0183)
0.0471
(0.0336)
0.0800***
(0.0209)
0.18669***
(0.56063)
0.265
(0.224)

L1. Log stock
Log GDP per capita
Institution index
Log Patent applications

Observations
Countries
E(Q)
Timespan

(2)
0.0139***
(0.00368)
0.000765
(0.00695)
-0.00177
(0.0556)
0.106
(0.0909)
0.0182
(0.0569)
0.101**
(0.0395)
0.23855***
(0.083)

(1)
0.0130***
(0.00224)
0.00951***
(0.00248)
-0.00736
(0.0221)
-0.00297
(0.0203)
-0.0546
(0.0652)
-0.104
(0.0674)
-.146725
(0.13317)

(2)
0.0131***
(0.000690)
0.0102***
(0.00111)
0.0539
(0.0561)
0.101
(0.142)
0.0154
(0.0886)
-0.0767***
(0.0135)
0.1168832
(0.25461)

-0.262
(0.166)

1.904*
(1.056)
0.00817
(0.0622)
0.317*
(0.179)

0.662*
(0.354)
2.703**
(1.073)
0.121
(0.114)
-0.345
(0.311)

717
30
0.0000
1984-2009

703
30
0.0827
1984-2009

Flood control
(1)
0.214**
(0.0986)
0.131**
(0.0620)
0.312***
(0.0968)
0.120*
(0.0650)
0.0107
(0.0434)
0.0958
(0.0706)
0.8841***
(0.23391)
0.254***
(0.0891)

0.622
(1.082)
0.0941
(0.110)
0.343
(0.413)

0.0163
(0.291)
2.077
(1.807)
0.0743
(0.152)
-0.383
(0.594)

1.845**
(0.825)
0.297**
(0.135)
0.286
(0.250)

338
15
0.0000
1984-2009

327
15
0.2053
1984-2009

459
21
0.0000
1986-2009

Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1.
Deaths are measured by 1000 people. The instruments we use in the specification (2) for quake-proof building and earthquake detection technologies
include the maximum earthquake magnitude and counts of earthquakes with magnitude 6 or larger in year t to year t-25, and population in year t to year t-5.

35

Technology
Damage
L1.damage
L2.damage
L3.damage
L4.damage
L5.damage
Sum of damages
L6. Log stock
L1. Log stock
Log GDP per capita
Institution index
Log Patent
applications
Observations
Countries
Timespan
E(Q)

Table 4. Regression Results in Response to Damages
Quake-proof building
Detection
Flood control
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
0.00443
0.0124***
0.00847*** 0.0119**
0.0476***
0.111**
(0.00380)
(0.00193)
(0.00189)
(0.00090
(0.0123)
(0.0462)
0.00322
0.00336
0.00461*** 0.00823*
0.0414***
0.0442**
(0.00196)
(0.00223)
(0.00172) (0.00106)
(0.0157)
(0.0185)
0.00286**
0.00133
0.00358*
0.00583*
0.0323***
0.0309
(0.00144)
(0.00135)
(0.00198) (0.00265)
(0.00954)
(0.0643)
0.00474***
0.00324
0.000752
0.00275
0.0111
0.0473
(0.00100)
(0.00310)
(0.00318) (0.00455)
(0.00948)
(0.0376)
0.00280**
0.00110
0.000666
0.00431
0.0121*
-0.0898**
(0.00133)
(0.00152)
(0.00230) (0.00290)
(0.00681)
(0.0408)
0.00297***
0.00332**
-0.00295
0.00527*
0.00492
0.0719
(0.00101)
(0.00135)
(0.00227) (0.00226)
(0.00497)
(0.0490)
0.02102*** 0 .0248***
0.01513
0.025557
0.14947**
0.21493
(0.00813)
(0.00479)
(0.01153) (0.00934)
(0.05297)
(0.20379)
0.195
-0.129
0.146*
(0.222)
(0.245)
(0.0768)
0.565**
0.584**
0.104
(0.242)
(0.271)
(0.343)
1.710**
1.650*
0.444
1.037
1.843**
-1.319
(0.749)
(0.929)
(0.983)
(1.094)
(0.785)
(7.648)
0.0290
0.0612
0.0432
-0.0677
0.306**
0.367
(0.0499)
(0.0805)
(0.0787)
(0.155)
(0.135)
(0.252)
0.417***
-0.0950
0.301
-0.463
0.400
2.316
(0.150)
(0.295)
(0.346)
(0.338)
(0.254)
(1.837)
717
30

703
30

1984-2009
0.0000
0.0048

338
327
15
15
1984-2009
0.0000
0.2259

459
21
1986-2009
0.0000

383
20
1986-2006
0.0245

Drought-resistant crop
(1)
(2)
0.0659***
0.175**
(0.0140)
(0.0714)
0.0177
-0.0358
(0.0209)
(0.0670)
0.0514***
0.0120
(0.0197)
(0.0460)
0.00771
-0.0486
(0.0124)
(0.0949)
0.0246***
-0.0846
(0.00806)
(0.0577)
0.0346***
-0.00908
(0.00907)
(0.0228)
0.202
0.009
0.0624
0.1204
-0.0181
(0.125)
0.685***
(0.241)
0.120
3.584**
(0.529)
(1.796)
0.0653
-0.344***
(0.0687)
(0.120)
0.302*
-1.422**
(0.177)
(0.706)
503
491
23
22
1984-2009
0.0000
0.0305

Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1. Economic damages are measured by billion US dollars at 2005 level. The instruments we use in the
specification (2) for quake-proof building and earthquake detection technologies include the maximum earthquake magnitude and counts of earthquakes with magnitude 6 or larger
in year t to year t-25, and population in year t to year t-5. For flood control we use area-weighted precipitation in year t to year t-25 to instrument for all damage variables and
l1.kstock in specification (2). For drought-resistant crop, we use the country aggregated mean SPEI value tin year t to year t-25 and population in year t to year t-5 to instrument
for all damage variables and l1.kstock.

36

Table 5. Regression Results in Response to Global Death and Damage
Technology
Impact measure

Quake-proof Building
Death
Damage
(1)
(2)

Death
(3)

Detection
Damage
(4)

Flood Control
Death
Damage
(5)
(6)

Crop
Damage
(7)

0.0187***
(0.00497)
0.0124*
(0.00636)
0.0404***
(0.0111)
0.0283**
(0.0142)
0.0378***
(0.00504)
0.0103*
(0.00580)
0.148***
(0.0292)

0.00408***
(0.000737)
0.00355***
(0.000345)
0.00386***
(0.000616)
0.00495***
(0.000709)
0.00445***
(0.000584)
0.00249***
(0.000461)
0.023***
(0.0010)

0.0167***
(0.00187)
0.00944***
(0.00337)
0.0427*
(0.0257)
0.0199
(0.0226)
0.00226
(0.0146)
-0.0562**
(0.0226)
0.035
(0.0515)

0.00928***
(0.000606)
0.00264**
(0.00115)
0.00352***
(0.00120)
0.00234**
(0.00103)
-0.000272
(0.00115)
-0.000564
(0.000679)
0.017***
(0.0044)

0.268***
(0.0841)
0.153*
(0.0822)
0.301***
(0.0586)
0.174**
(0.0714)
0.0766*
(0.0458)
0.0999
(0.0745)
1.072***
(0.2817)

0.0355**
(0.0144)
0.0456**
(0.0183)
0.0356***
(0.0124)
0.0136
(0.0121)
0.0289***
(0.00924)
0.0229***
(0.00418)
0.182***
(0.0680)

0.0618**
(0.0246)
0.0488*
(0.0276)
0.0845***
(0.0248)
0.0320***
(0.00661)
0.0352***
(0.0100)
0.0509***
(0.00779)
0.313***
(0.0772)

-0.00152
(0.00113)
-0.00308***
(0.00104)
-0.00544***
(0.00151)
-0.00707***
(0.00196)
-0.00737***
(0.00267)
-0.000580
(0.000981)
-0.0251***
(0.0045)

-0.000500
(0.000903)
-0.000916
(0.000920)
0.00147*
(0.000829)
-0.0000487
(0.000793)
-0.00201
(0.00209)
-0.00204
(0.00143)
-0.0040
(0.0044)

0.000733***
(0.000249)
-0.000373
(0.000626)
-0.000350
(0.000921)
0.0000358
(0.000997)
-0.000563
(0.000552)
-0.00219***
(0.000612)
-0.0027
(0.0018)

0.00156*
(0.000857)
-0.00270
(0.00181)
0.00294**
(0.00150)
0.00213
(0.00271)
-0.0000288
(0.00180)
0.00386**
(0.00169)
0.0078
(0.0074)

0.0185***
(0.00355)
0.00779
(0.00638)
0.0163**
(0.00719)
0.0256***
(0.00642)
0.0265***
(0.00743)
0.0258***
(0.00469)
0.1204***
(0.0155)

-0.0135***
(0.00505)
0.00469
(0.00456)
0.000795
(0.00433)
0.00144
(0.00329)
0.0201***
(0.00318)
0.0145***
(0.00489)
0.0281***
(0.0041)

0.0102
(0.0107)
0.0264*
(0.0151)
0.0342***
(0.0127)
0.0130
(0.00995)
0.00475
(0.0122)
-0.00419
(0.00995)
0.0845
(0.0496)

log Patent
applications

0.0856
(0.114)
0.102
(0.230)
2.043**
(0.901)
-0.0343
(0.0711)
0.214
(0.298)

0.0449
(0.0663)
-0.0491
(0.144)
1.245***
(0.301)
0.0576
(0.0562)
0.555**
(0.228)

-0.242
(0.163)
0.552***
(0.127)
1.538
(1.174)
-0.0491
(0.0897)
0.00944
(0.362)

-0.173
(0.205)
0.604***
(0.175)
0.863
(0.808)
0.0345
(0.0690)
0.288
(0.322)

0.271***
(0.0763)
-0.00977
(0.124)
1.803**
(0.809)
0.313**
(0.124)
0.317
(0.266)

0.168**
(0.0690)
-0.0148
(0.133)
1.702**
(0.829)
0.335***
(0.126)
0.442
(0.275)

0.247**
(0.107)
0.887***
(0.162)
0.122
(0.556)
0.0377
(0.0502)
0.227
(0.217)

Observations

717

717

338

338

459

459

503

Countries

30

30

15

15

21

21

23

year 0
year -1
year -2
year -3
year -4
year -5
sum of domestic
shocks
year 0
year -1
year -2
year -3
year -4
year -5
sum of foreign
shocks
l6. log domestic
stock
l6. log foreign
stock
log GDP per
capita
Institution index

Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1
Deaths are measured by 1000 people. Damages are measured by billion US dollars of 2005 price.

37

Table 6- Regression Results in Response to Foreign Shocks (based on the same continent)
Technology
Impact measure

Quake-proof Building
Death
Damage
(1)
(2)

Death
(3)

Detection
Damage
(4)

Flood Control
Death
Damage
(5)
(6)

Crop
Damage
(7)

0.0190***
(0.00697)
0.0106
(0.00720)
0.0303*
(0.0165)
0.0149
(0.0204)
0.0279
(0.0369)
0.0685***
(0.0204)
0.171**
(0.0671)

0.00273
(0.00249)
0.00292
(0.00211)
0.00158
(0.00195)
0.00422***
(0.00153)
0.00284
(0.00194)
0.00240**
(0.000985)
0.017*
(0.0088)

0.0124***
(0.00194)
0.00920***
(0.00229)
-0.00187
(0.0196)
-0.0103
(0.0217)
-0.0282
(0.0606)
-0.0922
(0.0663)
-0.111
(0.1337)

0.0141***
(0.00214)
0.00699***
(0.00203)
0.00330*
(0.00198)
-0.00136
(0.00359)
-0.000618
(0.00236)
-0.00149
(0.00375)
0.021*
(0.0122)

0.206**
(0.100)
0.127*
(0.0733)
0.359***
(0.0890)
0.110
(0.0864)
-0.0180
(0.0542)
0.122*
(0.0704)
0.906***
(0.2632)

0.0443***
(0.0107)
0.0532***
(0.0147)
0.0417***
(0.0125)
0.0126
(0.0121)
0.0126
(0.00847)
0.0113*
(0.00672)
0.176***
(0.0557)

0.0621***
(0.00954)
0.0105
(0.0209)
0.0435**
(0.0192)
0.00748
(0.0122)
0.0213***
(0.00774)
0.0318**
(0.0142)
0.177***
(0.0628)

0.00399
(0.00443)
0.00244
(0.00318)
-0.00517*
(0.00294)
-0.00141
(0.00253)
-0.00239
(0.00265)
-0.00749**
(0.00300)
-0.0100
(0.0095)

-0.00358
(0.00235)
0.0000405
(0.00153)
-0.00484
(0.00350)
-0.000453
(0.00224)
-0.000591
(0.00153)
-0.000887
(0.00307)
-0.0103
(0.0080)

0.00192
(0.00140)
0.00277**
(0.00130)
0.00414***
(0.00129)
0.00197
(0.00200)
0.00486***
(0.000846)
0.00416
(0.00292)
0.0198***
(0.0041)

0.00762***
(0.00179)
0.00355*
(0.00191)
-0.000691
(0.00158)
-0.00454*
(0.00271)
-0.000917
(0.00145)
0.00256
(0.00333)
0.0076
(0.0067)

-0.0291
(0.0436)
0.0653**
(0.0256)
0.110*
(0.0568)
-0.0245
(0.0662)
-0.0157
(0.0352)
0.00922
(0.0292)
0.1154
(0.1076)

0.00150
(0.00536)
0.0212***
(0.00549)
0.0120**
(0.00608)
0.000726
(0.00654)
-0.00413
(0.00571)
0.00324
(0.00632)
0.0345**
(0.0152)

0.000723
(0.0391)
-0.0183
(0.0257)
-0.0422
(0.0463)
-0.00301
(0.0167)
-0.0198
(0.0215)
-0.00398
(0.0201)
-0.0865
0.0762

log Patent
Applications

0.294
(0.255)
1.964*
(1.017)
0.0110
(0.0609)
0.286*
(0.169)

0.226
(0.224)
1.648**
(0.738)
0.0244
(0.0468)
0.395***
(0.138)

-0.480***
(0.115)
1.963***
(0.673)
0.0762
(0.0887)
-0.0106
(0.237)

-0.159
(0.225)
0.659
(0.847)
0.0437
(0.0672)
0.268
(0.280)

0.247***
(0.0942)
1.578*
(0.837)
0.294**
(0.144)
0.328
(0.262)

0.112
(0.0764)
1.755**
(0.718)
0.315**
(0.148)
0.467*
(0.243)

0.0102
(0.116)
0.136
(0.510)
0.0686
(0.0713)
0.270
(0.185)

Observations

717

717

338

338

459

459

503

Countries

30

30

15

15

21

21

23

year 0
year -1
year -2
year -3
year -4
year -5
sum of domestic
shocks
year 0
year -1
year -2
year -3
year -4
year -5
sum of foreign
shocks
l6. log domestic
stock
log GDP per capita
Institution Index

Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1
Deaths are measured by 1000 people. Damages are measured by billion US dollars of 2005 price.

38

Figure 1: Patenting of earthquake-mitigation technology
A. United States

B. Japan

39

Figure 2: Patenting of flood control technology
A. United States

B. United Kingdom

40

Figure 3: Patenting of drought-resistant crop technology
A. United States

B. China

41

Appendix 1. Patent Search Codes
Earthquake–proof building
((E04H 00902) <in> IC)
Earthquake detection
((G08B 02110 OR G01V OR G01H) <in> IC) AND (earthquake <in> (TI, AB))
Drought-resistant crops
((drought AND (tolerant OR tolerance OR resistant OR resisting OR resistance OR combat OR
fight)) <in> (AB, TI))
Desalination
((C02F 10308 <in> IC) AND ((desalination OR desalinization OR desalinating) <in> (TI, AB)))
OR (((desalination OR desalinization OR desalinating) AND (((sea OR ocean) AND water) OR
seawater)) <in> (TI, AB))
Flood control
(flood <in> (AB,TI)) AND ((E02B 0030? OR E02B 0031? OR E02B 007??) <in> IC)

A1

Appendix 2. Sample Countries for each type of technology
 Quake-proof Building
Former Soviet Union
Argentina
Germany
Australia
Greece
Austria
Hungary
Belarus
Italy
Belgium
Japan
Bulgaria
Mexico
Canada
Netherlands
China
New Zealand
Denmark
Poland
France

Republic of Korea
Romania
Russia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States

 Earthquake Detection
Canada
China
France
Former Soviet Union
Germany

Greece
Israel
Italy
Japan
Republic of Korea

Russia
Taiwan
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States

 Drought-resistant Crop
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Canada
China
East Germany
France

Former Soviet Union
Germany
Hungary
India
Israel
Japan
Mexico
Netherlands

New Zealand
Republic of Korea
Russia
Spain
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

 Flood Control
Australia
Austria
Canada
China
Czech Republic
France
Former Soviet Union
Germany
Hungary
Italy

Japan
Netherlands
Poland
Republic of Korea
Romania
Russia
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
United Kingdom

United States

A2

Appendix 3. Sensitivity to Lag Length
In the main paper, we include deaths and damages lagged through year 5. In this appendix we
demonstrate that our results are robust to different lag lengths. The tables in this section present
reduced form estimates (corresponding to column (1) in Tables 3 and 4) including lags from 3 to
8 years. The results are not sensitive to the length of the lag. In particular, there is little change
in the magnitude of coefficients for recent years as more distant lags are added to the model.
Moreover, with the exception of flood control in reaction to deaths, the sum of all damage or
death coefficients experience little change when adding more than five years of lags.
We choose to present lags of five years in the paper as nearly all lagged values are insignificant
after 5 years. Moreover, the AIC statistics verify that either a four or five year lag is optimal for
all technologies except drought-resistant crops. Thus, for ease of presentation in the main text,
we choose a lag of five years for all technologies.

A3

Table A1: Lag sensitivity: Deaths as Independent Variable
A. Quake-proof buildings
(1)
year 0
year -1
year -2
year -3
year -4
year -5
year -6
year -7
year -8
sum of shocks
L4.log stock
L5.log stock
L6.log stock
L7.log stock
L8.log stock
L9.log stock
log GDP per capita
Institution Index
log Patent apps
AIC
Observations
Countries

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.0155*** 0.0152*** 0.0149*** 0.0145** 0.0141**
0.0139*
(0.00513) (0.00542) (0.00540) (0.00578) (0.00654) (0.00750)
0.00807
0.00853
0.00821
0.00810
0.00766
0.00761
(0.00634) (0.00621) (0.00653) (0.00685) (0.00775) (0.00892)
0.0256** 0.0260**
0.0242*
0.0222
0.0228
0.0251
(0.0117)
(0.0118)
(0.0130)
(0.0144)
(0.0153)
(0.0154)
0.0135
0.0127
0.0123
0.0107
0.0132
0.0177
(0.0182)
(0.0182)
(0.0183)
(0.0186)
(0.0181)
(0.0171)
0.0504
0.0471
0.0385
0.0358
0.0444
(0.0332)
(0.0336)
(0.0370)
(0.0403)
(0.0366)
0.0800*** 0.0683*** 0.0662*** 0.0718***
(0.0209)
(0.0221)
(0.0257)
(0.0278)
-0.0384
-0.0447
-0.0409
(0.0321)
(0.0356)
(0.0385)
-0.0130
-0.0143
(0.0287)
(0.0289)
-0.0121
(0.0386)
0.063*
0.113**
0.187***
0.124
0.102
0.113
(0.0346)
(0.0513)
(0.0561)
(0.0905)
(0.1135)
(0.1220)
0.312
(0.227)
0.284
(0.226)
0.265
(0.224)
0.256
(0.230)
0.196
(0.235)
0.0973
(0.228)
1.834*
1.862*
1.904*
1.960*
1.930
1.823
(0.989)
(1.026)
(1.056)
(1.145)
(1.234)
(1.315)
-0.000254
0.00307
0.00817
0.0107
0.00650
-0.00272
(0.0528)
(0.0564)
(0.0622)
(0.0657)
(0.0689)
(0.0688)
0.298*
0.313*
0.317*
0.333*
0.375**
0.416**
(0.179)
(0.176)
(0.179)
(0.183)
(0.187)
(0.192)
2247.92
717
30

2249.90
717
30

2244.42
717
30

2247.16
717
30

2266.31
717
30

2284.29
717
30

Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1.

A4

B. Earthquake Detection
(1)
year 0
year -1
year -2
year -3
year -4
year -5
year -6
year -7
year -8
sum of shocks
L4.log stock
L5.log stock
L6.log stock
L7.log stock
L8.log stock
L9.log stock
log GDP per capita
Institution Index
log Patent apps
AIC
Observations
Countries

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.0134*** 0.0131*** 0.0130*** 0.0133*** 0.0137*** 0.0142***
(0.00206)
(0.00212)
(0.00224)
(0.00223)
(0.00228) (0.00232)
0.0103*** 0.00988*** 0.00951*** 0.00969*** 0.0105*** 0.0113***
(0.00197)
(0.00212)
(0.00248)
(0.00263)
(0.00257) (0.00243)
-0.00283
-0.00323
-0.00736
-0.00621
-0.00638
-0.00779
(0.0270)
(0.0232)
(0.0221)
(0.0252)
(0.0285)
(0.0291)
-0.00193
-0.00174
-0.00297
-0.00290
0.00164
0.000735
(0.0291)
(0.0235)
(0.0203)
(0.0215)
(0.0276)
(0.0297)
-0.0425
-0.0546
-0.0630
-0.0513
-0.0419
(0.0499)
(0.0652)
(0.0729)
(0.0751)
(0.0686)
-0.104
-0.113
-0.106
-0.0962
(0.0674)
(0.0751)
(0.0814)
(0.0796)
-0.101*** -0.0944** -0.0840*
(0.0367)
(0.0439)
(0.0468)
-0.0345
-0.0324
(0.0450)
(0.0470)
-0.117***
(0.0450)
0.019
-0.025
-0.147
-0.263
-0.267
-0.353
(0.0519)
(0.0666)
(0.1332)
(0.1781)
(0.2304)
(0.2587)
-0.163
(0.130)
-0.248**
(0.116)
-0.262
(0.166)
-0.243
(0.166)
-0.142
(0.179)
-0.0519
(0.176)
0.372
0.628
0.622
0.469
0.113
-0.140
(0.980)
(0.994)
(1.082)
(1.092)
(1.020)
(0.982)
0.101
0.0933
0.0941
0.0931
0.102
0.115
(0.116)
(0.106)
(0.110)
(0.120)
(0.130)
(0.131)
0.347
0.315
0.343
0.396
0.459
0.482
(0.369)
(0.384)
(0.413)
(0.432)
(0.438)
(0.457)
1072.24
1067.99
1065.88
1066.52
1074.86
1074.12
338
338
338
338
338
338
15
15
15
15
15
15

Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1.

A5

C. Flood control
year 0
year -1
year -2
year -3

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.190**
(0.0787)
0.113**
(0.0535)
0.310***
(0.0928)
0.167***
(0.0636)

0.184**
(0.0807)
0.105**
(0.0535)
0.301***
(0.101)
0.154**
(0.0632)
0.0212
(0.0415)

0.214**
(0.0986)
0.131**
(0.0620)
0.312***
(0.0968)
0.120*
(0.0650)
0.0107
(0.0434)
0.0958
(0.0706)

0.273**
(0.126)
0.171**
(0.0735)
0.344***
(0.0906)
0.146**
(0.0651)
-0.0259
(0.0361)
0.0977
(0.0772)
0.141**
(0.0680)

0.257*
(0.131)
0.210**
(0.0845)
0.368***
(0.0945)
0.178***
(0.0629)
-0.0180
(0.0354)
0.0479
(0.0643)
0.146*
(0.0745)
0.121***
(0.0460)

0.780***
(0.1904)
0.238**
(0.112)

0.765***
(0.1700)

0.884***
(0.2339)

1.146***
(0.3644)

1.309***
(0.4249)

0.272*
(0.142)
0.198**
(0.0796)
0.360***
(0.0932)
0.182***
(0.0675)
-0.0132
(0.0401)
0.0447
(0.0627)
0.123**
(0.0621)
0.104*
(0.0563)
0.0262
(0.0462)
1.297***
(0.4514)

year -4
year -5
year -6
year -7
year -8
sum of shocks
L4.log stock
L5.log stock

0.303***
(0.0894)

L6.log stock

0.254***
(0.0891)

L7.log stock

0.177
(0.139)

L8.log stock

0.106
(0.173)

L9.log stock
log GDP per capita
Institution Index
log Patent apps
AIC
Observations
Countries

1.600**
(0.683)
0.285**
(0.126)
0.331
(0.270)
1321.00
459
21

1.659**
(0.737)
0.293**
(0.129)
0.269
(0.247)
1314.21
459
21

1.845**
(0.825)
0.297**
(0.135)
0.286
(0.250)
1322.01
459
21

2.045**
(0.892)
0.288**
(0.130)
0.366
(0.277)
1328.27
459
21

2.086**
(0.921)
0.282**
(0.128)
0.439
(0.293)
1332.17
459
21

-0.0827
(0.163)
2.060**
(0.964)
0.273**
(0.124)
0.543*
(0.285)
1334.88
459
21

Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1.

A6

Table A2: Lag sensitivity: Damages as Independent Variable
A. Quake-proof buildings
(1)
year 0
year -1
year -2
year -3
year -4
year -5
year -6
year -7
year -8
sum of shocks
L4.log stock
L5.log stock
L6.log stock
L7.log stock
L8.log stock
L9.log stock
log GDP per capita
Institution Index
log Patent apps
AIC
Observations
Countries

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.00411
0.00417
0.00443
0.00435
0.00456
0.00473
(0.00384) (0.00377) (0.00380)
(0.00385)
(0.00373)
(0.00357)
0.00275
0.00293
0.00322
0.00315
0.00335*
0.00374**
(0.00172) (0.00190) (0.00196)
(0.00206)
(0.00202)
(0.00175)
0.00268** 0.00274** 0.00286** 0.00282*
0.00306** 0.00354**
(0.00120) (0.00130) (0.00144)
(0.00147)
(0.00144)
(0.00140)
0.0044*** 0.0046*** 0.0047*** 0.00450*** 0.00478*** 0.00524***
(0.00066) (0.00088)
(0.0010)
(0.00124)
(0.00112)
(0.000890)
0.00248* 0.00280** 0.00257*
0.00264
0.00313**
(0.00126) (0.00133)
(0.00154)
(0.00165)
(0.00149)
0.0030*** 0.00268** 0.00276** 0.00315**
(0.00101)
(0.00123)
(0.00136)
(0.00140)
-0.000446
-0.000429
-0.000108
(0.00137)
(0.00154)
(0.00154)
0.000493
0.000771
(0.00122)
(0.00126)
0.00118
(0.00138)
0.014**
0.017**
0.021**
0.020*
0.021*
0.025**
(0.0058)
(0.0071)
(0.0081)
(0.0100)
(0.0112)
(0.0114)
0.263
(0.213)
0.226
(0.221)
0.195
(0.222)
0.189
(0.226)
0.140
(0.217)
0.0570
(0.177)
1.786***
1.764**
1.710**
1.753**
1.683**
1.551*
(0.687)
(0.724)
(0.749)
(0.837)
(0.852)
(0.802)
0.0246
0.0266
0.0290
0.0290
0.0265
0.0222
(0.0426)
(0.0458)
(0.0499)
(0.0507)
(0.0512)
(0.0490)
0.389**
0.408*** 0.417***
0.427***
0.452***
0.473***
(0.156)
(0.151)
(0.150)
(0.156)
(0.165)
(0.178)
2279.89
2278.66
2272.21
2275.11
2285.71
2294.07
717
717
717
717
717
717
30
30
30
30
30
30

Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1.

A7

B. Earthquake Detection
(1)
year 0
year -1
year -2
year -3
year -4
year -5
year -6
year -7
year -8
sum of shocks
L4.log stock
L5.log stock
L6.log stock
L7.log stock
L8.log stock
L9.log stock
log GDP per capita
Institution Index
log Patent apps
AIC
Observations
Countries

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.0093*** 0.0090*** 0.0085*** 0.0085*** 0.0088*** 0.0089***
(0.00129) (0.00144) (0.00189) (0.00182) (0.00167) (0.00153)
0.0058*** 0.0052*** 0.0046*** 0.0045** 0.0049*** 0.0049***
(0.00137) (0.00153) (0.00172) (0.00175) (0.00168) (0.00141)
0.00497** 0.00443** 0.00358* 0.00356** 0.00403** 0.00383**
(0.00195) (0.00204) (0.00198) (0.00178) (0.00180) (0.00157)
0.00198
0.00164
0.000752 0.000609
0.00120
0.00102
(0.00315) (0.00306) (0.00318) (0.00321) (0.00318) (0.00296)
0.00157
0.000666 0.000354 0.000895 0.000740
(0.00181) (0.00230) (0.00255) (0.00246) (0.00216)
-0.00295
-0.00330
-0.00289
-0.00310
(0.00227) (0.00245) (0.00269) (0.00247)
-0.00223
-0.00187
-0.00215
(0.00162) (0.00187) (0.00174)
-0.000470 -0.000886
(0.00209) (0.00197)
-0.00301*
(0.00169)
0.022*** 0.022***
0.015
0.012
0.015
0.010
(0.0060)
(0.0078)
(0.0115)
(0.0131)
(0.0147)
(0.0143)
0.0921
(0.213)
-0.0305
(0.202)
-0.129
(0.245)
-0.134
(0.231)
-0.0555
(0.221)
-0.0693
(0.213)
-0.170
0.177
0.444
0.425
0.192
0.182
(0.904)
(0.928)
(0.983)
(0.928)
(0.846)
(0.826)
0.0487
0.0481
0.0432
0.0389
0.0415
0.0395
(0.0910)
(0.0850)
(0.0787)
(0.0785)
(0.0815)
(0.0784)
0.357
0.309
0.301
0.322
0.343
0.357
(0.319)
(0.332)
(0.346)
(0.352)
(0.349)
(0.372)
1054.58
1056.02
1053.58
1054.19
1057.99
1056.78
338
338
338
338
338
338
15
15
15
15
15
15

Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1.

A8

C. Flood Control
(1)
year 0
year -1
year -2
year -3
year -4
year -5
year -6
year -7
year -8
sum of shocks
L4.log stock
L5.log stock
L6.log stock
L7.log stock
L8.log stock
L9.log stock
log GDP per capita
Institution Index
log Patent apps
AIC
Observations
Countries

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.0470*** 0.0456*** 0.0476*** 0.0542*** 0.0549*** 0.0541***
(0.0134)
(0.0125)
(0.0123)
(0.0127)
(0.0133)
(0.0128)
0.0407** 0.0416*** 0.0414*** 0.0429*** 0.0419** 0.0420**
(0.0159)
(0.0160)
(0.0157)
(0.0163)
(0.0165)
(0.0164)
0.0324*** 0.0314*** 0.0323*** 0.0349*** 0.0365*** 0.0350***
(0.00911) (0.00949) (0.00954) (0.00957) (0.00984)
(0.0115)
0.0115
0.0115
0.0111
0.0163
0.0156*
0.0178*
(0.00819) (0.00933) (0.00948)
(0.0101)
(0.00831)
(0.0101)
0.0128*
0.0121*
0.0135*
0.0125** 0.0129**
(0.00668) (0.00681) (0.00713) (0.00620) (0.00636)
0.00492
0.00588
0.00591
0.00502
(0.00497) (0.00486) (0.00436) (0.00527)
0.0118** 0.0109** 0.0109**
(0.00524) (0.00508) (0.00502)
-0.00568
-0.00664
(0.00648) (0.00628)
-0.00689
(0.00576)
0.132*** 0.143*** 0.149*** 0.180*** 0.172*** 0.164***
(0.0430)
(0.0500)
(0.0530)
(0.0553)
(0.0516)
(0.0566)
0.195**
(0.0927)
0.212**
(0.0903)
0.146*
(0.0768)
0.0750
(0.0941)
0.0379
(0.127)
-0.124
(0.145)
1.622**
1.738**
1.843**
1.895**
1.852**
1.803**
(0.709)
(0.729)
(0.785)
(0.820)
(0.876)
(0.916)
0.302**
0.306**
0.306**
0.303**
0.297**
0.286**
(0.124)
(0.128)
(0.135)
(0.131)
(0.132)
(0.127)
0.401
0.382
0.400
0.482*
0.510**
0.611**
(0.263)
(0.263)
(0.254)
(0.258)
(0.256)
(0.258)
1282.88
1280.86
1288.32
1290.82
1292.92
1291.57
459
459
459
459
459
459
21
21
21
21
21
21

Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1.

A9

D. Drought-resistant crops
(1)
year 0
year -1
year -2
year -3
year -4
year -5
year -6
year -7
year -8
sum of shocks
L4.log stock
L5.log stock
L6.log stock
L7.log stock
L8.log stock
L9.log stock
log GDP per capita
Institution Index
log Patent apps
AIC
Observations
Countries

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.0746*** 0.0717*** 0.0659*** 0.0651*** 0.0611*** 0.0643***
(0.0132)
(0.0131)
(0.0140)
(0.0155)
(0.0140)
(0.0143)
0.0140
0.0173
0.0177
0.0159
0.0187
0.0207
(0.0219)
(0.0218)
(0.0209)
(0.0195)
(0.0198)
(0.0192)
0.0509*** 0.0522*** 0.0514*** 0.0493** 0.0508*** 0.0593***
(0.0177)
(0.0181)
(0.0197)
(0.0192)
(0.0191)
(0.0195)
0.00350
0.00675
0.00771
0.00512
0.00541
0.0132
(0.0128)
(0.0125)
(0.0124)
(0.0128)
(0.0131)
(0.0132)
0.0176** 0.0246*** 0.0239*** 0.0205* 0.0270***
(0.00732) (0.00806) (0.00926)
(0.0108)
(0.0102)
0.0346*** 0.0349*** 0.0370*** 0.0334***
(0.00907) (0.00976) (0.00958) (0.00980)
-0.00338
0.000467
0.00159
(0.00964) (0.00991)
(0.0102)
0.0124
0.0184*
(0.0103)
(0.00969)
0.0308***
(0.0105)
0.143*** 0.166*** 0.202*** 0.191*** 0.206*** 0.269***
(0.0513)
(0.0536)
(0.0624)
(0.0633)
(0.0613)
(0.0706)
0.182
(0.118)
0.128
(0.116)
-0.0181
(0.125)
-0.0599
(0.122)
-0.175
(0.112)
-0.298***
(0.105)
0.339
0.312
0.120
0.0512
-0.0932
-0.286
(0.601)
(0.583)
(0.529)
(0.538)
(0.508)
(0.494)
0.0391
0.0456
0.0653
0.0707
0.0931
0.124
(0.0651)
(0.0656)
(0.0687)
(0.0701)
(0.0771)
(0.0833)
0.0854
0.127
0.302*
0.348*
0.490*** 0.676***
(0.181)
(0.181)
(0.177)
(0.192)
(0.189)
(0.201)
1273.44
1276.90
1277.14
1278.37
1274.79
1261.78
503
503
503
503
503
503
23
23
23
23
23
23

Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1.

A10

Appendix 4. Lag sensitivity without knowledge stocks
In this section we provide additional sensitivity analysis showing the robustness of our results to
both different finite lag structures and to potential endogeneity concerns when including
knowledge stocks. To avoid these endogeneity concerns about the knowledge stock, the models
presented here consider a reduced form in which the knowledge stock is replaced by the sum of
previous deaths or damages. Essentially, the entire history of deaths or damages for each
country is included, with the coefficient constrained to be the same after L years to allow
estimation of the equation. The model can be written as:
(A1)

∑

,

∑

,

For example, if L = 3, the model includes a separate damage coefficient for years 0 to t-3, and a
single coefficient, H, on the sum of all damages occurring from year t-4 onward until 1960, the
first year for which we have disaster data. We denote this as year H above. Xit represents a
matrix of the various control variables used.
Panels A-C in Table A3 present the results for deaths and panels A-D in Table A4 present the
results for damages. The tables show that our results are robust to various lag lengths. With the
exception of flood control technology, lagged deaths or damages are rarely significant after four
or five years. Moreover, in most cases (the effect of damages on earthquake detection being the
most notable exception), the coefficient on the sum of past events is insignificant, suggesting that
additional lags are unimportant. Moreover, the sums of the various l coefficients, shown at the
bottom of each table, are comparable to the sums found in the regressions in Tables 3 and 4 of
our paper and do not vary much across various lag specifications. For example, the sum of
deaths for a 5 year lag for earthquake-proof buildings, shown in panel A of Table A4, is 0.185,

A11

compared to 0.187 in the reduced form regression in Table 3 of the paper. The largest range of
the sums occurs for flood control in response to deaths, with a range from 0.621-0.857.

A12

Table A3: Lag sensitivity without knowledge stocks: Deaths as Independent Variable
A. Quake-proof buildings
lag:
Death
L1.death
L2.death
L3.death

(3)
0.0146**
(0.0065)
0.0080
(0.0075)
0.0281**
(0.0116)
0.0230
(0.0173)

(4)
0.0149**
(0.0065)
0.0084
(0.0074)
0.0280**
(0.0114)
0.0222
(0.0171)
0.0448
(0.0339)

(5)
0.0149**
(0.0063)
0.0090
(0.0072)
0.0278**
(0.0112)
0.0199
(0.0171)
0.0429
(0.0344)
0.0702**
(0.0320)

(6)
0.0149**
(0.0064)
0.0090
(0.0072)
0.0277**
(0.0111)
0.0203
(0.0170)
0.0435
(0.0342)
0.0708**
(0.0316)
-0.0432
(0.0465)

(7)
0.0149**
(0.0063)
0.0090
(0.0072)
0.0277**
(0.0112)
0.0202
(0.0171)
0.0434
(0.0345)
0.0705**
(0.0321)
-0.0433
(0.0471)
-0.0203
(0.0287)

-0.0052
(0.0367)
1.5944*
(0.9556)
-0.0119
(0.0548)
0.4640*
(0.2518)
717
0.074**
(0.0310)
2287.497
2420.174

-0.0136
(0.0396)
1.5536*
(0.9299)
-0.0128
(0.0539)
0.4503*
(0.2462)
717
0.118**
(0.0508)
2282.405
2415.082

-0.0285
(0.0432)
1.5147*
(0.8885)
-0.0154
(0.0529)
0.4159*
(0.2456)
717
0.185***
(0.0667)
2268.616
2401.293

-0.0254
(0.0438)
1.5232*
(0.9012)
-0.0148
(0.0527)
0.4222*
(0.2422)
717
0.143
(0.1055)
2268.126
2400.803

-0.0265
(0.0506)
1.5226*
(0.8999)
-0.0150
(0.0523)
0.4197*
(0.2350)
717
0.122
(0.1286)
2268.068
2400.745

L4.death
L5.death
L6.death
L7.death
L8.death
Sum of past deaths
Log GDP per capita
Institution index
Log patent apps
Observations
sum of deaths
AIC
BIC

(8)
0.0149**
(0.0063)
0.0090
(0.0071)
0.0277**
(0.0111)
0.0201
(0.0171)
0.0435
(0.0343)
0.0704**
(0.0322)
-0.0435
(0.0479)
-0.0204
(0.0288)
-0.0228
(0.0437)
-0.0273
(0.0577)
1.5211*
(0.8962)
-0.0151
(0.0516)
0.4184*
(0.2265)
717
0.099
(0.1576)
2268.037
2400.714

Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1

A13

B. Earthquake detection
lag:
Death
L1.death
L2.death
L3.death

(3)
0.0135***
(0.0016)
0.0107***
(0.0022)
-0.0004
(0.0326)
0.0063
(0.0313)

(4)
0.0133***
(0.0017)
0.0105***
(0.0023)
-0.0001
(0.0327)
0.0076
(0.0316)
-0.0134
(0.0664)

(5)
0.0134***
(0.0017)
0.0102***
(0.0022)
0.0002
(0.0328)
0.0118
(0.0322)
-0.0155
(0.0671)
-0.0597
(0.0826)

(6)
0.0133***
(0.0018)
0.0102***
(0.0022)
-0.0001
(0.0327)
0.0155
(0.0323)
-0.0099
(0.0683)
-0.0591
(0.0814)
-0.0472
(0.0476)

(7)
0.0132***
(0.0018)
0.0102***
(0.0022)
-0.0002
(0.0326)
0.0168
(0.0323)
-0.0087
(0.0685)
-0.0554
(0.0827)
-0.0464
(0.0472)
0.0183
(0.0587)

0.0107
(0.0724)
-0.0365
(1.0146)
0.0971
(0.1340)
0.4215
(0.3183)
338
0.030
(0.0612)
1038.474
1091.996

0.0162
(0.0755)
-0.0727
(1.0303)
0.0983
(0.1345)
0.4463
(0.3378)
338
0.018
(0.1006)
1038.061
1091.583

0.0332
(0.0701)
-0.1526
(1.0603)
0.1035
(0.1354)
0.5070
(0.3619)
338
-0.040
(0.1707)
1033.985
1087.507

0.0539
(0.0744)
-0.2439
(1.0542)
0.1111
(0.1352)
0.5753
(0.3631)
338
-0.077
(0.2135)
1029.137
1082.660

0.0635
(0.0790)
-0.2758
(1.0369)
0.1139
(0.1345)
0.6003*
(0.3535)
338
-0.052
(0.2627)
1028.142
1081.664

L4.death
L5.death
L6.death
L7.death
L8.death
Sum of past deaths
Log GDP per capita
Institution index
Log patent apps
Observations
sum of deaths
AIC
BIC

(8)
0.0134***
(0.0018)
0.0103***
(0.0022)
-0.0006
(0.0327)
0.0182
(0.0330)
-0.0063
(0.0662)
-0.0509
(0.0808)
-0.0350
(0.0471)
0.0209
(0.0568)
-0.0553
(0.0660)
0.0864
(0.0777)
-0.2975
(1.0239)
0.1195
(0.1330)
0.6335*
(0.3553)
338
-0.085
(0.3128)
1019.437
1072.960

Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1

A14

C. Flood Control
lag:
Death
L1.death
L2.death
L3.death

(3)
0.1565**
(0.0679)
0.0671
(0.0483)
0.2784***
(0.0899)
0.1404**
(0.0606)

(4)
0.1599**
(0.0740)
0.0676
(0.0477)
0.2706**
(0.1071)
0.1398**
(0.0608)
-0.0171
(0.0440)

(5)
0.1647**
(0.0759)
0.0875**
(0.0425)
0.2758***
(0.1045)
0.0999
(0.0719)
-0.0203
(0.0436)
0.0483
(0.0538)

(6)
0.2057**
(0.0911)
0.1065**
(0.0425)
0.2997***
(0.0932)
0.1155*
(0.0691)
-0.0647*
(0.0383)
0.0521
(0.0556)
0.0845*
(0.0450)

-0.0341
(0.0382)
2.0454**
(0.8835)
0.2673**
(0.1310)
0.4298
(0.3231)
459
0.642***
(0.1534)
1311.618
1394.199

-0.0357
(0.0395)
2.0707**
(0.9116)
0.2670**
(0.1302)
0.4366
(0.3222)
459
0.621***
(0.1428)
1311.551
1394.132

-0.0441
(0.0397)
2.2210**
(0.9433)
0.2670**
(0.1282)
0.4654
(0.3179)
459
0.656***
(0.1385)
1309.636
1392.217

-0.0565
(0.0366)
2.4125**
(0.9475)
0.2702**
(0.1247)
0.5515*
(0.3139)
459
0.799***
(0.1583)
1304.491
1387.072

L4.death
L5.death
L6.death
L7.death
L8.death
Sum of past deaths
Log GDP per capita
Institution index
Log patent apps
Observations
sum of deaths
AIC
BIC

(7)
0.1904**
(0.0846)
0.1332***
(0.0429)
0.3126***
(0.0887)
0.1408**
(0.0600)
-0.0658*
(0.0364)
-0.0035
(0.0392)
0.0925*
(0.0481)
0.0570
(0.0501)

(8)
0.1924**
(0.0849)
0.1226***
(0.0435)
0.3190***
(0.0850)
0.1448**
(0.0582)
-0.0555
(0.0382)
-0.0056
(0.0391)
0.0604
(0.0400)
0.0532
(0.0475)
-0.0126
(0.0458)
-0.0658*
-0.0746*
(0.0361)
(0.0403)
2.5270*** 2.6318**
(0.9598)
(1.0356)
0.2748** 0.2771**
(0.1230)
(0.1220)
0.5967*
0.6216**
(0.3063)
(0.2977)
459
459
0.857*** 0.819***
(0.1626)
(0.1607)
1300.780 1299.736
1383.361 1382.317

Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1

A15

Table A4: Lag sensitivity without knowledge stocks: Damages as Independent Variable
A. Quake-proof buildings
lag:
Damage
L1.damage
L2.damage
L3.damage
L4.damage
L5.damage
L6.damage
L7.damage
L8.damage
Sum of past damage
Log GDP per capita
Institution index
Log patent apps
Observations
sum of damages
AIC
BIC

(3)
0.0050
(0.0031)
0.0040***
(0.0012)
0.0045***
(0.0013)
0.0062***
(0.0010)

(4)
0.0051
(0.0031)
0.0041***
(0.0012)
0.0045***
(0.0013)
0.0063***
(0.0010)
0.0041***
(0.0015)

(5)
0.0051
(0.0031)
0.0042***
(0.0012)
0.0045***
(0.0013)
0.0063***
(0.0010)
0.0043***
(0.0015)
0.0045***
(0.0014)

(6)
0.0051
(0.0031)
0.0042***
(0.0012)
0.0045***
(0.0013)
0.0063***
(0.0010)
0.0043***
(0.0015)
0.0044***
(0.0014)
0.0012
(0.0017)

(7)
0.0051
(0.0032)
0.0041***
(0.0012)
0.0045***
(0.0013)
0.0063***
(0.0010)
0.0043***
(0.0015)
0.0044***
(0.0014)
0.0012
(0.0017)
0.0021
(0.0013)

(8)
0.0051
(0.0031)
0.0042***
(0.0012)
0.0045***
(0.0013)
0.0063***
(0.0010)
0.0043***
(0.0015)
0.0044***
(0.0014)
0.0012
(0.0017)
0.0021
(0.0013)
0.0025*
(0.0015)
0.0026** 0.0023*
0.0019
0.0021
0.0021
0.0020
(0.0013)
(0.0013)
(0.0014)
(0.0014)
(0.0016)
(0.0018)
1.8234*** 1.7625*** 1.6812*** 1.7124*** 1.7136** 1.6999**
(0.6563)
(0.6390)
(0.6278)
(0.6553)
(0.6687)
(0.6855)
0.0371
0.0352
0.0328
0.0337
0.0338
0.0333
(0.0446)
(0.0441)
(0.0437)
(0.0431)
(0.0425)
(0.0414)
0.5236** 0.5193** 0.5080** 0.5122** 0.5126*** 0.5099***
(0.2099)
(0.2073)
(0.2073)
(0.2040)
(0.1990)
(0.1930)
717
717
717
717
717
717
0.020*** 0.024*** 0.029*** 0.030*** 0.032*** 0.035***
(0.0048)
(0.0059)
(0.0067)
(0.0078)
(0.0089)
(0.0099)
2280.224 2276.314 2268.486 2267.374 2267.370 2267.043
2412.901 2408.991 2401.163 2400.051 2400.047 2399.721

Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1

A16

B. Earthquake detection
lag:
Damage
L1.damage
L2.damage
L3.damage

(3)
0.0094***
(0.0013)
0.0060***
(0.0008)
0.0064***
(0.0014)
0.0038
(0.0030)

(4)
0.0094***
(0.0013)
0.0060***
(0.0008)
0.0064***
(0.0014)
0.0038
(0.0030)
0.0040**
(0.0017)

(5)
0.0093***
(0.0013)
0.0059***
(0.0008)
0.0064***
(0.0014)
0.0039
(0.0029)
0.0039**
(0.0015)
0.0005
(0.0021)

0.0039**
(0.0018)
0.4995
(0.8920)
0.0712
(0.0978)
0.3054
(0.2947)
338
0.026***
(0.0044)
1001.577
1055.099

0.0038*
(0.0020)
0.5001
(0.8908)
0.0706
(0.0961)
0.3034
(0.2898)
338
0.030***
(0.0056)
1001.566
1055.089

0.0046**
(0.0019)
0.5547
(0.8307)
0.0724
(0.0912)
0.3300
(0.2750)
338
0.030***
(0.0073)
993.924
1047.447

L4.damage
L5.damage
L6.damage
L7.damage
L8.damage
Sum of past damages
Log GDP per capita
Institution index
Log patent apps
Observations
sum of damages
AIC
BIC

(6)
0.0093***
(0.0014)
0.0059***
(0.0008)
0.0065***
(0.0014)
0.0040
(0.0029)
0.0040***
(0.0015)
0.0005
(0.0020)
0.0018
(0.0013)

(7)
0.0093***
(0.0014)
0.0059***
(0.0008)
0.0065***
(0.0014)
0.0041
(0.0029)
0.0041***
(0.0016)
0.0006
(0.0020)
0.0018
(0.0013)
0.0036*
(0.0022)

(8)
0.0094***
(0.0013)
0.0059***
(0.0008)
0.0066***
(0.0014)
0.0042
(0.0029)
0.0042***
(0.0015)
0.0009
(0.0020)
0.0021
(0.0014)
0.0036
(0.0023)
0.0019
(0.0018)
0.0054*** 0.0059*** 0.0069***
(0.0021)
(0.0022)
(0.0022)
0.5910
0.6122
0.6730
(0.8146)
(0.8031)
(0.7797)
0.0764
0.0790
0.0816
(0.0881)
(0.0869)
(0.0844)
0.3594
0.3793
0.3970
(0.2612)
(0.2552)
(0.2473)
338
338
338
0.032*** 0.036*** 0.039***
(0.0083)
(0.0101)
(0.0116)
987.937
985.300
975.806
1041.459 1038.823 1029.329

Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1

A17

C. Flood control
lag:
Damage
L1.damage
L2.damage
L3.damage

(3)
0.0445***
(0.0133)
0.0377**
(0.0155)
0.0269***
(0.0097)
0.0047
(0.0102)

(4)
0.0451***
(0.0135)
0.0396**
(0.0158)
0.0267***
(0.0101)
0.0053
(0.0109)
0.0053
(0.0081)

-0.0063
(0.0051)
1.9448**
(0.8288)
0.2810**
(0.1234)
0.5546**
(0.2778)
459
0.114***
(0.0437)
1267.923
1350.504

-0.0074
(0.0046)
2.0193**
(0.7902)
0.2809**
(0.1216)
0.6057**
(0.2781)
459
0.122**
(0.0531)
1264.714
1347.295

L4.damage
L5.damage
L6.damage
L7.damage
L8.damage
Sum of past damages
Log GDP per capita
Institution index
Log patent apps
Observations
sum of damages
AIC
BIC

(5)
0.0434***
(0.0137)
0.0396**
(0.0161)
0.0277***
(0.0103)
0.0056
(0.0109)
0.0050
(0.0083)
-0.0019
(0.0044)

(6)
0.0478***
(0.0130)
0.0373**
(0.0179)
0.0288**
(0.0117)
0.0096
(0.0116)
0.0057
(0.0087)
-0.0012
(0.0049)
0.0032
(0.0059)

(7)
0.0482***
(0.0136)
0.0367**
(0.0167)
0.0294**
(0.0132)
0.0096
(0.0114)
0.0055
(0.0084)
-0.0008
(0.0057)
0.0034
(0.0062)
-0.0128**
(0.0060)

(8)
0.0481***
(0.0135)
0.0372**
(0.0167)
0.0289**
(0.0123)
0.0103
(0.0128)
0.0056
(0.0083)
-0.0008
(0.0056)
0.0039
(0.0069)
-0.0123***
(0.0047)
-0.0123*
(0.0068)
-0.0086*
-0.0108** -0.0103*
-0.0098
(0.0047)
(0.0047)
(0.0058)
(0.0064)
2.1005*** 2.1441*** 2.1179*** 2.0891**
(0.7763)
(0.7414)
(0.8093)
(0.8904)
0.2811** 0.2865** 0.2857** 0.2851**
(0.1203)
(0.1174)
(0.1190)
(0.1200)
0.6298** 0.7191** 0.7100*** 0.7044***
(0.2780)
(0.2798)
(0.2669)
(0.2592)
459
459
459
459
0.119**
0.131**
0.119*
0.109
(0.0583)
(0.0646)
(0.0648)
(0.0680)
1263.631 1258.947 1258.818 1258.687
1346.212 1341.528 1341.399 1341.268

Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1

A18

D. Drought-resistant crops
lag:
Damage
L1.damage
L2.damage
L3.damage

(3)
0.0662***
(0.0088)
0.0155
(0.0251)
0.0535**
(0.0242)
0.0108
(0.0123)

(4)
0.0641***
(0.0092)
0.0125
(0.0268)
0.0506**
(0.0250)
0.0082
(0.0129)
0.0218
(0.0234)

(5)
0.0600***
(0.0098)
0.0109
(0.0271)
0.0447*
(0.0263)
0.0011
(0.0146)
0.0174
(0.0243)
0.0269
(0.0238)

(6)
0.0605***
(0.0119)
0.0111
(0.0278)
0.0450*
(0.0273)
0.0016
(0.0167)
0.0177
(0.0258)
0.0272
(0.0253)
-0.0113
(0.0288)

(7)
0.0585***
(0.0125)
0.0084
(0.0285)
0.0431
(0.0281)
-0.0013
(0.0175)
0.0154
(0.0258)
0.0244
(0.0255)
-0.0140
(0.0279)
-0.0044
(0.0365)

0.0078
(0.0281)
0.1785
(0.6341)
0.0545
(0.0632)
0.1986
(0.2066)
503
0.146**
(0.0608)
1257.304
1350.157

0.0027
(0.0301)
0.1751
(0.6285)
0.0577
(0.0621)
0.2297
(0.2055)
503
0.157*
(0.0851)
1256.062
1348.915

-0.0102
(0.0332)
0.1678
(0.6179)
0.0647
(0.0609)
0.3079
(0.1931)
503
0.161
(0.1136)
1250.880
1343.733

-0.0093
(0.0375)
0.1603
(0.6582)
0.0646
(0.0607)
0.3055
(0.1892)
503
0.152
(0.1483)
1250.866
1343.719

-0.0166
(0.0377)
0.2226
(0.6794)
0.0657
(0.0600)
0.3263*
(0.1830)
503
0.130
(0.1838)
1250.263
1343.116

L4.damage
L5.damage
L6.damage
L7.damage
L8.damage
Sum of past damages
Log GDP per capita
Institution index
Log patent apps
Observations
sum of damages
AIC
BIC

(8)
0.0572***
(0.0121)
0.0079
(0.0287)
0.0369
(0.0283)
-0.0052
(0.0182)
0.0112
(0.0253)
0.0201
(0.0247)
-0.0204
(0.0268)
-0.0108
(0.0342)
-0.0012
(0.0367)
-0.0336
(0.0358)
0.3628
(0.6814)
0.0694
(0.0583)
0.3805**
(0.1740)
503
0.096
(0.2139)
1245.607
1338.460

Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1

A19

Appendix 5. Further Sensitivity Analysis
The reduced form models presented in the paper use damage lagged 6 years to avoid endogeneity
concerns. The instrumental variables model include instruments for damage, and thus include
only a one year lag so as to ease interpretation of the stock variable. However, this may lead to
changes in the lagged damage coefficients, since the lagged values in the reduced form equation
include both the direct effect of the event on innovation and the indirect effect of the lagged
event changing the existing knowledge stock.
To assess whether moving from a six-year lag to a one-year lag affects the results, Tables A5-A6
present three results. For each technology, column (1) is the reduced form results presented in
Tables 3 or 4 (corresponding to column 1 in those tables). Columns (2) & (3) use instrumental
variables for knowledge and deaths (or damages).

Column (2) uses the six-year lagged

knowledge stock, and column (3) uses the one-year lagged knowledge stock, as in column (2) for
each technology in Tables 3 and 4.26 In all cases, the results are similar. Moreover, the sum of
deaths or damages is larger in both columns (2) and (3) for all cases except flood control (where
the results are insignificant), suggesting that it is the use of instrumental variables, and not
changing the lagged knowledge stock, that leads to slightly larger estimates.

26

No results are presented for drought-resistant crops, as the model using instruments with the six-year knowledge stock did not
converge to a solution.

A20

Table A5. Further Sensitivity Analysis: Deaths as Independent Variable

death
L1.death
L2.death
L3.death
l4.death
L5.death
Sum of deaths

lag6_dstock

Quake-Proof Building
Earthquake Detection
Baseline
IV
IV
Baseline
IV
IV
0.0149*** 0.0158*** 0.0139*** 0.0130*** 0.0131*** 0.0131***
(0.00540) (0.00492) (0.00368) (0.00224) (0.000945) (0.000690)
0.00821
0.00921* 0.000765 0.00951*** 0.0104*** 0.0102***
(0.00653) (0.00482) (0.00695) (0.00248)
(0.00202) (0.00111)
0.0242*
-0.0255
-0.00177
-0.00736
0.0605
0.0539
(0.0130)
(0.0629)
(0.0556)
(0.0221)
(0.0429)
(0.0561)
0.0123
0.0797
0.106
-0.00297
0.107
0.101
(0.0183)
(0.0728)
(0.0909)
(0.0203)
(0.0877)
(0.142)
0.0471
0.0226
0.0182
-0.0546
0.0216
0.0154
(0.0336)
(0.0571)
(0.0569)
(0.0652)
(0.0417)
(0.0886)
0.0800*** 0.108***
0.101**
-0.104
-0.0710
-0.077***
(0.0209)
(0.0320)
(0.0395)
(0.0674)
(0.0622)
(0.0135)
0.187***
0.210*
0.239***
-0.147
0.141***
0.117
(0.0561)
(0.1126)
(0.0830)
(0.1332)
(0.0507)
(0.2546)
0.265
(0.224)

0.294
(0.270)

lag1_dstock
Log GDP per capita
Institutional index
Log patent apps
Observations
e(Q)
Countries
Time Span

1.904*
(1.056)
0.00817
(0.0622)
0.317*
(0.179)
717
0.0000
30

3.022**
(1.184)
0.0415
(0.0926)
-0.194
(0.417)
703
0.0712
30
1984-2009

-0.262
(0.166)
0.662*
(0.354)
2.703**
(1.073)
0.121
(0.114)
-0.345
(0.311)
703
0.0827
30

0.622
(1.082)
0.0941
(0.110)
0.343
(0.413)
338
0.0000
15

0.0428
(0.386)

1.994
(2.310)
0.0791
(0.184)
-0.369
(0.689)
327
0.2053
15
1984-2009

0.0163
(0.291)
2.077
(1.807)
0.0743
(0.152)
-0.383
(0.594)
327
0.2053
15

A21

Table A6. Further Sensitivity Analysis: Damages as Independent Variable
Quake-proof Building
Baseline
IV
IV
damage
0.00443
0.0123*** 0.0124***
(0.00380)
(0.00379)
(0.00193)
L1.damage
0.00322
0.00687*
0.00336
(0.00196)
(0.00401)
(0.00223)
L2.damage
0.00286**
0.000606
0.00133
(0.00144)
(0.00193)
(0.00135)
L3.damage
0.00474***
0.00236
0.00324
(0.00100)
(0.00271)
(0.00310)
L4.damage
0.00280**
0.000803
0.00110
(0.00133)
(0.00141)
(0.00152)
L5.damage
0.00297*** 0.00364*** 0.00332**
(0.00101)
(0.00111)
(0.00135)
Sum of damages
0.021***
0.027***
0.025***
(0.0081)
(0.0096)
(0.0048)
L6.log stock
0.195
0.222
(0.222)
(0.291)
L1.log stock
0.565**
(0.242)
Log GDP per capita
1.710**
2.077*
1.650*
(0.749)
(1.141)
(0.929)
Institutional Index
0.0290
0.0117
0.0612
(0.0499)
(0.0871)
(0.0805)
Log Patent Apps
0.417***
0.0492
-0.0950
(0.150)
(0.432)
(0.295)
Observations
717
703
703
e(Q)
0.0000
0.0704
0.0817
Countries
30
30
30
Time Span
1984-2009
Standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1

Earthquake Detection
Baseline
IV
IV
0.00847*** 0.0111***
0.0108***
(0.00189)
(0.00111)
(0.000827)
0.00461*** 0.00941*** 0.00781***
(0.00172)
(0.00132)
(0.00109)
0.00358* 0.00794*** 0.00576**
(0.00198)
(0.00160)
(0.00289)
0.000752
0.00237
0.00113
(0.00318)
(0.00206)
(0.00428)
0.000666
0.00302
0.00185
(0.00230)
(0.00185)
(0.00264)
-0.00295
-0.000347
-0.0018***
(0.00227)
(0.00160)
(0.000406)
0.015
0.033***
0.026***
(0.0115)
(0.0034)
(0.0093)
-0.129
0.303
(0.245)
(0.258)
0.313*
(0.175)
0.444
0.0852
0.930
(0.983)
(1.455)
(1.388)
0.0432
0.0164
-0.00290
(0.0787)
(0.201)
(0.143)
0.301
0.0187
-0.240
(0.346)
(0.506)
(0.524)
338
327
327
0.0000
0.2188
0.2259
15
15
15
1984-2009

Baseline
0.0476***
(0.0123)
0.0414***
(0.0157)
0.0323***
(0.00954)
0.0111
(0.00948)
0.0121*
(0.00681)
0.00492
(0.00497)
0.149***
(0.0530)
0.146*
(0.0768)

1.843**
(0.785)
0.306**
(0.135)
0.400
(0.254)
459
0.0000
21
1986-2009

Flood Control
IV
IV
0.00218
0.111**
(0.0339)
(0.0462)
-0.0169
0.0442**
(0.0480)
(0.0185)
-0.0270
0.0309
(0.0474)
(0.0643)
-0.00403
0.0473
(0.0181)
(0.0376)
-0.00921
-0.0898**
(0.0402)
(0.0408)
0.0449**
0.0719
(0.0183)
(0.0490)
-0.010
0.215
(0.1500)
(0.2038)
0.792***
(0.195)
0.104
(0.343)
0.648
-1.319
(5.280)
(7.648)
0.368
0.367
(0.555)
(0.252)
0.0944
2.316
(1.300)
(1.837)
383
383
0.0205
0.0245
20
20
1986-2006 1986-2006

A22

Appendix 6. Instrument Quality
To assess the quality of our instruments, Table A7 includes the partial R2 and Shea partial R2
statistics for each of our endogenous variables for each technology. With multiple endogenous
variables, simply assessing the F-statistic of the excluded instruments is not a sufficient test of
the strength of the instrument (Baum 2006).

Shea’s partial R2 statistic accounts for the

intercorrelations among instruments. If the Shea partial R2 is significantly smaller than the
standard partial R2, it suggests that there are not enough unique instruments to identify each
endogenous variable. As we see in Table A1, that is not the case, as both partial R2 values are
similar for each variable.
However, as discussed in the text, the instruments for flood control and drought-resistant crops
are weak, as the partial R2 values are below 0.05 for nearly all variables. Thus, for these
technologies we have more faith in our reduced form regressions. Given that there are few
differences between the reduced form and instrumental variable results when the instruments are
stronger in the case of earthquake, we do believe that these reduced form estimates are valid.

A23

Table A7. Partial R2 Statistics
Earthquake Buildings
Shea
partial R2 partial R2
Deaths(t)
0.3457
0.3984
Deaths(t-1)
0.2880
0.3666
Deaths(t-2)
0.1893
0.2038
Deaths(t-3)
0.2138
0.2293
Deaths(t-4)
0.2068
0.2374
Deaths(t-5)
0.1924
0.2409
Knowledge Stock (t-1) 0.0731
0.0789
Damages(t)
Damages(t-1)
Damages(t-2)
Damages(t-3)
Damages(t-4)
Damages(t-5)
Knowledge Stock (t-1)

0.2844
0.2485
0.1980
0.2098
0.2309
0.2444
0.0661

0.2980
0.2908
0.2102
0.2224
0.2431
0.2747
0.0789

Earthquake Detection
Shea
partial R2 partial R2
0.4227
0.4594
0.3913
0.4301
0.3729
0.3732
0.3928
0.3938
0.3701
0.3883
0.3902
0.4420
0.3455
0.3625
0.3433
0.3291
0.2575
0.2910
0.3074
0.3340
0.3602

0.3489
0.3463
0.2662
0.2925
0.3150
0.3566
0.3625

Flood Control
Shea
partial R2 partial R2
0.0187
0.0278
0.0124
0.0240
0.0149
0.0201
0.0163
0.0220
0.0184
0.0281
0.0112
0.0205
0.1431
0.1608
0.0417
0.0401
0.0376
0.0410
0.0396
0.0392
0.1446

0.0478
0.0463
0.0563
0.0555
0.0484
0.0475
0.1608

Drought-Resistant Crops
Shea partial
partial R2
R2

0.0861
0.0420
0.0380
0.0410
0.0396
0.0339
0.0769

0.1044
0.0530
0.0416
0.0477
0.0523
0.0489
0.1185

A24

Appendix References
Baum, C.F. (2006). An Introduction to Modern Econometrics Using Stata. Stata Press: College
Station, TX.

A25

