                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE EFFECT OF COLLEGE EDUCATION ON HEALTH

                                          Kasey Buckles
                                        Andreas Hagemann
                                          Ofer Malamud
                                        Melinda S. Morrill
                                        Abigail K. Wozniak

                                       Working Paper 19222
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19222


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2013




The authors would like to thank William Evans, Bob Kaestner and seminar participants at the NBER
Education Program Meetings, Population American Association (PAA) Meetings, the Society of Labor
Economists (SOLE) Meetings, University of Illinois at Chicago, NBER Education Group meetings,
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Georgia State University, University of Maryland, University
of Maryland-Baltimore County, and the University of Notre Dame for helpful comments. Elizabeth
Munnich provided valuable research assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Kasey Buckles, Andreas Hagemann, Ofer Malamud, Melinda S. Morrill, and Abigail K.
Wozniak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of College Education on Health
Kasey Buckles, Andreas Hagemann, Ofer Malamud, Melinda S. Morrill, and Abigail K. Wozniak
NBER Working Paper No. 19222
July 2013
JEL No. I12,I23,J24

                                              ABSTRACT

We exploit exogenous variation in college completion induced by draft-avoidance behavior during
the Vietnam War to examine the impact of college completion on adult mortality. Our preferred estimates
imply that increasing college completion rates from the level of the state with the lowest induced rate
to the highest would decrease cumulative mortality by 28 percent relative to the mean. Most of the
reduction in mortality is from deaths due to cancer and heart disease. We also explore potential mechanisms,
including differential earnings, health insurance, and health behaviors, using data from the Census,
ACS, and NHIS.


Kasey Buckles                                        Melinda S. Morrill
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
436 Flanner Hall                                     North Carolina State University
University of Notre Dame                             Box 8110
Notre Dame, IN 46556                                 Raleigh, NC 27695-8110
kbuckles@nd.edu                                      melinda_morrill@ncsu.edu

Andreas Hagemann                                     Abigail K. Wozniak
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame                             University of Notre Dame
434 Flanner Hall                                     441 Flanner Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556                                 Notre Dame, IN 46556
andreas.hagemann@nd.edu                              and NBER
                                                     a_wozniak@nd.edu
Ofer Malamud
Harris School of Public Policy Studies
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
malamud@uchicago.edu
I. Introduction

        Schooling is highly correlated with subsequent health outcomes. For example, in 2007, the

age-adjusted mortality rate of high school graduates aged 25 to 64 was more than twice as large as

the mortality rate of those with some college or a collegiate degree (Xu et al., 2010). If these

associations between health and education reflect a causal relationship, they would represent a

significant non-pecuniary return to education. They would also imply that policies meant to increase

educational attainment could serve as an important means for improving health. However, there is

substantial debate about whether these associations actually represent causal effects (see the reviews

by Grossman, 2006, and Cutler and Lleras-Muney, 2010). This paper is the first to provide a causal

estimate of the effect of college completion on mortality. In doing so, we contribute to knowledge

about the impacts of education on health for a new part of the schooling distribution, where the

observed health gradient in education is steeper.

        We use variation in college attainment induced by draft-avoidance behavior during the

Vietnam War in an instrumental variables strategy, as in Malamud and Wozniak (2012). This enables

us to identify the effect of increased higher education on the later health status of men who were

eligible to be drafted into the Vietnam War. This strategy builds on Card and Lemieux (2000, 2001)

who document the excess educational attainment among cohorts induced to enter college in order to

defer conscription. While Card and Lemieux focus on differences in induction risk across birth

cohorts, we also exploit state level variation in induction risk within cohorts. The existence of state

level variation allows us to decompose national induction risk into two constituent parts: induction

risk faced by a young man’s own state cohort and induction risk faced by young men of that cohort

in the rest of the country. Our decomposition yields two instruments, which we use to identify the

impact of the two endogenous variables—education and veteran status—in our empirical

framework. This approach is an advance over studies that used the Card and Lemieux measures to



                                                    2
identify the effect of college going on health outcomes using only year to year variation in induction

risk (e.g., De Walque, 2007; Grimard and Parent, 2007; MacInnis 2006). This strategy was developed

by Malamud and Wozniak (2012); here we provide a more detailed explanation of how identification

works in our setting in which there are two linked endogenous variables. We also develop a test for

identification grounded in the assumptions of our structural model.

        We merge our data on national and state-level induction risk with the Vital Statistics

Mortality Files from 1981 to 2007 and the U.S. Censuses for 1980, 1990, and 2000 to construct birth

state-by-cohort level mortality rates. We also include information about basic demographic

characteristics, cohort size, and labor market conditions at the time of entry from a variety of

additional sources. Our instruments predict both veteran status and educational attainment for men

in the affected cohorts, with the increase in education coming primarily from increased post-

secondary schooling attainment. We therefore have a viable instrument for educational attainment at

higher levels that can be purged of its correlation with veteran status for the Vietnam cohorts.

        We focus on the cumulative mortality rate between 1981 and 2007 and perform our main

analysis using data aggregated to the birth state-birth year cohort level. We first establish that the

well-known gradient between education and health status is present and statistically significant in our

Vital Statistics data using OLS specifications. Specifically, OLS shows that a birth state-birth year

cohort with 100 percent college completion is associated with 102 fewer deaths by 2007 per 1,000

persons compared to a cohort with no one completing college. Our instrumental variables estimates

indicate an effect that ranges from 93 to 172 fewer deaths per 1,000 persons, with our preferred

specification yielding a magnitude similar to the OLS estimate. For the birth state-birth year cohorts

in our sample, this translates into a reduction in mortality of 42.8 per 1,000 for states with the

highest induced completion rates versus the lowest. Furthermore, none of these 2SLS estimates are

significantly different from the OLS estimates. Results using 10-year mortality rates for the 1980s,



                                                    3
1990s and 2000s show that the effects of college completion on health are not confined to any

particular decade. The largest effects are found for the impact of college completion in lowering

deaths due to cancer and heart disease, which represent the leading causes of mortality in our sample

of older adults. College completion decreases the cancer mortality rate by 72 percent, with lung

cancer accounting for over half of the reduction.

         Before concluding, we use the American Community Survey (ACS) and the National Health

Interview Survey (NHIS) to explore mechanisms that might explain the documented relationship

between college education and mortality. We examine the causal effect of college completion on

auxiliary outcomes such as health insurance and wages, as well as the cross-sectional relationship

between college completion and various health behaviors such as smoking, exercise, and obesity.

         This paper helps to fill an important gap in the literature on the relationship between

education and health. Previous analyses of the causal impacts of education on health outcomes, such

as mortality, have relied on variation at the lower part of the schooling distribution. For example,

Lleras-Muney (2005), Clark and Royer (2010), and Meghir et al. (2012) all exploit changes in

compulsory schooling requirements to examine whether increased schooling improved the health of

students on the margin of dropping out before 12th grade. Lleras-Muney (2005) finds large and

significant effects of increased education on declines in mortality in the United States, whereas Clark

and Royer (2010) find no evidence for an impact of education on mortality in England.1 Meghir et

al. (2012) find temporary improvements in mortality and other health measures for affected cohorts

following a reform in Sweden. However, regardless of the causal impact of schooling on health at

the margin of dropping out of high school, the causal relationship may be different at the margin

between high school and college. Moreover, estimating the effect of education on health at the


1 Arendt (2005) and Albouy and Lequien (2009) also find no statistically significant impact of compulsory school

reforms on health outcomes in Denmark and France, respectively, but in both studies the estimated effects have large
standard errors.


                                                           4
college margin may be of particular interest given that the largest increase in educational attainment

in recent years has occurred among students entering college (Turner, 2004).

         The findings in this paper have important implications for both health and education policy.

People value health, and the health returns to education may represent a substantial fraction of the

pecuniary returns. Indeed, Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2006) calculate that their estimates of the health

benefits from education increase the total returns to education by 15 to 55 percent. Because higher

education policy in recent years has been focused on increasing college completion, this represents a

particularly important margin of analysis.2 If individual investments in college education are

suboptimal because of credit constraints, externalities, or lack of information, the presence of

additional health returns to college provides an even stronger case for subsidizing education. This is

particularly relevant given recent discussions about the rising cost of college and the decline in

federal financial aid for college students. On the other hand, a positive causal impact of higher

education on health may pose a dilemma for health policy. Health improvements, like smoking

cessation, may reduce health care costs in the short run only to increase them in the long run as

individuals live longer or as other unforeseen consequences arise (Bearman, et al., 2011). Our

analysis will help inform policymakers interested in the link between education policy and national

healthcare spending.

         The effect of postsecondary education on certain health behaviors—smoking in particular—

has been examined previously. De Walque (2007) and Grimard and Parent (2007) exploit year-to-

year variation in induction risk faced by cohorts of young men during the Vietnam War to identify

the impact of education on smoking. Using different datasets (NHIS and the CPS Tobacco

Supplements, respectively) and different specifications, they find that additional education has a


2 Increasing college completion rates is a stated goal of the Obama-Biden administration. They have pushed for higher

college completion rates on several fronts: by expanding Pell Grant access, proposing grants to state post-secondary
systems, and devising action plans for states (Office of the Vice President, 2011).


                                                           5
negative and significant effect on the likelihood of smoking.3 Our paper extends this identification

strategy by incorporating within-cohort variation in induction risk to account for veteran status.

Moreover, we examine a wide range of both health outcomes and behaviors across multiple decades,

providing a much broader picture of higher education’s potential health impacts.

         Finally, although it is not our main focus, this paper contributes to research examining the

impact of military service during the Vietnam War on health outcomes and behaviors (Angrist,

Chen, and Frandsen, 2010; Dobkin and Shabani, 2007; Conley and Heerwig, 2009; Hearst, Newman,

and Hulley, 1986).4 We find that veteran status has a statistically significant protective effect on

mortality conditional on survival to 1980. This is potentially explained by higher rates of health

insurance access among veterans in our sample.



II. Background on the Vietnam Draft

         Our instrumental variables strategy exploits variation in the risk of induction (also referred to

colloquially as the risk of “being drafted”) to which young men in the US were exposed during the

Vietnam conflict. This section provides a brief overview of the sources of this variation. A more

detailed discussion can be found in Malamud and Wozniak (2012); hereafter MW.

         Approximately 2 million American men were drafted during the Vietnam War. The Selective

Service System, which comprised over 4,000 local draft boards across the nation at that time, was

responsible for registering recruits and classifying them for either deferment or selection.

Responsibility for devising and meeting the national target number of conscriptions rested with the

federal Department of Defense (DoD). To achieve this target, the DoD issued monthly “draft calls”



3 MacInnis (2006) uses a similar identification strategy to document the effect of education in reducing obesity and its
co-morbidities such as hypertension and adult-onset diabetes.
4 These studies all exploit variation in veteran status induced by the Vietnam draft lottery, which is a different source of

identification than our own. None reject the hypothesis that the impact of veteran status on health outcomes is zero.


                                                              6
that divided the national number into quotas assigned to state draft boards, which did the active

work of ordering men to be inducted.

         Faced with an excess of eligible draft age men, draft boards adopted generous deferral

policies toward large categories of men. Enrollment in a four-year college was the second most

common deferral category, after the exemption for dependents (Semiannual Reports of the Director

of the Selective Service System, 1967-1973).5 The Military Service Act of 1967 codified the existing

de facto arrangement by stating that college students in good standing could defer induction until

receipt of an undergraduate degree or age 24, whichever occurred first. Over 1.7 million college

deferments were granted in 1967 alone.6 Although men who received college deferments were

technically eligible for induction until age 35, very few men between the ages of 26 and 35 were ever

drafted. Card and Lemieux (2000) estimate that, among men born between 1945 and 1947, those

with a college degree were only one-third as likely to serve in Vietnam as compared to those without

a college degree. Thus, the incentive to enroll in college to avoid the draft during these years was

large.

         Our identification strategy relies on two sources of variation in induction risk: over time and

across states. The existence of intertemporal variation is well-known (Card and Lemieux 2000) and

has been used in previous research (e.g., De Walque, 2007; Grimard and Parent, 2007). Inductions

varied considerably over the course of the Vietnam War. From 1960 to 1963, inductions were fairly

low at approximately 8,000 per month. However, following the Gulf of Tonkin incident in August 2,

1964, Congress authorized an expanded role for the U.S. military in Vietnam. Inductions more than

doubled from 1964 to 1965 and again from 1965 to 1966. By the spring of 1968, in the midst of

raging student protests, the rate of inductions reached a peak of almost 42,000 a month.

5 See also Tatum and Tuchinsky, Guide to the Draft, Ch. 3. By contrast, enrollment in a two-year college was not

considered grounds for automatic deferment. See Rothenberg (1968).
6 The number of college deferments remained above 1.7 million in 1968 and 1969, and then fell to 1.5 million and 1.3

million in 1970 and 1971 respectively (Semi-annual Reports of the Director of the Selective Service System, 1967-1973).


                                                           7
            The introduction of the draft lottery in 1969 led to a substantial change in the induction

process. However, college deferments continued to be issued until September 1971, and men who

were already enrolled were allowed to retain their deferment until the end of the school year. Risk of

induction during this period was also much lower since men were at risk of induction for only a

single year and the overall rate of inductions was substantially lower, falling from about 20,000 per

month in late 1969 to 2,000 per month in late 1971. In February of 1973, the draft was suspended

and no more inductions took place.

            The existence of state level variation in induction risk was less well known at the time, and

remains so today. This type of variation arose through two channels. The first was uneven and

idiosyncratic application of formal procedures across the thousands of local draft boards.7 In their

influential study of the draft, Davis and Dolbeare write, “The conclusion seems inescapable: local

board autonomy implies both within state and between state variability, even among

socioeconomically similar board jurisdictions.”8 Similar idiosyncrasies were described in the report of

the U.S. National Advisory Commission on Selective Service, in 1967. A second source of state and

year variation in induction risk were communication delays between federal, state, and local officials.

These delays meant that the DoD assigned quotas using registrant numbers that were several

months old. Thus, draft risk for an eligible man at a point in time was not only a function of the

number of men in his state currently eligible for the draft but also of the number available several

months ago. The current pool could be much larger than the past pool if, for example, a large

number of local men graduated high school thus becoming draft eligible or much smaller if a large

number married or aged out of the draft pool in the intervening months.




7   Davis and Dolbeare, Little Groups of Neighbors, Page 18.
8   Davis and Dolbeare, Little Groups of Neighbors, Page 84.


                                                               8
III. Empirical Strategy

         We use variation in college attainment caused by draft-avoidance behavior during the

Vietnam conflict to isolate the causal effect of education on health. An artifact of this identification

strategy is that the likelihood an individual is a veteran also varies systematically across cohorts in

our sample. Given that veteran status is a plausible determinant of health, it is important to control

for this variable in our estimation strategy.9 However, selection into military service during the

Vietnam War was likely based on characteristics that are unobserved in our data, which would

confound our estimates of veteran status and potentially other covariates as well. To deal with this,

we exploit changes in both national and state-level induction risk to generate exogenous variation in

both college-going and veteran status.10

         This strategy is identical to the one described in MW. However, we extend the MW analysis

in two ways. First, we provide formal econometric evidence of the relevance of our instruments by

developing and implementing a test for first-stage power under the identifying assumptions

appropriate to our model. Second, we provide a detailed discussion of the interpretation of our

estimates when both direct and indirect effects are possible.

A. Identification in a Structural Model with Direct and Indirect Effects

         We begin by presenting a simple structural model that relates veteran status and college-

going to health through both direct and indirect channels. The parameters of interest for our analysis

of a health outcome Y are the coefficients on the college-going indicator C and the veteran status

indicator V in the first equation of the structural equation system11


9 As noted above, the literature on this question is mixed but tends to find no causal relationship between veteran status
and later health among Vietnam veterans. Nevertheless, because veteran status will be affected by our instrumental
variables for educational attainment, we think it is important to control for it.
10 A number of related papers face the same problem. De Walque (2007) includes veteran status but treats it as an

exogenous variable. MacInnis (2006) instruments for veteran status using a quartic polynomial in age, while Grimard and
Parent (2007) consider a specification that instruments for veteran status using information about early health problems.
11
   Our model assumes that education only has a direct effect on health at the state-cohort level (that is, there is no
indirect effect through veteran status). We believe this reflects the historical record. Certainly, college students could


                                                            9
(1)

(2)

(3)                                          .

Suppose for simpliclity that the vector of instruments Z has two entries                   and     . The p-

dimensional vector X contains additional covariates, including a constant. Both Z and X are

exogenous in the sense that the unobserved error components , , and                       satisfy E( |Z,X)=E( ),

E( |Z,X)=E( ), and E( |Z,X)=E( ). Since we have constants in the system, we can without loss

of generality take E( )=E( )=E( )=0. The variables C and V are assumed to be endogenous in (1)

so that Cov( , C) ≠ 0 and Cov( , V) ≠ 0.

         For our purposes, identification of             ≔        ,    ′ is best thought of in terms of reduced-

form restrictions. We can write the reduced form of the structural system (1)-(3) as


                                                  Π          Π
(4)                                     ′    ′                        Ψ.
                                                  Π          Π

Here Ψ is a row vector of reduced-form errors and Π                        ,   is the matrix of reduced-form

parameters. The dimensions of Π and Π                 are 2×1 and 2×2, respectively; Π           and Π    are p×1 and

p×2. The reduced form of (2) and (3) is therefore

                                            Π
                                  ′    ′
                                            Π22
                                                      Ψ2 ,


where Ψ consists of the second and third entry of Ψ. Denote the first entry by Ψ and plug the

preceding display into (1) to see



delay or avoid conscription by staying in school, but induction rates for a birth state-birth cohort were unlikely to be
affected by individual draft-avoidance behavior. This is because local draft boards needed to fulfill specific manpower
requirements set by the Department of Defense. This assumption is also supported by evidence (available upon request)
showing that veteran status is not predicted by graduation rates at the birth-state birth-cohort level in our data.
Ultimately this assumption simplifies our econometric analysis, but it is not required for identification.


                                                             10
                                                     Π
                                 ′      ′                               Ψ.
                                                 Π

We conclude from (4) that Π                              Π , and therefore                 Π   Π . The sample equivalent of this

is just the IV estimator of              . Since the reduced-form parameters are identified as long as

E[(Z',X')'(Z',X')] is invertible, it follows that                       is identified if and only if


(5)                rank Π                   2,

which requires the correlation structure of Z and (C,V) to be rich enough to disentangle the effects

coming from C and V.12


         We now briefly outline a test of this rank condition based on minimum-distance

considerations. Partition Π                 into 2-dimensional vectors                 and        so that Π       1,   2   . In

particular, equations (2) and (3) imply                      1,   2                    ,       . Under the null hypothesis


(6)                    : rank Π                      1

there exists some            ∈        so that                     . Under the alternative (5), there is no such            . Denote

the OLS estimate of                    vec Π12               ′,       ′ ′ by   and let         be an estimate of the covariance

matrix of . For         ∈            , define the function                ,            ,        ′. Because             ,          0

under the null hypothesis, minimum-distance estimates of                                   ,     can be found by minimizing


                         ,                               ,    ′                    ,




12
   In the standard case with a single endogenous variable, Π would be a vector and the usual first-stage F statistic could
be used to test the null hypothesis Π        0 against the alternative of identification. In the present case, large F statistics
in first-stage regressions for C and V only provide evidence that there is correlation between the instruments and the
endogenous variables, but do not rule out that the effects of and           on C and V are too similar to prevent
identification of . The more relevant pair of hypotheses is therefore the null of an insufficiently rich correlation
structure, rank Π         1, with the alternative of identification, rank Π        2.


                                                                          11
with respect to       ,       . Denote these minimizers by          ,   . Provided that standard conditions are

satisfied (Wooldridge, 2002),               ,      has an asymptotic      distribution under the null hypothesis

(6) and otherwise diverges in probability as the sample size grows to infinity.


         In the more general case with two endogenous variables and                      2 instruments, the null and

alternative hypotheses of this test remain unchanged, but Π                has    rows and         ,    converges to a

          distribution under the null. Hence, if we divide                ,      by 2      1 , we can interpret


                                        ,
                          ,


as a generalized first-stage F statistic for a pair of endogenous variables. This is the Cragg and

Donald (1993) test for identifiability.13 In the standard case with a single endogenous variable, it

reduces to the usual first-stage F test. In our two-variable setting, the standard first-stage F test and

the Cragg-Donald test complement one another: we can use standard F statistics to separately test,

in each first stage model, the null hypothesis of no correlation between the instruments and the

endogenous variables against the alternative of correlation. Rejecting the null in each case provides

evidence that there is correlation, but the correlation structure is not necessarily rich enough to

identify our structural parameter               . The presence of correlation with insufficient structure is

precisely the null hypothesis of the Cragg-Donald F test. The alternative is identification of                    .

Hence, if we reject the null in both the first-stage F tests and the Cragg-Donald test, we have

evidence that the structural parameters are identified.

         Another test that is sometimes proposed in settings with multiple endogenous variables is

the adjusted F-statistic developed in Angrist and Pischke (2009). It tests, separately for each first


13
  Note that, as opposed to the Cragg-Donald minimum eigenvalue statistic routinely reported in statistical software, this
test remains valid when cluster-robust covariance matrices are used.


                                                              12
stage model, whether the correlation between the instruments and a given endogenous variable is

weak while accounting for the fact that some of the variation in the instruments is used in the

remaining first stages. Although they do not represent a direct test of our structural model and

identifying assumptions, the Angrist-Pischke F statistics are potentially of interest as a diagnostic test

of weak instruments so we report them as well.

B. Interpretation of the Structural Parameters

          We now show that                         ,   ′ has a causal interpretation by using the instruments

and       to mimic otherwise impossible interventions that change C while holding V fixed (or vice

versa) without affecting the error term . To avoid obscuring the problem with unnecessary

notation, we do not explicitly include the covariates in the discussion, although all of the results

below remain valid conditional on X. To interpret                         , it follows from (5) that we can find values

      ,      and       ,           such that


(7)                E       |               ,                 E    |                 ,            0         and

(8)                E       |               ,                 E    |                 ,            0,

i.e., switching from           ,          to       ,    changes the probability of college education without

changing the probability of veteran status. From these two relations, equation (1), and the exogeneity

assumption, we can conclude

                                   |           ,         |            ,
                                                                                .
                                   |           ,         |            ,


          The parameter                therefore measures the average change in the outcome variable for

individuals where an intervention changed the probability of college education without changing the

probability of veteran status, adjusted for the fact that a change in the probability does not




                                                                 13
necessarily induce an effect in the outcome. A similar argument can be made for            with different

values for      ,     and reversed equality signs in (7) and (8).


         We can also show that       and     measure the direct causal effect of a change in C

(respectively V) status holding V (respectively C) status constant in a potential outcomes

framework. Write the observed outcome Y as a function of the potential outcomes               ,   ,     , or

      depending on realizations (C,V)=(1,1), (0,1), (1,0), or (0,0),


(9)                                   1                    1              1        1


                                                                                                  .

Under linear regression (constant effects) assumptions, we have                                        and

                                . In particular, the marginal effect of a college education is the same for

veterans and non-veterans and the marginal effect of veteran status is the same for college graduates

and non-college graduates. Hence, the first term in the second line of the preceding display drops

out and, if we take E         as the intercept and               E      , we are back in the framework of

the structural system in equation (1). As such,       is the “average treatment effect” because

E                                            E                 . The same argument, with the roles of C and

V reversed, yields the equivalent result for      .


         Finally, it can also be seen that the parameters       and     are “local average treatment

effects” from two different interventions. Within the constant effects framework,           measures the

causal effect of an intervention described by (7) and (8) on individuals that comply with the

intervention. Intuitively, as long as condition (5) holds, our instruments vary enough to mimic a

situation in which variation in college access and variation in veteran status come from two




                                                      14
independent randomized experiments.14 This breaks the dependency between outcomes in

equations (1)-(3). It may be that some individuals would be “randomly selected” to receive both

interventions, but their receipt of both interventions is random and unrelated to the relationships in

the structural model. However, we emphasize that this interpretation crucially depends on our

parametric assumptions. For a general nonparametric potential outcomes model, we cannot simplify

(9). We therefore we do not claim to non-parametrically identify local average treatment or any other

(direct, indirect, or total) causal effect.


C. Instruments for College Education and Veteran Status


         Finding instrumental variables that meet the conditions on Z discussed in the previous

section is obviously critical to our analysis. Fortunately, we are able to employ the same strategy as

MW, who in turn extend an instrumental variables strategy inspired by Card and Lemieux (2000,

2001); henceforth CL. Like CL, we assume that draft avoidance was proportional to the risk of

induction. To account for the mechanical relationship between inductions and veteran status, we

exploit state level variation within the cohort level variation identified by CL. The existence of state-

cohort level variation allows us to break national induction risk into its constituent parts and obtain

two separate instruments that can be used to identify both college attainment and veteran status.

Thus, young men faced state cohort risk that is analogous to the CL measure, where s indexes state

of residence and c indexes one-year birth cohorts:


(10)              staterisksc 
                                                   I
                                       t | c 19 to 22 sct   /4
                                             N sc




14
   In other words, this is analogous to the thought experiment in which names are randomly selected from an urn to be
treated with college access without affecting veteran status. For , all names are then placed back in the urn, and a
second round of names is randomly drawn to be treated with veteran access without changing college status.


                                                                   15
I sct is the number of inductions from birth state–birth year cohort sc in year t. Like CL, we construct

an average draft risk for the years a man was 19 to 22 since draft risk was non-trivial for men ages 20

to 22. Nsc is birth state-cohort size. This measure of state cohort risk is our first instrument. We

then use our state level data on I and N to construct a second instrument in the following manner:


(11)              nationalrisksc 
                                         t | c 19 to 22         I
                                                                  s  sct   /4
                                                       s
                                                             N sc

This measure defines national cohort risk for a man born in state s and in birth cohort c as the

number of inductees from the set of all other states, denoted –s, and birth cohort c, divided by the

total number of such men at age 17.15 In other words, the numerator and denominator in (11) are

national level inductions and cohort size for a cohort c minus the birth state inductions and cohort

size for the same cohort, respectively.

         To construct the measures in equations (10) and (11), we obtained data on the number of

inductees from 1961 to 1972 in each state from reports of the Selective Service. We estimate state

cohort size using enrollment numbers spanning 1959 to 1970, the academic years in which our

cohorts of interest were in 11th grade. Thus state-cohort level risk (henceforth state risk) for a young

man born in Alabama in 1950 equals the number of inductees from Alabama in 1969 (the year he

turned 19) divided by the number of students enrolled in 11th grade in Alabama in 1967. National

level risk for the same young man roughly equals the number of men inducted nationally in 1969

divided by the size of his birth cohort; more precisely, we subtract own state inductions from the

numerator and own state cohort size from the denominator. We then construct an average national

draft risk for the years a man was 19 to 22. Figure 1 graphs the variation in state-level induction risk

for a selection of states over our period of interest. Panel A shows raw induction risk as defined in


15 Note that MW use variation at the six month birth cohort level. Here we use yearly variation because month of birth
is not available in the public use mortality data.


                                                                   16
(10), Panel B shows residual state-level induction risk after controlling for a cohort trend, state-of-

birth fixed effects, and national risk, and Panel C shows residual national-level induction risk after

controlling for a cohort trend, state-of-birth fixed effects, and state-level risk. Given that we include

these controls in our main empirical specifications, the patterns in Panels B and C most closely

approximate our identifying variation.16 We present our first stage analysis in the later results section.

D. Validity of Our Instruments

         Given the novelty of our identification strategy, some of the IV assumptions bear more

discussion. Our instruments could fail if young men attempted to exploit local variation in induction

risk by moving between localities. In this case, risk would not be truly randomly assigned. Our risk

measures would only bind for men who were unwilling or unable to move to low risk jurisdictions,

which might in turn be correlated with other unobservable characteristics related to health. MW

document that this type of “local board shopping” was prohibited by draft board regulations.

         Identification further requires the assumption that induction risk only affected health

through either education or veteran status. There are two ways in which this might fail. First, the

health screenings required to determine draft eligibility might uncover an important health condition

earlier than it might otherwise have been detected, thereby encouraging individuals to treat the

condition and improving future health. Our reading of the historical literature suggests that this was

unlikely. The required exams were very standard and did not involve any invasive testing for health

conditions not easily observed in a doctor’s office. It is therefore unlikely these exams provided

young men with information they did not already have. 17



16
   For a more detailed discussion of the variation in residual induction risk seen in Figure 1, see MW.
17 In fact, Tatum and Tuchinsky describe the exams this way, “Since the [Army] examines large numbers of men each
day, and since the doctors, orderlies, and clerks assigned there must process them in assembly-line fashion as quickly as
possible, the examinations are often careless. If you have a medical or other condition which should disqualify you, bring
letters and other evidence from your own doctors…” (Ch. 6). A 1964 report to the president noted that “The current
published medical standards are roughly the same as those which were in effect at the close of World War II,” (U.S.
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, 1964, Ch. 3).


                                                           17
         Second, young men may have viewed marriage or fertility choices as a means to reduce their

chances of being drafted, and these choices may have connections to health. Marriage was not in

itself grounds for deferment (Shapiro and Striker, 1970). Fatherhood, on the other hand, was

grounds for deferment and was the most common draft exemption. However, there is little evidence

that male fertility among affected cohorts responded to this. Bitler and Schmidt (2012) examine

fertility changes among women who were likely to have been affected by the absence of men in

affected cohorts. Their findings indicate that men in our affected cohorts were modestly but

statistically significantly less likely to become fathers during the Vietnam years. Whether there is an

effect on completed fertility is unknown. Nevertheless, we know of no evidence linking fertility

timing to later adult health for men. Since the known effects (for women) are small, and since there

is no known channel to link any potential effects for men to health, we believe that the exclusion

restriction is valid in our context.18



IV. Data Sources and Estimating Equations

         We focus on mortality as our measure of health. We perform our main analysis on data

aggregated to the birth state-birth year cohort level, and we refer to these cells as birth state-cohorts.

Our main measure of mortality at the birth state-cohort level is the cumulative mortality rate per

1000 persons between 1981 and 2007, constructed as follows:

(12)                                                                       ∗ 1,000

where s is state of birth and c is year of birth. Thus the mortality rate gives the fraction of the cohort

that died by 2007, conditional on having been alive in 1980. We also construct cumulative mortality

rates by cause. These are defined as above, but where                         is mortality due to cause j, and the


18Also, fertility effects were largest among blacks and low skilled whites (Bitler and Schmidt, 2012). Since we omit blacks
from our sample, this further reduces concerns about fertility changes in young adulthood driving later health for men.


                                                            18
numerator is all deaths due to cause j over the period.

         The data for our analysis come from two sources. First, we use data from the IPUMS

microdata 5% samples of the 1980 Census (Ruggles et al., 2004) to construct the denominators in

the mortality rate measures as well as the birth state-cohort rates of college completion and veteran

status. We restrict our sample to men born between 1942 and 1953. These are the years for which

both inductions and enrollments are available at the state level, which are the two components of

our induction risk measures. Finally, we omit non-white men from our sample because they may

have been less able to avoid the draft by enrolling in college.19

         Our second source is the Vital Statistics mortality data for the period 1981 to 2007, which

contains observations on all deaths in the United States, at the annual level. We use these data to

construct the numerators in our mortality rate measures, after applying the same sample restrictions

applied to the Census data. We match numbers of deaths to the appropriate state-cohort

information using year and state of birth. We also have information on the primary (or underlying)

cause of death, and we use this to construct cause-specific mortality rates.

         Our primary measure of educational attainment is a dummy variable for college completion.

To inform this choice, we explored the impact of our instruments on educational attainment and

confirmed that higher national and state-level induction risk increased male educational attainment

at all post-secondary levels, including completion. We also experimented with alternative

specifications using years of schooling and years of college as our measure of educational attainment.

The substance of our conclusions appears robust to the choice of education measure.20




19 MW discusses this possibility and its potential consequences in more detail.
20 College completion has been shown to be the most accurately measured higher education outcome and to contain
little measurement error overall (Black, et al., 2003). On the other hand, years of post-secondary schooling is unlikely to
be plagued by error that is negatively correlated with the recorded value, as is the case with the dummy variable
schooling measures (Kane, Rouse, and Staiger, 1999, and Black, et al., 2000).


                                                            19
          Our measure of veteran status is based on veteran information in the Census. Specifically,

we define a veteran in our cohorts as someone who answered affirmatively that he was a Vietnam

veteran.21 We exclude anyone from our sample that is on active duty in the military. We also exclude

observations with imputed values for a number of key variables.22

          We estimate our main regressions at the birth state by birth cohort level. We use the

aggregated data for several reasons. First, our source of exogenous variation occurs at this level.

Second, since we cannot observe veteran status, education, and mortality for a representative set of

individuals in a single data set, it allows for construction of a birth state-cohort panel from which we

can estimate our main econometric model. Finally, an individual’s risk of death in a given year is low,

so the fit of our model is likely better at the aggregate level than in a model estimating rare outcomes

in individual level data. Our main econometric model is as follows:

(13)                                                                          δ

where s indexes state of birth and c indexes birth year, and the dependent variable                        is the

mortality rate per 1,000 persons as defined in (12)—either in total or by cause. The variable                        is

the fraction of veterans, and           is the fraction with a college degree. In addition, trend is a region-

specific linear trend in birth cohort,           is a set of state-cohort level controls, and δ represents a

full set of state of birth dummies. Allowing for state of birth fixed effects removes variation arising

from states with persistently higher or lower than average induction rates, which may be associated

with other state characteristics (e.g., industrial composition) that are correlated with mortality rates.

       includes two variables to capture labor market conditions facing a cohort at the time of the

college enrollment decision: (a) the employment to population ratio in the individual’s state of birth

21 Census respondents are asked whether they are veterans, and if they answer yes, they are asked to identify a specific
period of conflict. A small number of men in our cohorts report that they are veterans but not Vietnam veterans. For
1990, we define Reservists or National Guard members as non-veterans to match the veteran definition in the 1980 and
2000 Censuses. We also omit those living in group quarters.
22 Specifically, we drop observations with imputed values for age, education, birth place, and veteran status. Our results

are not sensitive to including the imputed values and those living in group quarters or on active duty in the military.


                                                            20
the year his cohort turned 19, and (b) the log of the number of respondents from a birth state and

year cohort in the 1960 Census. Together, these approximate the changes in labor demand and labor

supply which may have occurred alongside changes in state-level induction risk.23

         Our endogenous variables, C and V, are predicted from first stage equations that include the

remaining right hand side covariates in equation (13) plus functions of staterisk and nationalrisk as

defined in (10) and (11), respectively. Our main results show estimates from three different first

stage specifications. In the first, staterisk and nationalrisk are entered linearly. The second and third

specifications include quadratic and cubic functions of both risk measures, respectively. In results

not shown, our inspection of the relationship between our identifying state risk variation and our

covariates of interest (veteran status and college completion) suggests that the relationship may be

non-linear, in which case including higher order risk terms is appropriate. This is an advance over

MW that is especially relevant here because there has been discussion in the literature about

alternative specifications in identifying the impact of education on health (Lleras-Muney, 2005;

Mazumder, 2008). Estimation is done via standard linear 2SLS as well as LIML for the higher order

specifications, weighted by the number of observations in each state-cohort cell.24 We follow

Bertrand et al. (2004) and cluster standard errors at the birth state level after collapsing our data to

birth state-cohort cells.25

         Descriptive statistics are shown in Table 1, which summarizes the variables used in our

analysis for the sample of white men born between 1942 and 1953. The average cumulative


23 The literature tends to find no consistent, significant relationship between local labor market conditions and college

attendance (Wozniak, 2010; Card and Lemieux, 2001). However, early labor market conditions affect longer-run labor
market outcomes (Wozniak, 2010; Kahn, 2010; Oreopoulos, et al., 2012) and labor market outcomes have been linked to
later adult health (Sullivan and von Wachter, 2009). We do not include fertility and marriage rates as controls since these
may be endogenous to education and may therefore interfere with identification of education’s total effect on mortality.
24 See Wooldridge (2002) pp. 622-624 concerning 2SLS versus an approach with a probit first stage when the

endogenous variable is a dummy variable. In some cases, the latter is more efficient but may tend to produce larger point
estimates. Given our concerns about possible upward bias, we implement 2SLS estimation.
25 Because our mortality measures combine Census data with data on the universe of mortality outcomes, we do not

further correct our standard errors to account for multiple data sources, as for example, in two-sample IV.


                                                            21
mortality rate per 1,000 persons as defined in (12) is 138.58. Table 1 also gives mortality rates by

cause-of-death for ten important causes for these cohorts, in order of prevalence. The most

common causes of death were cancers (36.5 per 1,000 white men) and heart disease (35.7/1,000).

External causes (accidental injury, suicide, and homicide) accounted for 23.0 deaths per 1,000 men.

Figure 2 shows the fraction of deaths attributable to common causes by age for our cohorts. For

younger men, external causes like accidental injury and suicide are the leading causes of death, but by

their forties cancer and heart disease are the leading causes.



V. Results

A. First Stage Results

         Table 2 presents results from estimating the first stage, with linear, quadratic, and cubic

specifications of the risk measures. For transparency, we estimate two first stage equations for each

specification—predicting college graduation and veteran status separately—although 2SLS estimates

these equations jointly. Consistent with the manner in which 2SLS identifies endogenous variables,

both equations include national and state cohort risk as identifying variables. We also report the

Cragg and Donald (1993) F-statistic for identifiability developed in 3.A, the Angrist-Pischke F-

statistics, and the traditional single equation first stage F-statistics.

         The first two columns show results from the linear specification. A 10 percentage point

increase in national cohort risk (roughly the entire range of this variable) increased the percent with a

college degree by 9.4 percentage points. In other words, cohorts with higher national risk were

more likely to graduate college.26 Coefficients from the quadratic and cubic specifications also

indicate an overall positive relationship between higher national risk and college graduation over the


26 The comparable estimate from Table 1 in Card and Lemieux (2001) shows a 4.6 percentage point increase. Our

estimate is larger because we restrict the sample to whites. When we do not make this restriction, our estimates are very
close to those in Card and Lemieux.


                                                           22
range of the risk variable. On the other hand, college graduation is negatively related to state cohort

risk when national induction risk is included, particularly in the linear and quadratic specifications.

As discussed in MW, this may be an artifact of the high correlation (collinearity) between national

and state level risk. Across specifications, the F-statistics suggest both that we meet the

identification assumptions in our model (implied by the Cragg-Donald statistics) and that this first

stage has substantial power (implied by the Angrist-Pischke F statistics).27

           The first stage estimates with veteran status as the dependent variable show that veteran

status positively varies with both national and state cohort risk. This is reassuring since higher rates

of induction risk at both the state and national level should lead more young men to go to war. We

interpret the fact that the coefficient on national risk exceeds the one on state risk in the veteran

equation to mean that the time series variation in draft risk generated by the massive fluctuation in

military manpower demands is responsible for more of the variation in veteran status than are the

differences in induction risk across states.

B. OLS and 2SLS Effects of College Education on Total Mortality

           Table 3 presents our OLS and 2SLS estimates of the effect of college graduation on

cumulative mortality (equation 13). For the IV results, we show specifications in which the

induction risk variables are linear, quadratic, and cubic. For the quadratic and cubic specifications

the model is over-identified, so we can estimate the model using both 2SLS and limited-information

maximum likelihood (LIML). We do this to further investigate the validity of our instruments—

LIML is less precise than 2SLS but is also less biased in the presence of confounding variables. If

the coefficients from the two approaches are similar, this is evidence that the bias in 2SLS is small

(Angrist and Pischke 2009).

           The OLS coefficient for college graduation is -101.97. This indicates that increasing college


27   Reduced form results available upon request.


                                                     23
completion rates from the level of the state with the lowest rates to that with the highest (a 42

percentage point change) is associated with 42.8 fewer deaths per 1,000 men. This is consistent with

the well-documented educational gradient in most health outcomes. Veteran status is also negatively

associated with mortality for these cohorts, but it is less clear what we should expect for the sign on

this coefficient, even in our OLS estimates. There are two reasons for this. First, we observe

mortality conditional on surviving to 1980. Veteran status may increase mortality at young ages, both

via combat injuries and death but also through risky behavior (Hearst et al., 1986). Less is known

about the relationship between veteran status and health in the longer term, and the existing studies

find mixed evidence, as noted above.

        Table 3, Column [2] shows the point estimates of the causal effect of college graduation and

veteran status on mortality using a linear specification for the instruments. The results are

remarkably similar to the OLS estimates, though they are less precise. With the quadratic

specification, the estimated effect of college graduation is substantially larger and is statistically

significant; with the cubic specification the point estimates are again very close to OLS and are

statistically significant. In columns [3] through [6], the 2SLS and LIML results are nearly identical,

further supporting our identification strategy. Taken together, the 2SLS results imply a large causal

role for both college graduation and veteran status in reducing cumulative mortality for these

cohorts. The magnitude of our estimated impacts is also economically significant. For example, the

estimate from Table 3, Column [5], implies that increasing college completion rates from the level of

the state with the lowest rates to that with the highest (a 42 percentage point change) leads to 39.5

fewer deaths per 1,000 men.

        Table 3 shows the impact of high college completion rates on later mortality is robust to

three specifications of the first stage equation. We have examined robustness to other alternative

specifications. In results not shown but available upon request, we substitute a common quadratic



                                                     24
time trend for the linear birth region trends. Results are very similar. We have also verified that our

estimates are robust to excluding the non-linear state-cohort varying controls (employment to

population ratio and log cohort size).

         A final check is shown in Appendix Table 1. Here we estimate our baseline OLS

specification on subgroups of the sample defined by birth year. The “late” cohorts, those born 1951-

1953, are somewhat different from the “early” cohorts, those born 1942-1944, and middle cohorts

in that they were partially exposed to the draft lottery and had access to more generous GI Bill

benefits upon release. One might be concerned that the late cohorts drive our results. If so, this

might raise questions about our identification strategy. We do not have the first stage power to

estimate our 2SLS specifications for a subset of only three cohorts.28 However, the late cohorts are

unlikely to contribute much to our estimates of the negative impact of college on mortality because

the OLS results show no college completion health gradient for them. This is likely because these

cohorts have not yet reached the ages where mortality is due to causes for which college completion

has a greater effect (something we show in more detail later). We therefore view our main results as

robust to concerns about differential policy treatment across cohorts.

         Returning to our main analysis, one might wonder whether the effect of education on

mortality changes over time, since the causes of death vary considerably over the period, as Figure 2

shows. In Table 4, we show OLS and IV estimates for the effect of college completion rates on

mortality by decade. In these and most remaining results, we show results for the cubic 2SLS

specification only.29 For each decade, this measure is the total number of deaths over the decade

(1981-1990, 1991-2000, 2001-2007) divided by the cohort size in the beginning of the decade (taken


28 We generally lose first stage power when we drop more than two cohorts from the analysis.
29 We choose to show the cubic specification because the estimates are generally more precise, but results using lower
order polynomial functional forms for the first stage equations are qualitatively similar. De Walque (2007) uses a non-
linear specification of induction risk to instrument for both education and veteran status. The 2SLS and LIML results
for decadal mortality are similar using the cubic functional form (though more so for 1980 and 2000 than for 1990),
which again suggests that the bias from using 2SLS is small.


                                                           25
from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses, respectively). These shorter-term mortality rates allow us

to determine whether the role of education changes as the likely reasons for mortality evolve.30

         For each decade, college graduation and veteran status are negatively associated with

mortality. For the 1980s (where the first stage is strongest), IV results are again very similar to OLS.

The estimated effect of increased college attainment on mortality during the 1980s is -24.38;

increasing college education from the level of the least educated birth state-cohort to the highest

would decrease mortality by 10.2 per 1,000 men (or 40% relative to the mean). For the 1990s and

2000s, the IV estimates are larger than the OLS estimates and indicate that moving from the lowest-

education birth state-cohort to the highest would decrease mortality by 61% and 57% relative to the

mean, respectively. Results for these decades are less precise, however, which may be driven by the

weaker first stage for college graduation (first-stage F-statistics are reported in the table). So while

we interpret these results with caution, there is little evidence that the negative effect of college

education on total mortality is confined to a particular decade. Veteran status has a negative and

statistically significant negative effect on mortality in all periods.

C. OLS and 2SLS Effects of College Education on Mortality by Cause of Death

         Table 5 shows the effect of state-cohort college graduation rates on leading causes of death

for men in these cohorts. Causes are shown in descending order of prevalence between 1980 and

2007. OLS results are in Panel A and 2SLS results are in Panel B. Again, all specifications include

birth region trends and a control for veteran status. For cancer and heart disease—the two leading

causes of death—the point estimates on college graduate are negative and statistically significant for

both OLS and IV and are larger for IV. Moving from the lowest-education birth state-cohort to the


30 Ideally, we would construct mortality rates by age, rather than by decade (for example, rates for men in their forties).

However, to construct the denominators for the mortality rates, we would need to know the number alive at certain
ages, by birth state. We would also need the average education level and veteran status for the cell. These cannot be
constructed from the Census since it is only conducted every 10 years, and the SEER population counts are not available
by state of birth and do not have information on education and veteran status.


                                                            26
highest would reduce cancer deaths by 25.9 per 1,000 (71% relative to the mean) and heart disease

deaths by 18.9 (42% relative to the mean). The effect of veteran status on mortality due to these

causes is also negative, though not statistically significant for heart disease.

        In results not shown here, we estimated the model for deaths by specific type of cancer.

Lung cancer accounts for nearly one-third of the cancer deaths in our sample; the next leading

specific cause is colon cancer, which accounts for about 10% of cancer deaths. The IV estimate of

the effect of a college degree on lung cancer is -35.59 (s.e. = 5.09), suggesting that 57% of the

decline in total cancer deaths is due to lung cancer. This is greater than the decline that would be

observed if college education had an equal effect on deaths from all cancers. That college education

has a particularly big effect on death from lung cancer is not surprising, as De Walque (2007) and

Grimard and Parent (2007) both find that education has a large and statistically significant negative

effect on smoking. Cigarette smoking is known to be a leading cause of both lung cancer and

cardiovascular (heart) disease (Chaloupka and Warner, 2000).

        College education has a negative and statistically significant effect on mortality from three

other causes: diabetes, stroke, and chronic low respiratory conditions (CLRCs). In the IV

specifications, a college degree decreases deaths per 1,000 white men from both diabetes and stroke

by 7 and from CLRCs by 9. The latter effect is especially large and is also likely related to the effect

of college on the likelihood of smoking, since smoking is a known cause of CLRCs like chronic

bronchitis and emphysema (Chaloupka and Warner, 2000). Veteran status decreases deaths due to

chronic low respiratory conditions and stroke, while its effect on diabetes is small and statistically

insignificant at the 5 percent level.

        The OLS results show a negative association between a college degree and death by two

external causes—accidental injury and homicide. But for both of these, the IV coefficient is smaller

and statistically insignificant. There is also no evidence that college decreases deaths by suicide.



                                                     27
Veteran status, however, does decrease deaths due to accidents and suicide, conditional on surviving

to 1980.

         Finally, for infectious and parasitic diseases and liver diseases, the point estimate for college

graduate is negative in the OLS specification but positive and statistically significant in the 2SLS

specifications. For infectious and parasitic diseases, 78% of deaths for these cohorts were due to

HIV alone, and HIV deaths are driving the positive coefficient. There are several ways in which

college-going might increase one’s risk of contracting HIV during this period. For example, college-

going is associated with living in an urban area and engaging in same-sex relationships, which are

significant risk factors for contracting HIV (Shilts 1987).31 Liver diseases, on the other hand, include

cirrhosis which can be caused by excessive alcohol consumption—48% of deaths to cirrhosis in

2007 were alcohol-related (Yoon and Yi, 2010). If a college degree increases this behavior, graduates

may be more at risk for liver diseases.32 We investigate the relationship between college education

and alcohol consumption in the next section. The effect of veteran status on deaths by infectious

diseases and liver disease is negative.

         The results in Tables 3, 4, and 5 indicate that college education has a negative effect on total

mortality; that the effect was not confined to any particular decade; and that deaths due to heart

disease and cancer are particularly affected. A college education has a particularly strong negative

effect on deaths from causes related to smoking.




31 About half of all HIV cases in the U.S. are for men who have sex with men (Center for Disease Control 1997).

Lambert et al. (2006) find that upper-class college students had more positive attitudes toward gay and lesbians than
underclassmen, suggesting that college increases acceptance of homosexuality. Smith (1991) found that among
respondents to the General Social Survey in 1989, college graduates were more likely to have engaged in risky sexual
behaviors than less educated groups, although shares in the highest risk group were similar across education levels. Smith
also finds that risky behavior is significantly higher among younger and more urban individuals, who are more likely to
be college educated.
32 Competing risks may also explain these positive coefficients, (as well as the coefficients on other specific causes of

death). Since the first two columns in the table indicate that college prevented some men from dying of cancer and heart
disease, these men may now be more susceptible to death by other causes (Honoré and Lleras-Muney, 2006).


                                                           28
VI. Potential Mechanisms

        A number of potential mechanisms might explain the negative effect of college completion

on cumulative mortality and the heterogeneity in the effects across specific causes of death. For

example, if the college educated are less likely to smoke and more likely to drink, this may explain

the negative coefficient on cancer and the positive coefficient on liver disease, respectively. Mokdad

et al. (2004) find that behavioral factors such as smoking, obesity, and excessive alcohol

consumption represent almost half of the “actual” causes of death in the United States in 2000.

Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010) describe the role of cognition, resources, prices, and health

behaviors in mediating the relationship between education and health for nationally-representative

populations in the US and UK. In this section, we focus on our cohort in particular and explore

whether we can find evidence supporting or refuting potential mechanisms that would explain the

cause-of-death mortality results.

        First, using data from the Census, we examine the causal relationship between education and

earnings or wages for our cohort. Second, we assess the impact on access to health insurance in the

2008-2010 American Community Survey (ACS) and 1980 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS)

Health Insurance Supplement. Finally, using data from the 1985 National Health Interview Survey

(NHIS), Health Promotion and Disease Prevention (HPDP) Supplement, we consider acute health

outcomes, including diabetes, hypertension, and BMI, and health behaviors, including smoking,

exercise, and alcohol consumption.

A. Earnings and Wages

        An extensive literature demonstrates that increased schooling is causally related to higher

wages and earnings (Card, 1999). To the extent that higher income enables individuals to purchase

better health care or acquire a healthier lifestyle, it represents a potentially important mechanism in

explaining the relationship between education and mortality. Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010)



                                                   29
demonstrate that family income is an important mediating factor between education and health.

However, health may directly affect earnings potential, so these results must be interpreted only as

suggestive evidence of a possible mechanism. We examine this potential mechanism by estimating

the effect of college completion on wages and earnings for cohorts who came of age during the

Vietnam War. Using data from the 1980 Census, Table 6 presents OLS and IV estimates based on

our preferred cubic first-stage specification.33

         The OLS estimates for log earnings indicate that a cohort moving from a 0 to 100 percent

college completion rate is associated with an increase of 43 percent in earnings for that cohort. Thus,

increasing college completion rates from the level of the state with the lowest rates to that with the

highest (a 42 percentage point change) is associated with 18 percent higher wages for the more

educated cohort. The IV estimate suggests that college completion causes a significant increase in

earnings of approximately 78 percent. The OLS estimate for hourly wages indicates that moving

from a 0 to 100 percent college completion rate is associated with an increase in hourly wages of 23

percent. The IV specifications yield large and significant impacts indicating that universal college

completion would raise wages by about 40 percent. As with the earnings results, we cannot reject

that the IV estimates are significantly different from the OLS estimates.

         These findings suggest that wages and earnings may be an important mediating factor in the

effect of education on health. If health is a normal good, we expect that higher incomes would lead

to lower mortality rates. However, quantifying the causal effect of income on mortality is difficult

due to the endogeneity of income (Smith, 1999). International studies find no difference in

mortality rates by average income differences between countries (e.g., Wilkenson, 1996). So while it

is plausible that the effect of college graduate rates on mortality rates operates through earnings and

wages, we explore other potential mechanisms as well.

33All of the regressions are restricted to full-time workers. Hourly wages are further truncated to remove the bottom and
top 0.5 percent in order to reduce measurement error.


                                                           30
B. Health Insurance Measures in the American Community Survey

        We consider the role of health insurance as an additional potential mechanism through

which education might reduce mortality. Earning a college degree qualifies individuals for jobs that

are more likely to include benefits such as employer-provided health insurance (Hipple and Stewart,

1996). Health insurance has been linked to better access to preventative care, which should lead to

better health and lower mortality, all else equal (Miller, 2012). However, Finkelstein and McKnight

(2008) find that the introduction of Medicare, i.e., nearly universal access to health insurance after

age 65, had very little impact on mortality rates. When considering health insurance status among

those under age 65, those with poorer health or who are at higher risk of needing expensive medical

services might be more inclined to purchase health insurance, complicating the measurement of a

causal effect of health insurance on mortality. Here we explore whether college attainment is

associated with a higher probability of being covered by health insurance in order to assess whether

access to health insurance is a channel through which education might improve health.

        Our primary data on insurance comes from the 2008-2010 ACS. In Section VI.C, below, we

present parallel results using the 1980 NHIS Health Insurance Supplement which confirm these

main findings. We first explore whether the individual has any health insurance; we then consider

private and public health insurance coverage separately. Private health insurance includes both

employer-provided health insurance and plans that individuals purchase in the private market. We

anticipate that having a college degree is associated with a higher probability of having private health

insurance. Our public health insurance measure includes Medicaid, Medicare and disability, and the

veteran’s health insurance program CHAMPUS. We therefore anticipate that veterans are much

more likely to have public health insurance coverage. We expect that both having a college degree

and being a veteran are associated with a higher probability of having any health insurance. Note

that in the ACS individuals can be classified as having both private and public health insurance.



                                                   31
        The main results are reported in Table 7. The IV estimates suggest that increasing college

completion rates from the level of the state with the lowest rates to that with the highest (a 42

percentage point change) leads to a 5.7 percentage point higher rate of having any health insurance

coverage (which is about 6.1 percent of the mean of 92.4). Next, we consider private coverage.

While the coefficient on college graduate is only significant in the OLS specification, the magnitude

is similar in both OLS and IV and suggests that a cohort having a 100 percent college graduation

rate versus 0 percent is associated with a 10-16 percentage point higher probability of individuals in

that cohort having private health insurance coverage. Finally, we see that rates of college

completion are unrelated to public coverage rates, although the OLS relationship is negative.

Veterans have higher rates of public coverage in both the OLS and IV specifications, which appears

to drive their higher rates of coverage overall.

C. Health Insurance Measures in the National Health Interview Survey

        We next present results for access to health insurance from the more detailed 1980 National

Health Interview Survey (NHIS) Health Insurance Supplement. The 1980 NHIS is chosen because

this is the baseline year from our mortality analysis. Estimation using the NHIS data necessitates

some changes in our specifications since we cannot observe state of birth or state of residence (but

we do observe the Census region of residence) in the public use versions of the NHIS. We

therefore estimate our insurance models using individual-level data, rather than data aggregated to

the birth state-birth year cohort level. Our econometric model for the NHIS data is the following:

(14)                                                                δ

where i indexes individuals, r indexes region of residence, and c indexes birth year. Here the

dependent variable is an indicator for either any insurance coverage, private coverage, or public

coverage. The variable V is an indicator for whether the individual is a veteran, and C is an

indicator for whether the individual has a college degree. In addition, trend is a region-specific linear


                                                   32
trend in birth cohort, and δ represents region of residence dummies. Note that because of the lack

of state identifiers in the NHIS, we cannot use the set of state-cohort level controls described above

(the employment to population ratio and the cohort size).

         We do not present results using instrumental variables with the NHIS data because of power

issues. The 1980 Census sample is over 200 times larger than the 1980 wave of the NHIS. Although

theoretically one could merge together data from three decades of the NHIS using restricted-access

data that includes state of birth, even then the sample size is not sufficient to have a strong first

stage.34 Thus, using the NHIS data, we present results from linear probability model regressions,

with standard errors clustered by region of residence. We also report the sample size for each

specification and the mean of the dependent variable.

         The results are reported in the top of Table 8. We see that the OLS estimates for health

insurance coverage using the 1980 NHIS are very similar to those from the more recent ACS data,

with the exception of the probability of having public health insurance coverage. We find that being

a college graduate is associated with a 9.4 percentage point higher probability of having any health

insurance, which is approximately 10 percent of the mean of 89 percent. Similarly, college graduates

are 11.1 percentage points more likely to have private health insurance coverage than non-college

graduates.

         When we consider public health insurance coverage, we see some differences. In the NHIS,

individuals can be classified as having public coverage only if they do not have any private health

insurance coverage. Those that do not have private insurance or Medicare are asked to state the

reason, to which they may respond, among other things, that they receive services through Medicaid,

welfare, or CHAMPUS. Only 2 percent of the sample report having any public insurance coverage


34 Results using pooled data from the 1997-2009 NHIS are available upon request, but show a weak first-stage and no

statistically significant coefficients in 2SLS. The power issues arise because we are limited to looking at men from only
11 birth year cohorts. Other studies using the NHIS (e.g. DeWalque 2007) use larger samples.


                                                            33
in the NHIS. The restrictiveness of the definition contributes to the differences between this figure

and the one based on the ACS, where 17.9 percent have public coverage. Our cohort is also

younger in 1980, so these men are much less likely to be disabled and qualify for Medicare than they

will be at ages 55-64. Indeed, when we look at individuals who are ages 55-64 in 1980 (born

between 1916-1925), we see that 11.9 percent have public health insurance coverage, which is much

closer to the ACS mean. Although the estimated coefficient on college graduate is much larger in

the ACS data, the effect size relative to the sample mean is quite similar between the two datasets.

In the NHIS data, we do not see any association between veteran’s status and public health

insurance coverage, while the effect is positive and significant in the ACS. Taken together, these

results confirm that access to health insurance is another potential mechanism through which

college attainment could improve health and reduce mortality.

D. Acute Health Outcomes and Health Behaviors in the National Health Interview Survey

        Our final set of results considers how acute health conditions and health behaviors are

associated with college attainment and veteran status for our cohort of men. Here we use the 1985

NHIS Health Promotion and Disease Prevention (HPDP) Supplement, which allows us to measure

outcomes for our particular cohort as close to the 1980 baseline year as possible. We again estimate

equation (14) at the individual-level, but where the dependent variable is a measure of either a health

outcome or a health behavior. We report estimated coefficients on college graduate and veteran

status in the bottom of Table 8.

        We first consider several acute health measures that could help to explain the association

between education and mortality. First, we find that college graduates have significantly lower body

mass index (BMI) and are significantly less likely to be obese. We find that college graduates are 3.9

percentage points more likely to report having been under a lot of stress in the past two weeks

relative to non-college graduates. This result is in contrast to the finding in Table 5 that college



                                                   34
graduates are significantly less likely to die from heart disease. However, it may be that higher stress

levels among college graduates are due to reporting differences across education groups, rather than

true underlying stress levels. We do not find any relationship between being a college graduate and

the probability of missing work or having restricted activity or bed days in the past two weeks.

        The bottom of Table 8 explores a series of health behaviors that Cutler and Lleras-Muney

(2010) identify as important mediating factors between education and health. Consistent with prior

literature, we find that college graduates in our cohorts are less likely to smoke while veterans are

more likely to smoke. Similarly, we see that college graduates are more likely to exercise. Therefore,

we observe that college graduates are exhibiting healthier behaviors than non-college graduates,

while veterans are more likely to smoke. The evidence on heavy drinking is mixed. According to

Table 8, college graduates report similar levels of heavy drinking to less educated respondents in two

of the three categories, but lower levels of heavy drinking in the third category. This behavior alone

is therefore unlikely to explain the increase in mortality from liver disease seen in Table 5, although

competing risks (and reporting differences across education groups) may explain the higher

mortality rates from liver disease among college graduates. Health behaviors also cannot explain the

protective effect of veteran status on mortality.



VII. Conclusion

        This paper examines the causal impact of a college education on early adult mortality. We

exploit changes in national and state-level risk of induction into military service during the Vietnam

conflict as a source of exogenous variation in college completion. Using Census data from 1980 to

2000 and Vital Statistics data from 1981 to 2007, we show that the magnitude of causal impacts of

higher cohort college completion rates estimated by 2SLS is quite similar to the OLS gradient. In our

cohorts, these estimates indicate that increasing college completion rates from the level of the birth-



                                                    35
state with the lowest rate to that with the highest would decrease deaths by about 39 per 1,000 men.

This is equivalent to 28 percent of the mean of total mortality over our period, or a full standard

deviation in birth state-cohort mortality. Alternatively, given the fraction of our sample with a

college degree, our IV coefficient indicates that mortality rates over the period are about 2.21 times

greater for non-college graduates than for college graduates. 35 We find large negative effects of

college completion on deaths from cancer and heart disease, the leading causes of mortality among

older adults. Increasing college completion rates in the lowest-education birth state-cohort to that

of the highest would reduce early cancer deaths by 25.9 per 1,000 (71% relative to the mean) and

early heart disease deaths by 18.9 (42% relative to the mean).

         For comparison, 10-year mortality rates for 50-year old men in the U.S. are 2.6 times higher

for smokers than for non-smokers (Woloshin et al. 2008).36 We find that non-college graduates are

over twice as likely to report being a smoker in 1985 relative to college graduates. Thus, smoking

alone could explain a large portion of the mortality differential we find. We also shed some light on

other potential mechanisms for the effect of college education on mortality by examining the causal

effect of college completion on auxiliary outcomes such as health insurance and earnings, as well as

the cross-sectional relationship between college completion and various health behaviors such as

smoking, exercise, and obesity. Using data from the Census and the American Community Survey

and employing the same IV strategy used to establish the mortality results, we show that increased

college completion leads to both higher earnings and higher rates of health insurance. Using data

from the National Health Interview Study, we show that college completion is also associated with

less smoking and more exercise for our cohorts of interest.37 These results suggest that the impact of


35 To see this, note that with 35% of the sample having a college degree and a mean mortality rate of 138.58, the

coefficient implies that mortality rates would be 171.5 for non-college graduates and 77.5 for college graduates.
36 A study of Norwegian men found that mortality by age 70 (conditional on living to age 40) was 2.9 times higher for

smokers than non-smokers (Vollset et al. 2006).
37 See Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010) for similar results in the NHIS for a broader set of cohorts.




                                                          36
college completion on overall mortality may partially operate through greater financial and health

resources, and that the impacts on cancer (especially lung cancer) and heart disease may be partially

explained by the differences in behavior between college graduates and non-graduates.

        The findings in this paper indicate that there is a large return to schooling on health at the

top part of the education distribution. Given that higher education policy in recent years has been

focused on increasing college completion, this represents a particularly important margin of analysis.

Of course, whether these findings would point towards education subsidies depends on the presence

of market failures, either in the form of externalities, credit constraints, or lack of knowledge about

the health benefits of college graduation. To the extent that this paper provides useful information

about the benefits of college completion in reducing adult mortality, we hope that it may address

one possible source of inefficient investments in human capital.




                                                   37
References
Albouy, Valerie, and Lequien, Laurent. 2009. “Does Compulsory Education Lower Mortality?”
Journal of Health Economics, 28(1): 155-168.
Angrist, Joshua, Chen, Stacey, and Brigham Frandsen. 2010. “Did Vietnam Veterans Get Sicker in
the 1990s? The Complicated Effects of Military Service on Self-Reported Health,” Journal of Public
Economics, 94 (11-12): 824-837.
Angrist, Joshua and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s
Companion. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Arendt, Jacob Nielsen. 2005. “Does Education Cause Better Health? A Panel Data Analysis Using
School Reforms for Identification.” Economics of Education Review, 24(2): 149-160.
Bearman, Peter; Kathryn M. Neckerman; and Leslie Wright. 2011. After Tobacco: What Would Happen
if Americans Stopped Smoking? New York: Columbia University Press.
Bertrand, Marianne; Esther Duflo; and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should We Trust
Difference-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 119(1): 249-275.
Bitler, Marianne and Lucie Schmidt. 2012. “Birth Rates and the Vietnam Draft.” American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings, 102(3): 566-569.
Black, Dan A.; Mark C. Berger; and Frank A Scott. 2000. “Bounding Parameter Estimates with
Nonclassical Measurement Error,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, Sep 2000, 95(451): 739-
738.

Black, Dan; Seth Sanders; and Lowell Taylor. 2003. “Measurement of Higher Education in the
Census and Current Population Survey,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, Sep 2003, 98
(463): 545-554.

Card, David. 1999. “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings.” Handbook of Labor Economics. Vol
3. Ed. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. Elsevier Science B.V.

Card, David, and Lemieux, Thomas. 2000. “Going to College to Avoid the Draft: The Unintended
Legacy of the Vietnam War.” Manuscript. Vancouver, Canada: University of British Columbia (2000).
Card, David, and Lemieux, Thomas. 2001. “Going to College to Avoid the Draft: The Unintended
Legacy of the Vietnam War,” American Economic Review, 91(2001): 97-102.
Center for Disease Control. 1997. “Update: Trends in AIDS Incidence -- United States, 1996,”
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 46(37): 861-867.
Chaloupka, Frank, and Kenneth Warner. 2000. “The Economics of Smoking.” In Culyer and
Newhouse (Ed.), Handbook of Health Economics, Vol. 1, Part B, Elsevier.
Clark, Damon and Heather Royer. 2010. “The Effect of Education on Adult Health and Mortality:
Evidence from Britain” NBER Working Paper No. 16013.



                                                   38
Conley, Dalton and Jennifer Heerwig. 2009. “The Long-Term Effects of Military Conscription on
Mortality: Estimates from the Vietnam-Era Draft Lottery.” NBER Working Paper No. 15105.
Cragg, John G. and Stephen G. Donald. 1993. “Testing Identifiability and Specification in
Instrumental Variable Models.” Econometric Theory, 9: 222-240.
Cutler, David M. and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2010. “Understanding Differences in Health Behaviors
by Education.” Journal of Health Economics, 29(1): 1-28.
Davis, Jr., James W., and Dolbeare, Kenneth M. Little Groups of Neighbors: The Selective Service System.
Chicago: Markham Publishing Company (1968).
De Walque, D. 2007. “Does education affect smoking behaviors?: Evidence using the Vietnam draft
as an instrument for college education," Journal of Health Economics, 26(5): 877-895.
Dobkin, Carlos and Shabani, Reza. 2007. “The Health Effects of Military Service: Evidence from
the Vietnam Draft” Economic Inquiry, 47(1): 69–80.
Finkelstein, Amy, and Robin McKnight. 2008. "What did Medicare do? The initial impact of
Medicare on mortality and out of pocked medical spending," Journal of Public Economics, 92(7): 1644-
1668.
Grimard, F. and D. Parent. 2007. “Education and Smoking: Were Vietnam War Draft Avoiders Also
More Likely to Avoid Smoking?” Journal of Health Economics, 26(5): 896-926.
Grossman, Michael, 2006. "Education and Nonmarket Outcomes," Handbook of the Economics of
Education, Elsevier.
Hearst, Norman, Thomas Newman and Stephen Hulley. 1986. “Delayed Effects of the Military
Draft on Mortality.” New England Journal of Medicine, 314: 620-624.
Hipple, Steven, and Jay Stewart. 1996. “Earnings and Benefits of Workers in Alternative Work
Arrangements,” Monthly Labor Review, October 1996, 119(10): 46-54.

Honoré, Bo and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2006. “Bounds in Competing Risks Models and the War on
Cancer.” Econometrica, 74(6): 1675-1698.

Kahn, Lisa. 2010. “The Long-Term Labor Market Consequences of Graduating from College in a
Bad Economy.” Labour Economics 17(2).

Kane, Thomas; Cecilia Rouse and Douglas Staiger. 1999. “Estimating Returns to Schooling When
Schooling is Misreported.” Industrial Relations Section Working Paper #419. Princeton University.

Lambert, Eric, Lois Ventura, Daniel Hall, and Terry Cluse-Tolar. 2006. “College Students’ Views
on Gay and Lesbian Issues: Does Education Make a Difference?” Journal of Homosexuality, 50(4): 1-
30.

Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2005. “The Relationship between Education and Adult Mortality in the
United States.” Review of Economic Studies, 72, 189-221.



                                                    39
MacInnis, Bo. 2006. “The Long-Term Effects of College Education on Morbidities: New Evidence
from the Pre-Lottery Vietnam Draft,” mimeo, University of Michigan.
Malamud, Ofer and Wozniak, Abigail. Forthcoming. “The Impact of College on Migration:
Evidence from the Vietnam Generation.” Journal of Human Resources.
Mazumder, Bhashkar. 2008. “Does Education Improve Health? A Reexamination of the Evidence
from Compulsory Schooling Laws.” Economic Perspectives. 32(2): 2-16.
Meghir, Costas; Marten Palme; and Emilia Simeonova. 2012. “Education, Health, and Mortality:
Evidence from a Social Experiment.” IZA Discussion Paper #6462.
Miller, Sarah. 2012. “The Impact of the Massachusetts Health Care Reform on Health Care Use
among Children.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 102(3): 502-07.
Mokdad, A.H., Marks, J.S., Stroup, D.F, Gerberding, J.L., 2004. “Actual causes of death in the
United States 2000.” Journal of the American Medical Association, 291(10): 1238-1245.
Office of the Vice President. Press release for March 22, 2011. “Vice President Issues Call to Action
to Boost College Graduation Rates Nationwide.” http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-
office/2011/03/22/vice-president-biden-issues-call-action-boost-college-graduation-rates-n.
Accessed 29 May 2012.
Oreopoulos, Philip; Till von Wachter, and Andrew Heisz. 2012. “Short- and Long-Term Career
Effects of Graduating in a Recession.” American Economic Journal: Applied. 4(1): 1-29.
Rothenberg, Leslie S. The Draft and You: A Handbook on Selective Service. New York: Doubleday &
Company, Inc. Anchor Books (1968).
Ruggles, Steven; and Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patricia
Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 3.0
[Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center [producer and
distributor], 2004. URL: www.ipums.org.
Shilts, Randy. 1987. And the Band Played On. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Smith, James P. 1999. “Healthy bodies and thick wallets: The dual relationship between health and
economic status,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13(2): 145-166.
U.S. Selective Service. “Semiannual Report of the Director of Selective Service.” Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office. Various issues from 1967 to 1973.
Shapiro, Andrew O. and Striker, John M. Mastering the Draft: A Comprehensive Guide to Solving Draft
Problems. Boston: Little, Brown and Company (1970).
Smith, Tom W. 1991. “Adult Sexual Behavior in 1989: Numbers of Partners, Frequency of
Intercourse and Risk of AIDS.” Family Planning Perspectives. 23(3): 102-107.
Sullivan, Daniel and Till von Wachter. 2009. “Job Displacement and Mortality: An Analysis Using
Administrative Data.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 124(3): 1265-1306.
Tatum, Arlo and Tuchinsky, Joseph S. Guide to the Draft. 2nd Edition. Boston: Beacon Press (1969).


                                                  40
Turner, Sarah. 2004. “Going to College and Finishing College: Explaining Different Educational
Outcomes.” In College Decisions: How Students Actually Make Them and How They Could, ed. Caroline
Hoxby. University of Chicago Press for NBER.
United States National Advisory Commission on Selective Service. 1967. “In Pursuit of Equity: Who
Serves When Not All Serve?” Report. Washington D.C. : U.S. Government Printing Office.
Vollset, S.E., A. Tverdal, H.K. Giessing. 2006. “Smoking and Deaths between 40 and 70 Years of
Age in Women and Men.” Annals of Internal Medicine, 144(6): 381-389.
Woloshin, Steven, Lisa Schwartz and H. Gilbert Welch. 2008. “The Risk of Death by Age, Sex, and
Smoking Status in the United States: Putting Health Risks in Context.” Journal of the National Cancer
Institute, 100(12): 845-853.

Wilkenson, Richard G., 1996. Unhealthy Societies; The Afflictions of Inequality. London, Routledge.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross-section and Panel Data. MIT Press:
Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Wozniak, Abigail. (2010) “Are College Graduates More Responsive to Distant Labor Market
Opportunities?” Journal of Human Resources.
Xu, J.Q., Kochanek K.D., Murphy S.L., Tejada-Vera B. (2010). Deaths: Final Data for 2007.
National Vital Statistics Reports, 58(19). National Center for Health Statistics: Hyattsville, MD.
Yoon, Young-Hee, and Hsiao-ye Yi. 2010. “Surveillance Report #88: Liver Cirrhosis Mortality in
the United States, 1970–2007.” Bethesda, MD: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism, Division of Epidemiology and Prevention Research.




                                                   41
                              Figure 1: Birth State-Birth Year Cohort Variation in Induction Risk


                                                                   Panel A: Induction Risk
              0.16



              0.14



              0.12



                       0.1



              0.08


      Induction risk




              0.06



              0.04



              0.02



                          0
                              1942    1943        1944      1945     1946        1947         1948      1949      1950      1951       1952   1953


                                     AK      AR        CO    IL     KY      LA          MA        MO        ND   PA      Aggregate National




                                             Panel B: Residual state induction risk
           0.04



           0.03



           0.02



           0.01



                          0
                              1942    1943        1944      1945     1946        1947         1948      1949      1950      1951       1952   1953


       -0.01
Residual induction risk




       -0.02



       -0.03



       -0.04

                                      AK          AR        CO       IL      KY              LA        MA        MO       ND          PA




                                                                                 42
                                              Panel C: Residual national induction risk

               0.04



               0.03



               0.02



               0.01



                              0
                                  1942   1943     1944   1945   1946    1947        1948    1949    1950    1951    1952   1953


           -0.01
    Residual induction risk




           -0.02



           -0.03



           -0.04

                                         AK      AR      CO     IL     KY      LA          MA      MO      ND      PA




Notes: Panel A plots state risk as defined in equation (10) for a selected set of states, as well as the aggregate
national risk calculated by summing enrollments and inductions over all states. Panel B plots residual state
risk adjusted for birth state fixed effects, birth year trend, and national risk as defined by equation (11). Panel
C plots residual national risk adjusted for birth state fixed effects, birth year trend, and state risk.




                                                                               43
             Figure 2: Fraction of Deaths Attributable to Common Causes, by Age




Source: Mortality Detail Files, 1981-2007.




                                             44
                                      Table 1: Summary Statistics

                VARIABLES                                               Mean           SD
                Census Data
                Years of Higher Education                                1.99         0.38
                College Graduate                                        0.3508       0.0666
                Veteran                                                 0.3092       0.1231
                Individual Observations                                     14,392,122

                Mortality Data
                1981-2007 Mortality Rates by Cause of Death:
                Total                                        138.58                   38.03
                Cancers                                                 36.52         15.18
                Heart Disease                                           35.73         13.99
                Accidental Injury                                       13.67          3.49
                Suicide                                                 7.31          1.37
                Infectious and Parasitic Diseases                       7.20          2.41
                Liver Disease                                            5.75          1.93
                Diabetes                                                 3.82          1.44
                Cerebrovascular Disease (Stroke)                        3.61          1.47
                Chronic Low Respiratory Disease                         3.21          2.16
                Homicide                                                1.98          0.97
                Total Deaths                                                 1,994,481
                State/Birth Year Cells                                          600


Notes: Census data are from the 5% sample of the 1980, 1990, and 2000 U. S. Census, available from
IPUMS. Mortality data are from the Vital Statistics Multiple Cause of Death files from 1980 to 2007. The
sample is restricted to white men born between 1942 and 1953. Veterans include any respondent that served
in active duty in the Vietnam War. Respondents currently in active duty are excluded. Means are weighted by
cell size. Mortality rates are deaths over the period per 1,000 population, where population is the cohort size
in 1980.




                                                      45
                Table 2: First Stage Estimates of Effect of Induction Risk on College Completion and Veteran Rates

                                                                          Dependent Variable:
                                   College                              College                               College
                                   Graduate           Veteran           Graduate            Veteran           Graduate           Veteran
 National Induction Risk           0.935**            2.349**           1.899**             2.865**           2.368**          1.237*
                                   (0.091)            (0.185)            (0.263)            (0.354)            (0.437)         (0.728)
 National Risk ^2                                                       -7.484**            -3.891*          -22.748**        25.194**
                                                                         (1.644)            (2.068)            (5.946)         (9.238)
 National Risk ^3                                                                                            101.276**       -154.080**
                                                                                                              (29.076)        (42.970)
 State Induction Risk              -0.240**           0.768**            -0.380             0.653**             0.588          1.171*
                                    (0.089)           (0.162)            (0.233)            (0.311)            (0.375)         (0.702)
 State Risk ^ 2                                                           0.770              0.627           -12.254**         -5.907
                                                                         (1.260)            (1.731)            (4.646)         (8.736)
 State Risk ^ 3                                                                                              54.507**          25.502
                                                                                                              (19.888)        (36.988)
 Cragg-Donald F-stat                         14.23                                 11.64                                13.14
 [p-value]                                   [0.00]                                [0.00]                               [0.00]
 Angrist-Pischke F-Stat             19.18             123.00             16.07              269.77             21.89             277.53
 F-Stat                             255.23            2154.74            169.47             1137.29            129.27            851.75


Notes: Standard errors are in parenthesis and are clustered by birth state. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level
respectively. Specification refers to the functional form of the induction risk variables in the first stage regression. See the text for a discussion of the
null hypotheses of the three F-statistics. See Table 1 notes for data sources, sample restrictions and variable definitions. Number of observations is 600
in each regression and regressions are weighted by cell size. Additional controls include birth state fixed effects, the employment to population ratio,
the cohort size (derived from the 1960 Census and defined at the birth-year level), and birth-region trends.




                                                                             46
         Table 3: OLS and IV Estimates for the Impact of College Completion Rates on Cumulative Mortality, 1980-2007

                                                                                      IV Specification:
                                                                                         Quadratic-
                                 OLS               Linear-2SLS         Quadratic-2SLS      LIML                       Cubic-2SLS            Cubic-LIML
                                  [1]                  [2]                  [3]             [4]                           [5]                   [6]
 College Graduate            -101.97***                -99.26             -170.76***            -172.46***             -93.93***             -93.53***
                               (19.59)                (77.55)                (38.34)              (39.22)               (25.56)                (26.69)
 Veteran Status               -46.36***             -42.93***              -27.21***             -26.82***             -44.45***             -44.50***
                                (5.14)                (16.43)                 (9.67)               (9.86)                (6.81)                 (7.03)
 Observations                    600                    600                   600                    600                   600                   600
 R-squared                      0.9516                0.9515                0.9505                 0.9504                0.9515                0.9515


Notes: Standard errors are in parenthesis and are clustered by birth state. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level
respectively. See Table 1 notes for data sources, sample restrictions and variable definitions. The IV specifications use the national and state-level
induction risk to instrument for college graduate and veteran status. The column headings indicate the functional form of the instruments in the first
stage equation (linear, quadratic, or cubic) and the choice of model (two-staged least squares or limited-information maximum likelihood). Number of
observations is 600 in each regression and regressions are weighted by cell size. Additional controls include birth state fixed effects, the employment to
population ratio, the cohort size (derived from the 1960 Census), and birth region trends.




                                                                              47
                 Table 4: OLS and IV Estimates for the Impact of College Completion Rates on Mortality by Decade

                                            1981-1990                                   1991-2000                                2001-2007
    VARIABLES                            OLS          IV                          OLS                IV                   OLS                  IV
    College Graduate                  -24.51***           -24.38***           -20.00**            -79.46***            -38.58***          -100.37***
                                        (4.56)              (6.43)             (9.10)              (30.46)              (11.26)             (37.05)
    Veteran Status                     -9.93***           -9.33***            -35.54***           -27.32***            -36.99***          -28.80***
                                        (1.10)             (1.36)               (2.20)              (4.49)               (2.53)             (6.06)

    Cragg-Donald F-Stat                          13.14                                     5.46                                      3.60
    [p-value]                                    [0.00]                                   [0.00]                                    [0.00]
    A-P F-Stat for:
       College Grad                              21.89                                     8.91                                     5.81
       Veteran                                   277.53                                   100.11                                   101.06
    F-Stat for:
       College Grad                              129.27                                   38.51                                    50.81
       Veteran                                   851.75                                  1002.92                                   977.61
    Mean Mortality
                                                  25.46                                   54.88                                     73.33
    Rate
    Total Deaths                                366,365                                  727,108                                   901,008


Notes: Standard errors are in parenthesis and are clustered by birth state. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level
respectively. See the text for a discussion of the null hypotheses of the three F-statistics. See Table 1 notes for data sources, sample restrictions and
variable definitions. The IV specifications use a third-order polynomial in the national and state-level induction risks to instrument for college graduate
and veteran status using a 2SLS model. Number of observations is 600 in each regression and regressions are weighted by cell size. Additional controls
include birth state fixed effects, the employment to population ratio, the cohort size (derived from the 1960 Census), and birth region trends.




                                                                             48
                       Table 5: OLS and IV Estimates for the Impact of College Completion Rates on Mortality,
                                                   by Leading Causes of Death

                                                                                                                                       Chronic
                                      Heart       Accidental                   Infectious/      Liver
                       Cancers                                    Suicide                                   Diabetes       Stroke       Low         Homicide
                                     Disease        Injury                      Parasitic      Disease
                                                                                                                                        Resp.
 Panel A: OLS
 College Graduate      -38.34***     -32.29***       -5.21**         -0.68            -2.62       -1.19         -2.41      -2.98***     -5.33***       -1.62**
                         (6.57)        (5.95)         (2.11)        (1.47)           (2.46)      (1.54)        (1.52)       (0.86)       (1.56)         (0.63)
 Veteran Status        -15.88***     -10.16***      -3.20***       -1.71***        -0.980**    -1.250***      -0.730**     -1.79***     -4.00***         0.04
                         (1.69)        (1.81)         (0.60)        (0.46)           (0.45)      (0.41)        (0.36)       (0.28)       (0.36)         (0.16)
 Panel B: IV
 College Graduate      -61.90***     -45.07***        -0.71          4.24          14.75***     12.20***      -7.04***     -6.61***     -9.11***        -0.10
                         (9.18)       (11.32)        (4.92)         (3.02)          (5.19)       (4.16)        (2.21)       (1.94)       (2.65)         (1.49)
 Veteran Status         -9.72***      -6.64**       -3.81***       -2.74***        -4.56***     -4.04***        0.35        -0.88*      -3.05***         -0.22
                         (2.45)        (3.20)        (1.15)         (0.80)          (1.18)       (0.94)        (0.48)       (0.45)       (0.56)         (0.35)


Notes: Standard errors are in parenthesis and are clustered by birth state. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level
respectively. See Table 1 notes for data sources, sample restrictions and variable definitions. The IV specifications use a third-order polynomial in the
national and state-level induction risks to instrument for college graduate and veteran status using a 2SLS model. Number of observations is 600 in
each regression and regressions are weighted by cell size. Additional controls include birth state fixed effects, the employment to population ratio, the
cohort size (derived from the 1960 Census), and birth region trends.




                                                                              49
                            Table 6: The Causal Impact of College Completion Rates on Earnings and Wages

                                                                 Log Earnings                                   Log Wages
                     VARIABLES                                OLS             IV                             OLS          IV

                     College Graduate                      0.427***                 0.780***              0.230***            0.393***
                                                            (0.071)                  (0.157)               (0.058)             (0.100)
                     Veteran Status                        0.170***                 0.0701*               0.125***           0.0753***
                                                            (0.020)                 (0.041)                (0.014)             (0.029)

                     Mean Earnings/Wages                                9.542                                        1.964


Notes: Standard errors are in parenthesis and are clustered by birth state. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level
respectively. Data are birth state-cohort cell averages from white men in the 1980 Census IPUMS extracts, born between 1942 and 1953. First stage
specifications and estimating sample are identical to those in Table 2. Dependent variable is log real earnings or log real wages. Underlying microdata
sample is therefore restricted to those with valid earnings in 1980. We truncate the top and bottom 1 percent of the hourly wage distribution to deal
with measurement error in hours and weeks worked. Specifications are otherwise identical to those in Table 3. Number of observations is 600 in each
regression and regressions are weighted by cell size.




                                                                               50
                 Table 7: College Completion Rates and Health Insurance Access

                                Any Insurance         Private Coverage         Public Coverage

Panel A: OLS
College Graduate                    0.093***                 0.163***              -0.083**
                                     (0.025)                  (0.028)               (0.035)
Veteran Status                      0.049***                  -0.038*              0.241***
                                     (0.011)                  (0.021)               (0.028)
Panel B: IV
College Graduate                     0.135*                    0.107                 0.082
                                     (0.072)                 (0.108)                (0.135)
Veteran Status                      0.074***                  -0.027               0.306***
                                     (0.017)                 (0.020)                (0.023)
Mean of dep.
variable                             92.4%                    83.7%                  17.9%


Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered by birth state. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively. Data are from ACS survey years 2008-2010.
Samples restricted to white, male respondents born between 1942 and 1953, and aged 64 or younger at the
time of the survey. Each “College Graduate” and “Veteran” pair are coefficients from a single estimation
using the cubic OLS and IV specifications from Table 3. C-D F statistic is 0.72 (p-value of 0.49). First stage
standard F statistics are 13.6 and 11.2 for college graduate and veteran status, respectively; A-P F statistics are
13.3 and 146.1 for college graduate and veteran status, respectively.




                                                        51
                      Table 8: Acute Health Outcomes and Health Behaviors

                                                     Mean /      College
  Dependent Variable                        N                                            Veteran
                                                     Percent     Graduate
  1980 Health Insurance Supplement:
  Any Health Insurance                      6,292    89.0%       0.094*** (0.010)        0.036**      (0.009)
  Private Coverage                          6,292    86.8%       0.111*** (0.010)        0.035***     (0.005)
  Public Coverage                           6,292    2.0%        -0.019*** (0.002)       -0.001       (0.004)
  1985 NHIS HPDP Supplement:
  Body Mass Index (BMI)                     3,069    25.82       -1.081**     (0.294)    0.084         (0.093)
  Obese (BMI ≥30)                           3,069    10.9%       -0.066*      (0.022)    -0.011        (0.008)
  Ever told had:
    Hypertension                            3,031    18.7%       -0.017       (0.012)    0.006         (0.007)
    High cholesterol                        3,035    4.5%        0.013        (0.014)    -0.015**      (0.004)
    Heart Condition                         3,033    3.2%        -0.003       (0.006)    0.002         (0.011)
    Stroke                                  3,035    0.5%        -0.004*      (0.001)    0.003         (0.002)
  Has Diabetes                              3,032    1.3%        0.002        (0.002)    -0.006        (0.003)
  Any Restricted Days in Past 2 Wks         3,069    8.0%        -0.008       (0.009)    0.013         (0.013)
  Any Work Loss Days in Past 2 Wks          3,069    4.7%        0.000        (0.006)    0.016         (0.015)
  Any Bed Days in Past 2 Wks                3,069    4.2%        -0.001       (0.006)    0.010         (0.009)
  A Lot of Stress in Past 2 Weeks           3,018    22.7%       0.039*       (0.012)    -0.010        (0.017)
  Ever Smoked 100 Cigarettes                3,030    67.2%       -0.200***    (0.008)    0.074***      (0.012)
  Smoke Now                                 3,006    37.6%       -0.213***    (0.016)    0.062**       (0.013)
  Any days in Past Year 5+ Drinks           2,977    44.1%       -0.030       (0.011)    0.071**       (0.015)
  25+ days in Past Year 5+ Drinks           2,977    14.0%       -0.082**     (0.023)    0.005         (0.009)
  Any Drunk Driving in Past Year            2,996    20.9%       -0.008       (0.014)    0.014         (0.023)
  Exercise or play sports regularly         3,036    45.0%       0.249***     (0.019)    0.011         (0.014)

Notes: The sample is restricted to white, male respondents born between 1942 and 1953. Each “College
graduate” and “Veteran” pair are coefficients from a single regression. Specifications are estimated using
microdata at the individual-level and include region-specific linear trend in birth cohort and region of
residence fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by the four Census regions of residence. ***, **, and *
indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level respectively. Health insurance information is
from the 1980 NHIS Health Insurance Supplement. For this sample 30.1% are college graduates and 41.7%
are veterans. For public coverage, individuals are reported as having Medicare, or could report receiving
services through Medicaid/Welfare or CHAMPUS. The remaining rows report data from the 1985 NHIS
HPDP Supplement. With the exception of BMI, all dependent variables are dichotomous and estimates are
from a linear probability model. For this sample, 32.6% are college graduates and 38.1% are veterans.




                                                        52
       Appendix Table 1: OLS Estimates for the Impact of College Completion Rates on Cumulative Mortality, 1980-2007,
                                                 for Early and Late Cohorts

                                           Baseline OLS                        OLS - Early Cohorts                       OLS - Late Cohorts
                                     [1]                   [2]                  [3]            [4]                       [5]             [6]
      College Graduate          -101.97***            -115.40***             -101.88            -146.15**               1.42                -3.76
                                  (19.59)                (19.50)             (65.98)             (66.38)              (23.46)              (23.62)
      Veteran Status             -46.36***             -49.62***              -73.29              -97.98               -44.85             -70.11**
                                   (5.14)                 (5.25)             (63.50)             (66.05)              (32.35)              (31.93)

      Controls?                       Y                    N                     Y                   N                   Y                    N
      Birth Cohorts                42-53                42-53                 42-44               42-44               51-53                51-53
      Observations                  600                   600                   150                 150                 150                  150
      R-squared                    0.9516               0.9491                0.9212              0.9112              0.9568               0.9559


Notes: Standard errors are in parenthesis and are clustered by birth state. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level
respectively. See Table 1 notes for data sources, sample restrictions and variable definitions. “Early cohorts” include men born 1942-1944, while “late”
cohorts include men born 1951-1953. Regressions are weighted by cell size. Additional controls include birth state fixed effects, the employment to
population ratio, the cohort size (derived from the 1960 Census), and birth region trends.




                                                                              53
