NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO FIRMS ISSUE MORE EQUITY WHEN MARKETS ARE MORE LIQUID?
René M. Stulz
Dimitrios Vagias
Mathijs A. van Dijk
Working Paper 19229
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19229

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2013

Van Dijk thanks the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) for financial support
through a “Vidi” grant. We are grateful for comments from Brian Baugh, Andrew Carverhill, Thierry
Foucault, Yeejin Jang, Jeffrey Pontiff, Ioanid Rosu, and seminar participants at Boston College, Boston
University, Erasmus University, HEC Paris, and the 2012 Frontiers of Finance Conference at Warwick
Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by René M. Stulz, Dimitrios Vagias, and Mathijs A. van Dijk. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Firms Issue more equity when markets are more liquid?
René M. Stulz, Dimitrios Vagias, and Mathijs A. van Dijk
NBER Working Paper No. 19229
July 2013
JEL No. F30,G15,G32
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates how public equity issuance is related to stock market liquidity. Using quarterly
data on IPOs and SEOs in 36 countries over the period 1995-2008, we show that equity issuance is
significantly and positively related to contemporaneous and lagged innovations in aggregate local
market liquidity. This relation survives the inclusion of proxies for market timing, capital market conditions,
growth prospects, asymmetric information, and investor sentiment. Liquidity considerations are as
important in explaining equity issuance as market timing considerations. The relation between liquidity
and issuance is driven by the quarters with the greatest deterioration in liquidity and is stronger for
IPOs than for SEOs. Firms are more likely to carry out private instead of public equity issues and to
postpone public equity issues when market liquidity worsens. Overall, we interpret our findings as
supportive of the view that market liquidity is an important determinant of equity issuance that is distinct
from other determinants examined to date.

René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu
Dimitrios Vagias
Rotterdam School of Management
Erasmus University
Postbus 1738
3000 DR, Rotterdam
The Netherlands
dvagias@rsm.nl

Mathijs A. van Dijk
Rotterdam School of Management
Erasmus University
P.O. Box 1738
3000 DR Rotterdam
The Netherlands
madijk@rsm.nl

1. Introduction
If the demand for a firm’s shares is perfectly elastic, an increase in the supply of that firm’s
shares resulting from an equity issue has no effect on the share price keeping everything else the
same. The existing empirical literature presents considerable challenges to the view that the
demand for shares is perfectly elastic. First, many studies build on the finding in Shleifer (1986)
that a firm’s stock price increases when it experiences an increase in demand because of being
added to a stock index such as the S&P 500. Second, studies that have access to data that make it
possible to directly measure the demand for shares find that it is downward-sloping (e.g.,
Bagwell, 1992). Third, there is a vast literature showing that in many countries stock prices fall
when an equity issue is announced, a result that is consistent with the existence of downwardsloping demand curves as well as other explanations (see Eckbo, Masulis, and Norli (2007) for a
review of the literature). Fourth, more generally, the theoretical and empirical market liquidity
literature suggests that buy and sell orders (which tend to involve far fewer shares than equity
issues) can move share prices (e.g., Kyle, 1985; Easley and O’Hara, 1987; Glosten and Harris,
1988; Breen, Hodrick, and Korajczyk, 2002). Fifth, a more recent literature shows that market
liquidity affects the expected cost of underwriters in placing an issue, their fees, and the price at
which shares are sold (e.g., Butler, Grullon, and Weston, 2005; Ellul and Pagano, 2006; Gao and
Ritter, 2010).
Imperfect liquidity is a common thread to these findings from the literature. As a firm’s
shares trade in a less liquid market, investors have to be given more of a discount to absorb these
shares. We would therefore expect that equity issuance is more costly for existing shareholders
when a firm’s stock is less liquid. As issuance becomes more costly, firms are expected to issue
less equity, everything else equal. In this paper, we investigate the hypothesis that security
issuance is inversely related to illiquidity. We find very strong evidence across the world that
firms become less likely to issue equity when the liquidity of equity markets worsens.

2

The liquidity of a firm’s common stock can worsen because aggregate liquidity worsens or
because of idiosyncratic shocks. Idiosyncratic liquidity shocks could be caused by shocks to firm
attributes related to firm value, so that it would be difficult to identify the impact of liquidity as
opposed to the impact of shocks to factors that affect liquidity but other firm characteristics as
well. For instance, adverse information about a firm could lower the stock price and increase
information asymmetry which would then lower liquidity as well. Since one would expect an
increase in information asymmetry to make it more expensive for a firm to issue equity,
identification of the liquidity effect when liquidity changes because of information asymmetry
would be challenging. In this paper, we resolve this identification issue by focusing on equity
issuance at the country level and by examining the relation between aggregate equity issuance
and aggregate liquidity. Aggregate liquidity could affect a firm’s decision to issue equity because
there are strong common factors in liquidity (e.g., Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam, 2000) and
because aggregate liquidity could proxy for the general capacity of the market to absorb new
shares.
We create a sample of equity issues that covers 36 countries from 1995 to 2008. Like earlier
papers that investigate equity issuance globally, such as Henderson, Jegadeesh, and Weisbach
(2006) and Kim and Weisbach (2008), we obtain the equity issues from SDC and include both
initial public offerings (IPOs) and seasoned equity offerings (SEOs). Our dataset has 1,872
country-quarters. We use two measures of equity issuance. The first measure consists of counts
normalized by listings. The second one uses proceeds normalized by market capitalization. Most
of our work focuses on the counts measure as the proceeds measure can be affected by a single
large issue in many countries. We use the Amihud (2002) liquidity measure estimated across
countries by Karolyi, Lee, and van Dijk (2012). Since the country-level Amihud measures are
non-stationary and since their levels are not comparable across countries due to differences in
trading volume definitions and currency units, we first construct time-series of market liquidity
innovations as the residuals from country-by-country AR(1) regressions, and subsequently

3

standardize these series to make them comparable across countries. We would expect differences
in levels of liquidity across countries to affect equity issuance. Further, as noted by recent studies
(e.g., Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2012; Kim and Weisbach, 2008; McLean, Zhang, and Zhao,
2011), countries differ along many dimensions that affect equity issuance. We therefore estimate
our regressions with country fixed effects and year fixed effects. All of our regressions use
quarterly data.
When we regress our equity issuance counts measure on lead liquidity innovations,
contemporaneous liquidity innovations and four lags of liquidity innovations controlling for
market returns, we find that while the coefficient on lead liquidity innovations is not significant,
the contemporaneous as well as three of the four lagged liquidity innovation variables have a
positive and significant coefficient.
The unconditional mean of the quarterly counts variable is 2.52%. We find that a one
standard deviation shock to liquidity is associated with a contemporaneous increase in equity
issuance of 28 basis points, representing an increase of 11%. The coefficient on liquidity
innovations in three of the four prior quarters is at least half the magnitude of the coefficient on
contemporaneous liquidity innovations. The cumulative increase in equity issuance over the next
five quarters associated with a one standard deviation improvement in liquidity is 101 basis points
(or roughly 40% of the unconditional mean of the quarterly counts variable). Treating liquidity
innovations as an explanatory variable for equity issuance, we find that liquidity innovations
explain as much of the variation in equity issuance as stock returns. Stock returns are often used
as a proxy for market timing.
After having established that equity issuance is positively related to liquidity innovations, we
examine whether this relation could be explained by variables known to be correlated with
aggregate liquidity that might affect equity issuance on their own. For example, U.S. studies
predicting aggregate seasoned equity issuance (e.g., Choe, Masulis, and Nanda, 1993) and the
aggregate rate at which firms go public (e.g., Lowry, 2003) show that equity issuance is affected

4

by the state of capital markets and aggregate economic activity, which are variables known to be
related to liquidity as well.
Our first battery of tests therefore controls for proxies for general capital market conditions,
such as market volatility, turnover, and liquidity risk. It is already known from the literature that
aggregate equity issuance is lower when market volatility is higher (e.g., Schill, 2004). While we
find a negative coefficient on lagged market volatility in our regressions, its inclusion does not
affect the coefficients on the liquidity variables. We find no evidence that variation in market
turnover is related to equity issuance, and again the coefficients on the liquidity variables remain
significant when we include this variable. We do find that one-quarter lagged conditional
volatility in liquidity (a measure of liquidity risk) is strongly negatively related to equity issuance,
and reduces the explanatory power of lagged liquidity innovations, which suggests that firms not
only care about the level of liquidity, but also about the risk that it deteriorates.
Next, we control for a number of valuation proxies. Market-to-book is used in studies of
market timing (e.g., Loughran and Ritter, 1995, 1997; Baker and Wurgler, 2002; DeAngelo,
DeAngelo, and Stulz, 2010). There is also evidence that more liquid firms in the U.S. have a
higher market-to-book ratio (Fang, Noe, and Tice, 2009), so that liquidity could proxy for marketto-book in our regressions. After controlling for liquidity and market returns, we find no
significant effect of the aggregate market-to-book ratio on equity issuance, while the relation
between liquidity and equity issuance is unchanged. We do find a strong positive
contemporaneous relation between the aggregate price-earnings ratio and equity issuance, but this
does not materially change the relation between liquidity and equity issuance.
Recent literature shows that liquidity is a predictor of economic activity (e.g., Næs, Skjeltorp,
and Ødegaard, 2010). Since at least Miller (1963), it is known that poor economic activity is
associated with lower equity issuance and, not surprisingly, this finding holds in our sample. We
find that when we control for proxies for future levels of economic activity, the coefficients on
the liquidity measures remain significant.

5

Baker and Stein (2004) argue that liquidity is higher when more irrational investors are in the
market and that the presence of these investors (in combination with short sales constraints) is
associated with overvaluation. Their prediction is that firms issue more equity as liquidity
improves. When we control for various measures of sentiment, we find that these measures are
not related to equity issuance in our sample and the coefficients on the liquidity variables are
unaffected. Also, we examine whether positive and negative liquidity shocks have a similar
relation with equity issuance. We find that negative shocks have a much stronger relation with
equity issuance and that there is little evidence that positive shocks have any relation with equity
issuance. This finding is not supportive of Baker and Stein (2004) and other models whose key
prediction is that an increase in liquidity leads to greater equity issuance.
We then turn to tests that focus more directly on the nature of the mechanism that explains
this relation between liquidity and equity issuance. We would expect that many factors that affect
equity issuance would be the same for public and private equity issues. However, private equity
issues do not increase the supply of traded shares as typically the investors in a private equity
issue face restrictions on selling the shares. We would therefore expect firms to have a private
equity issue rather than a public equity issue when liquidity deteriorates. We investigate this
hypothesis and find support for it. Next, we would expect adverse liquidity shocks to be
accompanied by postponements and cancellations of equity issues. We find that postponements
are more likely following adverse liquidity shocks, although cancellations are not. When we
examine whether the relation between liquidity and IPOs is similar to the relation between
liquidity and SEOs, we find that it is stronger for IPOs. Through most of the paper, we measure
equity issuance by dividing counts of equity issues by the number of listed firms. We would
expect the results to be weaker when we use proceeds instead of counts because the proceeds
measure is extremely skewed and can be heavily influenced by one single extremely large issue.
When we investigate whether there is a relation between liquidity innovations and aggregate
equity issuance proceeds, we find that such a relation exists, but only for IPOs.

6

Our paper contributes to several literatures. Our primary contribution is to the equity issuance
literature. We find that liquidity is an important determinant of equity issuance across the world.
While the recent literature on equity issuance has focused on market timing motivations for
equity issuance, we show that liquidity’s importance is of the same magnitude as the market
timing motivation. A growing recent literature emphasizes the interaction between market
liquidity and funding liquidity, following the work of Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009). The
empirical literature on this interaction has focused on financial institutions. The results in this
paper suggest that market liquidity affects funding liquidity more generally. Several papers
investigate how stock liquidity affects some aspects of the equity issuance process. In particular,
Butler, Grullon, and Weston (2005) show that underwriters charge more when liquidity is lower
and Gao and Ritter (2010) demonstrate that underwriters affect the slope of the demand function
for shares through their marketing activities. Our paper adds to that literature by showing that
aggregate liquidity has a powerful relation with security issuance. Finally, there is a large
literature on the role of liquidity in the pricing of financial assets. In this paper, we provide
evidence consistent with the view that the role of liquidity extends beyond financial markets and
that it has a pervasive impact on corporate financial policies. While Fang, Noe, and Tice (2009)
and Lipson and Mortal (2009) show that stock liquidity is related to a firm’s capital structure,
such a finding does not necessarily mean that firms are more likely to issue equity in more liquid
markets. Our contribution therefore helps understand one mechanism whereby more liquid firms
have less leverage, namely that higher liquidity makes it less costly to issue equity.
The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we introduce our sample. In Section 3, we show
that equity issuance is related to liquidity. In Section 4, we check whether equity issuance is
related to liquidity because liquidity proxies for other variables that are known to affect equity
issuance. In Section 5, we investigate in more detail the mechanisms linking equity issuance to
liquidity. We conclude in Section 6.

7

2. Data
We collect data on the number of issues and the amount of proceeds (in US$) raised from
both IPOs and SEOs (both public and private) in 36 countries from January 1995 to December
2008 from the Securities Data Company (SDC) database. Our sample consists only of common
stock offerings (ordinary common shares). In discussions with SDC representatives it was
brought to our attention that there is a limited number of outdated security classifications that
refer to common shares and were applied in the early part of our sample for certain countries. For
these cases, we extend our sample of equity offerings to include the earlier definitions as well.

1

We include only primary offerings, since pure secondary issues by current shareholders do not
increase the supply of a firm’s shares, and therefore fall outside the scope of the present study.
We exclude issues by utility companies, which are heavily regulated (2-digit SIC code 49), as
well as issues by financial firms (2-digit SIC code 60). We also exclude foreign issues and issues
of depository receipts (DRs). In addition, we discard issues that although announced, were
eventually withdrawn (cancelled or postponed) from our main sample – but we use them in a
separate analysis. For the U.S., we only include offerings from companies traded on the NYSE
because our liquidity measure is not comparable across exchanges.2 SEOs consist of public
follow-on offerings, as well as private placements and rights offerings. The sample includes both
underwritten issues and rights issues. In almost every market, the overwhelming majority of
equity offerings are underwritten (the exceptions are Australia and Japan).
We aggregate equity issues at a quarterly frequency on the basis of their issue date. We
deflate the quarterly number (US$ proceeds) of issues by the total number (market capitalization
in US$) of all publicly listed companies in the country as of the end of the previous year. The
resulting issuance measures reflect the relative increase in the supply of equity given the size of

1

Examples of such security definitions include the category of “Par Value Common Shares” for Japan, “Equity
Shares” for India, and “Class A Common/Ordinary Shares” for China.
2
We identify NYSE equity offerings based on the SDC field “Primary Exchange Where Issuer’s Stock Trades”.

8

each market. We use the World Development Indicators database to obtain information on the
number of listed companies and the aggregate market capitalization of each market.
As a measure of time-variation in liquidity, we use the market-wide Amihud (2002) proxy
constructed by Karolyi, Lee, and van Dijk (2012) that is available for the 36 countries in our
sample.3 The Amihud proxy is designed to capture the marginal impact of a unit of trading
volume on the stock price. It is computed as the daily ratio of the absolute stock return over the
local currency trading volume of the stock. This measure stays close to the intuitive description of
liquid markets as those that accommodate trading with the least effect on price. Amihud (2002)
shows that this measure is strongly positively related to microstructure estimates of illiquidity for
the U.S. stock market. Hasbrouck (2006) and Goyenko, Holden, and Trzcinka (2009) show that
the Amihud measure performs well relative to other proxies in capturing high-frequency
measures of transaction costs based on U.S. data. Lesmond (2005) reports a high correlation
between the Amihud measure and bid-ask spreads in 23 emerging markets. Many recent
empirical studies use the Amihud proxy to measure stock market liquidity, both for the U.S. and
for other countries. Examples include Acharya and Pedersen (2005), Spiegel and Wang (2005),
Avramov, Chordia, and Goyal (2006), Kamara, Lou, and Sadka (2008), Watanabe and Watanabe
(2008), and Beber and Pagano (2013). Karolyi, Lee, and van Dijk (2012) take a log
transformation of the Amihud measure and multiply it by -10,000 to obtain a measure that is
increasing in liquidity. To mitigate the effect of outliers, we winsorize their monthly liquidity
time-series at the 1st and 99th percentiles by country. We then transform the monthly market
liquidity time-series to a quarterly frequency by computing the average within each quarter. We
apply the same procedure to their monthly turnover time-series.
Because market liquidity is characterized by persistent long-term trends (e.g., Chordia, Roll,
and Subrahmanyam, 2008; Næs, Skjeltorp, and Ødegaard, 2011), we test for stationarity using the
panel unit root test of Levin, Lin, and Chu (2002) and find evidence of non-stationarity.
3

The data on liquidity are available at http://mathijsavandijk.com.

9

Therefore, all our regressions include a measure of liquidity innovations (rather than liquidity
levels), taken as the residuals from country-by-country AR(1) regressions of the level of market
liquidity.
We obtain the daily (value-weighted) total market return index for each country in our sample
from Datastream. We then compute the average of the daily market returns within each quarter to
obtain the corresponding quarterly time-series. We construct a quarterly time-series of market
volatility for each country as the standard deviation of the daily market returns within the quarter
and a quarterly time-series of liquidity risk as the conditional volatility of the raw quarterly
liquidity series based on a GARCH(1,1) model.
We also construct quarterly time-series of idiosyncratic volatility and of “stock price
synchronicity” (Morck, Yeung, and Yu, 2000) based on the value-weighted average standard
deviation of the residuals and the value-weighted average R2, respectively, from a simple market
model run for individual stocks based on daily data within the quarter. For this purpose, we use
Datastream to collect the daily total return index (RI) and monthly market capitalization (MV;
expressed in millions of local currency) for all individual stocks traded in the 36 countries in our
sample. To be consistent with Karolyi, Lee, and van Dijk (2012), we limit our sample to only
stocks from major exchanges.
Data on quarterly aggregate market-to-book ratios, price-earnings ratios, and dividend yields
are also obtained from Datastream. As proxies for macroeconomic conditions we use quarterly
GDP growth and sales growth rates from OECD and Datastream (following, e.g., Lowry, 2003;
Næs, Skjeltorp, and Ødegaard, 2011). For the same purpose, we use the amplitude-adjusted
composite leading economic indicator from the OECD, which is a compilation of several key
economic indicators that provide signals on future turning points of economic activity.
To account for investor sentiment we use three different proxies: the U.S. investor sentiment
index of Baker and Wurgler (2006), which is increasing with investors’ optimism; the local
closed-end country fund discount (Lee, Shleifer, and Thaler, 1991), which is available for 22

10

countries in our sample; and a global sentiment indicator computed as the equally-weighted
average of the discounts of local closed-end fund discounts as in Karolyi, Lee, and van Dijk
(2012). For the latter two variables, lower numbers indicate more optimistic investors.4
A detailed description of all variables and data sources is included in the Appendix.
Table 1 presents summary statistics for the number of equity issues, equity issuance proceeds,
and market returns, liquidity, and volatility for each of the 36 countries in our sample. The table
distinguishes developed and emerging countries based on the classification by the International
Finance Corporation (IFC). The total number of equity issues (IPOs plus SEOs) in the sample is
47,399 (of which 36,400 took place in developed countries and 10,999 in emerging countries).
The number of equity issues in Australia (12,013) is striking and may be due to the mining boom.
We have carefully inspected the SDC data for Australia and found no reasons to assume that the
number of equity issues is incorrect. Nonetheless, we have rerun all our analyses without
Australia to make sure the results are not driven by this particular country.
The second and third columns of Table 1 show the time-series mean and standard deviation
of the quarterly number of equity issues scaled by the number of listed stocks by country. This is
the main dependent variable in our analyses. On average, the countries in our sample experience a
number of equity issues per quarter that corresponds to 2.52% of the number of listed stocks on
the local equity market. There is considerable variation in the average equity issuance counts
variable across countries. The mean ratio of equity issues to listed stocks varies from 0.26% for
South Africa to 15.31% for Australia. The ratio is larger in developed than in emerging countries
(3.24% vs. 1.62%), even when we exclude Australia (2.61% vs. 1.62%). The time-series standard
deviations in the third column of Table 1 suggest considerable time-variation in equity issuance.
Consistent with prior studies, we find that equity issues tend to be clustered in time. The slope
coefficient in a pooled AR(1) model of the quarterly equity issues counts variable across
countries is 0.81.
4

Data for these variables are available at http://mathijsavandijk.com.

11

The fourth and fifth columns of Table 1 show the time-series mean and standard deviation of
the quarterly proceeds of these equity issues (expressed in US$) scaled by the local stock market
capitalization (also in US$). We use this equity issuance proceeds variable as an alternative to the
counts variable in some of our tests. On average, firms in the countries in our sample raise public
equity capital per quarter corresponding to 0.22% of the local equity market capitalization. This
number is much smaller than the average counts variable of 2.52% and thus indicates that the size
of the average equity issue is much smaller than the average market cap of the firms listed on the
local stock market. Average equity proceeds are somewhat greater in emerging countries than in
developed countries, at 0.27% vs. 0.18%. China displays an outlier for this variable, with average
equity proceeds per quarter corresponding to 0.77% of the local market capitalization, or 3.5
times the average across all 36 countries. Again, we have found no reasons to question the SDC
data for China and suspect this number is driven by several large privatizations early on in the
sample when the Chinese stock market was still relatively undeveloped.
It is important to note that a direct comparison of the level of the Amihud measure across
countries is not possible because of differences in currency units and trading volume definitions.
Therefore, we standardize the quarterly time-series of market liquidity innovations for each
country to have zero mean and unit standard deviation in our tests.

3. Does liquidity help explain time-variation in equity issuance?
Table 2 shows the estimation results of pooled tobit models to explain quarterly variation in
the equity issuance counts variable (i.e., the number of IPOs + SEOs scaled by the number of
listed stocks) in the 36 countries in our sample over 1995-2008 (in unreported tests, we obtain
similar results when we exclude the years of the recent global financial crises 2007-2008). We
use tobit specifications since the dependent variable is truncated at zero; many of the countries in
our sample have zero equity issues in at least some quarters. Almost all models include country
fixed effects to account for time-invariant country characteristics that can explain cross-country

12

variation in equity issuance intensity. To be conservative, we also include year fixed effects in
almost all models to account for any common global trends – although they subsume some of the
time-variation in equity issuance that could potentially be due to liquidity. These year fixed
effects may capture the impact of the increased financial globalization on equity issuance shown
to be important by Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2012). As prior studies (e.g., Lowry, 2003) argue
that there may be institutional reasons that cause equity issuance to be less intense in the first
calendar quarter, we also include a quarter one dummy in many of the tobit models. In the last
model of Table 2, we also include a lagged dependent variable. Standard errors are clustered at
the country-level. The last two rows of Table 2 report the results of F-tests on the joint
significance of all liquidity variables, and of only the lagged liquidity variables.
Model (1) of Table 2 includes one-quarter lead local stock market liquidity innovations,
contemporaneous liquidity innovations, and four quarterly lags of liquidity innovations as
explanatory variables. The coefficients on the contemporaneous and the first three lags of
liquidity innovations are all positive and statistically significant, which is consistent with the
hypothesis that firms issue more equity in and following quarters of improving market liquidity.
The coefficient on lead liquidity innovations is close to zero and statistically insignificant. There
is thus little evidence of liquidity timing in the sense that firms are able to time their equity issues
before market liquidity worsens.
The economic significance of the coefficients on contemporaneous and lagged liquidity
innovations is substantial. A one standard deviation increase in market liquidity is associated with
a contemporaneous increase in equity issues by 28 basis points (equal to the magnitude of the
coefficient, since the liquidity variables have been standardized to have zero mean and unit
standard deviation), which corresponds to 11% of the unconditional average ratio of equity issues
of 2.52% (from Table 1). The coefficients on the lagged liquidity variables tend to be slightly
smaller, but still sizable at more than half of the contemporaneous coefficient. The cumulative
change in equity issuance over the next five quarters associated with a one standard deviation

13

improvement in liquidity is 101 basis points (or around 40% of the average fraction of issues in
any given quarter across all countries in our sample).
One could argue that the contemporaneous relation between liquidity and equity issuance
may be driven by reverse causality, since equity issues could affect local stock market liquidity.
However, there are at least three reasons why this is unlikely to be a concern in our analyses.
First, equity issues correspond to a tiny fraction of existing listings on each market (counts are on
average 2.52% of the number of listed stocks and proceeds are on average 0.22% of local market
capitalization) and we measure market liquidity based on the value-weighted average liquidity
across the existing stocks on a market. We thus expect the impact of equity issues on our liquidity
variables to be very small. Second, if anything, we would expect the effect of equity issues on
market liquidity to be negative, while we find a positive coefficient on contemporaneous liquidity
innovations in Table 2. IPOs tend to involve relatively small stocks that are less liquid than the
average existing stock, so a wave of IPOs could depress aggregate market liquidity. SEOs create
the equivalent of a large sell order imbalance on the market for existing stocks, which is likely to
temporarily depress liquidity. Third, in each of the models in Table 2 at least two of the
coefficients on the lagged liquidity variables are significant (in addition to the significant
coefficient on contemporaneous liquidity), which suggests that liquidity matters even when
disregarding the contemporaneous relation because of potential reverse causality concerns.
In model (2) of Table 2, we use the same specification as in model (1) but then for lead,
contemporaneous, and lagged local market returns instead of market liquidity innovations (for the
same sample of country-quarters). These results serve two purposes. First, they confirm the
finding of prior work that equity issuance is positively and significantly related to
contemporaneous and lagged market returns, and negatively and significantly related to lead
market returns.5 Second, they provide a benchmark for the importance of the relation between

5

Whether the latter finding can be attributed to market timing abilities by managers is subject to debate
(e.g., Butler, Grullon, and Weston, 2005).

14

liquidity and equity issuance in model (1). In our regressions, the relation between liquidity
innovations and equity issuance is as strong as the relation between market returns and equity
issuance. The cumulative change in equity issuance over the next five quarters associated with a
positive one standard deviation shock to market returns is 102 basis points (not taking into
account the coefficient on lead market returns), which is almost identical to the cumulative
change in equity issuance of 101 basis points for liquidity innovations discussed above.
In model (3), we include liquidity innovations and returns at the same time. The effects on
equity issuance diminish somewhat relative to the first two models (for example, the coefficient
on one-quarter lagged liquidity innovations becomes insignificant), but both liquidity and returns
are still statistically and economically significant determinants of time-variation in equity
issuance and still have comparable cumulative effects. The coefficient on the quarter one dummy
is negative and significant, but its inclusion does not materially affect the coefficients on the
liquidity and return variables. In model (4), we drop the lead liquidity innovations as well as the
three- and four-quarter lags of market returns as they are not significant in model (3). Models (5)
and (6) demonstrate that the relations between liquidity and returns and equity issuance are
roughly equally strong when we drop either the year fixed effects or both the year and country
fixed effects. Model (7) includes a lagged dependent variable, which has a coefficient of 0.544
and is statistically significant. The effects of liquidity and returns survive. In most of the other
analyses we present below, we do not include a lagged dependent variable since our purpose is to
understand which economic forces drive time-variation in equity issuance rather than to develop
the best possible econometric model to explain the dynamics of equity issuance.
In unreported robustness tests, we estimate the specifications in Table 2 using panel tobits
with random effects (instead of country fixed effects) and using regular panel models (instead of
tobits) and obtain similar results. We also estimate the specifications in Table 2 with liquidity
changes rather than liquidity innovations as independent variables. We still find a statistically and
economically significant effect of the market liquidity variables (the F-tests on the joint

15

significance of the coefficients on contemporaneous and lagged liquidity changes are significant
at the 5% level or better), though overall the results are slightly weaker. It thus seems that firms
respond particularly strongly to contemporaneous and lagged unexpected changes in liquidity (as
captured by the liquidity innovations variables).
In sum, Table 2 presents evidence that equity issuance is positively related to innovations in
liquidity. The relation between liquidity and equity issuance survives controlling for market
returns and is roughly equally important as the relation between market returns and equity
issuance uncovered by earlier studies.

4. Is the relation between liquidity and equity issuance due to other factors?
The results in the previous section show that equity issuance is positively related to liquidity,
even after controlling for market returns. This finding is consistent with the hypothesis that
managers take the costs associated with downward-sloping demand curves into account in their
decision to issue equity. However, it could also be the case that our liquidity variables proxy for
other factors that affect equity issuance and are correlated with liquidity. In this section, we
investigate whether the effects of liquidity can be explained by other financial and economic
variables, including capital market conditions, (expected) economic activity, asymmetric
information, and investor sentiment.
Table 3 reports the results of tobit regressions that include various other measures of capital
market conditions in addition to market liquidity innovations and market returns. All models
include country and year fixed effects as well as the quarter one dummy. Significance is again
based on standard errors clustered at the country-level.
In model (1), we add contemporaneous and lagged market volatility to our baseline model
that includes market liquidity and returns. We know that liquidity is negatively related to
volatility (e.g., Chordia, Sarkar, and Subrahmanyam, 2005) and Schill (2004) shows there are
fewer equity issues in volatile times. It is thus possible that the effects of liquidity in Table 2

16

capture the role of market volatility. Consistent with Schill (2004), we find a negative and
significant coefficient on (one-quarter lagged) volatility. However, there is virtually no change in
the magnitude and statistical significance of the coefficients on the liquidity variables.
Baker and Stein (2004) argue that market liquidity is a sentiment indicator and that periods of
positive sentiment coincide with intense equity issuance. Using turnover as a liquidity proxy, they
show that liquidity is positively correlated with aggregate time-variation in U.S. equity issuance.6
Model (2) of Table 3 shows that the relation between liquidity and equity issuance in our global
sample is not driven by turnover. None of the coefficients on market turnover are significant and
the coefficients on the liquidity variables are unaffected. These coefficient estimates suggest that
our results are distinct from those of Baker and Stein (2004) and that there is no relation between
turnover and equity issuance in our global sample once returns and liquidity are controlled for.
Model (3) shows that the contemporaneous relation between liquidity and equity issuance
survives controlling for a proxy for liquidity risk (conditional liquidity volatility based on a
GARCH(1,1) model). However, the significantly negative coefficient on one-quarter lagged
liquidity risk and the weakened effects of lagged liquidity innovations suggest that equity
issuance is in part related to liquidity because firms respond to uncertainty about liquidity in the
recent past. Uncertainty about liquidity can deter equity issues since it leads to uncertainty about
the discount that investors have to be given to absorb the additional supply of shares – and thus to
uncertainty about the equity issue proceeds.
Although we control for potential market timing effects using lead, contemporaneous, and
lagged market returns, many studies use the market-to-book ratio as a proxy for market timing.
6

Turnover can proxy for other stock characteristics besides liquidity. For instance, it can proxy for
diversity of opinion. More generally, turnover does not seem to be widely accepted as a good liquidity
proxy. A common counterexample is that turnover tends to be high during financial crises, while liquidity
tends to be low. Recent studies that evaluate liquidity proxies for U.S. and international equity markets
(Goyenko, Holden, and Trzcinka, 2009; Fong, Holden, and Trzcinka, 2011) do not even include turnover as
a proxy for liquidity. Lesmond (2005) studies the liquidity of emerging equity markets using different
proxies (including turnover) and concludes: “These results cast doubt on a wide range of studies employing
turnover as a principal liquidity proxy.” (p. 423). In our sample, market turnover is only weakly correlated
with the liquidity variables, at 0.12 with liquidity levels and 0.06 with liquidity innovations.

17

Since more liquid firms in the U.S. have a higher market-to-book ratio (Fang, Noe, and Tice,
2009), we want to make sure that liquidity is not picking up the effect of market-to-book. Model
(4) shows that issuance is not related to the aggregate market-to-book ratio after controlling for
liquidity and returns, and the effects of liquidity are not diminished. Model (5) shows a significant
effect of the contemporaneous price-earnings ratio on equity issuance, but again the effects of
liquidity are intact. The coefficients on the dividend-price ratio in model (6) are not significant.
Consequently, the relation between liquidity and equity issuance cannot be attributed to these
valuation proxies.
The estimation results of model (7) indicate that even when controlling for all of these
variables as well as a lagged dependent variable, there is still a statistically and economically
significant relation between contemporaneous liquidity innovations and aggregate equity
issuance. The coefficients on the lagged liquidity innovations are no longer significant. We note
that this specification stacks the odds against finding a significant effect of liquidity, since the
year fixed effects, quarter one dummy, and lagged dependent variable absorb a significant
fraction of the quarterly variation in equity issuance that could potentially be due to variation in
liquidity. In addition to the significantly positive coefficient on contemporaneous liquidity
innovations, model (7) still shows a significantly negative coefficient on lagged liquidity risk. In
sum, the significant coefficients on liquidity and liquidity risk are not explained by a host of other
capital market conditions.
Recent studies show that liquidity forecasts economic activity (e.g., Næs, Skjeltorp, and
Ødegaard, 2010) and we know from the equity issuance literature that firms issue more equity in
anticipation of better economic conditions. Following Lowry (2003), we proxy for expectations
about economic conditions using contemporaneous and lead GDP and sales growth in models (1)
through (3) of Table 4. Lowry introduces these variables as proxies for the demand for capital. In
model (3), we also include the composite leading economic indicator by the OECD. (We note that
data on the sales growth and leading economic indicator variables are available for relatively few

18

country-quarter observations.) In line with the results of earlier studies that document that firms
issue more equity in (anticipation of) good economic times, the coefficients on contemporaneous
GDP growth and sales growth are positive and significant – though only when these variables are
considered in isolation. Moreover, the coefficients on the liquidity variables are still significant.
It is well-documented that the liquidity of a stock is inversely related to the degree of
asymmetric information about the stock’s value. More asymmetric information is also likely to
lead to greater costs of raising equity capital, so changes in information asymmetries could
influence liquidity and equity issuance simultaneously and in the same direction. As argued in the
introduction, this identification issue is unlikely to be of great concern in our analysis of the
relations between aggregate liquidity and aggregate equity issuance.7 Nonetheless, it may be the
case that market-wide fluctuations in information asymmetries affect aggregate liquidity and
aggregate issuance at the same time and in a similar way. In model (4) of Table 4, we include two
proxies for market-wide variation in information asymmetries. The first is idiosyncratic volatility,
computed as the value-weighted average of the residual volatility from market model regressions
run for each individual stock within a country. The second is “stock price synchronicity,” which
is computed as the value-weighted average R2 from market model regressions run for each
individual stock within a country. Morck, Yeung, and Yu (2000) argue that greater stock price
synchronicity is associated with less-informative stock prices. Model (4) shows that the inclusion
of these variables does not materially affect the coefficients on the contemporaneous and lagged
liquidity innovations.
Models (5) through (7) of Table 4 include various proxies for investor sentiment. In the
model of Baker and Stein (2004), irrational investors can drive up stock prices above their
fundamental value in the presence of short-sales constraints, and irrational investors also make
the market more liquid. If market liquidity and sentiment are related, the relation between

7

Baker and Stein (2004, p. 272) state that it seems “a stretch to argue that there are large swings in the
degree of asymmetric information about the market as a whole.”

19

liquidity and equity issuance could thus be driven not by managerial concerns about downwardsloping demand curves, but by their incentives to issue equity when their stock is overvalued.
Investor sentiment should be reflected in market returns and valuation ratios, so our evidence that
the effects of liquidity are robust to the inclusion of returns and valuation proxies (such as
market-to-book) is hard to reconcile with a sentiment-based explanation for our main results.
Moreover, we find no evidence that market turnover – the variable that Baker and Stein use to
proxy for this sentiment effect – has an impact on equity issuance in our international sample.
To further examine the sentiment hypothesis, we also include direct proxies for sentiment in
our tobit models. We use local and global closed-end country fund discounts (Lee, Shleifer, and
Thaler, 1991) and the U.S. investor sentiment index of Baker and Wurgler (2006) as proxies for
variation in investor sentiment. We obtain the country fund discount variables from Karolyi, Lee,
and van Dijk (2012). They construct time-series of local closed-end country fund discounts for 22
of the countries in our sample based on a sample of 42 closed-end funds. The global sentiment
indicator is the equally-weighted average of the discounts of these 42 country funds. None of the
sentiment variables is significant in models (5) through (7) and the coefficients on liquidity
remain significant even after controlling for these sentiment proxies. The magnitudes of the
coefficients on liquidity innovations are somewhat attenuated in model (7), but this model can
only be estimated based on 840 country-quarter observations (compared to 1,800 in Table 2) and
the F-tests in the bottom two rows of Table 4 confirm that the joint effects of all liquidity
variables and of only the lagged liquidity variables are still significant at the 5% level.8
Overall, the results in Tables 3 and 4 suggest that the positive relation between market
liquidity and aggregate equity issuance is not due to economic or financial variables that are

8

Since the global and U.S. sentiment factors are the same for all countries, including year fixed effects in
the tobit models may be overly restrictive. We therefore re-estimate models (5) through (7) of Table 4
without year fixed effects. The results suggest that the number of equity issues is greater in quarters with
more pessimistic global sentiment and more optimistic U.S. sentiment, respectively. Neither of these effects
survives the inclusion of the other sentiment variables and the lagged dependent variable in model (7). The
coefficients on the liquidity variables remain significant.

20

unrelated to the aggregate demand elasticity of the stock market, but could simultaneously affect
liquidity and equity issuance for other reasons.

5. How does equity issuance depend on liquidity?
In this section, we present the results of tests that focus more directly on the nature of the
mechanism through which equity issuance is related to liquidity. We explore asymmetries in this
relation, study the choice between private and public equity issues, and analyze postponements
and cancellations of equity issues. We conclude with an analysis of the relation between liquidity
and IPOs vs. SEOs and of the relation between liquidity and equity issue proceeds rather than
equity issue counts.
Table 5 allows for an asymmetric effect of declines and improvements in liquidity by
introducing dummy variables indicating quarters with the top 33% (Market liquidity UP) and the
bottom 33% (Market liquidity DOWN) of observations by country based on liquidity innovations.
The table contains five different models that differ in the number of lags of these dummy
variables and in the extent to which we control for market returns. The results are consistent
throughout the table: the relation between liquidity and equity issuance is driven by the quarters
with the greatest deterioration in liquidity. The coefficient on the contemporaneous DOWN
market liquidity dummy is always statistically significant at the 5% level or better. Its magnitude
suggests that the ratio of equity issues is about 30 to 40 basis points lower in quarters with the
most negative liquidity innovations, or about 15% of the unconditional average ratio of equity
issues of 2.52%. In addition, in most models, the coefficients on at least two of the lagged DOWN
liquidity dummies are significant. In model (4), a large deterioration in liquidity is associated with
a decrease in equity issues over the next five quarters (based only on the significant coefficients
on the DOWN liquidity dummies) by 89 basis points, or around 35% of the average fraction of
issues in any given quarter across all countries in our sample. This effect is close in magnitude to
the cumulative change in equity issues associated with a one standard deviation shock to liquidity

21

documented in Section 3 based on Table 2. In contrast, we find only weak evidence that equity
issuance goes up during or following quarters with large improvements in market liquidity. The
coefficient on the contemporaneous UP market liquidity dummy is positive and significant at the
10% level, but only in models (1) and (2) and none of the lagged UP market liquidity variables
has a significant coefficient.9
These results seem to be at variance with the intuition of the model of Baker and Stein
(2004), which predicts that liquidity is related to equity issuance because – in the presence of
short-sales constraints – stocks can become overvalued and more liquid at the same time, and
managers tend to issue more equity during these times. In contrast, our results are driven by
periods of deteriorating liquidity. More generally, stories about managers exploiting mispricing
on the equity market tend to focus on episodes of overvaluation and high liquidity when the
overvaluation is associated with active participation in the markets of noise traders. The
asymmetric effects of liquidity innovations on equity issuance documented in Table 5 thus seem
hard to reconcile with alternative explanations based on investor sentiment. In contrast, they
accord well with the intuition that firms shun equity issues when markets are illiquid to avoid the
large discount they need to offer investors to absorb the additional supply of shares in such
market conditions.
It is interesting to note that although Baker and Stein (2004) argue that liquidity and
sentiment are positively related, they do not necessarily attribute the positive empirical relation
between market turnover (their proxy for liquidity) and aggregate U.S. equity issuance they find
to managers having some comparative advantage in assessing mispricing and therefore timing
equity issues to exploit overvaluation. In fact, footnote 7 of Baker and Stein (2004) discusses that
their preferred interpretation is that “managers care about market liquidity per se – i.e., they
simply wish to avoid large price impacts when issuing equity.” The bigger point Baker and Stein

9

In unreported robustness tests, we obtain almost identical results for the UP and DOWN liquidity
dummies when we allow for asymmetric effects of market returns in a similar way.

22

make is that managers may appear to time the market successfully even when they base their
decision to issue equity on the demand elasticity of the equity market, which happens to be
correlated with investor sentiment.
The results in Table 5 lead us to conclude that it is unlikely that the relation between liquidity
and equity issuance is due to sentiment. First, sentiment should be picked up by the market return
variables and valuation proxies. Second, including direct measures of sentiment in our regressions
does not affect the relation between liquidity and equity issuance. Third, that relation is driven by
large deteriorations in liquidity, which is not consistent with common stories about how sentiment
affects public capital raising.
We would expect that many of the other factors that could affect equity issuance (and that
may not have been perfectly controlled for in Tables 2 through 5) should have similar effects on
public and private equity issues. However, downward-sloping demand curves are less of a
concern for private equity issues since investors in a private issue tend to face restrictions on
selling the shares, which implies that a private equity issue has less of an effect on the supply of
shares in the public market. We therefore expect that poor liquidity conditions lead managers to
opt for a private rather than a public equity issue. We test this conjecture in Table 6 by estimating
tobit models to explain time-variation in the quarterly number of privately placed SEOs scaled by
the number of public SEOs plus the number of privately placed SEOs. All models in Table 6
contain contemporaneous and lagged market liquidity innovations and market returns as well as
lead market returns. Models (2) through (6) also include proxies for capital market conditions,
future economic activity, or asymmetric information. The bottom line is that liquidity has a
negative and significant relation with the fraction of private equity issues. In other words, firms
tend to issue more private equity relative to public equity when market liquidity deteriorates. In
model (1), a one-standard deviation deterioration in liquidity is associated with an increase in the
fraction of private equity issues over the next two quarters by around 3.1% (where the
unconditional average fraction of private SEOs in our sample is 25.0%). The negative relation

23

between liquidity innovations and the fraction of private equity issues survives the inclusion of
market volatility, market-to-book, idiosyncratic volatility, and stock price synchronicity.
If firms are concerned about the price impact of equity issues, adverse liquidity shocks should
make them more likely to postpone or cancel equity issues previously filed. We investigate this
hypothesis in Table 7. We obtain quarterly data on the number of postponements and
cancellations from SDC. We scale the number of postponements (cancellations) in a countryquarter by the number of realized equity issues plus the number of postponements (cancellations).
Models (1) through (4) explain time-variation in postponements, while models (5) through (8)
explain time-variation in cancellations. Like in Table 6, we control for market returns and for
proxies for capital market conditions, future economic activity, or asymmetric information in
different models. One drawback of the SDC data on postponements and cancellations is that they
are reported by the filing date of the equity issue and not by the postponement or cancellation
date. We expect that most postponements and cancellations are announced within six months of
the filing date, so we include only contemporaneous and two quarterly leads of the explanatory
variables in Table 7. The aggregation of postponements and cancellations by filing dates prevents
us from making strong statements about the exact timing of postponements and cancellations
relative to changes in market liquidity, returns, capital market conditions, and economic activity.
Model (1) of Table 7 shows that postponements are negatively related to both market
liquidity innovations and to market returns, consistent with the hypothesis that firms tend to
postpone equity issues during times of deteriorating liquidity and decreasing valuations. The
economic effect of liquidity is large and of the same order of magnitude as that of returns. The
effects of liquidity and returns both survive the inclusion of additional variables in models (2)
through (4). In contrast, we find no significant relation between the liquidity variables and the
fraction of cancelled equity issues. A potential explanation is that cancellations of equity issues
are more costly (if only as a signal about the issuing firm’s prospects) and are therefore less likely
to be based on capital market conditions alone. We still find a significantly negative effect of

24

market returns, though it is weaker in models (5) through (8) than in models (1) through (4).
Unreported results show that the relation between liquidity and postponements of equity issues is
similar for IPOs and SEOs.
In Table 8, we examine whether the effects of market liquidity innovations are different for
IPOs and SEOs. Models (1) through (4) have the ratio of IPOs to listed stocks as dependent
variable, while models (5) through (8) are based on SEOs over listed stocks. There are a number
of interesting results in Table 8. First, liquidity is significantly related to time-variation in both
IPOs and SEOs. Second, the relation is stronger for IPOs. A one standard deviation shock to
liquidity is associated with a change in equity issuance over the next five quarters (based only on
the significant liquidity coefficients in models (1) and (5)) that is equal to 65 basis points for IPOs
and 25 basis points for SEOs. The correlation of contemporaneous liquidity innovations is
stronger with IPOs than with SEOs throughout. In models (4) and (8) – which control for all
explanatory variables in this table – four of the five liquidity coefficients are significant for IPOs,
versus only two for SEOs. That said, the number of observations is significantly reduced in
models (4) and (8) and, if anything, the F-tests reported in the last two rows of Table 8 seem to
suggest a stronger joint effect of lagged liquidity for SEOs. Third, the effects of market returns
are considerably stronger both statistically and economically for SEOs than for IPOs. Most
notably, the negative effect of one-quarter lead returns reported in previous tables is only
observed in the SEO specifications. In other words, the evidence consistent with market timing is
much stronger for SEOs than for IPOs.
In Table 9, we investigate whether our finding that firms issue less equity when market
liquidity deteriorates is robust to using equity issue proceeds instead of equity issue counts. We
estimate similar tobits as before, but use quarterly equity issue proceeds scaled by the local stock
market capitalization (both expressed in US$) as dependent variable. We again distinguish
between IPOs and SEOs; models (1) through (4) try to explain time-variation in IPO proceeds,
and models (5) through (8) focus on SEO proceeds. Ex ante, we expect these results to be weaker

25

since the proceeds measure is highly skewed and is more sensitive to individual extreme
observations. We therefore drop China from the sample for this analysis, as Table 1 shows that
there were a number of issues with very large proceeds that are likely to influence the results.
(We obtain slightly weaker results when we include China.) Further, financial globalization
makes it possible for firms to issue shares abroad (Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2012, and Caglio,
Weiss-Hanley, and Marietta-Westberg, 2011, show the growing importance of global IPOs during
our sample period), so that proceeds may overstate the amounts sold domestically. Also, firms
might choose to issue more abroad when domestic liquidity has suffered an adverse shock but
liquidity abroad has not.
Models (1) through (4) of Table 9 show a strong relation between liquidity innovations and
IPO proceeds. At least two of the coefficients on contemporaneous and lagged liquidity
innovations are significant in each model. A one standard deviation shock to liquidity is
associated with a change in IPO proceeds over the next five quarters (based only on the
significant liquidity coefficients in model (1)) that is equal to 0.09% of local market
capitalization, which corresponds to around 40% of the unconditional average fraction of equity
issues of 0.22% in our sample – an economic effect that is comparable in magnitude to the effect
on equity issue counts documented in Section 3 based on Table 2. In contrast, models (5) through
(8) show almost no significant relation between liquidity innovations and SEO proceeds.

6. Conclusions
In this paper, we have shown that equity issuance across the world is strongly related to
equity market liquidity. We provide evidence that this relation between liquidity and equity
issuance cannot be attributed to liquidity serving as a proxy for future economic growth or market
sentiment. Further, we show that it is not plausible that the relation could be due to reversecausation. Using liquidity as an explanatory variable for equity issuance, we find that liquidity
explains as much of equity issuance as contemporaneous and past market returns. The relation

26

between liquidity and equity issuance is stronger for decreases in liquidity than increases. As one
would expect, the fraction of private equity issues to public equity issues increases as liquidity
worsens since private equity issues do not increase the supply of traded shares in the short run
because of restrictions on selling the shares from such issues. We interpret our findings to be
supportive of the view that in imperfectly liquid markets, the demand for shares is downwardsloping and that corporations take into account the slope of the demand curve for shares in their
financing decisions.

27

References
Acharya, V., and L. Pedersen, 2005, Asset pricing with liquidity risk, Journal of Financial
Economics 77, 375-410.
Amihud, Y., 2002, Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time-series effects, Journal of
Financial Markets 5, 31-56.
Avramov, D., T. Chordia, and A. Goyal, 2006, Liquidity and autocorrelations in individual stock
returns, Journal of Finance 61, 2365-2394.
Bagwell, L.S., 1992, Dutch auction repurchases: An analysis of shareholder heterogeneity,
Journal of Finance 47, 71-105.
Baker, M., and J.C. Stein, 2004, Market liquidity as a sentiment indicator, Journal of Financial
Markets 7, 271–299.
Baker, M., and J. Wurgler, 2002, Market timing and capital structure, Journal of Finance 57, 1–
32.
Baker, M., and J. Wurgler, 2006. Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock returns,
Journal of Finance 61, 1645-1680.
Beber, A., and M. Pagano, 2013, Short-selling bans around the world: Evidence from the 2007-09
crisis, Journal of Finance 68, 343-381.
Breen, W.J., L.S. Hodrick, and R.A. Korajczyk, 2002, Predicting equity liquidity, Management
Science 48, 470-483.
Brunnermeier, M.L., and L.H. Pedersen, 2009, Market liquidity and funding liquidity, Review of
Financial Studies 22, 2201-2238.
Butler, A.W., G. Grullon, and J.P. Weston, 2005, Stock market liquidity and the cost of issuing
equity, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 40, 331-348.
Caglio, C., K. Weiss-Hanley, and J. Marietta-Westberg, 2011, Going Public Abroad: The Role of
International Markets for IPOs, Working paper, SEC.

28

Choe, H., R.W. Masulis, and V.K. Nanda, 1993, Common stock offerings across the business
cycle: Theory and evidence, Journal of Empirical Finance 1, 3-31.
Chordia, T., R. Roll, and A. Subrahmanyam, 2000, Commonality in liquidity, Journal of
Financial Economics 56, 3-28.
Chordia, T., R. Roll, and A. Subrahmanyam, 2008, Liquidity and market efficiency, Journal of
Financial Economics 87, 249-268.
Chordia, T., A. Sarkar, and A. Subrahmanyam, 2005, An empirical analysis of stock and bond
market liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 18, 85-129.
DeAngelo, H., L. DeAngelo, and R.M. Stulz, 2010, Seasoned equity offerings, market timing,
and the corporate lifecycle, Journal of Financial Economics 95, 275-295.
Doidge, C., G.A. Karolyi, and R.M. Stulz, 2012, The U.S. left behind: The rise of IPO activity
around the world, working paper.
Easley, D., and M. O’Hara, 1987, Price, trade size, and information in securities markets, Journal
of Financial Economics 19, 69-90.
Eckbo, B.E., R.W. Masulis, and O. Norli, 2007, Security offerings, in B.E. Eckbo, ed., Handbook
of Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance, vol. 1, Chapter 6, Elsevier, NorthHolland.
Ellul, A., and M. Pagano, 2006, IPO underpricing and after-market liquidity, Review of Financial
Studies 19, 381-421.
Fang, V.W., T.H. Noe, and S. Tice, 2009, Stock market liquidity and firm value, Journal of
Financial Economics 94, 150-169.
Fong, K., C.W. Holden, and C.A. Trczinka, 2011, What are the best liquidity proxies for global
research?, working paper.
Gao, X., and J.R. Ritter, 2010, The marketing of seasoned equity offerings, Journal of Financial
Economics 97, 33-52.

29

Glosten, L.R., and L.E. Harris, 1988, Estimating the components of the bid/ask spread, Journal of
Financial Economics 21, 123-142.
Goyenko, R., C.W. Holden, and C. Trzcinka, 2009, Do liquidity measures measure liquidity?,
Journal of Financial Economics 92, 153-181.
Hasbrouck, J., 2006, Trading costs and returns for US equities: the evidence from daily data,
working paper.
Henderson, B.J., N. Jegadeesh, and M.S. Weisbach, 2006, World markets for raising new capital,
Journal of Financial Economics 82, 63-101.
Kamara, A., X. Lou, and R. Sadka, 2008, The divergence of liquidity commonality in the crosssection of stocks, Journal of Financial Economics 89, 444-466.
Karolyi, G.A., K.-H. Lee, and M.A. van Dijk, 2012, Understanding commonality in liquidity
around the world, Journal of Financial Economics 105, 82-112.
Kim, W., and M.S. Weisbach, 2008, Motivations for public equity offers: An international
perspective, Journal of Financial Economics 87, 281-307.
Kyle, A.S., 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 1315-1335.
Lee, C.M.C., A. Shleifer, R.H. Thaler, 1991, Investor sentiment and the closed-end fund puzzle,
Journal of Finance 46, 75-109.
Lesmond, D., 2005, Liquidity of emerging markets, Journal of Financial Economics 77, 411-452.
Levin, A., C. Lin, and C. J. Chu., 2002, Unit root tests in panel data: asymptotic and finite sample
properties, Journal of Econometrics 108, 1-24.
Lipson, M.L., and S. Mortal, 2009, Liquidity and capital structure, Journal of Financial Markets
12, 611-644.
Loughran, T., and J.R. Ritter, 1995, The new issues puzzle, Journal of Finance 50, 23-51.
Loughran, T., and J.R. Ritter, 1997, The operating performance of firms conducting seasoned
equity offerings, Journal of Finance 52, 1823-1850.

30

Lowry, M., 2003, Why does IPO volume fluctuate so much?, Journal of Financial Economics 67,
3-40.
McLean, R.D., T. Zhang, and M. Zhao, 2011, Investor protection and choice of share issuance
mechanism, working paper.
Miller, M.H., 1963, The corporate income tax and corporate financial policies, Cowles
Foundation Paper 210b.
Morck, R., B. Yeung, and W. Yu, 2000, The information content of stock markets: Why do
emerging markets have synchronous stock price movements?, Journal of Financial
Economics 58, 215-260.
Næs, R., J.A. Skjeltorp, and B.A. Ødegaard, 2010, Stock market liquidity and the business cycle,
Journal of Finance 66, 139-176.
Schill, M.J., 2004, Sailing in rough water: Market volatility and corporate finance, Journal of
Corporate Finance 10, 659-681.
Shleifer, A., 1986, Do demand curves for stock slope down?, Journal of Finance 41, 579-590.
Spiegel, M., and X. Wang, 2005, Cross-sectional variation in stock returns: liquidity and
idiosyncratic risk, working paper.
Watanabe, A., and M. Watanabe, 2008, Time-varying liquidity risk and the cross-section of stock
returns, Review of Financial Studies 21, 2449-2486.

31

Appendix: Variable definitions and data sources
Variable
Dependent variables
# equity issues / # listed
companies

proceeds / local market cap

# private SEOs / (# public +
private SEOs)

# postponements / (# realized
issues + # postponements )

# cancellations / (# realized
issues + # cancellations )

Description

Source

Quarterly number of primary common share issues (IPOs and SEOs) over 1995-2008,
scaled by the total number of listed domestic companies (as of the end of the previous
year). Aggregation by quarter is based on the date of issuance. We exclude issues by
utility companies and financial firms (two-digit SIC codes 49 and 60), foreign issues,
and issues that were eventually postponed or cancelled. For the U.S., we only include
issues from NYSE-listed companies. The number of listed companies is from the
World Bank (for Taiwan, we use http://www.world-exchanges.org/statistics).
Quarterly amount of proceeds (in million US$) raised from primary common share
issues (IPOs / SEOs) over 1995-2008, scaled by the total market capitalization of
domestic companies (in million US$, as of the end of the previous year). Aggregation
by quarter is based on the date of issuance. We exclude issues by utility companies and
financial firms (two-digit SIC codes 49 and 60), foreign issues, and issues that were
eventually postponed or cancelled. For the U.S., we only include issues from NYSElisted companies. Total domestic market capitalization is from the World Bank (for
Taiwan, we use Datastream).
Quarterly number of privately placed SEOs over 1995-2008, scaled by the total number
of public and privately placed SEOs. In the U.S., a private placement is directly
addressed to an institutional investor, without having to be registered with the
Securities and Exchange Commission. In other countries, an offering is classified as a
private placement when the corresponding securities are not widely listed. Rights
offerings are excluded.
Quarterly number of primary common share issues (IPOs and SEOs) that were
eventually postponed (over 1995-2008), scaled by the total number of realized and
postponed issues. Aggregation of postponed issues by quarter is based on the
announcement date of the offering.
Quarterly number of primary common share issues (IPOs and SEOs) that were
eventually cancelled (over 1995-2008), scaled by the total number of realized and
cancelled issues. Aggregation of cancelled issues by quarter is based on the
announcement date of the offering.

Securities Data Company (SDC)
World Bank’s World
Development Indicators.

32

Securities Data Company (SDC)
World Bank’s World
Development Indicators.

Securities Data Company (SDC)

Securities Data Company (SDC)

Securities Data Company (SDC)

Variable
Independent variables
market returns
market liquidity

market liquidity UP (DOWN)
market volatility
market turnover
market liquidity risk
market-to-book ratio
price-earnings ratio
dividend-price ratio
GDP growth
sales growth
leading economic indicator
idiosyncratic volatility

stock price synchronicity
global sentiment
U.S. sentiment index
closed-end fund discount

Description

Source

Quarterly average of daily local currency market returns, computed as the % change in
the country’s Datastream value-weighted total market return index.
Residuals from quarterly AR(1) regressions of market-wide liquidity estimated by
country over the whole sample period. Our quarterly time-series of market-wide
liquidity are constructed as the average monthly liquidity within the quarter obtained
from Karolyi, Lee, and van Dijk (2012), winsorized at 1% by country. The Amihud
measure is multiplied by -10,000 to obtain a measure that is increasing in liquidity.
Dummy variable indicating top (market liquidity UP) and bottom (market liquidity
DOWN) 33% liquidity quarters by country based on market-wide liquidity innovations.
Standard deviation of daily market returns within a quarter.
Average of monthly market-wide turnover within the quarter obtained from Karolyi,
Lee, and van Dijk (2012), winsorized at 1% by country.
Conditional volatility of quarterly market-wide Amihud liquidity based on a
GARCH(1,1) model estimated by country.
Aggregate market value of equity, scaled by the aggregate book value of equity of all
listed domestic companies in a country.
Aggregate market value of equity, scaled by the aggregate earnings of all listed
domestic companies in a country.
Aggregate dividends, scaled by the aggregate market value of equity of all listed
domestic companies in a country.
Year-on-year % change of quarterly GDP (real, seasonally adjusted) by country.
Year-on-year % change of quarterly aggregate sales by country.
Amplitude-adjusted composite leading economic indicator by country.
Value-weighted average across all stocks within a country of the standard deviation of
the residuals obtained from a simple market model run based on daily data within the
quarter.
Logistic transformation of the value-weighted average R2 across all stocks within a
country from a simple market model run based on daily data within the quarter.
Quarterly average of the monthly global country fund discount, which is computed as
the average % discount of 42 closed-end funds; decreasing with investors’ optimism.
Quarterly average of the monthly time-series of the U.S. sentiment index of Baker and
Wurgler (2006); increasing with investors’ optimism.
Quarterly average of the monthly time-series of the local country fund discount. The
local country fund discount is the % closed-end country fund discount for 22 countries
in our sample obtained from Karolyi, Lee, and van Dijk (2012); decreasing with
investors’ optimism.

Datastream

33

Own computations; Karolyi,
Lee, and van Dijk (2012)

Own computations; Karolyi,
Lee, and van Dijk (2012)
Own computations; Datastream
Own computations; Karolyi,
Lee, and van Dijk (2012)
Own computations; Karolyi,
Lee, and van Dijk (2012)
Datastream
Datastream
Datastream
Haver Analytics
OECD Statistics
OECD Statistics
Own computations; Datastream

Own computations; Datastream
Own computations; Karolyi,
Lee, and van Dijk (2012)
Own computations; Baker and
Wurgler (2006)
Own computations; Karolyi,
Lee, and van Dijk (2012)

Table 1: Summary statistics
This table reports the total number of equity issues (IPOs and SEOs from SDC), and the time-series average and standard deviation (based on quarterly
data) of the number of equity issues scaled by the number of listed stocks, of the total proceeds (in US$) of these equity issues scaled by the local stock
market capitalization (in US$), of local stock market returns (in local currency, expressed in % per day), and of market liquidity, as well as the time-series
average of local market volatility. The sample covers the period from the first quarter of 1995 through the fourth quarter of 2008 (with the exception of
Brazil and Germany, for which the data start in 1999QI, and Poland, for which the data start in 1996QII). Market returns are the total returns on the
value-weighted local market index from Datastream. The liquidity time-series are taken from Karolyi, Lee, and van Dijk (2012) and are based on the
value-weighted average of the daily estimates of Amihud’s (2002) price impact proxy for individual stocks – computed as the absolute stock return
divided by local currency trading volume. The Amihud measure is multiplied by -10,000 so that we obtain a measure that is increasing in liquidity.
Volatility is the standard deviation of daily market returns within a quarter. The table also depicts the total number of equity issues and the average of the
other variables for developed countries and for emerging countries, as well as the grand total / average for developed and emerging countries jointly.
# equity
issues
Developed countries
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Hong Kong
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Singapore
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
U.K.
U.S.
Total/average

12,013
95
151
5,178
197
181
1,138
934
2,823
377
4,534
229
130
377
876
178
428
178
4,792
1,591
36,400

# equity issues /
# listed companies
mean (%)
st.dev.
15.3090
1.7238
1.6293
5.1065
1.6133
2.7570
2.7289
2.3011
5.9706
2.5403
2.9519
1.9035
1.5674
3.8794
3.8994
0.4728
2.8811
1.2996
3.8666
0.4332
3.24

4.5993
1.8889
2.0957
3.1686
1.4026
3.0731
1.7541
2.1491
3.4771
2.3623
1.0626
1.7360
1.8053
2.5345
2.3402
0.5821
2.0682
1.3561
1.8814
0.1879
2.08

proceeds /
local market cap
mean (%)
st.dev.
0.4126
0.2189
0.0906
0.2284
0.1173
0.1586
0.1753
0.2317
0.1055
0.2953
0.1576
0.1098
0.1806
0.4214
0.1367
0.1573
0.1328
0.0770
0.1524
0.0595
0.18

0.5686
0.2689
0.1401
0.1823
0.1563
0.2696
0.2430
0.2787
0.0862
0.5504
0.1583
0.1696
0.3450
0.4376
0.1627
0.2700
0.2519
0.1244
0.1046
0.0302
0.24

34

mean (%)

st.dev.

mean

st.dev.

market
volatility
mean

0.0391
0.0219
0.0260
0.0422
0.0384
0.0621
0.0391
0.0304
0.0393
0.0291
-0.0005
0.0286
0.0287
0.0410
0.0190
0.0506
0.0456
0.0339
0.0301
0.0376
0.03

0.0988
0.1636
0.1580
0.1320
0.1568
0.2785
0.1688
0.1799
0.1952
0.1720
0.1588
0.1743
0.1068
0.1894
0.2232
0.1588
0.1978
0.1470
0.1137
0.1139
0.16

-0.7060
-0.9726
-0.5089
-0.7698
-0.0748
-0.4777
-0.9335
-1.2991
-0.0827
-0.2152
-0.0025
-0.1425
-1.1213
-0.0777
-0.9222
-0.1890
-0.0573
-0.0804
-0.1990
-0.0208
-0.44

0.3872
0.6679
0.3242
0.4018
0.0643
0.4481
0.6931
0.9297
0.0636
0.1764
0.0014
0.1384
0.3764
0.0412
0.5042
0.1750
0.0373
0.0546
0.2486
0.0172
0.29

0.8445
0.8661
0.9367
0.9106
0.9925
1.8307
1.1561
1.1213
1.4499
1.1665
1.2258
1.1334
0.7295
1.2298
1.1754
1.0485
1.3750
0.9977
0.9715
0.9854
1.11

market returns

market liquidity

Table 1, continued
# equity
issues
Emerging countries
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
China
Greece
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Mexico
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
South Africa
South Korea
Taiwan
Thailand
Total/average

48
128
166
1,286
218
2,418
202
1,232
49
132
203
94
66
3,226
1,117
414
10,999

Developed and emerging countries
Grand total/average
47,399

# equity issues /
# listed companies
mean (%)
st.dev.

proceeds /
local market cap
mean (%)
st.dev.

mean (%)

st.dev.

mean

st.dev.

market
volatility
mean

market returns

market liquidity

0.6133
0.5071
1.0721
2.9684
1.3593
0.8823
1.2762
2.7717
0.5058
1.0569
1.9204
1.7484
0.2575
3.7280
3.5377
1.7046
1.62

0.7894
0.5244
1.1693
3.5382
1.6975
1.6295
1.0818
1.5933
0.8336
1.3966
2.1497
1.8641
0.3289
3.4454
1.7733
1.6815
1.59

0.1175
0.1017
0.1279
0.7674
0.2272
0.1171
0.4047
0.1612
0.0764
0.0939
0.3570
0.6037
0.0393
0.5561
0.2493
0.2583
0.27

0.2703
0.1547
0.2073
1.2834
0.4071
0.2060
0.6211
0.1575
0.1836
0.1845
0.5329
1.1258
0.0839
0.8031
0.2693
0.4254
0.43

0.0517
0.0740
0.0335
0.0612
0.0458
0.0501
0.0488
0.0224
0.0704
0.0098
0.0506
0.0282
0.0588
0.0428
0.0174
0.0051
0.04

0.2239
0.2278
0.1378
0.2855
0.2298
0.2269
0.2778
0.2196
0.1672
0.2142
0.2290
0.1788
0.1594
0.2854
0.2049
0.2695
0.22

-0.9933
-0.4877
-0.0030
-0.0384
-2.9752
-0.6527
-0.0031
-1.3489
-0.0365
-0.1353
-2.2061
-1.0851
-0.5774
-0.0009
-0.0071
-0.1475
-0.67

0.5020
0.4578
0.0023
0.0426
2.2572
0.5520
0.0043
0.8099
0.0176
0.0676
1.9785
0.8026
0.3832
0.0015
0.0072
0.1485
0.50

1.5657
1.5221
0.8167
1.8783
1.3931
1.5210
1.6862
1.1674
1.2442
1.2706
1.5268
0.8617
1.1217
1.8862
1.5083
1.7531
1.42

2.52

1.86

0.22

0.33

0.04

0.19

-0.54

0.38

1.25

35

Table 2: Tobit models to explain quarterly variation in equity issues in 36 countries
This table reports coefficient estimates of pooled tobit models to explain variation in the quarterly number of equity
issues (IPOs and SEOs from SDC) – scaled by the number of listed stocks – in each of the 36 countries in our
sample over the period 1995-2008. Independent variables include lead, contemporaneous, and lagged local market
liquidity innovations and local market returns, a dummy for the first calendar quarter, and a lagged dependent
variable. The liquidity time-series are taken from Karolyi, Lee, and van Dijk (2012) and are based on daily estimates
of Amihud’s (2002) price impact proxy for individual stocks – computed as the absolute stock return divided by
local currency trading volume. The Amihud measure is multiplied by -10,000 so that we obtain a measure that is
increasing in liquidity. Since the level of Amihud market liquidity is non-stationary in most countries, we use
market liquidity innovations (taken as the residuals from country-by-country AR(1) regressions of the level of
market liquidity) as independent variable. Market returns are the total returns on the value-weighted local market
index from Datastream. All independent variables are standardized to have zero mean and unit standard deviation,
so the coefficients can be interpreted as the effect of a one standard deviation (1SD) shock in the independent
variable. The last two rows present the results of F-tests on the joint significance of all lagged market liquidity
variables and of all market liquidity variables, respectively. Significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level is indicated
by ***, **, and *, respectively (based on standard errors that are clustered by country).
dependent variable:
(1)
market liquidity (t+1)
market liquidity (t)
market liquidity (t-1)
market liquidity (t-2)
market liquidity (t-3)
market liquidity (t-4)
market returns (t+1)
market returns (t)
market returns (t-1)
market returns (t-2)
market returns (t-3)
market returns (t-4)
quarter 1 dummy
equity issues (t-1)

0.00003
0.00279***
0.00182***
0.00292***
0.00160*
0.00095

Year fixed effects
Country fixed effects
# Observations
# Countries
Pseudo R2
F-test lagged liquidity
F-test all liquidity

yes
yes
1,800
36
0.327
3.751***
8.468***

# equity issues (IPOs + SEOs) / # listed companies in quarter t
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

(7)

0.00079
0.00220*** 0.00217*** 0.00201*** 0.00174** 0.00175***
0.00033
0.00033
0.00003
0.00021
-0.00064
0.00194**
0.00214**
0.00190*
0.00284** 0.00146**
0.00147
0.00190**
0.00178**
0.00229**
0.00092
0.00152*
0.00166**
0.00162**
0.00234** 0.00126**
-0.00220*** -0.00181*** -0.00149*** -0.00232*** -0.00239*** -0.00187***
0.00140*
0.00100
0.00126
0.00050
0.00056
0.00221***
0.00278*** 0.00346*** 0.00346*** 0.00324*** 0.00322*** 0.00329***
0.00310*** 0.00191** 0.00187*** 0.00195**
0.00158*
0.00049
0.00173**
0.00070
0.00122*
0.00054
-0.00733*** -0.00721*** -0.00715*** -0.00769*** -0.00971***
0.544***
yes
yes
1,800
36
0.329
NA
NA

yes
yes
1,800
36
0.339
1.577
4.242***

36

yes
yes
1,800
36
0.338
1.928
5.522***

no
yes
1,800
36
0.330
1.985*
4.337***

no
no
1,800
36
0.0108
2.409*
2.972**

yes
yes
1,800
36
0.437
2.216*
3.531***

Table 3: Tobit models to explain quarterly variation in equity issues in 36 countries:
Controlling for capital market conditions
This table reports coefficient estimates of pooled tobit models to explain variation in the quarterly number of equity
issues (IPOs and SEOs from SDC) – scaled by the number of listed stocks – in each of the 36 countries in our
sample over the period 1995-2008. Independent variables include lead, contemporaneous, and/or lagged local
market liquidity innovations, returns, volatility, turnover, liquidity risk (conditional liquidity volatility based on a
GARCH(1,1) model), market-to-book ratio, price-earnings ratio, dividend-price ratio, a dummy for the first calendar
quarter, and a lagged dependent variable. The liquidity time-series are taken from Karolyi, Lee, and van Dijk (2012)
and are based on daily estimates of Amihud’s (2002) price impact proxy for individual stocks – computed as the
absolute stock return divided by local currency trading volume. The Amihud measure is multiplied by -10,000.
Since the level of Amihud market liquidity is non-stationary in most countries, we use market liquidity innovations
(taken as the residuals from country-by-country AR(1) regressions of the level of market liquidity) as independent
variable. Variable definitions are in the Appendix. All independent variables are standardized. The last two rows
present the results of F-tests on the joint significance of all lagged and all market liquidity variables, respectively.
Significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively (based on standard errors that
are clustered by country).
dependent variable:
market liquidity (t)
market liquidity (t-1)
market liquidity (t-2)
market liquidity (t-3)
market liquidity (t-4)
market returns (t+1)
market returns (t)
market returns (t-1)
market returns (t-2)
market volatility (t)
market volatility (t-1)
market volatility (t-2)
market turnover (t)
market turnover (t-1)
market turnover (t-2)
market liquidity risk (t+1)
market liquidity risk (t)
market liquidity risk (t-1)
market liquidity risk (t-2)
market-to-book ratio (t)
market-to-book ratio (t-1)
market-to-book ratio (t-2)
price-earnings ratio (t)
price-earnings ratio (t-1)
price-earnings ratio (t-2)
dividend-price ratio (t)
dividend-price ratio (t-1)
dividend-price ratio (t-2)
quarter 1 dummy
equity issues (t-1)
Year fixed effects
Country fixed effects
# Observations
# Countries
Pseudo R2
F-test lagged liquidity
F-test all liquidity

(1)
0.00228***
0.00024
0.00190**
0.00175*
0.00167**
-0.00165***
0.00121
0.00323***
0.00155**
0.00045
-0.00160*
-0.00119

# equity issues (IPOs + SEOs) / # listed companies in quarter t
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.00217*** 0.00264** 0.00161*** 0.00162*** 0.00209***
0.00038
0.00104
0.00008
0.00020
0.00019
0.00217**
0.00165
0.00211**
0.00195**
0.00198**
0.00192**
0.00156
0.00217*** 0.00195*** 0.00174**
0.00174**
0.00134
0.00167**
0.00163**
0.00158**
-0.00155*** -0.00140** -0.00123*
-0.00063
-0.00137**
0.00101
0.00119
0.00104
0.00061
0.00144
0.00341*** 0.00345*** 0.00314**
0.00248**
0.00325**
0.00194*** 0.00180**
0.00163**
0.00160**
0.00160**

(7)
0.00192**
-0.00006
0.00084
0.00087
0.00129
-0.00153**
0.00157*
0.00246*
0.00056
-0.00123
-0.00014
0.00038
0.00135
0.00116
-0.00054
-0.00046
-0.00106
-0.00144
0.00105
0.00097
0.00068
0.00041
-0.00354***
-0.00380**
0.00115
0.00196
0.00198
0.00105
0.00067
-0.00112
0.00027
0.00017
0.00438***
0.00250*
0.00140
0.00083
-0.00139
-0.00181
0.00010
0.00298**
-0.00129
-0.00229
-0.00033
-0.00071
-0.00746*** -0.00770*** -0.00709*** -0.00701*** -0.00700*** -0.00738*** -0.00954***
0.512***
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
1,800
1,800
1,800
1,762
1,797
1,800
1,762
36
36
36
35
36
36
35
0.339
0.338
0.339
0.349
0.356
0.338
0.444
1.667
1.763
0.758
3.900***
2.895**
2.295*
0.870
4.603***
5.249***
3.710***
4.771***
3.362***
4.141***
1.651

37

Table 4: Tobit models to explain quarterly variation in equity issues in 36 countries:
Controlling for business cycle, asymmetric information, and investor sentiment
This table reports coefficient estimates of pooled tobit models to explain variation in the quarterly number of equity
issues (IPOs and SEOs from SDC) – scaled by the number of listed stocks – in each of the 36 countries in our
sample over the period 1995-2008. Independent variables include lead, contemporaneous, and/or lagged local
market liquidity innovations and returns, business cycle proxies (GDP and sales growth, OECD leading indicator),
asymmetric information proxies (idiosyncratic volatility, “stock price synchronicity” or average R2 from market
model as in Morck, Yeung, and Yu, 2000), investor sentiment (local closed-end country fund discount, global
closed-end fund discount, and the U.S. sentiment index of Baker and Wurgler, 2006), a dummy for the first calendar
quarter, and a lagged dependent variable. Variable definitions are in the Appendix. All independent variables are
standardized. The last two rows present the results of F-tests on the joint significance of all lagged market liquidity
variables and of all market liquidity variables, respectively. Significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level is indicated
by ***, **, and *, respectively (based on standard errors that are clustered by country).
dependent variable:
(1)

# equity issues (IPOs + SEOs) / # listed companies in quarter t
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

market liquidity (t)
0.00187**
0.00160**
0.00142*
market liquidity (t-1)
-0.00005
-0.00107
-0.00119
market liquidity (t-2)
0.00175*
0.00197*
0.00179*
market liquidity (t-3)
0.00150
0.00268*** 0.00236***
market liquidity (t-4)
0.00173**
0.00227**
0.00218**
market returns (t+1)
-0.00127** -0.00196** -0.00190**
market returns (t)
0.00136
0.00142
0.00127
market returns (t-1)
0.00352*** 0.00472*** 0.00440***
market returns (t-2)
0.00163** 0.00255*** 0.00213**
GDP growth (t+2)
0.00220*
0.00067
GDP growth (t+1)
0.00040
-0.00017
GDP growth (t)
0.00020
0.00107
sales growth (t+2)
0.00204**
0.00185
sales growth (t+1)
0.00040
0.00018
sales growth (t)
0.00192
0.00147
leading economic indicator (t)
0.00089
idiosyncratic volatility (t)
idiosyncratic volatility (t-1)
stock price synchronicity (t)
stock price synchronicity (t-1)
global sentiment (t)
global sentiment (t-1)
U.S. sentiment index (t)
U.S. sentiment index (t-1)
closed-end fund discount (t)
closed-end fund discount (t-1)
quarter 1 dummy
-0.00788*** -0.00847*** -0.00868***
equity issues (t-1)
Year fixed effects
Country fixed effects
# Observations
# Countries
Pseudo R2
F-test lagged liquidity
F-test all liquidity

yes
yes
1,746
36
0.350
1.726
2.666**

yes
yes
1,221
26
0.413
4.377***
4.242***

yes
yes
1,202
26
0.415
3.993***
3.530***

38

0.00274***
0.00077
0.00254***
0.00225**
0.00196**
-0.00133**
0.00119
0.00296***
0.00177**

(7)

0.00224*** 0.00251***
0.00140*
0.00033
0.00048
0.00004
0.00212**
0.00231**
0.00122**
0.00190**
0.00205**
0.00114**
0.00168**
0.00174**
0.00038
-0.00176*** -0.00196*** -0.00210***
0.00146*
0.00109
0.00099
0.00363*** 0.00352*** 0.00293***
0.00190***
0.00201**
-0.00011

0.00234*
0.00105
-0.00069
-0.00180
0.00258
-0.00061

-0.00144
0.00033
-0.00022
0.00005
-0.00158
-0.00085
0.00011
0.00024
-0.00762*** -0.00660*** -0.00676*** -0.0104***
0.551***
yes
yes
1,800
36
0.342
2.602**
6.455***

yes
yes
1,800
36
0.338
1.944
5.461***

yes
yes
1,609
35
0.352
1.986*
4.235***

yes
yes
840
22
0.537
3.244**
2.729**

Table 5: Tobit models to explain quarterly variation in equity issues in 36 countries:
Asymmetric effect of liquidity
This table reports coefficient estimates of pooled tobit models to explain variation in the quarterly number of equity
issues (IPOs and SEOs from SDC) – scaled by the number of listed stocks – in each of the 36 countries in our
sample over the period 1995-2008. The key independent variables are (contemporaneous and lagged) dummy
variables indicating quarters with the top (Market liquidity UP) and bottom (Market liquidity DOWN) 33%
observations based on liquidity innovations by country. Other independent variables include lead, contemporaneous,
and lagged local market returns, and a dummy for the first calendar quarter. Variable definitions are in the
Appendix. All independent variables are standardized. The last two rows present the results of F-tests on the joint
significance of all UP and DOWN market liquidity variables, respectively. Significance at the 1%, 5% and 10%
level is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively (based on standard errors that are clustered by country).
dependent variable:
(1)
market liquidity UP (t)
market liquidity DOWN (t)
market liquidity UP (t-1)
market liquidity DOWN (t-1)
market liquidity UP (t-2)
market liquidity DOWN (t-2)
market liquidity UP (t-3)
market liquidity DOWN (t-3)
market liquidity UP (t-4)
market liquidity DOWN (t-4)
market returns (t+1)
market returns (t)
market returns (t-1)
market returns (t-2)
market returns (t-3)
market returns (t-4)
quarter 1 dummy
Year fixed effects
Country fixed effects
# Observations
# Countries
Pseudo R2
F-test all liquidity UP
F-test all liquidity DOWN

# equity issues (IPOs + SEOs) / # listed companies in quarter t
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

0.00311*
-0.00425***
0.00097
-0.00291**
-0.00024
-0.00186

0.00319*
-0.00428***
0.00115
-0.00333***
0.00075
-0.00167
0.00093
-0.00246*
-0.00037
-0.00295**

-0.00657***

-0.00672***

-0.00690***

-0.00712***

0.00250
-0.00283**
-0.00010
-0.00168
0.00029
-0.00090
0.00069
-0.00213
-0.00064
-0.00309**
-0.00171***
0.00109
0.00307***
0.00236***
0.00127
0.00089
-0.00713***

yes
yes
1,872
36
0.318
1.378
3.334**

yes
yes
1,800
36
0.330
1.798
3.450***

yes
yes
1,872
36
0.325
1.552
1.477

yes
yes
1,800
36
0.337
1.829
2.765**

yes
yes
1,800
36
0.338
2.011*
2.036*

39

0.00227
-0.00304**
-0.00031
-0.00146
-0.00058
-0.00139

-0.00169***
0.00120
0.00292***
0.00204***

0.00232
-0.00293**
-0.00022
-0.00170
0.00052
-0.00108
0.00122
-0.00276*
-0.00039
-0.00323**
-0.00169***
0.00123
0.00316***
0.00222***

Table 6: Tobit models to explain quarterly variation in the fraction of
privately placed SEOs in 36 countries
This table reports coefficient estimates of pooled tobit models (censored at 0 and 1) to explain variation in the
quarterly number of privately placed SEOs (from SDC) – scaled by the number of public SEOs plus the number of
privately placed SEOs – in each of the 36 countries in our sample over the period 1995-2008. Independent variables
include lead, contemporaneous, and/or lagged local market liquidity innovations and returns, proxies for capital
market conditions (market volatility, market-to-book ratio), business cycle proxies (GDP growth), and asymmetric
information proxies (idiosyncratic volatility, “stock price synchronicity” or average R2 from market model as in
Morck, Yeung, and Yu, 2000). Variable definitions are in the Appendix. The last row presents the results of F-tests
on the joint significance of all market liquidity variables. Significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level is indicated by
***, **, and *, respectively (based on standard errors that are clustered by country).
dependent variable:
(1)
market liquidity (t)
market liquidity (t-1)
market returns (t+1)
market returns (t)
market returns (t-1)
market returns (t-2)
market volatility (t)
market volatility (t-1)
market volatility (t-2)
market-to-book ratio (t)
market-to-book ratio (t-1)
market-to-book ratio (t-2)
GDP growth (t+2)
GDP growth (t+1)
GDP growth (t)
idiosyncratic volatility (t)
idiosyncratic volatility (t-1)
idiosyncratic volatility (t-2)
stock price synchr. (t)
stock price synchr. (t-1)
stock price synchr. (t-2)
Year fixed effects
Country fixed effects
# Observations
# Countries
Pseudo R2
F-test all liquidity

-0.0256***
-0.0052*
-0.0288***
0.0334***
-0.0192***
-0.0189***

# private SEOs / (# public + private SEOs) in quarter t
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
-0.0164***
0.0038
-0.0342***
0.0354***
-0.0210***
-0.0324***
0.0320***
-0.0143
-0.0528***

-0.0211***
0.0014
-0.0308***
0.0295***
-0.0612***
-0.0130***

-0.0303***
-0.0060
-0.0369***
0.0325***
-0.0270***
-0.0302***

-0.0223***
0.0001
-0.0341***
0.0297***
-0.0222***
-0.0236***

(6)
-0.0242***
-0.0054*
-0.0317***
0.0412***
-0.0191***
-0.0226***

-0.0042
0.0627***
-0.0934***
0.0203*
-0.0239*
0.0207
0.0220***
-0.0104
-0.0465***
0.0269***
-0.0011
-0.0062
yes
yes
1,236
36
0.391
30.74***

yes
yes
1,236
36
0.393
26.21***

yes
yes
1,213
35
0.385
27.85***

40

yes
yes
1,208
36
0.388
39.31***

yes
yes
1,235
36
0.392
36.12***

yes
yes
1,236
36
0.391
22.11***

Table 7: Tobit models to explain quarterly variation in postponements and cancellations of
equity issues in 36 countries
This table reports coefficient estimates of pooled tobit models to explain variation in the quarterly number of
postponed equity issues (models (1) through (4)) scaled by the number of realized equity issues plus the number of
postponements and in the quarterly number of canceled equity issues (models (5) through (8)) scaled by the number
of realized equity issues plus the number of cancellations – in each of the 36 countries in our sample over the period
1995-2008. Postponements and cancellations of IPOs and SEOs are obtained from SDC. Independent variables
include lead and contemporaneous local market liquidity and returns, proxies for capital market conditions (marketto-book ratio), the state of the business cycle (GDP growth), and asymmetric information (idiosyncratic volatility,
“stock price synchronicity” or average R2 from market model as in Morck, Yeung, and Yu, 2000). Variable
definitions are in the Appendix. Since SDC does not report postponements and cancellations by the postponement or
cancellation date but by the filing date, we only include contemporaneous and lead independent variables. The last
row presents the results of F-tests on the joint significance of all market liquidity variables. Significance at the 1%,
5% and 10% level is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively (based on standard errors that are clustered by
country).
dependent variable:

market liquidity (t+2)
market liquidity (t+1)
market liquidity (t)
market returns (t+2)
market returns (t+1)
market returns (t)
market-to-book ratio (t+2)
market-to-book ratio (t+1)
market-to-book ratio (t)
GDP growth (t+2)
GDP growth (t+1)
GDP growth (t)
idiosyncratic volatility (t+2)
idiosyncratic volatility (t+1)
idiosyncratic volatility (t)
stock price synchronicity (t+2)
stock price synchronicity (t+1)
stock price synchronicity (t)
Year fixed effects
Country fixed effects
# Observations
# Countries
Pseudo R2
F-test all liquidity

# postponements / (# realized issues +
# postponements) in quarter t
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
-0.0484***
-0.0345***
-0.0397***
-0.0276***
-0.0073
-0.0301***

-0.0536***
-0.0466***
-0.0482***
-0.0535***
0.0178***
-0.0487***
0.1280***
-0.0952***
0.1150***

-0.0572***
-0.0451***
-0.0550***
-0.0212***
-0.0081
-0.0295***

yes
yes
1,667
36
0.323
127.6***

yes
yes
1,636
35
0.340
146.6***

yes
yes
1,607
36
0.320
158.0***

# cancellations / (# realized issues +
# cancellations) in quarter t
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

-0.0470*** -0.0057
-0.0054
-0.0026
-0.0082
-0.0616*** -0.0011
-0.0046
-0.0010
-0.0027
-0.0527***
0.0078
0.0141
0.0081
0.0169
-0.0523*** -0.0291* -0.0524** -0.0378** -0.0360*
-0.0158***
0.0165
-0.0028
0.0114
0.0131
-0.0402*** -0.0493*** -0.0514*** -0.0461*** -0.0587***
0.0460
0.0078
-0.0523
0.0884***
0.0161
-0.0588***
-0.0331
0.0658***
0.00603
0.0143
-0.0028
-0.0656***
-0.0217
0.0402***
0.0634**
-0.0635***
0.0056
-0.0072
0.0001
0.0028
-0.0077

41

yes
yes
1,601
36
0.349
94.73***

yes
yes
1,696
36
0.178
0.210

yes
yes
1,664
35
0.182
0.772

yes
yes
1,635
36
0.179
0.177

yes
yes
1,630
36
0.192
0.423

Table 8: Tobit models to explain quarterly variation in equity issues in 36 countries:
IPOs vs. SEOs
This table reports coefficient estimates of pooled tobit models to explain variation in the quarterly number of equity
issues (separate regressions for IPOs and SEOs from SDC) – scaled by the number of listed stocks – in each of the
36 countries in our sample over the period 1995-2008. Models (1) through (4) have IPOs scaled by listed companies
as dependent variable. Models (5) through (8) have SEOs scaled by listed companies as dependent variable.
Independent variables include lead, contemporaneous, and/or lagged local market liquidity innovations and returns,
proxies for capital market conditions (market volatility, market-to-book ratio), business cycle proxies (GDP growth,
OECD leading indicator), asymmetric information proxies (idiosyncratic volatility, “stock price synchronicity” or
average R2 from market model as in Morck, Yeung, and Yu, 2000), investor sentiment (global closed-end fund
discount), and a dummy for the first calendar quarter. Variable definitions are in the Appendix. The last two rows
present the results of F-tests on the joint significance of all lagged market liquidity variables and of all market
liquidity variables, respectively. Significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level is indicated by ***, **, and *,
respectively (based on standard errors that are clustered by country).
dependent variable:
market liquidity (t)
market liquidity (t-1)
market liquidity (t-2)
market liquidity (t-3)
market liquidity (t-4)
market returns (t+1)
market returns (t)
market returns (t-1)
market returns (t-2)
market volatility (t)
market volatility (t-1)
market volatility (t-2)
market-to-book ratio (t)
market-to-book ratio (t-1)
market-to-book ratio (t-2)
GDP growth (t+2)
GDP growth (t+1)
GDP growth (t)
leading econ. indic. (t)
idiosyncratic volatility (t)
idiosyncratic volatility (t-1)
stock price synchr. (t)
stock price synchr. (t-1)
global sentiment (t)
global sentiment (t-1)
quarter 1 dummy
Year fixed effects
Country fixed effects
# Observations
# Countries
Pseudo R2
F-test lagged liquidity
F-test all liquidity

# IPOs / # listed companies in quarter t
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

# SEOs / # listed companies in quarter t
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

0.00193*** 0.00265*** 0.00250*** 0.00239*** 0.00081*
0.00073 0.00141***
0.00063
0.00054
0.00065
0.00082
0.00027
-0.00060
0.00039
0.00157**
0.00089 0.00151** 0.00136* 0.00160** 0.00127* 0.00177***
0.00164*
0.00099
0.00174* 0.00212** 0.00099*
0.00094
0.00131**
0.00138*** 0.00160** 0.00193*** 0.00232*** 0.00027
0.00087*
0.00084
-0.00062
0.00006
-0.00026
0.00010 -0.00144*** -0.00165*** -0.00116***
0.00009
-0.00053
0.00048
-0.00104
0.00109
0.00147*
0.00083
0.00134*
0.0013
0.00194** 0.00213* 0.00211*** 0.00280*** 0.00195**
0.00156*** -0.00021 0.00107**
0.00024 0.00154*** 0.00134** 0.00122**
-0.00124
-0.00163*
0.00026
0.00212
-0.00248**
0.00219**
0.00090
0.00032
0.00130
0.00057
0.00096
-0.00113
0.00040
0.00015
0.00080
0.00515**
0.00308**
0.00044
0.00074
0.00149
0.00112
0.00196
0.00021
0.00052
0.00082
-0.00138**
0.00005
-0.00033
-0.00206**
0.00103
0.00217*
-0.00784*** -0.00612*** -0.00724***
-0.00373** -0.00372***
yes
yes
1,800
36
0.190
1.961*
4.433***

yes
yes
1,389
29
0.209
1.692
3.292***

yes
yes
1,800
36
0.199
2.804**
5.145***

42

yes
yes
1,351
28
0.212
2.474**
3.318***

yes
yes
1,800
36
0.422
2.650**
2.858**

yes
yes
1,389
29
0.492
2.283*
1.861*

yes
yes
1,800
36
0.431
2.859**
3.535***

0.00083*
-0.00091
0.00107
0.00105
0.00115**
-0.00159**
0.00158
0.00247*
0.00065
0.00122
-0.00031
-0.00188
0.00007
0.00085
0.00177
0.00104
-0.00104
0.00031
0.00042
0.00150
-0.00264***
-0.00283**
0.00082
-0.00118
-0.00414**
yes
yes
1,351
28
0.510
3.416***
2.818**

Table 9: Tobit models to explain quarterly variation in equity issues in 35 countries:
IPO proceeds vs. SEO proceeds
This table reports coefficient estimates of pooled tobit models to explain variation in the quarterly US$ proceeds of
equity issues (separate regressions for IPOs and SEOs from SDC) – scaled by the US$ local market capitalization –
in 35 countries in our sample (we drop China because of its very large proceeds) over the period 1995-2008. Models
(1) through (4) have IPO proceeds scaled by local market cap as dependent variable. Models (5) through (8) have
SEO proceeds scaled by local market cap as dependent variable. Independent variables include lead,
contemporaneous, and/or lagged local market liquidity innovations and returns, proxies for capital market
conditions (market volatility, market-to-book ratio), business cycle proxies (GDP growth, OECD leading indicator),
asymmetric information proxies (idiosyncratic volatility, “stock price synchronicity” or average R2 from market
model as in Morck, Yeung, and Yu, 2000), investor sentiment (global closed-end fund discount), and a dummy for
the first calendar quarter. Variable definitions are in the Appendix. The last two rows present the results of F-tests
on the joint significance of all lagged market liquidity variables and of all market liquidity variables, respectively.
Significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively (based on standard errors that
are clustered by country).
dependent variable:
market liquidity (t)
market liquidity (t-1)
market liquidity (t-2)
market liquidity (t-3)
market liquidity (t-4)
market returns (t+1)
market returns (t)
market returns (t-1)
market returns (t-2)
market volatility (t)
market volatility (t-1)
market volatility (t-2)
market-to-book ratio (t)
market-to-book ratio (t-1)
market-to-book ratio (t-2)
GDP growth (t+2)
GDP growth (t+1)
GDP growth (t)
leading econ. indic. (t)
idiosyncratic volatility (t)
idiosyncratic volatility (t-1)
stock price synchr. (t)
stock price synchr. (t-1)
global sentiment (t)
global sentiment (t-1)
quarter 1 dummy
Year fixed effects
Country fixed effects
# Observations
# Countries
Pseudo R2
F-test lagged liquidity
F-test all liquidity

IPO proceeds / local market cap in quarter t
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

SEO proceeds / local market cap in quarter t
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

0.00027*** 0.00034*** 0.00036*** 0.00046***
0.00001
-0.00002
0.00005
0.00002
0.00002
-0.00007
0.00000
-0.00001
0.00005
-0.00011
0.00002
-0.00014
0.00022*** 0.00011
0.00020** 0.00012
0.00013
0.00005
0.00013
0.00011
0.00040*** 0.00033** 0.00040*** 0.00032**
0.00019
0.00010
0.00020*
0.00014
0.00004
0.00002
0.00014
0.00008
-0.00014
-0.00012
-0.00006
-0.00009
0.00011
0.00017
0.00015*
0.00013
-0.00014
-0.00023
-0.00012
-0.00023
0.00009
-0.00005
0.00019* -0.00028*
0.00020*
0.00026*
0.00025*
0.00017
0.00017
0.00016
0.00023** 0.00022
0.00045*** 0.00055*** 0.00046*** 0.00038*
0.00023**
-0.00011
0.00015
-0.00003
0.00021
0.00012
0.00016
0.00021
0.00013
0.00022
-0.00005
0.00022
-0.00003
0.00029
0.00043
0.00047
-0.00064**
-0.00026
-0.00003
-0.00016
-0.00022
-0.00032
0.00044
0.00047
0.00073**
0.00092**
-0.00051**
-0.00047*
-0.00004
-0.00004
0.00072***
0.00072***
0.00051***
0.00054***
0.00015
0.00018
0.00005
0.00015
-0.00013
0.00001
0.00015
0.00019
0.00017
0.00013
0.00020* 0.00026*
0.00009
-0.00002
-0.00012
-0.00017
-0.00024** -0.00048**
-0.00032
0.00012
0.00091**
-0.00011
-0.00120*** -0.00096*** -0.00137***
-0.00088** -0.00064** -0.00077*
yes
yes
1,749
35
0.051
4.513***
5.940***

yes
yes
1,338
28
0.062
2.676**
3.562***

yes
yes
1,749
35
0.055
5.650***
5.988***

43

yes
yes
1,303
27
0.068
1.988*
3.134***

yes
yes
1,749
35
0.024
1.630
1.355

yes
yes
1,338
28
0.032
0.723
0.593

yes
yes
1,749
35
0.026
1.265
1.082

yes
yes
1,303
27
0.035
0.941
0.762

