NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HEALTH AND HEALTH BEHAVIORS DURING THE WORST OF TIMES
Erdal Tekin
Chandler McClellan
Karen Jean Minyard
Working Paper 19234
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19234

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2013

Previously circulated as "Health and Health Behaviors during the Worst of Times: Evidence from
the Great Recession." Erdal Tekin gratefully acknowledges support from the Gary and Stacey
Jacobs Fellowship. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2013 by Erdal Tekin, Chandler McClellan, and Karen Jean Minyard. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Health and Health Behaviors during the Worst of Times
Erdal Tekin, Chandler McClellan, and Karen Jean Minyard
NBER Working Paper No. 19234
July 2013, Revised January 2017
JEL No. E32,I00,I10,I12,I14,I15
ABSTRACT
Previous studies have shown that recessions are typically associated with better health and health
behaviors. However, majority of these studies use data from the periods of relatively milder
economic downturns that predate the “Great Recession.” In this paper, we examine the
relationship between measures of macroeconomic conditions and a large set of outcomes of
health and health behaviors using data from BRFSS between 1990 and 2014 with an emphasis on
the period enveloping the Great Recession. Our results provide some support for the notion that
weaker macroeconomic conditions are positively associated with health related outcomes,
although the evidence is stronger for some of the outcomes (e.g., smoking and physical exercise)
than others and is not present for some of the other outcomes (e.g., experiencing poor mental
health) at all. But overall, the estimates are too small and imprecisely estimated to have any
meaningful implications. Furthermore, the estimates become weaker over time and largely
disappear in years prior to the period of the Great Recession and continues to remain small during
periods enveloping the recession and the afterwards. Overall, we found no evidence that the Great
Recession had a significant influence on the existing trends in health and health behaviors.
Erdal Tekin
School of Public Affairs
American University
4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20016-8070
and IZA
and also NBER
tekin@american.edu
Chandler McClellan
Center for Behavioral Health Statistics
and Quality (CBHSQ):
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration
chandler.mcclellan@gmail.com

Karen Jean Minyard
Department of Public Management and Policy
and Georgia Health Policy Center
Andrew Young Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
kminyard@gsu.edu

I. Introduction
The most recent recession in the United States, commonly referred to as the “Great
Recession,” differs significantly from any other economic crisis since World War II, and closely
resembles the Great Depression, particularly in terms of its severity and duration. The recession,
which lasted for 18 months, officially ended in June 2009, but the recovery had been slow,
particularly in job creation with the unemployment rate remaining at a stubbornly high level until
recently. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, between 2007 and 2010, the average
unemployment rate more than doubled from 4.6 percent to 9.6 percent. During the same period,
the employment rate decreased from 63 percent to 58.5 percent and approximately 5.2 million
individuals left the labor force.1
The fact that the recent economic downturn was both deeper and longer than the previous
recessions prompts an important question: to what extent has the Great Recession affected health
and health behaviors of Americans, and has the rising unemployment or decreasing employment
experienced during the Great Recession had a different effect on these outcomes than in previous
recessions? Although there is an extensive literature on the relationship between economic
conditions and health outcomes, the coverage period of the majority of existing studies predate
the period of Great Recession. But it is not clear whether the findings from these studies can
serve as a reliable guide to the relationship in more recent years for several reasons. First, the
sharp rise in unemployment and poor prospects of re-employment experienced during the Great
Recession may have led to an unprecedented number of Americans struggling with financial
strain. Consequently, the poverty rate rose sharply from 12.5 percent to 15 percent between 2007
and 2011 (U.S. Census Bureau 2012). Furthermore, the caseload for the Supplemental Nutrition

1

See http://www.bls.gov/cps/cpsaat01.pdf.

3"
"

Assistance Program (SNAP) reached record levels, with about one in seven Americans
participating in the program in 2011 (U.S. Department of Agriculture 2012). Second, the
collapse of the United States housing market in the same period and the subsequent decline in the
housing prices caused foreclosure rates to rise to historically high levels, further creating a
difficult burden on the lives of millions of Americans. As a culmination of a period of financial
strain, foreclosure often represents both a highly stressful event and a major shock to family
wealth, effects of which might be exacerbated by high unemployment rates during a recession
(Currie and Tekin 2015). Third, there was a sharp decline in the proportion of the population
with employer-sponsored health insurance during the Great Recession, driven by the significant
loss of employment during that time (e.g., Cawley et al. 2011, Holahan 2011, White and
Reschovsky 2012). According to Cawley et al. (2011), the number of Americans who lost health
insurance during the Great Recession was about nine times higher than the number who lost
insurance during the previous [2001] recession. Finally, the recession took a particularly
significant toll on local governments and their health departments across the United States,
undermining their capacity to provide critical core public health services for local communities
(Willard et al. 2012). Therefore, it is not clear whether one can make inferences from the studies
of earlier periods that would reliably apply to the most recession and the years since then.
This paper provides a fresh look at the relationship between macroeconomic conditions
and health and health behaviors. We use individual level data from the Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance System (BRFSS) to examine the relationship between macroeconomic conditions
and individuals’ health risk behaviors between 1990 and 2014. The range of outcome measures
we consider include modifiable health behaviors pertaining to smoking, alcohol consumption,
and physical activity, as well as self-reported general physical and mental health. While the
4"
"

BRFSS was used previously to study the relationship between unemployment and health
outcomes of individuals, our study is novel in terms of studying a large set of outcomes
reflecting both health and health behaviors for a period that leads up to, coincides with, and
follows the Great Recession. Furthermore, the previous studies usually rely on aggregate
unemployment rate as the proxy for the business cycle.2 In our analysis, we provide evidence
from two measures to capture macroeconomic conditions. The first measure is state
unemployment as utilized by the extant literature. The second measure that we use is the
employment rate, measured by the percentage of the state population who has a job. This
measure is potentially important because one of the key developments during the Great
Recession and the period that follows was the sharp rise in the number of people who have left
the labor force after losing hope of finding a job. Therefore, an analysis relying solely on
changes in the unemployment rate may not properly reflect a state’s economic condition. For
example, an improvement in the economic outlook may cause discouraged workers who had left
the labor force earlier to re-enter, leading to an increase in the unemployment rate or a prolonged
period of high unemployment. Conversely, a decrease in unemployment may reflect that
individuals are leaving the labor market after giving up hope of finding a job, rather than
improving economic conditions. However, despite these points it turns out that our results are
extremely consistent between these two measures.!
Our analysis also has the potential to provide useful information from a policy
perspective. According to data from the National Health Expenditure Accounts, the health care
spending represents a significant and increasing burden on the U.S. economy, accounting for
17.5 percent of the nation’s annual gross domestic product (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid

2

Several exceptions to this include Ruhm (1995; 2000; 2005), who employ measures of employment rate.

5"
"

Services, 2016). If, in fact, the sharp increase in unemployment during the Great Recession had
an adverse effect on health and, therefore is partially responsible for the rise in health care costs,
then this information could provide further basis for government interventions to reduce the
unemployment rate or mitigate its effects, including the American Jobs Act and expansions in
the Unemployment Insurance Program.
II. Literature
There is a sizeable literature examining the relationship between macroeconomic
fluctuations and health. In a widely cited study, Ruhm (2000) found that mortality and morbidity
in the United States follow a pro-cyclical pattern, i.e., they both worsen when the economy
temporarily improves. This finding was largely confirmed by a series of follow-up studies by
Ruhm (e.g., Ruhm 2003, Ruhm 2005, Ruhm 2007) and was echoed by others as well (e.g.,
Dehejia and Lleras-Muney 2004). To a large extent, a similar pattern was also established for
other countries (e.g., Neumayer 2004, Granados 2005, Gerdtham and Ruhm 2006, Ásgeirsdóttir
et al. 2014).!
Motivated by a desire to explain the mechanisms for the pro-cyclicality in mortality, this
finding has spawned a new wave of research focusing on the relationship between
macroeconomic conditions and health behaviors. The overall finding from these studies is that
health behaviors mostly improve during economic downturns. One common explanation offered
for this finding was that recessions lead to changes in certain life styles, which are health
promoting. In particular, it was argued that work itself is stressful and a reduction in time at work
may reduce the prevalence of stress-induced illness as well as make more time available for
salutary behaviors, such as exercise and healthy dieting (e.g., Catalano, Goldman-Mellor et al.
2011). For example, Ruhm (2005) used data from the BRFSS between 1987 and 2000 and found
6"
"

that changes in health behaviors represent a key mechanism for the pro-cyclical variation in
mortality and morbidity observed in the literature. In particular, he showed that smoking and
excess weight decline during temporary economic downturns, while leisure-time and physical
activity increase. In another study, Ruhm and Black (2002) used data from 1987 to 1999 waves
of the BRFSS to show that alcohol consumption decreased in bad economic times. The authors
concluded that any stress-induced increases in alcohol consumption during recessions were more
than offset by income effects.3
More recently, Xu (2013) combined health data from the BRFSS between 1984 and 2005
and the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) between 1976 and 2001 along with
employment data from the Current Population Survey (CPS) to examine the relationship between
wages and hours of work on health behaviors of low-educated individuals. He found that higher
wages and hours of work tied to economic expansions were associated with increased smoking
and decreased physical activity. His study also provided evidence suggesting that economic
downturns may have heterogeneous effects on health behaviors based on the extent to which
behaviors are time-intensive.
Studies using data sources other than the BRFSS usually reach similar conclusions,
although the consensus appears to be less robust and the findings to be more sensitive to the time
period considered. For example, Ettner (1997) used data from the 1988 National Health
Interview Survey (NHIS) and found that non-employment significantly reduced both alcohol
consumption and dependence symptoms, possibly due to an income effect. Ásgeirsdóttir et al.
(2014) examined the effect of the October 2008 economic crisis in Iceland on a range of health

3

In contrast, Dee (2001) finds that the prevalence of binge drinking is strongly counter-cyclical using data from the
BRFSS over the period of 1984-1995. Ruhm and Black (2002) offer a number of explanations for the contradictory
finding in Dee (2001), including the relatively small number of states contained in the BRFSS in early years and the
lack of sampling weights in the analysis performed in Dee (2001).

7"
"

behaviors and found that the crisis led to reductions in health-compromising behaviors, including
smoking, heavy drinking, consumption of sugared soft drinks and fast food, and indoor tanning.
Furthermore, they documented that the crisis reduced consumption of fruits and vegetables, but
increased consumption of fish oil and getting recommended hours of sleep. The authors also
argued that these behavioral changes were explained by increases in prices during the crisis. On
the other hand, Böckerman et al. (2007) explored the relationship between weight and economic
conditions using Finnish data from the period of 1978-2002. They found that an improvement in
economic conditions, measured by the regional unemployment rates, resulted in a decrease in
Body Mass Index (BMI). Similarly, Charles and DeCicca (2008) used data from the NHIS for
the years 1997-2001 to document evidence of a pro-cyclical relationship for weight-related
health and mental health among men.
Most recently, several studies documented that the pro-cyclical relationship between
macroeconomic conditions and mortality obtained in earlier studies might be weakening. For
example, Ruhm (2015a) revisited the aggregate mortality and unemployment relationship using
data from multiple sources over the period between 1976 and 2010. He found that the strong
procyclical pattern of mortality present in the 1970s and 1980s has largely disappeared or even
become countercyclical in recent years. One exception to this is the deaths from cardiovascular
disease and transport accidents. Interestingly, Ruhm (2015a) showed that the decline in the
procyclicality of mortality began long before the Great Recession and in fact increased slightly in
the recession. In another recent study, Ruhm (2015b) extended the analysis period to 2013 and
confirmed the earlier findings of a declining procyclical fluctuation in U.S. mortality.
Furthermore, this analysis also revealed that the two severe economic crises occurring at the
beginning of1980s and the Great Recession both had a protective effect on mortality that was
8"
"

about twice as large as that estimated by the higher unemployment rates experienced during such
periods alone.
Relatedly, McInerney and Mellor (2012) examined the relationship between recessions
and seniors’ health and health behaviors using data from the Medicare Beneficiary Survey. They
found that the relationship between unemployment and mortality of the elderly was negative for
the analysis period of 1976-1991, but positive for the period of 1994-2008.
It is important to stress that the existing evidence was largely built on information that
predates the period of the Great Recession, with the exception of the two recent Ruhm studies
mentioned above and a handful other studies (e.g., Macy et al. 2013; Colman and Dave 2013,
2014). Macy et al. (2013) used data from a county in Indiana to study the health behaviors of
individuals between 2005 and 2011. The authors found that financial strain reported during the
great recession had a negative impact on a range of health behaviors overall. Colman and Dave
(2013) examined the relationship between unemployment and physical activity using data from
the American Time Use Survey. Using within-state variation in employment and unemployment,
the authors found that recreational exercise increased during recessions as employment
decreased. In addition, they also found that individuals substituted into television watching,
sleeping, childcare, and housework. In a follow up study, the same authors studied the effects of
individual experience of unemployment on a range of health behaviors during the most recent
recession using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth 1979 (Colman and Dave 2014). Their findings were largely consistent with
prior studies based on cross-sectional data, i.e. becoming unemployed was associated with a
small increase in leisure-time exercise and in body weight, a moderate decrease in smoking, and
a substantial decline in total physical activity.
9"
"

III. Data
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance
System (BRFSS) is an on-going health survey system tracking the health conditions and risk
behaviors in the United States since 1984. Steadily expanding from 15 states in 1984, the BRFSS
is a representative telephone survey that currently provides coverage of all 50 states and the
District of Columbia. Over the course of each year, the BRFSS contacts over 200,000 individuals
to create a repeated annual cross section. The present study focuses on the period from 1990 to
2014, for which the sample size totals around 2.36 million individuals after limiting the analysis
to individuals ages 25 to 55 and excluding missing observations on key variables.4 Descriptive
statistics for the health behaviors and all of our covariates are presented in Table 1.
Measures of Macroeconomic Conditions
Our first measure of economic conditions is the state unemployment rate. This measure is
obtained from the Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS) of the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS). As shown in Table 1, the average state unemployment rate was 6.3 percent during our
analysis period. We take the average of this measure over a three-month period because
contemporaneous values might not reflect the true economic conditions in a state, but rather
capture short-term fluctuations.5 This is similar in principle to the approach in studies using
annual data, which basically smooth over a 12-month period.
Our second measure is based on the percentage of individuals employed at the state level,
again averaged over a three-month period. In particular, we construct the average percentage of
the civilian non-institutionalized state population (aged 16 and over) employed during the three

4

Note however that the sample size for each regression slightly differs from the baseline sample size due to the
number of observations in the outcome variables.
5
Note that we also estimate our models using one-month-lagged measures of these variables. These results produced
estimates that are very similar to those presented in this paper and are available from the authors upon request.

10"
"

months ending with the survey month.6 This measure is also available from the BLS’s LAUS.
As illustrated in Table 1, the average state employment rate was 61.3 percent during our analysis
period.
Outcome Variables
Topics included in BRFSS provide an extensive overview of a respondent's current
health, health history, and health behaviors. Current health questions range from broad ones,
such as those asking about general health, to specific ones, such as questions asking if the
respondent snores. Included in this range are questions regarding smoking and drinking behavior,
stress, and mental health. In addition to detailed health questions, the BRFSS provides
information on the typical demographic characteristics of its respondents.
We focus on smoking behavior as the first domain of outcomes in our study. The
“Current Smoker” outcome is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the respondent is a current
smoker, and 0 otherwise. BRFSS provides information on the smoking behavior based on
whether the respondent smokes daily, some days, is a former smoker, or has never smoked. The
current smoker variable indicates whether the respondent smokes daily or some days. Similarly,
“Daily Smoker” indicates whether the respondent smokes every day. In the past, smoking has
typically been considered a normal good and has exhibited a pro-cyclical pattern (Bobak, Jha et
al. 2000, Ruhm 2000). However, the prevalence of tobacco use has changed dramatically in the
United States in the past few decades and emerging evidence suggests that it might have shifted
from being normal good to an inferior good (Cheng and Kenkel 2010; Kenkel et al. 2014). As
shown in Table 1, about 23 percent of our sample reported being a current smoker and 18 percent
reported being a daily smoker.

6

These measures closely follow those used by Ruhm (2005).

11"
"

Our next set of outcomes is related to alcohol consumption. Specifically, we examine
three measures of alcohol use: being a current drinker, binge drinking, and chronic drinking. The
outcome of being a “current drinker” measures overall alcohol use, with any reported use over
the past month resulting in a value of 1. Being a “binge drinker” is measured by an indicator,
which takes on the value of 1 if the respondent drank more than five servings of alcohol in one
sitting during the previous month, and 0 otherwise. Lastly, the “chronic drinking” is defined as a
binary indicator for drinking more than 60 alcoholic beverages per month. The evidence on
alcohol use during the economic cycle is also mixed. A number of studies found pro-cyclical
effects (Ruhm and Black 2002, Johansson et al. 2006) while others have found no relationship
(Ogwang and Cho 2009) or even an increase in alcohol use during economic turmoil (Cotti et al.
2013). While the evidence on overall alcohol use is mixed, it has been suggested that heavy and
light drinkers might exhibit an opposite response to poor economic conditions, with heavy
drinkers reducing consumption and light drinkers slightly increasing consumption (Ruhm and
Black 2002). On average, 59 percent of our sample report drinking at least alcoholic beverage in
a month. The prevalence of binge and chronic drinkers are about 16 and 6 percent, respectively.
In addition to changes in consumption patterns of potentially harmful products, the
economic cycle can also affect physical activity patterns and dieting. We examine this potential
channel through the “Physical Activity” and “Obesity” outcomes. In the BRFSS, the respondents
are asked: “During the past month, other than your regular job, did you participate in any
physical activities or exercises such as running, calisthenics, golf, gardening, or walking for
exercise?” If the respondent reported any physical activity in the past 30 days other than that
which he or she does while working, we defined a “Physical Activity” indicator that takes on the
value of 1, and otherwise 0. Similarly, the “Overweight,” “Obese,” and “Severely Obese”
12"
"

outcomes are indicator variables equal to 1 if the respondent’s self-reported height and weight
result in a Body Mass Index greater than 25, 30, and 35, respectively.7 As shown in Table 1,
approximately 76 percent of sample respondents reported having engaged in physical activity,
while the proportion of the sample who is overweight, obese, and severely obese is 60, 24, and 9
percent, respectively.
The outcome variables thus far have measured potential channels through which the
business cycle can affect health. Our next set of outcomes measures the respondent’s reported
health directly. The outcome of “General Health” captures the respondent’s overall general
health at the time of the interview. While the original response is a categorical variable on a
Likert scale from 1 to 5, we condense respondent’s answers to a binary variable equal to 1 if the
respondent is in very good or excellent health, and 0 otherwise. Likewise, the outcomes of
“Excellent Health” and “Poor Health” are indicators if the respondent reports being in excellent
or poor health, respectively. We also have an outcome to represent those individuals who report
being in either “poor” or “fair” health. The next two outcomes focus on the respondent’s mental
well-being, which includes stress, depression, and problems with emotions over the 30 days
preceding the interview. These outcomes are measured by indicator variables equal to 1 if the
respondent reports poor mental health for more than 10 or 20 days in the past month, and 0
otherwise. About 87 percent of our respondents were in either good or excellent health. The
proportions of our sample in excellent and poor health were 24 percent and 3 percent,
respectively. Finally, approximately 14 percent of our sample reported having mental health
problems for at least 10 days in the past 30 days, while eight percent reported having such
problems for at least 10 days during that period.

7

Body Mass Index is calculated as the ratio of weight in kilograms and height in meters squared.

13"
"

Finally, we also supplement our analysis with a set of explanatory variables including
binary indicators representing age, gender, race and ethnicity, marital status, and education.
IV. Empirical Method
We estimate a series of regressions that relate changes in health and health behaviors to
macroeconomic conditions along with a vector of individual level characteristics. Specifically,
our basic empirical model is in the following form:
!"#$% = '( + '* +#$% + , "#$% '- + .# + /$ + 0% + 1!23 + 1 4"#$% 1,

(1)

where Hismy is one of our outcome measures for individual i living in state s interviewed in
month m of year y. The vector Xismy represents exogenous individual characteristics displayed
in Table 1. The variable of interest in equation (1) is Esmy, one of the two measures of state level
macroeconomic conditions.
In equation (1), we also control for state fixed effects, µs, which would account for
permanent differences across states that may affect health and health behaviors, such as lifestyles
associated with weather patterns, persistent smoking propensities, and state infrastructures on
health care and education. Therefore, the identification of α1 in equation (1) comes from within
state variation in economic conditions over time, rather than fluctuations across states. The δm is
a vector of month fixed effects, which accounts for the impact of seasonality that may exist in
some of the health behaviors such as physical activity (Ruhm 2005). We also control for year
fixed effects, λy, which would capture nationwide trends and shocks that may influence health
behaviors, such as national fluctuations in food and cigarette prices, calorie content in national
chain restaurants, the reduction in payroll tax in 2010, and federal regulations related to health.
We further control for confounding factors that may trend linearly by adding a vector of statespecific linear time trends denoted by !23. Adding state-specific linear time trends help us
14"
"

account for unobserved factors that vary within states over time, such as social norms related to
health behaviors like smoking and exercise. These trends also help us control for other state level
time-varying factors such as changes in health care delivery services that closely follow tax
revenues. The εismy is an idiosyncratic random error term. We estimate linear probability models
using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) and report robust standard errors clustered at the state level.
All the regressions are weighted using the BRFSS sampling weights.8
Estimating equation (1) would shed light into the relationship between macroeconomic
conditions and the outcome variables, but it would not provide any insights into our main
question, i.e., whether this relationship has changed over time with a special emphasis on the
period enveloping the Great Recession. We implement two methods to get at this question. First,
we augment equation (1) by adding a binary variable indicating whether the observation belongs
to a period that coincides with the Great Recession. This specification is similar to the one
estimated by Ruhm (2005), which examines the impact of severe national recessions along with
the effect of unemployment rate. In this specification, the estimate on the Great Recession
indicator reveals whether the recession had any impacts on health and health behaviors beyond
those expected due to the associated higher rates of unemployment (or lower rates of
employment). We also go beyond this specification by estimating regressions with a binary
indicator for Great Recession as well as an interaction between this indicator and each of our
measure of macroeconomic conditions. In these specifications the year fixed effects, 0% , must be
excluded in order to avoid perfect collinearity. Thus, these estimates should be viewed with
caution due to potential omitted variable bias.9
8

Note that we also estimate unweighted regressions. These results are similar to those presented here and are
available from the authors upon request.
9
Note that the beginning and end dates for state-level recessions are harder to define and we are aware of no reliable
source to gather that information accurately. While the depth and the duration of the recession vary considerably

15"
"

Second, we turn our attention to our second and also the main strategy, in which we
estimate equation (1) for different periods and observe how the predicted impact of
macroeconomic conditions evolve over time. Following Ruhm (2015ab), we implement this
analysis using differing starting dates and varying lengths of analysis periods. Furthermore, we
also estimate models in which we keep the analysis period fixed, but sequentially move the
sample window to cover all years between 1990-2014 using sample window periods of 5-year,
10-year, and 15-year. These analyses allow us to see how the pattern in the relationship between
macroeconomic conditions and health and health behaviors has evolved over time and between
periods that occurred prior to, during, and after the Great Recession.
V. Results
Table 2 presents the estimates of the relationship between state unemployment rate and
health and health behaviors from equation (1). The first column corresponds to estimates from a
specification with state, month, and year fixed effects along with time-variant state
characteristics. The second column adds state-specific linear time trends to the list of controls in
column 1. Robust standard errors clustered at state level are shown in parentheses.10
The emerging pattern from Table 2 is that the coefficients are mostly small in magnitude
and imprecisely estimated, and this pattern is largely consistent between columns 1 and 2.
Focusing on the estimates in column 2, in which we account for unobserved differences across
states that trend linearly, the only coefficients that are estimated with precision are those of the
two smoking variables and both of them correspond to relatively small effect sizes. In particular,

across states, we adopt the official dating scheme determined by the National Bureau of Economic Research in order
to avoid arbitrariness. Our results are largely robust to alternative dating schemes. Nevertheless, the potential
discrepancy between the timing of the Great Recession experienced nationwide and state-specific recessions
experienced around the same period.
10
We symbolize statistical significance at the 95 and 99 percent levels of confidence. The estimates on other control
variables are consistent with those found in the relevant literature are available from the authors upon request.

16"
"

a one-percentage point increase in the state unemployment rate is associated with a 0.469
percentage-point decrease in the likelihood of being a current smoker and a 0.353 percentagepoint decrease in the likelihood of being a daily smoker. These point estimates translate into an
effect size of approximately 2 percent for both outcomes. The negative relationship between
unemployment and smoking behavior obtained here is largely consistent with the previous
literature (e.g., Ruhm, 2005). The estimates on the other variables draw a mixed picture in terms
of the direction of the relation. For example, chronic drinking appears to be negatively associated
with unemployment while being a current drinker or a binge drinker is positively associated.
Similarly, the relationship between unemployment rate and being overweight appears to be
positive, but it is the opposite for being obese or severely obese. Physical activity has a positive
coefficient, suggesting that a rise in unemployment increases physical exercise. The point
estimate translates into an effect size of 0.431 percentage point or less than one percent
calculated at the sample mean of 0.763.
Regarding the self-reported health outcomes, the evidence in Table 2 is again mixed in
terms of the direction of estimates. For example, unemployment rate appears to be negatively
associated with both being excellent health and fair to poor health, but the estimates are
economically and statistically insignificant in both cases. The pattern is similar for the two
mental health outcomes, where the estimates are with opposite sign, but neither is significant nor
sizeable. Note that the physical and mental health measures in BRFSS are self-assessed and
therefore subject to reporting bias. For example, the response patterns to these questions may be
influenced by economic conditions. This reporting bias may be even more severe if the
responses of survey participants are also influenced by the physical and mental health of other
people close to them. These potential measurement problems may be one reason for the
17"
"

inconsistency between the findings on health outcomes in our analysis and the procyclical
mortality obtained in the literature. Overall, nine of the 15 estimates, including the two
statistically significant ones, imply that an increase in unemployment is associated with an
improvement in health and health behaviors. Having said that, they are all small in magnitude to
have any meaningful implications for any practical purposes.
The results from the estimation of equation (1) with state employment rate are presented
in Table 3. Similar to Table 2, the estimates are presented from specifications without and with
state-specific linear as shown in columns 1 and 2. Focusing on column 2, the estimates are again
small in magnitude and, with the exception of the two smoking outcomes, statistically
insignificant, suggesting that the relationship between state employment rate and health and
health behaviors is largely inconsequential once observable differences across individuals and
states are accounted for. The estimates on smoking variables are consistent with those in Table 2,
indicating that employment rate and the prevalence of smoking appears to be positively related
with each other. Although none of the estimates on other health behavior outcomes are
significant and sizeable, they appear to point to a pattern of a negative relationship between
employment and prevalence of healthy behaviors, i.e., an increase in state employment rate is
likely to increase the likelihood of obesity as well as being severely obese, and being a chronic
drinker, but likely to decrease engaging in physical activity. While this is consistent with the
previous research in general, it is important to stress that all of the coefficients in Table 3
including those of physical and mental health are small and imprecisely estimated.
One possible interpretation of the results presented in Tables 2 and 3 is that the countercyclical pattern in health and health behaviors obtained by much of the previous research has
become inconsequential when the analysis period is extended to more recent years including the
18"
"

Great Recession. In order to investigate this possibility further, we next turn our attention to
results from models which include a separate indicator for the Great Recession. In the first set of
results presented in Tables 4 and 5, we report the estimates on our measures of macroeconomic
condition and a binary indicator for the period of Great Recession. As shown in Table 4, the
estimates on unemployment rate are very similar to those displayed in Table 2. The coefficients
on the Great Recession indicator shown in column 3 reveal no association between our outcomes
and the recession. In other words, there are no changes in health and health behaviors during the
period of Great Recession that are beyond those captured by an increase in the state
unemployment rate. All of the estimates in Table 4 are very small ranging from 0.1 percentage
point to 0.6 percentage points, but always imprecisely estimated. The employment rate results
shown in Table 5 point to a similar a story. The only statistically significant estimate is for the
current drinking model, in which the estimated Great Recession effect is equivalent to a
reduction in being current drinker by 0.7 percentage point. However, this effect size is very small
for all practical purposes.
Note that our question of main interest is whether the relationship between indicators of
macroeconomic conditions and health and health behaviors exhibited a different pattern during
the period enveloping the Great Recession. The specification in Tables 4 and 5 show whether the
trajectory of outcomes in health and health behaviors considered in this paper changed in this
period, but do not really address the question of main interest. In order to shed light into this
question, we need to specify an equation that not only contains an indicator for Great Recession,
but also an interaction term between this indicator and our measures of macroeconomic
conditions. The estimates from this specification are shown in Tables 6 and 7 for the
unemployment rate and the employment rate, respectively. The unemployment rate estimates
19"
"

shown in column 1 are largely consistent with the results from the basic model presented in
Table 2. The unemployment rate is negatively associated with both smoking models and the
estimates are statistically significant at the five percent level in both cases. Regarding the
estimates for the other outcome variables, none are statistically significant, but the overall pattern
appears to favor the notion that an increased unemployment is more likely to result in an
improvement in health and health behaviors than the opposite. For example, the estimates on
chronic drinking, being obese and severely obese, physical exercise, being in fair to poor health
and having at least 10 days of poor mental health are all negative, implying that an increase in
unemployment is associated with an improvement in these outcomes. Exceptions to this pattern
are binge drinking, being overweight, being in at least good health, and experiencing poor mental
health for more than 20 days. But it is important to keep in mind that, if anything, the overall
evidence in Table 6 is weak and therefore should be interpreted with caution since none of the
estimates other than the two that are related to smoking behavior are statistically significant. The
estimates on the Great Recession indicator shown in column 3 are again small and imprecise,
offering no evidence of a particular recession effect beyond that of anticipated by
unemployment.
Next we turn our attention to the interaction coefficients shown in column 5 of Table 6
where we present the estimates on the interaction between the unemployment rate and the Great
Recession. First of all, with the exception of four coefficients, all of the estimates on the
interaction variables are opposite in sign to those of the unemployment rate variable. This
suggests that whatever is the pattern in the relationship between unemployment and health and
health behaviors, that pattern is likely to have been mitigated during the period of Great
Recession for those outcomes. Moreover, of the fifteen outcome variables considered in the
20"
"

regressions, 11 of them indicate that the unemployment had an effect in the direction of
worsening health and health behaviors during the period coincided with the Great Recession. For
example, the interaction coefficient is positive for both smoking variables, implying that any
smoking reducing effect of unemployment obtained previously appeared to be mitigated during
the Great Recession. A similar dampening effect is also obtained for the outcomes of all three
obesity measures, physical activity, being in good and excellent general health, being in fair to
poor health, and having more than 10 days of poor mental health. Note that the estimate on fair
to poor health is the only one estimated with statistical significance in this group. Among the
outcomes exception to this pattern, the only one estimated precisely is being in poor health,
which suggest that an increase in unemployment reduced the likelihood of being in poor health
during the Great Recession. Although there is no clear explanation for this result, it is
noteworthy that the estimate on unemployment for this model shown in column 1 is essentially
zero. It is important to keep in mind the potential measurement error in this variable for the
reasons mentioned above. This is also the variable with the lowest mean among all the fifteen
outcomes, which may make the regression results more sensitive to outliers.
The corresponding estimates for the interaction between the employment rate and the
Great Recession are shown in Table 7. Consistent with the results shown in Table 6, the
estimates in columns 1 and 5 of Table 7 are discordant in sign with each other in vast majority of
cases – 13 out of 15 to be exact. Keeping in mind that most of the estimates continue to remain
statistically insignificant, one interpretation of this evidence is that the underlying mechanisms
driving the relationship between macroeconomic conditions and health and health behaviors
likely worked in different directions during the period of Great Recession. Focusing on the
estimates on the interaction terms alone, about half of them point to a positive relationship
21"
"

between the employment rate and health and health behaviors. Moreover, all of the estimates
remain too small to have any meaningful implications.
The overall evidence from Tables 6 and 7 lend some, albeit not strong, support to the
notion that a deterioration in macroeconomic conditions as measured by either rising
unemployment or decreasing employment is associated with an improvement in health and
health behaviors. However, as mentioned earlier, these specifications exclude year fixed effects
to avoid perfect collinearity, raising the possibility of omitted variable bias. Thus, we next turn
attention to our main set of analyses, which is based on estimating the relationship between
macroeconomic conditions and outcomes of interest for different sub-periods, and then exploring
whether there are any detectable changes in this relationship in sub-periods that envelops the
Great Recession. For ease of exposition, we present the results from these analyses in a series of
graphs.
Figure 1A shows the unemployment rate coefficients from regressions in which the
analysis period begins in 1990 and ends in years ranging between 1999 and 2014. Similarly, the
employment rate coefficients are displayed in Figure 1B. Solid lines represent point estimates
and dotted lines show the 95% confidence intervals. It is not surprising that the confidence
intervals become narrower over time since the sample size grows as the analysis period is
extended. Interestingly however, the estimates get closer to zero not only statistically but also
economically in the process and this pattern is present in both Figures 1A and 1B. In other
words, the relationship between macroeconomic conditions and health and health behaviors
appear to become monotonically smaller over time between 1990 and 2014 regardless of the
outcome. Furthermore, the decline in the macroeconomic effect appears to have started in the
years prior to the beginning of the Great Recession and remained largely unchanged in the years
22"
"

following the recession.11 In addition to this pattern, the estimates have become less volatile over
time as they approach closer to zero.
Next, we specify analysis periods of fixed durations and then sequentially estimate
models for all alternative sample windows permitted by out data. This analysis is performed
using sample window periods of 5-years, 10-years, and 15-years for each of the two measures of
macroeconomic conditions. Figures 2A and 2B display the point estimates along with the 95%
confidence intervals using 5-year sample windows beginning in the specified year for
unemployment and employment rates, respectively. The pattern in these figures imply that
although the effects on health and health behaviors fluctuates around zero throughout the period
between 1990 and 2014, they steadily diminish and approach to zero over time.
The results using 10-year sample windows shown in Figures 3A and 3B are highly
consistent with the pattern observed in the 5-year window analysis, i.e., the relationship between
macroeconomic conditions and health and health behaviors becomes weaker and approaches to
zero over time for both unemployment and employment rates. The seemingly positive (negative)
association between unemployment (employment) for the smoking indicators, overweight and
obesity, physical exercise, general health, and fair to poor health indicators observed for early
periods of windows disappear rather quickly and fluctuate around zero until getting much closer
to zero during the period of Great Recession and afterwards. The relationship is opposite for
binge drinking and the two mental health indicators, but follows the same pattern over time as
the point estimates diminish and become zero. Note that the coefficients are also less volatile for
the 10-year sample windows than the 5-year windows, though we almost always fail to reject the
null hypothesis of no macroeconomic effect on health and health behaviors.
11

One important policy change in the years immediately following the Great Recession is the passage of the
Affordable Care Act (ACA) in 2010. One implication of this finding is that the overall pattern of the relationship
obtained in our analysis is unlikely to be influenced by the ACA.

23"
"

Finally, the Figures 4A and 4B display the estimates from sample windows specified at
15-year intervals. The estimates become even smoother in these figures compared to those from
5 and 10-year windows, but they are still imprecisely estimated despite a considerable increase in
sample size. This is consistent with Ruhm (2015a) who concludes from his analyses of the
relationship between unemployment and mortality using similar methods is that the estimates
could be too noisy to be informative when analysis periods are too short.
The results presented so far assume that the relationship between macroeconomic
conditions and health and health behaviors is identical for all demographic groups. Such an
assumption may obscure potentially important differences in the cyclicality of the relationship
across different population groups. We investigated this issue by estimating our models by
gender as well as race and ethnicity. In the interest of space, we only display figures for the
estimates for unemployment rate for the models in which the analysis period begins in 1990 and
ends in years ranging between 1999 and 2014.12 The results for males and females are shown in
Appendix Figures 1A and 1B, and the results for whites, blacks, and Hispanics are displayed in
Figures 2A, 2B, and 2C, respectively. The overall pattern obtained in these regressions is
strongly consistent with the one from the full sample discussed above. One of the consistent
patterns found in the estimations with full sample was the negative relationship between
unemployment rate and two smoking indicators and the positive relationship between
unemployment rate and the likelihood of physical exercise. Appendix Figures 1A and 1B show
that this pattern is largely present among males and not so much among females. Focusing on
race and ethnicity results shown in Appendix Figures 2A-2C, the similar pattern is present for the
two smoking outcomes among whites and Hispanics, but not for blacks. Furthermore, the

12

The results from other models are similar and available from the authors upon request.

24"
"

relationship appears to be reversed for physical exercise among Hispanics with no clear pattern
among whites and blacks. However, all of these arguments should be viewed with caution since
the vast majority of coefficients are imprecisely estimated. Furthermore, regardless of these
potential differences observed in earlier years, the relationship weakens over time and converge
towards zero during the period of the Great Recession and in the years afterwards.
V. Conclusion
While the effects of economic conditions on health and health behaviors have been wellstudied, the consequences of the Great Recession on these outcomes are not well-understood due
to relative paucity of research focusing on this period. Evidence obtained from studies of
previous recessions may not be applicable to understanding the effect of the recent recession on
health outcomes and health behaviors because the labor market difficulties that individuals
experienced during the recent recession were much more severe in this downturn. In this paper,
we examine the impacts of macroeconomic conditions as measured by state unemployment and
employment rates on a large set of health behaviors and health outcomes using data from BRFSS
between 1990 and 2014 with a close attention to the period enveloping the Great Recession.
Our results provide some support for the notion that weaker macroeconomic conditions
are positively associated with health and health behaviors, although the evidence is stronger for
some of the outcomes (e.g., smoking and physical exercise) than others and is not present for
some of the other outcomes (e.g., experiencing poor mental health). But overall, the estimates are
too small to have any meaningful implications. Furthermore, any evidence for the countercyclical pattern for health and heath behaviors has become weaker over time and largely
disappear in the period prior to the Great Recession and remain near zero in the years since. Our
Finally, the patterns observed for the full sample largely persist when we split our sample by
25"
"

gender as well as race and gender. The mechanisms for the potential weakening in the
relationship between macroeconomic conditions and health and health behaviors are not wellunderstood and remains an important question for future research.

26"
"

References
Ásgeirsdóttir, T., Corman, H., Noonan, K., Ólafsdóttir, Þ., Reichman, N. (2014). "Was the
Economic Crisis of 2008 Good for Icelanders? Impact on Health Behaviors." Economics and
Human Biology 13: 1– 19.
Bobak, M., et al. (2000). Poverty and smoking. Tobacco Control in Developing Countries. F.
Chaloupka and P. Jha. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Böckerman, P., et al. (2007). "Does a slump really make you thinner? Finnish micro6level
evidence 1978–2002." Health Economics 16(1): 103-107.
Business Cycle Dating Committee (2010). Committee Report - 9-20-2010.
Catalano, R., et al. (2011). "The health effects of economic decline." Annual review of public
health 32: 431-450.
Cawley, J., et al. (2011). The impact of the macroeconomy on health insurance coverage:
Evidence from the great recession, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Centers for Medicaid & Medicare Services (2016). National Health Expensitures 2014
Highlights. https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-andReports/NationalHealthExpendData/Downloads/highlights.pdf.
Charles, K. K. and P. DeCicca (2008). "Local labor market fluctuations and health: Is there a
connection and for whom?" Journal of Health Economics 27(6): 1532-1550.
Cheng, K.-W. and D. S. Kenkel (2010). "US cigarette demand: 1944-2004." The BE Journal of
Economic Analysis & Policy 10(1).
Colman, G. and Dhaval Dave (2013). "Exercise, physical activity, and exertion over the business
cycle," Social Science & Medicine, vol. 93(C), pages 11-20
Colman, G. and Dhaval Dave (2014). "Unemployment and Health Behaviors Over the Business
Cycle: A Longitudinal View." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
20748.
Cotti, C., et al. (2013). The Dow is Killing Me: Risky Health Behaviors and the Stock Market.
Available at SSRN.
Currie, J. and E. Tekin (2015). Is there a Link Between Foreclosure and Health? American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7(1): 63-94.
Dee, T. S. (2001). "Alcohol abuse and economic conditions: evidence from repeated cross6
sections of individual6level data." Health Economics 10(3): 257-270.
27"
"

Dehejia, R. and A. Lleras-Muney (2004). "Booms, busts, and babies' health." The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 119(3): 1091-1130.
Ettner, S. L. (1997). "Measuring the human cost of a weak economy: Does unemployment lead
to alcohol abuse?" Social Science & Medicine 44(2): 251-260.
Gerdtham, U.-G. and C. J. Ruhm (2006). "Deaths rise in good economic times: evidence from
the OECD." Economics & Human Biology 4(3): 298-316.
Granados, J. A. T. (2005). "Recessions and mortality in Spain, 1980–1997." European Journal of
Population/Revue européenne de Démographie 21(4): 393-422.
Holahan, J. (2011). "The 2007–09 recession and health insurance coverage." Health Affairs
30(1): 145-152.
Johansson, E., et al. (2006). "Alcohol-related mortality, drinking behavior, and business cycles."
The European Journal of Health Economics 7(3): 212-217.
Kenkel D.S. & Maximilian D. Schmeiser & Carly Urban (2014). "Is Smoking Inferior?:
Evidence from Variation in the Earned Income Tax Credit," Journal of Human Resources, vol.
49(4), pages 1094-1120.
Kochhar, R. (2011). Two Years of Economic Recovery: Women Lose Jobs, Men Find Them
Pew Research Social & Demographic Trends Project. Washington DC.
Macy, J. T., et al. (2013). "Predictors of health behaviors after the economic downturn: A
longitudinal study." Social Science & Medicine.
McInerney, M. and J. M. Mellor (2012). "Recessions and Seniors’ Health; Health Behaviors; and
Healthcare Use: Analysis of the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey." Journal of Health
Economics.
Mortgage Bankers Association (2010). "Delinquencies and Foreclosure Starts Decrease in Latest
MBA National Delinquency Survey." from
http://www.mbaa.org/NewsandMedia/PressCenter/73799.htm.
Neumayer, E. (2004). "Recessions lower (some) mortality rates:: evidence from Germany."
Social Science & Medicine 58(6): 1037-1047.
Ogwang, T. and D. I. Cho (2009). "Economic determinants of the consumption of alcoholic
beverages in Canada: a panel data analysis." Empirical Economics 37(3): 599-613.
Ruhm, C. J. (1995). "Economic conditions and alcohol problems." Journal of Health Economics
14(5): 583-603.

28"
"

Ruhm, C. J. (2000). "Are recessions good for your health?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics
115(2): 617-650.
Ruhm, C. J. (2003). "Good times make you sick." Journal of Health Economics 22(4): 637-658.
Ruhm, C. J. (2005). "Healthy living in hard times." Journal of Health Economics 24(2): 341-363.
Ruhm, C. J. (2007). "A healthy economy can break your heart." Demography 44(4): 829-848.
Ruhm, C. J. (2015a). Recessions, Healthy No More? Journal of Health Economics 42:17-28.
Ruhm, C. J. (2015b). Health Effects of Economic Crises. National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 21604.
Ruhm, C. J. and W. E. Black (2002). "Does drinking really decrease in bad times?" Journal of
Health Economics 21(4): 659-678.
U.S. Census Bureau (2012). Income, Poverty, and Health Insurance Coverage in the United
States: 2911. https://www.census.gov/newsroom/releases/archives/income_wealth/cb12172.html
U.S. Department of Agriculture (2012). Building a Healthy America: A Profile of the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program. Food and Nutrition Service, Office of Research and
Analysis. http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/BuildingHealthyAmerica.pdf.
White, C. and J. D. Reschovsky (2012). Great Recession Accelerated Long-Term Decline of
Employer Health Coverage NIHCR. Research Brief No. 8.
Willard, R., et al. (2012). "Impact of the 2008–2010 economic recession on local health
departments." Journal of Public Health Management and Practice 18(2): 106-114.
Xu, X. (2013). "The business cycle and health behaviors." Social Science & Medicine Volume
77, 126–136.

29"
"

Figure 1A: Changes in the Relationship Between Unemployment and Health and Health Behaviors over Time: Sample Begins
in 1990 and Continues through the Specified Year

Note: The dotted lines represent the 95% confidence intervals.

30#
#

Figure 1B: Changes in the Relationship Between Employment and Health and Health Behaviors over Time: Sample Begins in
1990 and Continues through the Specified Year

Note: The dotted lines represent the 95% confidence intervals.

31#
#

Figure 2A: Changes in the Relationship Between Unemployment and Health and Health Behaviors over Time: 5-Year
Windows

Note: The dotted lines represent the 95% confidence intervals.

32#
#

Figure 2B: Changes in the Relationship Between Employment and Health and Health Behaviors over Time: 5-Year Windows

Note: The dotted lines represent the 95% confidence intervals.

33#
#

Figure 3A: Changes in the Relationship Between Unemployment and Health and Health Behaviors over Time: 10-Year
Windows

Note: The dotted lines represent the 95% confidence intervals.

34#
#

Figure 3B: Changes in the Relationship Between Employment and Health and Health Behaviors over Time: 10-Year Windows

Note: The dotted lines represent the 95% confidence intervals.

35#
#

Figure 4A: Changes in the Relationship Between Unemployment and Health and Health Behaviors over Time: 15-Year
Windows

Note: The dotted lines represent the 95% confidence intervals.

36#
#

Figure 4B: Changes in the Relationship Between Employment and Health and Health Behaviors over Time: 10-Year Windows

Note: The dotted lines represent the 95% confidence intervals.

37#
#

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
Variable
Outcomes
Current Smoker
Daily Smoker
Current Drinker
Binge Drinker
Chronic Drinker
Physical Exercise
Overweight
Obese
Severely Obese
General Health
Excellent Health
Poor Health
Fair to Poor Health
Mental10: Poor Mental Health>10 days/month
Mental20: Poor Mental Health>20 days/month
Control Variables
State Employment Rate
State Unemployment Rate
Age: 25-29
Age: 30-34
Age: 35-39
Age: 40-44
Age: 45-49
Age: 50-54
Male
Married
Divorced
Widowed
Other Marital Status a
Less Than High School a
High School
Some College Education
College
White
Black
Other a
Hispanic

Mean

Standard Deviation

0.230
0177
0.587
0.156
0.057
0.763
0.599
0.240
0.087
0.874
0.240
0.029
0.126
0.142
0.078

0.421
0.359
0.486
0.401
0.233
0.410
0.472
0.452
0.282
0.305
0.420
0.121
0.331
0.333
0.248

0.613
0.063
0.164
0.185
0.170
0.177
0.153
0.151
0.484
0.638
0.104
0.012
0.247
0.105
0.263
0.273
0.358
0.664
0.117
0.109
0.110

0.040
0.024
0.352
0.385
0.367
0.388
0.367
0.375
0.498
0.479
0.295
0.098
0.435
0.291
0.434
0.443
0.487
0.475
0.318
0.264
0.362

Note: Data are from1990 to 2014 years of the BRFSS. Number of observations are 2,362,954 for the summary
statistics.
a
Omitted category.

38#
#

Table 2: Estimates of the Relationship between Unemployment and Health and Health
Behaviors
Outcome
I
II
Current Smoker
-0.382**
-0.469**
(0.120)
(0.136)
Daily Smoker
-0.321**
-0.353**
(0.085)
(0.101)
Current Drinker
0.083
0.026
(0.179)
(0.160)
Binge Drinker
0.126
0.026
(0.145)
(0.083)
Chronic Drinker
-0.060
-0.092
(0.040)
(0.057)
Overweight
-0.017
0.019
(0.077)
(0.076)
Obese
-0.009
-0.043
(0.104)
(0.089)
Severely Obese
-0.012
-0.019
(0.063)
(0.039)
Physical Activity
0.507*
0.431
(0.240)
(0.246)
General Health
-0.108
0.062
(0.119)
(0.069)
Excellent Health
-0.052
-0.012
(0.098)
(0.072)
Poor Health
0.045
0.024
(0.027)
(0.031)
Fair to Poor Health
0.108
-0.062
(0.119)
(0.069)
Mental Health Problems >10 days
0.100
-0.016
(0.083)
(0.092)
Mental Health Problems >20 days
0.119*
0.047
(0.056)
(0.054)
Month Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
State Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
State-specific Linear Trends
No
Yes
Notes: Standard errors are clustered at state. A * and ** indicate that the estimate is statistically
significance at the 95 and 99 percent levels of confidence, respectively.

39#
#

Table 3: Estimates of the Relationship between Employment and Health and Health
Behaviors
Outcome
I
II
Current Smoker
0.123
0.306*
(0.087)
(0.128)
Daily Smoker
0.118
0.277*
(0.073)
(0.106)
Current Drinker
-0.088
0.078
(0.127)
(0.161)
Binge Drinker
-0.122
-0.013
(0.142)
(0.100)
Chronic Drinker
0.059
0.088
(0.058)
(0.071)
Overweight
0.001
0.024
(0.060)
(0.074)
Obese
-0.031
0.086
(0.075)
(0.066)
Severely Obese
-0.042
0.018
(0.048)
(0.031)
Physical Activity
-0.173
-0.024
(0.169)
(0.180)
General Health
0.078
-0.007
(0.042)
(0.041)
Excellent Health
0.034
0.045
(0.072)
(0.073)
Poor Health
-0.028
-0.012
(0.022)
(0.021)
Fair to Poor Health
-0.078
0.007
(0.042)
(0.041)
Mental Health Problems >10 days
-0.125*
-0.048
(0.060)
(0.061)
Mental Health Problems >20 days
-0.119*
-0.074
(0.045)
(0.045)
Month Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
State Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
State-specific Linear Trends
No
Yes
Notes: Standard errors are clustered at state. A * and ** indicate that the estimate is statistically
significance at the 95 and 99 percent levels of confidence, respectively.

40#
#

Table 4: Estimates of the Relationship Between Unemployment and Health and Health
Behaviors with an Indicator for Great Recession
Great Recession
Outcome
Unemployment Rate
Current Smoker
-0.474**
(0.138)
-0.002
(0.002)
Daily Smoker
-0.356**
(0.108)
-0.001
(0.003)
Current Drinker
0.007
(0.166)
-0.006
(0.003)
Binge Drinker
0.016
(0.086)
-0.003
(0.004)
Chronic Drinker
-0.096
(0.057)
-0.001
(0.002)
Overweight
0.008
(0.081)
-0.004
(0.005)
Obese
-0.027
(0.086)
0.006
(0.004)
Severely Obese
-0.008
(0.040)
0.004
(0.003)
Physical Activity
0.445
(0.257)
0.005
(0.005)
General Health
0.056
(0.077)
-0.002
(0.003)
Excellent Health
-0.015
(0.078)
-0.001
(0.004)
Poor Health
0.018
(0.031)
-0.002
(0.001)
Fair to Poor Health
-0.056
(0.077)
0.002
(0.003)
Mental Health Problems >10 days
-0.011
(0.094)
0.001
(0.003)
Mental Health Problems >20 days
0.051
(0.054)
0.001
(0.002)
Notes: Standard errors are clustered at state. A * and ** indicate that the estimate is statistically
significance at the 95 and 99 percent levels of confidence, respectively. In addition to timevariant state characteristics, the models also control for state and month fixed effects, and state
specific linear time trends.

41#
#

Table 5: Estimates of the Relationship Between Employment and Health and Health
Behaviors with an Indicator for Great Recession
Great Recession
Outcome
Employment Rate
Current Smoker
0.308*
(0.130)
-0.000
(0.002)
Daily Smoker
0.279*
(0.111)
-0.001
(0.003)
Current Drinker
0.092
(0.165)
-0.007*
(0.003)
Binge Drinker
-0.007
(0.104)
-0.003
(0.004)
Chronic Drinker
0.097
(0.071)
-0.001
(0.002)
Overweight
0.032
(0.078)
-0.005
(0.005)
Obese
0.077
(0.065)
0.005
(0.004)
Severely Obese
0.008
(0.028)
0.004
(0.003)
Physical Activity
-0.027
(0.186)
0.001
(0.005)
General Health
0.001
(0.045)
-0.002
(0.003)
Excellent Health
0.047
(0.078)
-0.001
(0.004)
Poor Health
-0.006
(0.020)
-0.002
(0.001)
Fair to Poor Health
-0.001
(0.045)
0.002
(0.003)
Mental Health Problems >10 days
-0.056
(0.064)
0.002
(0.003)
Mental Health Problems >20 days
-0.079
(0.046)
0.001
(0.002)
Notes: Standard errors are clustered at state. A * and ** indicate that the estimate is statistically
significance at the 95 and 99 percent levels of confidence, respectively. In addition to timevariant state characteristics, the models also control for state and month fixed effects, and state
specific linear time trends.

42#
#

Table 6: Estimates of the Relationship Between Unemployment and Health and Health
Behaviors with an Indicator for Great Recession and Interaction with Employment
Outcome

Unemployment Rate

Great Recession

Current Smoker
Daily Smoker
Current Drinker
Binge Drinker
Chronic Drinker
Overweight
Obese
Severely Obese
Physical Activity
General Health
Excellent Health

-0.488**
-0.359**
0.036
0.027
-0.086
0.002
-0.033
-0.015
0.459
0.074
0.003

(0.143)
(0.111)
(0.171)
(0.089)
(0.056)
(0.084)
(0.091)
(0.042)
(0.257)
(0.076)
(0.078)

-0.011
-0.003
0.013
0.005
0.006
-0.008
0.002
-0.001
0.014
0.010
0.010

(0.010)
(0.008)
(0.012)
(0.006)
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.011)
(0.006)
(0.008)

0.009
-0.074
-0.015
0.053

(0.031)
(0.076)
(0.091)
(0.051)

-0.008**
-0.010
-0.001
0.002

(0.003)
(0.006)
(0.008)
(0.006)

Poor Health
Fair to Poor Health
Mental Health Problems >10 days
Mental Health Problems >20 days

Unemployment Rate*
Great Recession
0.126
(0.121)
0.028
(0.084)
-0.241
(0.142)
-0.103
(0.086)
-0.087
(0.128)
0.048
(0.100)
0.050
(0.113)
0.063
(0.113)
-0.112
(0.115)
-0.147*
(0.069)
-0.143
(0.096)
0.074*
0.147*
0.029
-0.019

(0.028)
(0.069)
(0.094)
(0.066)

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at state. A * and ** indicate that the estimate is statistically
significance at the 95 and 99 percent levels of confidence, respectively. In addition to timevariant state characteristics, the models also control for state and month fixed effects, and state
specific linear time trends.

43#
#

Table 7: Estimates of the Relationship Between Employment and Health and Health
Behaviors with an Indicator for Great Recession and Interaction with Employment
Outcome

Employment Rate

Current Smoker
Daily Smoker
Current Drinker
Binge Drinker
Chronic Drinker
Overweight
Obese
Severely Obese
Physical Activity
General Health
Excellent Health
Poor Health
Fair to Poor Health
Mental Health Problems >10 days
Mental Health Problems >20 days

0.309*
0.280*
0.087
-0.010
0.096
0.033
0.080
0.008
-0.030
0.002
0.046
-0.007
-0.002
-0.058
-0.081

(0.131)
(0.111)
(0.165)
(0.104)
(0.071)
(0.078)
(0.065)
(0.028)
(0.186)
(0.044)
(0.079)
(0.020)
(0.044)
(0.064)
(0.045)

Great Recession
0.017
0.005
-0.066
-0.052*
-0.016
0.013
0.048
0.006
-0.028
0.012
-0.011
-0.013
-0.012
-0.021
-0.024

(0.025)
(0.021)
(0.048)
(0.024)
(0.019)
(0.029)
(0.031)
(0.024)
(0.035)
(0.018)
(0.042)
(0.007)
(0.018)
(0.020)
(0.015)

Employment Rate*
Great Recession
-0.029
(0.042)
-0.009
(0.035)
0.097
(0.080)
0.081*
(0.037)
0.026
(0.032)
-0.030
(0.047)
-0.071
(0.049)
-0.004
(0.039)
0.049
(0.056)
-0.024
(0.028)
0.016
(0.068)
0.018
(0.011)
0.024
(0.028)
0.038
(0.033)
0.041
(0.023)

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at state. A * and ** indicate that the estimate is statistically
significance at the 95 and 99 percent levels of confidence, respectively. In addition to timevariant state characteristics, the models also control for state and month fixed effects, and state
specific linear time trends.

44#
#

Appendix Figure 1A: Changes in the Relationship Between Unemployment and Health and Health Behaviors among Males
over Time: Sample Begins in 1990 and Continues through the Specified Year

Obese

General Health
1

1
.5

2010

2015

-1
2000

Chronic Drinker

2005

2010

2015

2000

Severely Obese

2005

2010

2015

2000

Excellent Health

2005

2010

2015

Mental Health Problems
>10 days/month
.5

.5
2015

2005

2010

2015

.5
0
2010

2015

-.5
2000

2005

2010

2015

2000

2005

Note: The dotted lines represent the 95% confidence intervals.
45#
#

0
-.5
2005

2010

2015

2000

Poor Health

2005

2010

2015

Mental Health Problems
>20 days/month
.5

2
1.5
1

-.5
-1.5
2005

-1

Physical Exercise

-1

-1
-1.5
2000

2000

0

Overweight
0

.5
0
-.5

2000

2010

2015

-.5

2010

.5

Current Drinker

2005

.4

2000

.2

2015

0

2010

-.6 -.4 -.2

2005

-1.5 -1

-.2
-.4

-1
-2
2000

-.5

0

-2.5 -2 -1.5 -1

0

0

1

-.5

1

0

2

Daily Smoker

2005

-1.5 -1

-.5
2000

1

2015

.2

2010

-1

-1
2005

0

-.5

-.5

-2
-3
2000

-.5

0

0

.5

0

-1

Fair to Poor Health
.5

.5

1.5

Binge Drinker
1

0

Current Smoker

2000

2005

2010

2015

2000

2005

2010

2015

Appendix Figure 1B: Changes in the Relationship Between Unemployment and Health and Health Behaviors among Females
over Time: Sample Begins in 1990 and Continues through the Specified Year

1
.5

1
.5

0

2010

2015

2010

2015

2000

Chronic Drinker

2005

2010

2015

0
-.5
-1
2000

Severely Obese

2005

2010

2015

2000

Excellent Health

2005

2010

2015

Mental Health Problems
>10 days/month

2010

2015

2000

2010

2015

.5

.5
-.5

0

-.5
2000

Overweight

2005

2010

2015

2000

Physical Exercise

2005

2010

2015

Poor Health

2010

2015

2000

2005

2010

2015

.2
2000

2005

2010

Note: The dotted lines represent the 95% confidence intervals.

46#
#

2015

2005

2010

2015

-.2 0

-.2
-.4

-1

-1
2005

0

0
-.5

-.5

.5
0
-.5
2000

2000

Mental Health Problems
>20 days/month

0

1

.5

1

.5

1.5

Current Drinker

2005

.2 .4 .6 .8

2005

.4

2000

-1

-.5

-1.5

-1

0

-.3 -.2 -.1

0

-.5

0

.5

0

.1

1

.2

1

.5

Daily Smoker

2005

-1

-.8
2000

1

2005

-.5

-.6 -.4

0

.2
-.4

-.2

0

-2 -1.5 -1
2000

Fair to Poor Health

-.2

0
-.5

General Health

.2

Obese

.6

Binge Drinker
.4

.5

Current Smoker

2000

2005

2010

2015

2000

2005

2010

2015

Appendix Figure 2A: Changes in the Relationship Between Unemployment and Health and Health Behaviors among Whites
over Time: Sample Begins in 1990 and Continues through the Specified Year

.2
2000

2010

2015

2000

Chronic Drinker

2005

2010

2015

-.4 -.2
2000

Severely Obese

2005

2010

2015

.1
2010

2015

Overweight

2005

2010

2015

2005

2010

2015

1
2015

2005

2010

2015

2000

2005

2010

Note: The dotted lines represent the 95% confidence intervals.
47#
#

2015

2015

.4
0
-.2

-1
2000

2010

.2

.1
-.2 -.1

-.5
2010

2005

Mental Health Problems
>20 days/month

0

.5
0

-.5
-1
2005

2000

Poor Health

0
0
-.5
-1
2000

2015

-.2 0
2000

Physical Exercise

.5

.5

2000

1.5

Current Drinker

2005

-1

-.3
2000

2010

.6

2015

2005

Mental Health Problems
>10 days/month

.3

2010

.2

2005

-.5

-.5
-1

-.2

0

-.1

.5

0

0

-.5
-1
-1.5
-2
2000

2000

Excellent Health

1

0

1.5

Daily Smoker

2005

.2 .4 .6 .8

2015

.5

2010

-.6 -.4 -.2

-.2
-.4

0
-.5
2005

0

0

.2

0

.5

-2.5 -2 -1.5 -1
2000

Fair to Poor Health
.4

.4

.2

General Health
.6

Obese

1

Binge Drinker

-.5

0

Current Smoker

2000

2005

2010

2015

2000

2005

2010

2015

Appendix Figure 2B: Changes in the Relationship Between Unemployment and Health and Health Behaviors among Blacks
over Time: Sample Begins in 1990 and Continues through the Specified Year

Binge Drinker

Obese

Fair to Poor Health
2

1

1

General Health

2010

2015

2005

2010

2015

2000

Chronic Drinker

2005

2010

2015

0
-1
2000

Severely Obese

2005

2010

2015

Excellent Health

2000

2005

2010

2015

Mental Health Problems
>10 days/month

3

2005

2010

2015

2005

2010

2015

2005

2010

2015

-1
-2

-1
2000

2000

Physical Exercise
3

Overweight

2005

2010

2015

Poor Health

2000

2005

2010

2015

Mental Health Problems
>20 days/month

2000

2005

2010

2015

2000

2005

2010

2015

2000

2005

2010

2015

Note: The dotted lines represent the 95% confidence intervals.
48#
#

-1

-1
-1.5

-1
-2

-3

-1

-2

0

0

0

-1

-.5

1

1

1

0

0

2

2

1

Current Drinker
2

0

-.5
2000

.5

2000

-1

-1

-1.5 -1

-.5

-.5

1

0

0

0

0

2

1

.5

.5

.5

2

1

1

Daily Smoker

-2

-2
2000

4

2005

1

2000

-3

-2

-1

-1

-.5

-1

0

0

-1

1

.5

0

0

1

1

2

1.5

Current Smoker

2000

2005

2010

2015

2000

2005

2010

2015

Appendix Figure 2C: Changes in the Relationship Between Unemployment and Health and Health Behaviors among
Hispanics over Time: Sample Begins in 1990 and Continues through the Specified Year

Fair to Poor Health
1

2

-1

2005

2010

2015

-2

-2
-1

-3
2000

2005

2010

2015

2000

Chronic Drinker

2005

2010

2015

2000

Severely Obese

2005

2010

2015

Excellent Health

2000

2005

2010

2015

Mental Health Problems
>10 days/month

0

2005

2010

2015

2000

2010

2015

2005

2010

2015

0
-2
-3

-3
2000

2000

Physical Exercise

2005

2010

2015

Poor Health

2000

2005

2010

2015

Mental Health Problems
>20 days/month

0

2000

2005

2010

2015

2000

2005

2010

2015

2000

2005

2010

2015

Note: The dotted lines represent the 95% confidence intervals.
49#
#

-1
-2

-1

-3
-4

-3

-2

-2

-1

-.5

-2

0

0

-1

-1

1

0

1

.5

0

2

1

Overweight
2

1

Current Drinker

2005

1

2000

-1

-2

-2

-2

-1

-1

-.5

-1

-1

0

0

0

1

1

2

2

1

.5

1

Daily Smoker

0

-1

-.5
-1.5 -1

-2 -1.5 -1
2000

1

0

-.5

0

0

.5

.5
0

General Health
3

Obese
1

Binge Drinker
1

Current Smoker

2000

2005

2010

2015

2000

2005

2010

2015

