                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




GLOBAL SUPPLY CHAINS, CURRENCY UNDERVALUATION, AND FIRM PROTECTIONIST
                              DEMANDS

                                            J. Bradford Jensen
                                             Dennis P. Quinn
                                            Stephen Weymouth

                                          Working Paper 19239
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w19239


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        July 2013


 Some of the analysis in the paper was conducted at the Center for Economic Studies at the U.S. Census
 Bureau. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
 represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential
 information is disclosed. The statistical analysis of firm-level data on U.S. multinational companies
 was conducted at the Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce, under arrangements
 that maintain legal confidentiality requirements. The views expressed are those of the authors and
 do not reflect official positions of the U.S. Department of Commerce. We thank the International Monetary
 Fund and its Research Department for financial support. We thank audiences at the University of Virginia,
 Georgetown University, ETH, and the University of Texas, Austin for comments. We are grateful
 to Marc Busch for comments on several versions of the paper. We also thank Kishore Gawande, Andrew
 Kerner and David Steinberg for helpful comments and suggestions. Rachel Szymanski provided excellent
 research assistance. We thank Bill Zeile of the Bureau of Economic Analysis, Kristin Corwin at the
 Census Bureau for producing customized aggregates from Census trade data, and Jim Davis of the
 Boston Research Data Center. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
 reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
 Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19239.ack

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2013 by J. Bradford Jensen, Dennis P. Quinn, and Stephen Weymouth. All rights reserved. Short
 sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
 that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Supply Chains, Currency Undervaluation, and Firm Protectionist Demands
J. Bradford Jensen, Dennis P. Quinn, and Stephen Weymouth
NBER Working Paper No. 19239
July 2013
JEL No. F1,F13,F23,F31,F5

                                              ABSTRACT

We examine firm participation in global supply chains to help explain a puzzling decline in protectionist
demands in the U.S. despite increased import competition and ongoing currency undervaluation. To
explain firm responses to undervaluation, we rely on advances in the international trade literature that
uncover intraindustry heterogeneity in firm trade and investment activities. We propose that firm foreign
direct investments in, and subsequent related party trade with, countries with undervalued exchange
rates will lead to fewer antidumping filings. Examining the universe of U.S. manufacturing firms,
we find that antidumping petition filers are more internationally engaged than non-filing peers, but
conduct less related party trade with filed-against countries. High levels of related-party imports (arm’s
length imports) from countries with undervalued currencies significantly decrease (increase) the likelihood
of U.S. antidumping petitions. Our study highlights the centrality of global supply chains in understanding
political mobilization over international economic policy.


J. Bradford Jensen                              Stephen Weymouth
McDonough School of Business                    McDonough School of Business
Georgetown University                           Georgetown University
Washington, DC 20057                            Washington, DC 20057
                                                sw439@georgetown.edu
and Peterson Institute for International Economics
and also NBER
jbj24@georgetown.edu

Dennis P. Quinn
Georgetown University
Washington, DC
quinnd@georgetown.edu
       This paper examines the relationships between and among currency undervaluations,

investment and trade flows, and trade disputes in the United States from 1982 to 2011. Our

motivating puzzle is that, while trade flows into the U.S. have soared, especially from countries

with seemingly undervalued currencies, the number of antidumping trade filings by U.S. firms

appears to have declined markedly in the past 10 years. (See Figure 1.)

       We propose that the rapid expansion of global supply chains by U.S. multinational

corporations are at the root of the decreased demands for trade protection—increasing import

competition, long run trade deficits, and persistent currency undervaluations notwithstanding.

Our explanation draws on new theoretical and empirical research in international trade, which

views firm-level differences, rather than industries or factors, as fundamental determinants of

trade and international investment activities (Bernard and Jensen 1999, Bernard et al. 2007,

2009, Melitz 2003). We argue that intraindustry heterogeneity in firm integration into global

supply chains helps explain political mobilization—or the lack thereof—over international

economic policy.

       We apply our insights to explain protectionist demands in the specific context of currency

undervaluation, one of the most contentious issues in global politics. Scholars have established

that both currency undervaluation and increasing import competition are associated with

increased antidumping protectionism (Broz and Werfel 2013; Ludema and Mayda 2011).

       Extending existing research, we predict intraindustry variation in firm demand for trade

protection when faced with import competition from countries with undervalued currencies. In

instances where firms have made investments in countries with undervalued exchange rates,

these firms’ responses range from acquiescence to exploiting undervaluation by producing at

lower cost in these countries and engaging in related party (or intrafirm) trade with their foreign



                                                     3
affiliates. We do not expect these firms to pursue trade remedies in response to undervaluation

by their foreign host countries. Under similar conditions, firms without international operations

in these countries and facing resulting import price competition are more likely to either oppose

undervaluation and seek political remedy through temporary trade barriers or to invest

subsequently in those countries (or to do both).

       In sum, our central insight is that firm-specific heterogeneity in investment and related

party trading positions in foreign countries drive firm political and economic responses to the

economic policies of U.S. trade partners, such as currency undervaluation, and to the U.S.

response to these policies. In the context of foreign currency undervaluation and increasing

import competition, it is not a firm’s sectoral advantages, its industry, or even its international

orientation per se that determines its demand for trade protection. Rather, a firm’s supply chains

in a specific country at a point in time shape its protectionist vs. non-protectionist responses: a

salient cleavage divides firms that invest in and source from countries with undervalued

currencies versus those that do not.

       Our findings from the analysis of firm- and country-level data are consistent with our

expectations. Examining the universe of U.S. manufacturing firms, we find that antidumping

petition filers are more internationally engaged than non-filing peers, but conduct less related

party trade with filed-against countries. We find significant increases in the market share of U.S.

firms importing from China, suggesting that organizing a coalition of firms representing the 25

percent threshold of market share for filing an antidumping petition has become increasingly

difficult. In country-level regressions, we find that high levels of related-party imports (arm’s

length imports) from countries with undervalued currencies significantly decrease (increase) the

likelihood of U.S. antidumping petitions.



                                                      4
       The paper proceeds as follows. The next section explores the political and economic

interrelationships between and among international trade and investment, undervalued

currencies, and trade disputes. The section after that examines the universe of U.S. firms covered

by the economic census to provide descriptive statistics regarding the attributes of firms that file

antidumping filings compared to their product market peers and how these evolve over time. We

then report the results of panel negative binomial models of antidumping filings in the United

States. The final section concludes.



THEORETICAL BACKGROUND

Three broad secular trends in the world economy situate our analysis. First, as tariff rates steadily

decline globally, temporary trade barriers (TTBs) have become an important method of trade

protection (Mansfield and Busch 1995, Irwin 2005), and antidumping duties are by far the most

commonly employed TTB worldwide (Bown 2011). Successful filings can bring significant

economic advantage to filers (Bechtel and Sattler 2012).

       Second, global supply chains are an important feature of global trade. Firms increasingly

engage in so-called vertical, or trade related, FDI, setting up affiliates in foreign countries for the

purpose of exploiting relative factor endowments to export or import parts, components and

other intermediate inputs at lower cost. By an accounting definition, vertical FDI precedes

related party trade, as headquarter firms establish an ownership interest in foreign affiliates from

which they import and export. These multinational corporations (MNCs) anchor global supply

chains, mediating more than 80 percent of U.S. merchandise exports and imports. This includes,

by definition, all related-party trade, and the vast majority of arm’s-length transactions (see

Bernard, Jensen, and Schott, 2009).



                                                       5
         Third, two ideal-type macroeconomic policy strategies regarding export promotion have

been influential among emerging market economies in recent decades. As the main example of

one, the high performing East Asian economies have been characterized during their rapid

growth experiences by active exchange rate management policies that led to currency

depreciation and export surges (Page 1994; World Bank 1993). China’s sharp rise as a trading

nation has coincided with China’s use of a similar mix of policies to other East Asian countries

in order to facilitate exports. China’s currency undervaluation, in particular, has been argued to

produce developmental and growth advantages for China, which might serve as a model for

other developing countries (Rodrik 2008). The other ideal-type strategy, of which Mexico has

been an exemplar, is characterized by extensive participation in bilateral and international trade

agreements, open capital markets, and a floating, market determined, exchange rate.1 The latter

strategy limits the use of systematic currency undervaluation as a governmental policy option for

export promotion.

         We explore the political economy implications of each of these trends below.

The Political Economy of Currency Undervaluation

         Exchange rate policies represent an important component of countries’ macroeconomic

policy portfolios, and a large literature studies the macroeconomic implications of currency

valuation. One central finding is that currency overvaluation is linked to macroeconomic

instability (Fischer 1993) and slower economic growth (Easterly 2005, Rodrik 2008). Relatedly,

Dani Rodrik and others have examined the possible positive impact of undervaluation on

growth. In an influential paper, Rodrik (2008, p. 366) finds “an increase in undervaluation boosts

1
    Mexico has signed free trade agreements with 44 countries, including the United States, Japan,

Canada, and the member countries of the European Union (Villareal 2012).


                                                      6
economic growth just as powerfully as a decrease in overvaluation.” (See Berg and Miao 2010.)

          One plausible mechanism for the line between undervaluation and growth is increased

inward FDI and increased exports from MNCs and domestic firms. A depreciated currency

makes the value of assets relatively cheaper in foreign currency terms, lowering the costs of

investment by foreign firms (Blonigen 1997), and increasing the net worth of foreign bidders

relative to domestic investors (Froot and Stein 1991). Furthermore, following the comparative

advantage motive for vertical FDI, firms tend to produce abroad where they can take advantage

of cheaper inputs (Helpman 1984). A depreciated currency lowers the cost of labor and other

host-country inputs relative to production costs in the home country (Goldberg and Klein 1997).

For firms that use FDI as a platform for export, a depreciated currency increases the

competitiveness of exports (Blonigen 1997).

         To illustrate currency undervaluation vs. overvaluation graphically, we refer to Figure 2,

which shows the evolution of currency valuations over time for China and Mexico, two of the

leading trade partners of the U.S., and countries with very similar factor endowments.2 (The data

will be described in greater detail in the Data Appendix. Somewhat counter-intuitively, the

convention in the field is to denote undervaluation with positive numbers and overvaluation with

negative numbers. Zero is a neutral valuation.)

         For most of the pre-NAFTA period, Mexico’s currency was highly undervalued relative

to the United States. Excluding the period of the Mexican Peso Crisis, the post NAFTA Mexican

peso ceased its long-run undevaluation and was on average overvalued relative to the U.S. dollar,

offering decreased incentives for U.S. FDI and related party imports from Mexico.

2
    See Chiquiar et al. 2008 for a detailed comparison of the factor endowments and the wide range

of product market competition between the two economies.


                                                      7
         China, in contrast to Mexico’s earlier undervaluation, had maintained a strongly

overvalued currency prior to 1993. Since the 2000s, Chinese has sustained an undervalued

exchange rate compared to the Mexican peso’s overvaluation, which gives U.S. producers an

incentive to invest in and source from China rather than from Mexico.

         Currency undervaluation is a particularly attractive policy option for governments

because the international trading system under WTO rules does not proscribe countries from

engaging in currency undervaluation for the purposes of export promotion (Sanford 2011).

“Currency manipulation,” at least in cases of undervaluation, is arguably a violation of elements

of existing U.S. trade law, which could result in a Section 301 case against the firms of a

“currency manipulator” (Morrison and Labonte 2009, 37). However, these elements of U.S.

trade law are widely argued to be subsumed under the U.S.’s obligation of WTO membership

(Morrison and Labonte 2009, 37-39), limiting U.S. policy options under existing law and

international agreements.

         Even so, while an undervalued currency may offer economic advantages to exporting

nations and their firms, undervaluation risks backlash through other means by foreign trade

partners. Some governments, in the extreme, undertake policies to lessen the effects of the

depreciations of trading partner currencies through competitive devaluations.3

         Firms that are harmed by foreign currency undervaluation can pursue three main

strategies (Vandenbussche and Viegelahn 2011). One, they can lobby for an increase in the MFN

tariff in the event that a tariff overhang exists. Two, firms can lobby for protection by way of

increases in administrative trade barriers. Three, firms can pursue temporary trade barriers, such

3
    For example, Brazil, Israel, Japan, New Zealand, Poland, and Switzerland have undertaken

monetary or exchange policies targeted at lessening the value of their currencies.


                                                     8
as antidumping investigations.

          Options one and two are decreasingly viable, however. For firms in advanced

industrialized nations, the difference between applied MNF tariff rates and the bound rates

imposed by the WTO (i.e., tariff overhang) is quite low. And, according to the World Bank

(Doing Business 2012), countries have significantly reduced administrative trade barriers in

recent years, and international pressure to keep administrative barriers low remains strong.

Unlike the other two options, temporary trade barriers in general—and antidumping in

particular—remain a popular trade remedy among firms around the world.

          Numerous studies have, in fact, found a strong link between domestic (home county) real

exchange rate appreciation vis-à-vis trade partners4 and subsequent trade disputes (Broz and

Werfel 2013, Copelovitch and Pevehouse 2011, Irwin 2005, Knetter and Prusa 2003, Oatley

2010). The central inference of these papers is that AD filings represent the protectionist

response by particular industries to undervaluation among trade partners. In particular, Broz and

Werfel (2013) show that the pass-through of exchange rate movements to prices, which varies

systematically by industry, correlates with industry responses to domestic real exchange rate

fluctuations.

4
    With the exception of Knetter and Prusa (2003), existing studies of the effects of domestic

currency fluctuations on antidumping petitions rely on indexes of real effective exchange rates,

which capture the average of bilateral real exchange rates, weighted by trade volumes. This

approach is useful for examining the effects of aggregate domestic currency appreciation relative

to all trade partners, but it leaves the direct effects of undervaluation of specific foreign

currencies unexplored. Copelovitch and Pevehouse (2011) study the relationship between

bilateral undervaluation and governments’ decisions to file trade disputes at the WTO.


                                                       9
       We propose to extend the literature by considering firm participation in global production

networks. In particular, we expect that foreign direct investments in countries with undervalued

currencies will condition firm political responses to foreign currency undervaluation, leading to

intraindustry variation in demand for trade protection.

Heterogeneous Firms, Global Production Networks, and Firm Demand for Protection

       A standard treatment in the broader literature on trade protection has been to consider

demands for protection in the context of industries or sectors of the economy. This approach

builds on trade models that assume that firms are homogeneous within sectors, leading to the

inference that trade affects all firms in a given sector or industry in the same way. Models that

adopt a two-factor Heckscher-Ohlin framework with Stolper-Samuelson distributional effects

predict sectoral cleavages over international economic policy (Rogowski 1987). Models that

assume costly intra-industry factor mobility along the lines of Ricardo-Viner imply

homogeneous trade policy preferences among firms in the same sector. Neither approach

explains well the observed intra-industry variation in protectionist demands, or inter-temporal

changes in a given firm’s economic and political responses to undervaluation.

       To gain new insights, we draw on recent advances in the economics of international

trade, which sees firms, not industries or sectors, as the central mediators of international

commerce. The “heterogeneous firm” trade models emerged out of research by Bernard and

Jensen (1995, 1999), who were some of the first authors to exploit micro datasets to study

variation in exporting (and later importing) behavior at the plant- and firm-level. These studies

show that exporters are rare, larger, more productive, and more capital-intensive than non-

exporters. Melitz’s (2003) model advanced a theoretical explanation by showing that only the

largest and most productive firms can generate sufficient profits to cover positive fixed exporting



                                                     10
costs; thus productivity helps explain why firms self-select into trade. Subsequent research finds

that multinational corporations—firms with global affiliates—are yet larger and more productive

than firms that strictly export (Tomiura 2007, Yeaple 2009).

          We build on this new research and prior work on the trade preferences of international

firms to provide a more detailed picture of the protectionist demands of businesses. We

examine, in particular, variation in foreign direct investment positions in, and the resulting

intrafirm trade flows from, countries with undervalued exchange rates. We expect that firm-level

investment and intrafirm trade help explain economic and political responses to changes in

international economic conditions.

          Specifically, we argue that the internationalization of firms into countries with

undervalued currencies explains variation in firm demand for trade protection. Our argument

extends Milner (1988) and Nollen and Quinn (1993), who show that increases in firm

international economic orientation, in addition to industry location, reduce demands for import

protection. While it is well known that internationally-oriented firms are particularly susceptible

to exchange rate fluctuations (Campa and Goldberg 1997) our paper is, to our knowledge, the

first to argue that heterogeneity in firm investment and the resulting heterogeneity in global trade

and supply chains shape firm responses to currency undervaluation.5

          In particular, we argue that firms engaged in foreign direct investment and the

fragmentation of production for the purpose of producing parts, components, or services at lower

cost from abroad are likely to not oppose undervaluation by countries in their supply chains.

5
    Broz and Werfel (2013) investigate and find weak support for the proposition that firms in

industries with a greater share of inputs sourced from abroad are more likely to file AD disputes

when the real effective exchange rate appreciates.


                                                       11
Their lack of opposition may derive from the material benefits they accrue from a depreciated

foreign currency, which include cheaper foreign assets, more competitive platform exports, and

cheaper imported intermediates. That is, all else equal, firms that rely on foreign inputs from

countries with undervalued currencies will see profitability increases if domestic real

appreciation reduces their production costs. As a result, firms that source from countries with

undervalued currencies will be unlikely to engage their home governments for trade remedies

when confronted with relatively cheap imports from countries pursuing undervaluation.

         In contrast, firms that do not expand into markets with undervalued real exchange rates

may be harmed by foreign currency undervaluation, especially if they compete with relatively

cheaper imports from countries with undervalued currencies (Campa and Goldberg 1997). As a

result, these firms, sometimes large and internationally-oriented, will be more likely to pursue

protectionist remedies, such as antidumping, in the face of import competition.6 (See Gawande,

Hoekman, and Cui 2013 for the development of a related argument in the context of seven large

emerging market countries.)

         At the country-level, we expect more filings against firms in countries with undervalued

bilateral real exchange rates, though we expect this effect to be conditional on countries’

integration into global supply chains. Integrated countries will face fierce opposition to

undervaluation among firms that are not invested in, and thus not benefiting from, their weak

currency. We proxy for integration using measures of FDI and intrafirm trade.

         While we expect this pattern to hold probabilistically across U.S. trade partners,

antidumping filings and trade disputes with China are likely to represent a special case as China

6
    Analyzing antidumping filings in Canada, Ludema and Mayda (2011) find that Canadian firms

that compete against Chinese imports are the ones seeking protection.


                                                     12
is labeled a “non-market economy” under both the terms of China’s accession to the WTO and

its prior treatment under U.S. trade legislation (Messerlin 2004).7 Over the past three decades,

U.S. antidumping petitions against China account for 13.8% of all filed disputes. The large

direct investments by U.S. MNCs in China and the resulting supply chains and related party

trading with China will change the political calculus of these participant firms regarding

temporary trade protection through antidumping duties. MNCs with export-platform operations

in China benefit from low cost intermediate goods produced and final goods assembled in China;

firms without such operations that compete with Chinese exports will be harmed by an

undervalued Yuan.



EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS

Characteristics of Antidumping Petition Filers

         Our hypothesis is that firms that are engaged in trade with a country, particularly related-

party trade with their foreign affiliates, will be less likely to file antidumping petitions. We

compare filers to non-filers in the same product market for evidence that filers are different. We

focus specifically on the relative size of filers, their overall international engagement (imports

7
    See Rumbaugh and Blancher (2004). As they note (2004, 8), under the WTO agreement,

“other members can invoke "non-market economy" provisions to determine dumping cases for

15 years following [China’s] accession.” In antidumping cases, being labeled a non-market

economy makes “it much easier to reach a positive finding in an antidumping investigation.”

The methods for determining the ‘dumping margin’ and the remedies in the context of non-

market economies are discussed in detail in Prusa and Vermulst 2013, 219-23. Vietnam is the

other country that the U.S. labels as a nonmarket economy.


                                                      13
and exports), and their engagement with the country against which they file (in terms of arms’-

length trade and related-party trade).

          We consider AD filings in the United States, where individual firms, groups of firms, and

labor unions, representing at least 25% of U.S. production of a product, initiate the investigations

by filing a petition with the Department of Commerce (DOC). International Trade

Administration (ITA) of the DOC next determines whether foreign goods have been sold at less

than fair value (“dumped”), defined as a price below that which they are sold in the home market

or below an estimate of average total cost. Our data source for both AD petitions and the

preliminary ITA rulings is the May 2012 update of the Global antidumping Database (GAD-

USA.xls - Bown 2012).8 (The Data Appendix describes the data sources and defines several of

the variables in greater detail.)

          Our source of firm-level data is the Census Bureau Linked/Longitudinal Firm Trade

Transaction Database (LFTTD), covering the universe of firms in the scope of the economic

census.9 The LFTTD links individual U.S. trade transactions to U.S. firms using a longitudinal

database of U.S. enterprises that tracks almost all private sector firms in the United States. (This

is, to our knowledge, the first use of these data in the political science literature. See the Data

Appendix for a description of the data. See Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2009) for applications.)

          The results are presented in Table 1. A total of 559 organizations, including firms, trade

associations, unions, and other organizations, filed antidumping petitions over the period 1993-

2009. We are able to match 425 of these organizations to the Census Bureau’s Business Register,

an excellent match rate of 76 percent considering that not all filers are private sector firms.

8
    For applications of the data, see Pierce (2011) and Bown and Crowley (2013a,b).
9
    Our analysis begins in 1993 because this is the first year LFTTD data is available.


                                                      14
       Firms that file antidumping petitions are relatively large within their industries, having an

average rank of the 88th percentile in terms of employment within their product market industry

(line 1). The large size of filers within their industry may make assembling the coalition of 25

percent of U.S. production easier. Anti-dumping petition filers are generally engaged in

international trade, being above the median in terms of value of merchandise exports and

merchandise imports: filing firms have an average rank of 74th percentile in terms of exports and

68th percentile in terms of imports (lines 2 and 3, respectively). In contrast to expectations

derived from prior studies of firm trade preferences, we find that the average antidumping filing

(or protectionist) firm is an internationally engaged firm.

                            Table 1. Filer Characteristics at Date of Filing
                                          Pooled 1993‐2009

                                                             Prevalence of        Rank within
                                                                Activity            Industry
                                                            (indicator [0,1])      (of value)
     N = 425                                                Mean       Std Dev   Mean      Std Dev

 1   Employment*                                            5871        12860      0.88          0.19
 2   Export                                                  0.75         0.43     0.74          0.38
 3   Import                                                  0.68         0.47     0.68          0.42
 4   Related‐Party (RP) Export                               0.59         0.49     0.61          0.45
 5   Related‐Party (RP) Import                               0.52         0.50     0.55          0.46
   Export to Contemporaneous AD country in
 6 same HS4 product                                          0.29        0.45      0.36          0.45
   Import from Contemporaneous AD country
 7 in same HS4 product                                       0.25        0.43      0.33          0.44
   RP Export to Contemporaneous AD country
 8 in same HS4 product                                       0.12        0.32      0.21          0.37
   RP Import from Contemporaneous AD
 9 country in same HS4 product                               0.12        0.33      0.21          0.38


       In terms of trade within the product category with the country that the firm files against,

we find, perhaps not surprisingly, that antidumping filers are below the median in terms of

                                                       15
overall imports and exports. Anti-dumping filers are in only the 36th percentile in terms of

exports (within product category to the target of the petition) and only 33rd percentile in terms of

imports (within product category from the target) (lines 6 and 7, respectively).

       When we examine where in the distribution antidumping filers are in terms of related-

party trade in the product category with the target country, we find that they are quite small

relative to other participants in their industry. They are in only the 21st percentile in terms of

related-party exports (within product category to the target of the petition) and the 21st percentile

in terms of related-party imports (within product category from the target of the petition). The

relatively large standard deviations suggest that many firms have zero related party imports and

exports with the country against which they file. Antidumping filers, on average, have much

smaller supply chain relationships with target countries in the product categories in which they

file. The first column reports the share of firms engaged in the various types of trade. Only 12

percent of filers had either related-party exports to or related-party imports from the country filed

against.

       Table 1 also reports the incidence of filing firms’ engagement in international activity

(first column). Most filers export (75 percent) and import (68 percent) and more than 50 percent

are engaged in related party trade. (This is a much higher level of international engagement than

the manufacturing sector where overall fewer than 10 percent of manufacturing firms import or

export.) In contrast, only between a quarter and a third are engaged in exporting or importing

with the country filed against and only 12 percent are engaged in related party trade. Filers are

internationally engaged, but not with the countries in the products they file against.

       We further examine how filing firm characteristics evolve over time. We take the sample

of firms that file in the 1993-1997 period and examine their characteristics in 1993 and in 2009.



                                                      16
Table 4 presents the characteristics of the sample in 1993. The sample is the 48 firms that filed in

the 1993-1997 period and survived to 2009 (of a total of 89 filers 1993-1997). Table 2 presents

the same firm characteristics for the 48 survivors in 2009.

       We focus on the comparison of the filing firms’ trade activity with Mexico and China.

This is a particularly salient comparison because, as noted earlier, Mexico and China have

similar factor endowments and compete across a wide range of similar products, but have

pursued very different strategies vis a vis international trade. Mexico has largely allowed its

currency to float and has pursued an open trading policy with the rest of North America (as well

as Japan and the member countries of the European Union). China has maintained an under-

valued currency and has arguably pursued an export-led economic development policy that

encourages foreign direct investment and the resulting related party trades.

                                              [Table 2 here]

       Comparing the 1993 and 2009 statistics Table 2, we see that there have been significant

changes in the filing firms’ engagement with China in particular. Rows 2 and 3 show that these

firms’ overall international engagement, as measured by the share of firms that export or import,

has actually declined over time. In contrast, these firms’ engagement with Mexico and,

particularly, with China has increased. In 1993, only 17 percent of the AD filers had related-

party imports from China. In 2009, almost half (48 percent) had related-party imports from

China. The share of firms importing from China in general also shows significant increases over

the period, increasing from 33 percent to 63 percent.

       Anti-dumping filing firms engagement with Mexico also increased, but by less from a

higher initial level. In 1993, 31 percent of AD filing firms had related-party imports from




                                                    17
Mexico; in 2009, the share had increased to 42 percent. The share of firms with imports in

general increased from 46 percent to 56 percent.

       We interpret these simple statistics as evidence supporting the notion that filing firms

have changed the location of their global supply chains to take advantage of economic

opportunities (including an undervalued currency).

       Filing firms are not the only firms to have changed the locations of their supply chains.

Table 3 presents evidence on how much more prevalent investments in China have become over

time. The table presents the employment weighted (as a proxy for market share) mean of

indicator variables showing engagement in international trade with China and Mexico for firms

in industries that had an AD filing between 1993-1997 and those in industries that did not. In

1993 in industries that had an AD filing 1993-1997, we see that firms accounting for 22 percent

of employment had RP imports from China. Firms with any direct imports from China accounted

for 41 percent of 1993’s employment. In 2009, firms with imports from China accounted for 60

percent of employment in industries that had AD filings 1993-1997. Firms with RP imports from

China accounted for 41 percent of employment – a significant increase in the market share of

firms with investments in China. In contrast, the changes in importing from Mexico are much

smaller. These results demonstrate that firms in AD industries increased their investments in

China significantly more than in Mexico.

       Table 3 also shows the same data for industries that did not have an AD filing 1993-1997.

While starting from a lower level of engagement with China, firms in these industries exhibit

similar trends.

                                              [Table 3 here]




                                                     18
          The increase in firms with investments in China, and the associated significant increase in

the market share of firms with investments in China, is important because a requirement for a

successful AD filing is filers need to collectively represent 25 percent of activity in the product

being filed against. As the share of economic activity accounted for by firms with investments in

China grows, it becomes increasingly difficult to organize a coalition of firms representing 25

percent of production of the product.10

          For more direct evidence on the relationship between undervaluation and changes in

investment, we examine whether U.S. multinationals change their investment in countries with

undervalued currency, paying particular attention to affiliates that are vertical (the affiliate

exports to the U.S. parent) vs. horizontal (the affiliate does not export) using confidential survey

data on the global operations of U.S. multinationals, collected by the Bureau of Economic

Analysis.11 Using detailed sales data at the foreign affiliate level, we create variables to capture

the overall presence of MNC affiliates in foreign countries, as well as the presence of vertical

and horizontal affiliates specifically. (See the appendix for details on the construction of these

variables.)

          We link the total number of each affiliate type with our country-level measure of

undervaluation, which we average and lag for the five years leading up to and including each




10
     The threshold requirements for an antidumping filing involve the support of producers of 25%

of either the total volume or value of the production of the ´domestic-like product.´ For a

detailed description, see http://ia.ita.doc.gov/petitioncounseling/pcp-industry-support.html
11
     See N. Jensen (2013) for applications of the BEA data.


                                                      19
benchmark survey.12 (The derivation of the undervaluation index is detailed in the Data

Appendix.) We include a lagged dependent variable to capture initial conditions and to better

isolate the response to currency undervaluation in the host country. Specifically, we estimate the

following model using ordinary least squares:

                                                                                         (1)

where                 represents the logged number of affiliates13 in country i in benchmark year t,

for separate affiliate types; t-1 indicates the (5 year) period lag. We also estimate a model where

the dependent variable is change in affiliates as a function of undervaluation and year fixed

effects.

                                                 [Table 4 here]

           Table 4 reports the results of simple models of the affiliate counts regressed on

undervaluation and the lagged number of affiliates (top panel) and models of changes in affiliate

counts regressed on undervaluation (bottom panel). Our results suggest a positive and

statistically significant relationship between undervaluation and affiliate presence for each type

of foreign affiliate (except non-exporting, horizontal affiliates in column 5). The magnitude

effects are largest for related party affiliates. The results provide suggestive evidence that

undervaluation is particularly attractive to firms conducting vertical, rather than horizontal, FDI.




12
     For example, the average values of the covariates between1990-1994 are linked to the 1994

benchmark. We also experimented with one-year lags and the results were very similar.
13
     We add one to the total number of affiliates before taking logged values so that countries with

zero affiliates are not excluded from the analysis.


                                                       20
Currency Undervaluation, Trade Flows, and Anti-Dumping Filings at the Country Level

       To conduct our country level analysis, we link the antidumping petitions to country-

specific variables to generate a unique cross-national time-series dataset that includes a number

of theoretically informed country characteristics that vary annually. Subject to data availability,

our sample includes all countries in the world for which currency undervaluation data are

available, for either 1982-2011 or 1997-2011 (depending on the models specified). A major

advantage of our approach is that our explanatory variables are specific to countries outside the

U.S. In contrast to the majority of studies, which model AD filings as a function of filing country

and industry characteristics, we precisely match exchange rate, investment and other

macroeconomic data to the countries named (and not named) in the AD disputes.

       We report the estimates of the country-level determinants of antidumping filings by U.S.

firms over either 1982-2011 or 1997-2011. In terms of the dependent variable, we count the

number of antidumping petitions filed in the U.S. against each country, for each year in our

sample. We also assess, as dependent variables, the number of cases per country-year, where

antidumping petitions were granted, and the number of cases where the petitions were denied.

       One main independent variable in our analysis captures real currency undervaluation for

all countries in our sample. We generate bilateral real exchange rates, unique to each country-

year in our sample, to more precisely capture the association between a particular country’s real

undervaluation relative to the U.S. dollar, and the likelihood of trade disputes against that

particular country. (For further details of the measurement of undervaluation, please see the Data

Appendix.)

        We include several indicators of a country’s openness to foreign direct investment flows.

One is an indicator for capital account openness from Quinn and Toyoda (2008): countries with



                                                     21
open capital accounts have limited capacity to restrict U.S. foreign direct investment, which is

likely to lessen the likelihood of antidumping filings. We also include an indicator for whether a

country has a bilateral investment treaty with the U.S. We propose that firm value chains will

influence anti-dumping filings, and both capital account openness and a bilateral investment

treaty with the U.S. are likely to enable or enhance vertical integration by U.S. firms.

          We attempt to gauge the presence of U.S.-based global production networks by

incorporating measures of intrafirm (or related party) and arm’s-length imports from each

country into the U.S. as a share of U.S. GDP, 1996-2010.14 Intrafirm trade captures the degree to

which MNCs have made vertical FDI in each country and rely on the country for vertically

integrated inputs, while arm’s length imports indicate that the source of the imported product is

an unaffiliated party.

          We control for a host of variables identified in the literature as correlates of trade disputes

and of our main explanatory variables. The Polity 2 index measures democracy: prior studies

have found that democracy to be a positive correlate of trade disputes (Busch 2000, Rosendorff

2005, and Sattler and Bernauer 2011); GDP per capita proxies for wealth and overall institutional

quality, both of which are positive correlates of trade disputes (Knetter and Prusa 2003, Sattler

and Bernauer 2011). In the models where data for U.S. intrafirm trade data are not available, we

include a measure of the bilateral trade balance with the U.S. as a share of U.S. GPD, with

positive numbers indicating a U.S. trade surplus with the other country.

          Since the initiation of an AD filing requires firms to evaluate the material injury that they

have suffered, we expect a non-trivial delay between real exchange rate movements and the

14
     We note that the data do not allow us to differentiate between imports by U.S.-based parent

firms from affiliates abroad and imports by U.S.-based affiliates from foreign-based parent firms.


                                                        22
dependent variable. We therefore introduce all of our regressors with a one-year lag, except for

GDP/capita, which we lag three years in keeping with the estimation choice in Knetter and Prusa

(2003, 9). (The timing of the GDP lag among 1, 2, and 3 lags is not consequential.)

          The yearly count of anti-dumping disputes, our main dependent variable, ranges from

zero to a maximum of 12. The variable is strongly skewed, with about 85% of the observations

equaling zero. The mean (.19) is exceeded by the variance (.70), a strong signal of

overdispersion.

          To address overdispersion in the data, we follow the literature in assuming that the data

are generated by a negative binomial random variable. (See Hilbe 2011 for a discussion.)

Additional diagnostics, including a Vuong (1989) test, suggest that a zero inflated negative

binomial model is most appropriate due to the very large number of zeros relative to other

values.15 To account for prevalence of zero-value observations, investigators use zero inflated

binomial models (ZINB hereafter), estimating a first stage model using a control for the zeros.16

(Copelovitch and Pevehouse 2011 and Sattler and Bernauer 2011 adopt either the same or related

approaches in controlling for the ‘excess’ zeros found in bilateral trade disputes data.) We relax

the assumption of i.i.d standard errors, allowing for country-level clustering (i.e. intra-country

correlation). We use the prior number of trade disputes to control for possible country-specific

omitted variables, and we enter year fixed effects ( ,     .

          The full model estimated for the longest available data is:

15
     Following the estimation of a Poission baseline model, we find that a deviance goodness of fit

test suggests that the Poisson distribution is also not appropriate due to overdispersion.
16
     We use trade disputes lagged three years as the predictor for overdispersion. The estimates are

done in STATA 11 using the ZINB command with standard errors clustered by country.


                                                      23
Disputesi,t = ß0 + ß1(Disputesi,t-1) + ß2(Undervaluation i,t-1) + ß3(GDP/Per Capitai,t-3 )


        + ß4(Polity i,t-1) + ß5(Capital Account Opennessi,t-1 ) + ß6(Bilateral Investment Treatyi,t-1 )


       + ß7(Bilateral Trade Balance i,t-1 ) +    , + εi,t       t=1982-2011, i=109-113        (2)


       To test our argument with regard to firms and their value chains, we estimate a version of

(2), substituting Arm’s Length and Related Party Imports data for the Bilateral Trade Balance,

and adding appropriate interaction terms with undervaluation:

Disputesi,t = ß0 + ß1(Disputesi,t-1) + ß2(Undervaluation i,t-1) + ß3(GDP/Per Capitai,t-3 )


        + ß4(Polity i,t-1) + ß5(Capital Account Opennessi,t-1 ) + ß6(Bilateral Investment Treatyi,t-1 )


       + ß7(Arm’s Length Imports/GDP i,t-1 ) + ß7(Related Party Imports/GDP i,t-1 )


       + ß7(Arm’s Length*Undervaluation i,t-1 ) + ß7(Related Party*Undervaluation i,t-1 )


        +   , + εi,t           t=1997-2011, i=109-113         (3)


Models (2) and (3) are re-estimated separately with the number of country year Affirmations of

anti-dumping filings and Negations of anti-dumping filings as dependent variables.

       The models in Table 5 represent the longest available sample of anti-dumping filings.

The models in Table 6 contain theoretically relevant variables, especially indicators of related

party and arm’s length imports to the U.S., but the sample is limited to 1997-2011.

       The models reported in Table 5 estimate the relationship between bilateral real exchange

rate undervaluation and AD disputes for all non-banking center countries excluding China.

China is analyzed separately because, as noted above, it is categorized under U.S. trade law as a




                                                       24
“Non-Market Economy.”17 The initiation and adjudication of disputes for a non-market economy

differ from cases involving market economies. (See the discussion in Tatelman 2007.)

          The results in column 1 suggest that undervaluation increases the number of trade

disputes, which is similar to prior findings in the literature. In particular, a one-standard

deviation increase in undervaluation increases the number of AD filings by about 1.5.

                                                [Table 5 here]

          We find, to our knowledge uniquely, that greater openness to international capital flows

and the presence of a bilateral investment treaty with the U.S. are associated with reduced

likelihoods of anti-dumping filings. Both open capital markets and a bilateral investment treaty

enable FDI investment by U.S. firms in the host country, a point to which we return below.

While the control variables are not the main focus we find, consistent with other studies, that

U.S. firms are more likely to file antidumping disputes against firms in countries that are more

democratic, wealthier, and with whom the U.S. has a trade deficit.

          How well do the estimates in the column 1 fit the data? We examine the predictions of

column 1 in Figure 3, which shows actual trade disputes and the predicted number of trade

disputes based on the zero-inflated negative binomial estimates reported in column 1. Figure 3

shows that model 1 generates a very close approximation between predicted and observed trade

disputes, 1982-2011.18




17
     Empirically, we find the parameter estimates for China to be quite different from the rest of the

sample and this parameter heterogeneity also leads us to present analyses of China separately.
18
     Some scholars have found that trade disputes are largely driven by the steel and metal

industries (e.g., Broz and Werfel forthcoming). We explore this finding by restricting the sample


                                                      25
       The results in Table 6 explore the core theory about the relationship between and among

undervaluation, trade flows, and trade disputes. Specifically, we examine how arms’- length and

related party export shares relate to trade disputes in the context of undervalued currencies.

       The sample is necessarily shorter owing to the unavailability of related party and arms’-

length trade data from the U.S. Bureau of the Census before 1996. The model in column 1 in

Table 5 is re-estimated on the shorter sample (column 4 in Table 5) to assess whether the

parameter estimates differ owing to changes in the length of the sample. The signs, magnitudes,

and levels of statistical significance of the parameter estimates are similar between column 1

(1982-2011) and column 4 (1997-2011).

       The estimates reported in column 1 of Table 6 indicate that the unconditional relationship

between related party imports is positive: countries from which U.S. intrafirm imports represent

a higher share of U.S. GDP are more likely to incur trade disputes. Our theory, however,

proposes an interactive effective between and among trade flows and undervaluation. We report

interactions between the trade shares and undervaluation in the remaining columns of Table 6.

The results in columns 2 (with trade shares and the interactions with undervaluation and 3 (with

full covariates additionally added) are consistent with the hypothesis that firm participation in

international production networks mediates the relationship between undervaluation and

protectionist demands. In particular, we find that undervaluation increases or decreases the

likelihood trade disputes depending on the composition of imports. Undervaluation is associated

with an increased likelihood of antidumping filings against countries from which more arms’

length U.S. imports originate, and with fewer disputes against countries from which U.S. related


to non-metal and metal disputes, defined as HS codes 72-83. The relationship between

undervaluation and disputes is similar across those subsamples.


                                                     26
party imports represent a greater share of U.S. GDP. Figure 4 displays the predicted effects of

increasing related party trade on trade disputes, given undervaluation. With related party imports

at levels of roughly 4 billion U.S. dollars and beyond, the likelihood of a trade dispute with the

U.S. drops below one trade dispute per year, asymptotically approaching zero thereafter.

       In column 4, we substitute U.S. inward FDI for related party trade under the assumption

that FDI precedes U.S. intrafirm imports. The intuition is that related party imports arise (in

some sense by accounting identity) from U.S. foreign direct investment in the host country or

foreign direct investment in the U.S. Our results indicate that FDI lessens trade disputes in the

context of undervaluation controlling for the effects of arm’s length imports into the U.S.

       Do the forces that influence antidumping filings influence the affirmation or negation of

the filings? The results in Columns 2 and 3 in Table 5 and columns 5 and 6 in Table 6 address

the granting or denial of the trade disputes (respectively) using the same county-year ZINB panel

models. The parameter estimates for the Affirmation (dumping granted) models (columns 2 and

5 in Tables 5 and 6, respectively) have identical signs and levels of statistical significance as the

parameter estimates for antidumping filings and are very similar in magnitude. The same forces

at work in filing antidumping petitions are associated with the affirmation of these filings.

       In contrast, the parameter estimates for the Negations models reported in columns 3

(Table 5) and 6 (Table 6) are very different from the antidumping filings models. Of key interest

is that neither the arm’s length or related party variable nor undervaluation nor any of the

interaction terms emerged as being close to statistically significant. A key correlate of a

Negation is whether the U.S. ran a trade surplus with the targeted country.

       We investigate the China case explicitly and report the results in Table 7. We estimate

negative binomial models since the Vuong test does not indicate the presence of excess zeroes.



                                                     27
The results indicate that increased arms’ length imports from China are associated with increases

in trade disputes, while related party imports are strongly negatively correlated with filings.

Figure 5 demonstrates the substantive impact of the main independent variables based on the

results from model 3 of Table 7, and Figure 6 shows that our model closely predicts actual

antidumping petitions by U.S. firms against China.



CONCLUSION

Relying on recent advances in the international trade literature, we present a new explanation for

firm protectionist demands in the context of persistent currency undervaluation and increasing

import competition. Unlike existing research, we rely on neither alignments of factor of

production, nor sectoral cleavages nor firm international orientation per se. Rather, we argue that

the specific locations of global supply chains at points in time explain firm responses to

undervaluation.

       We explore our arguments relying on both micro-level firm and macro-level national

data. Consistent with our argument, we document a negative relationship between related party

trade—our proxy for participation in global supply chains—and antidumping disputes in the

context of undervaluation using both the firm-level and national-level data.

Our examination of the universe of U.S. manufacturing firms finds that the standard distinction

between domestically oriented firms and internationally oriented firms in understanding trade

disputes is not analytically useful in this context. Firms that file for trade remedies are much

larger in terms of employment than are industry peers in the same six digit industry. Further,

they are more internationally engaged in imports and exports than the median firm in their

industry. Where they differ from their peers is in the levels of related party trading originating in



                                                     28
countries against whose firms they file. Filing firms are internationally engaged, but their supply

chains do not generally include activities in countries against whom they file. We also find that

currency undervaluation is associated with increases in the number of MNC affiliates in a

country, particularly for foreign affiliates that export back to the U.S. MNC parent (vertically

integrated affiliates). We find broad increases in U.S. firms’ engagement with China (and far

smaller changes in engagement with Mexico). The rising share of economic activity accounted

for by firms with investments in China makes organizing a coalition representing 25 percent of

activity in a product market increasingly difficult.

       At the country level, we find that the effects of currency undervaluation on antidumping

filings are a non-linear function of the economic importance of the countries against whose firms

are being filed, as measured in terms of levels of related party trade and arm’s length trade. High

levels of arm’s length imports into the U.S. in the presence of high levels of undervaluation are

associated with increased disputes. In contrast, high levels of related party trading sharply

diminish the likelihood of trade disputes with the U.S. We find the same measures are associated

with the likelihood of the petition winning.

       Our paper contributes to the literature on firm political and economic behavior in the

context of changes in the international political economy by demonstrating that protectionist

demands are highly linked to firm supply chains. Once firms have investment or trade positions

in countries, trade disputes become less likely, even in the context of currency undervaluations.

Given the rapid expansion of global supply chains, our findings offer a partial explanation for the

decline in antidumping filings. The current round of semi-competitive ‘currency

undervaluations’ need not lead to increased trade disputes.




                                                       29
Data Appendix

Anti-Dumping Petition Data

Our data source for AD petitions is the May 2012 update of the Global Anti-dumping Database

(GAD-USA.xls - Bown 2012). Coverage includes all antidumping petitions filed in the U.S.

since 1980, including the name of the petitioner, a detailed product code corresponding to the

product(s) under investigation, the country host of the firm against which the dispute is filed, and

the date of the initiation of the investigation. 1 We also consider the outcomes of these filings,

also from Bown (2012). We take the preliminary dumping decisions, and code separately

affirming (denoted with “A”=1, all others 0) and negating (denoted with “N”=1, all others 0).

Each variable is summed by country year.2

Firm and Intra-Industry Level International Engagement Data

To examine the behavior of individual firms in an industry context, we use the U.S.

Linked/Longitudinal Firm Trade Transaction Database (LFTTD), which links individual U.S.

trade transactions to U.S. firms using a longitudinal database of U.S. enterprises that tracks

almost all private sector firms in the United States. (For more information on the LFTTD, see

Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2009).) For each export and import transaction, we observe the ten-

digit Harmonized System classification, the (nominal) value and quantity shipped, the shipment

date, the destination or source country, the transport mode, and whether the transaction takes

place at “arm’s length” or between “related parties”. Export partners are “related” if either party

owns, directly or indirectly, 10 percent or more of the other party. For imports, the ownership

1
    The GAD lists data from 1980 onward as being available, although data for 1979 for the U.S.

are available in the file.
2
    From column “J” in Bown 2012 in GAD-USA.xls.


                                                     30
cutoff is 6 percent.

         We match the antidumping firm filings data compiled by Bown (2012) to the Census

Bureau’s Business Register using the name of the filing organization. (Some of the filers are not

firms; filing organizations include, e.g., labor organizations, farm produce coops, and cities.)

Once the antidumping filing firms are matched to the Business Register, we use a common

identifier to match to the LFTTD and the Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business Database

(LBD). The LBD contains information on industry and employment for almost all private sector

establishments in the U.S. (See Jarmin and Miranda (2002) for more information.) The

combination of the LBD and the LFTTD allow us to construct a detailed and comprehensive

picture of U.S. firms’ domestic operations and international trade relationships.

         We classify firms into product markets based on the 6-digit NAICS industry that the firm

is active in which it has the most employment (using information from the Census Bureau’s

Longitudinal Business Database) for each year. All firms are classified into a single 6-digit

industry.

         Restricting the sample to the manufacturing sector, we determine the percentile ranking

of each firm within its 6-digit NAICS industry along several dimensions for each year.3 We

construct two sets of measures for firms. The first is the share of firms that engage in a particular

3
    The North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) is used to classify producers

based on the production technology used in the establishment. The Harmonized System (HS) is

used to classify products in international trade. Unfortunately, the two systems are distinct

systems with little structural similarity. We classify firms at the 6-digit NAICS level to obtain

fairly narrow company comparisons. We compare imports and exports of products at the 4-digit

level as this is the level we thought the AD filing data we most detailed and still reliable.


                                                     31
activity, e.g. exporting with a country that had an antidumping petition filed against it. We also

construct the rank of each firm within its 6-digit NAICS industry in terms of the value of a

particular activity, e.g. the rank of the firm within its industry in terms of its related-party (RP)

imports from China. The measures include the employment, exporting or total merchandise

export value, importing or total merchandise import value, merchandise exports in the 4-digit HS

product category to the country that is filed against, merchandise imports in the 4-digit HS

product category to the country that is filed against, and related party exports and imports in the

4-digit HS category to/from the country that is filed against. We also report engagement with

China and Mexico.

U.S. Multinational Corporation Affiliate Data

We rely on confidential firm-level data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA)

quinquennial Benchmark Surveys of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad. The International

Investment and Trade in Services Survey Act requires that owners of foreign affiliates4 detail the

balance sheets, income statements and international transactions of their affiliates. As a result of

the confidentiality assurances and the penalties for noncompliance, the coverage is considered

nearly complete and the accuracy of the responses is high. We use detailed affiliate-level data

from the 1994, 1999, 2004, and 2009 benchmark surveys. The affiliate-level data allow us to

decompose affiliate sales to a variety of buyers, including the U.S. parent, the host country, and

other foreign affiliates.5 In particular, we construct the following variables to represent different

types of investment for each country-benchmark year:

4
    Any U.S. person with direct or indirect ownership of ten percent or more of the voting

securities of a foreign business during the benchmark fiscal year owns a foreign affiliate.
5
    The data on foreign affiliate sales broken down by destination are collected for majority-owned

affiliates only.

                                                      32
                 Total affiliates: the total number of affiliates of U.S. MNCs

                 Related-party exporters: the total number of affiliates that export to the U.S.

                  parent or to other foreign affiliates (vertical affiliates)

                 Exporters to headquarters: the total number of affiliates that export to the U.S.

                  parent (vertical affiliates)

                 Exporters: the total number of affiliates that report positive exports

                 Non-Exporters: the total number of affiliates that do not report positive exports

                  (horizontal affiliates)

Computing Undervaluation vis-à-vis the U.S.

        The real exchange rate can be thought of as the price of tradables relative to non-

tradables. Our bilateral real exchange rate index captures the unique yearly value of a country’s

goods, relative to those in the U.S. at the prevailing nominal exchange rate. To generate our

index, we rely on price level data from the Penn World Tables (Heston et al. 2012). In particular,

we compute:

                                                  ln          /        .        (x)

        We adjust for two well-known determinants of the real exchange rate. First, to account

for the Balassa-Samuelson effect (i.e., that relative prices of nontradables tend to increase with

country wealth), we adjust for GDP/capita,                 . Second, following the IMF (2012), our

index captures capital controls using data from Quinn and Toyoda (2008). (See Quinn, Schindler

and Toyoda 2011 for a review of indicators of financial globalization.) Our undervaluation index

is the residual     of the following regression:

                                            ln                                              (x)




                                                         33
          where    is a year fixed effect term, and             is the Quinn/Toyoda capital

controls index for country i in year t-1. 6

          Following Lane and Milessi-Ferretti 2007, we exclude banking center/tax haven

countries from the analyses because the exchange rate valuations and trade data for these

countries are affected by the tax allocation strategies of multinational companies as much or

more than the economic fundamentals of those countries.7 (See also Gravelle 2013.)




6
    The data for five countries for years in which those countries experienced hyperinflation during

war or civil unrest are excluded owing to unreliable PWT data: Iraq during the first Gulf War,

Ghana during its civil war, Zimbabwe during hyperinflation, and Georgia (1995) and Nicaragua

(1988). The estimation results are unaffected by the inclusion or exclusion of these cases.
7
    In this study, the countries omitted because of their designations as “tax haven” banking centers

include the Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Hong Kong, Ireland, Luxembourg, Panama, Singapore,

and Switzerland. See Gravelle 2013 (p.3) for a list of countries with a “tax haven” designation.

All of the results reported here are substantively unaffected by the exclusion or inclusion of the

data for these countries.


                                                      34
REFERENCES

Bechtel, Michael M., and Thomas Sattler. Forthcoming. “What is Litigation in the World Trade

       Organization Worth” International Organization .

Berg, Andrew, and Yanliang Miao. 2010. “The Real Exchange Rate and Growth Revisited: The

       Washington Consensus Strikes Back?” IMF Working Paper #10-58.

Bernard, Andrew B., and J. Bradford Jensen. 1995. “Exporters, Jobs, and Wages in U.S.

       Manufacturing: 1976-87.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics

       1995: 67-119.

Bernard, A. B., and J. B. Jensen. 1999. “Exceptional Exporter Performance: Cause, Effect, or

       Both?” Journal of International Economics 47(1):1-25.

Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, S. Redding, and P. Schott. 2007. “Firms in International Trade."

       Journal of Economic Perspectives 21(3): 105-130.

Bernard, A.B., J.B. Jensen, and P. Schott. 2009. “Importers, Exporters and Multinationals: A

       Portrait of Firms in the U.S. that Trade Goods.” In Producer Dynamics: New Evidence

       from Micro Data, T. Dunne, J.B. Jensen, and M.J. Roberts, eds. Chicago: University of

       Chicago Press.

Blonigen, B. A., 1997. “Firm-Specific Assets and the Link between Exchange Rates and Foreign

       Direct Investment.” American Economic Review 87(3): 447-465.

Bown, Chad P. 2011. “Taking Stock of Anti-dumping, Safeguards and Countervailing Duties,

       1990-2009.” The World Economy 34(12): 1955-1998.

Bown, Chad P. 2011. “Introduction.” In The Great Recession and Import Protection: The Role of

       Temporary Trade Barriers. Edited by Chad P. Bown. PP. 1-51. London, UK: CEPR and

       the World Bank.



                                                   35
Bown, Chad P. (2012) "Global Anti-dumping Database,” available at

       <http://econ.worldbank.org/ttbd/gad/>

Bown, Chad P. and Meredith A. Crowley, 2013. "Self-Enforcing Trade Agreements: Evidence

       from Time-Varying Trade Policy," American Economic Review 103(2): 1071-1090.

Bown, Chad P. and Meredith A. Crowley. 2012. "Import Protection, Business Cycles, and

       Exchange Rates: Evidence from the Great Recession," Journal of International

       Economics 90(1): 50-64.

Broz, L., and S. Werfel. Forthcoming. “Exchange Rates and Industry Demands for Trade

       Protection.” International Organization.

Busch, Marc L. 2000. “Democracy, Consultation, and the Paneling of Disputes under GATT.”

       Journal of Conflict Resolution 44(4):425-446.

Chiquiar, Daniel, Manuel Ramos-Francia, Nicolas Amoroso, and Nuria Quella. 2008.

       “Determinants of Mexico’s Comparative Advantages and of the Performance of its

       Manufacturing Exports During 1996-2005.” SSRN Paper #1638889.

Copelovitch, Mark S., and Jon C. Pevehouse. 2011. “Currency Wars by Other Means?

       Exchange Rates and WTO Dispute Initiation.” Paper presented at the 2010 IPES

       conference.

Copelovitch, Mark S., and Jon C. Pevehouse. Forthcoming. “Ties that Bind? Preferential Trade

       Agreements and Exchange Rate Policy Choices.” International Studies Quarterly.

Easterly, William. 2005. “National Policies and Economic Growth: A Reappraisal.” In

       Handbook of Economic Growth. Edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf.

       Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.




                                                  36
Fischer, S. 1993. "The Role of Macroeconomic Factors in Growth." Journal of Monetary

       Economics 32(3): 485-512.

Froot, K. A., and J. Stein. 1991. "Exchange Rates and Foreign Direct Investment: An Imperfect

       Capital Markets Approach." Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(4): 1191-1217.

Gawande, Kishore, Bernard Hoekman, and Yue Cui. 2013. “Global Supply Chains and Trade

       Policy Responses to the 2008 Crisis.” Texas A&M Typescript Manuscript.

Gravelle, Jane G. 2013. “Tax Havens: International Tax Avoidance and Evasion.” CRS Report

       for Congress, #R40623.

Helpman, Elhanan. 1984. A Simple Theory of International Trade with Multinational

       Corporations." Journal of Political Economy 92 (3): 451-471.

Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J. Melitz, and S. R. Yeaple. 2004. “Export versus FDI with

       Heterogeneous Firms.” American Economic Review 94(1): 300-316.

Heston, Alan, Robert Summers and Bettina Aten (2012). Penn World Table Version 7.1. Center

       for International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of

       Pennsylvania URL <http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu/>

Hilbe, J. M. 2011. Negative Binomial Regression. New York: Cambridge University Press.

International Monetary Fund. 2012. “External Balance Assessment (EBA): Technical

       Background of the Pilot Methodology.” Accessed at

       http://www.imf.org/external/np/res/eba/pdf/080312.pdf.

Irwin, Douglas. 2005. “The Rise of U.S. Anti-dumping Activity in Historical Perspective.” The

       World Economy 28(5):651-668.

Jarmin, R.S., and J. Miranda. 2002. "The Longitudinal Business Database," Working Papers 02-

       17, Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau.



                                                  37
Jensen, J. Bradford. 2011. Global trade in Services: Fear, Facts, and Offshoring. Washington:

       Peterson Institute for International Economics.

Jensen, Nathan M. 2013. “Domestic Institutions and the Taxing of Multinational Corporations.”

       International Studies Quarterly. Forthcoming.

Knetter, Michael, and Thomas J. Prusa. 2003. "Macroeconomic Factors and Anti-dumping

       Filings." Journal of International Economics 61(1): 1-18.

Lane, Philip R., and Gian-Maria Milessi-Ferretti. 2007. The External Wealth of Nations, Mark

       II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004.

       Journal of International Economics 73: 223-250.

Ludema, Rodney and Anna-Maria Mayda. 2011. “Canada: No Place Like Home for

       Antidumping” in Chad P. Bown (ed.), The Great Recession and Import Protection: The

       Role of Temporary Trade Barriers. London, UK: CEPR and the World Bank.

Mansfield, Edward D., and Busch, Marc L. (1995). The political economy of nontariff barriers: a

       cross-national analysis. International Organization, 49, 723-723.

Melitz, Marc J. 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate

       Industry Productivity.” Econometrica 71(6): 1695-1725.

Messerlin, P.A. 2004. “China in the World Trade Organization: Antidumping and Safeguards.”

       The World Bank Economic Review 18(1):105-130.

Milner, Helen. 1988. "Trading Places: Industries for Free Trade." World Politics 40(3): 350-376.

Morrison, Wayne M., and Marc Labonte. 2008. “China’s Currency: Economic Issues and

       Options for U.S. Trade Policy. CRS Report for Congress #RL32165.




                                                   38
Nollen, Stanley D., and Dennis P. Quinn. 1994. “Free Trade, Fair Trade, Strategic Trade, and

       Protectionism in the U.S. Congress, 1987-88.” International Organization 48(3): 491-

       525.

Oatley, Thomas. 2010. “Real Exchange Rates and Trade Protectionism.” Business and Politics

       12(2): 1-17.

Page, John. 1994. “The East Asian Miracle: Four Lessons for Development Policy,” in NBER

       Macroeconomics Annual 1994, Stanley Fischer and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds. Cambridge:

       MIT Press.

Pierce, Justin R. 2011. Plant-Level Responses to Antidumping Duties: Evidence from U.S.

       Manufacturers, Journal of International Economics, 85 (2), pp. 222-233 (November

       2011).

Prusa, Thomas J., and Edwin Vermulst. 2013. “United States – Definitive Anti-Dumping and

       Countervailing Duties on Certain Products from China: Passing the Buck on Pass-

       Through.” World Trade Review 12(2):197-234.

Quinn, Dennis P., Martin Schindler, and A. Maria Toyoda. 2011. “Assessing Measures of

       Financial Openness and Integration.” IMF Economic Review. 59(3):488-522.

Quinn, Dennis P. and A. Maria Toyoda. 2008. “Does Capital Account Liberalization Lead to

       Economic Growth?” Review of Financial Studies. 21(3):1403-1449.

Rosendorff, B. Peter. 2005. “Stability and Rigidity: Politics and Design of the WTO’s Dispute

       Settlement Procedure.” American Political Science Review 99(3):389-400.

Rogowski, Ronald. 1987. Political cleavages and changing exposure to trade. American Political

       Science Review 81 (December): 1121-1137.




                                                  39
Rodrik, Dani. 2008. “The Real Exchange Rate and Economic Growth.” Brookings Papers on

       Economic Activity 2008(2): 365–412.

Rumbaugh, T. and N. Blancher. 2004. “China: International Trade and WTO Accession” IMF

       Working Paper #04-36.

Sanford, Jonathan E. 2011. “Currency Manipulation: The IMF and the WTO.” CRS Report for

       Congress, #22658.

Sattler, Thomas, and Thomas Bernauer. 2011. “Gravitation or Discrimination? Determinants of

       Litigation in the World Trade Organization.” European Journal of Political Research

       50(2):143-167.

Tatelman, Todd B. 2007. “United States’ Trade Remedy Laws and Non-Market Economies: A

       Legal Overview.” CRS Report for Congress, RL33976.

Tobin, Jennifer and Marc L. Busch. 2010. A BIT is Better Than a Lot: Bilateral Investment

       Treaties and Preferential Trade Agreements." World Politics 62 (1): 1-42.

Tomiura, Eiichi, 2007. Foreign Outsourcing, Exporting, and FDI: A Productivity Comparison at

       the Firm Level. Journal of International Economics 72 (1), 113–127.

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. World Investment Report (various

       years)

Vandenbussche, H., and C. Viegelahn. 2011. “European Union: No Protectionist Surprises.” In

       The Great Recession and Import Protection: The Role of Temporary Trade Barriers,

       Edited by Chad P. Bown. London: CEPR and the World Bank.

Villarreal, M. Angeles. 2012 “Mexico’s Free Trade Agreements.” Congressional Research

       Service Report #R40784.




                                                  40
Vuong, Q. 1989. Likelihood ratio tests for model selection and non-nested hypotheses.

       Econometrica 57: 307-333.

World Bank. 1993. The East Asian Miracle. Washington, D.C.: Policy Research Department.

World Bank. 2012. Doing Business in a More Transparent World: Comparing Regulation for

       Domestic Firms in 183 Economies. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.

Yeaple, Stephen Ross. 2009. "Firm heterogeneity and the structure of U.S. multinational

       activity." Journal of International Economics 78(2): 206-215.




                                                  41
Figure 1. Imports, Exports and Total Anti-dumping Filings by Firms in the U.S., 1982-2011




                                                 42
Figure 2. Real Exchange Rates of Mexican Peso and Chinese Yuan Relative to the
                           U.S. Dollar, 1975-2010.




                                         43
Figure 3. Actual vs. Predicted Trade Disputes.
  Derived from results in model 1, Table 5.




                         44
Figure 4. Predicted Anti-dumping Petition Filings.
    Derived from results in model 3, Table 6.




                           45
 Figure 5. Predicted Anti-dumping Petition Filings.
Derived from results in model 3, Table 7 (China only).




                             46
Figure 6. U.S. Anti-dumping Filings Against China. Observed and Predicated.
                  Derived from results in model 3, Table 7.




                                       47
          Table 2. Characteristics of Firms Filing Anti-Dumping Petitions 1993-1997 that Survive to 2009
                                     Characteristics of 1993‐1997 Filers that Survive to 2009

                                                     1993                                                   2009
                                    Prevalence               Industry Rank               Prevalence                 Industry Rank

                                  (indicator [0,1])            (of value)             (indicator [0,1])               (of value)
     N = 48                      Mean         Std Dev       Mean       Std Dev        Mean        Std Dev          Mean       Std Dev
 1   Employment*                 11118          17820        0.93         0.14        7557         11401            0.94         0.13
 2   Export                         0.88          0.33       0.85         0.33         0.83          0.38           0.82         0.37
 3   Import                         0.79          0.41       0.77         0.40         0.77          0.42           0.76         0.42
 4   Related‐Party (RP) Export      0.69          0.47       0.68         0.46         0.71          0.46           0.70         0.45
 5   Related‐Party (RP) Import      0.65          0.48       0.63         0.47         0.67          0.48           0.66         0.47
 6   Export to China                0.46          0.50       0.46         0.49         0.67          0.48           0.66         0.47
 7   Import from China              0.33          0.48       0.33         0.46         0.63          0.49           0.62         0.48
 8   RP Export to China             0.17          0.38       0.17         0.37         0.40          0.49           0.40         0.49
 9   RP Import from China           0.17          0.38       0.17         0.37         0.48          0.50           0.48         0.50
10   Export to Mexico               0.63          0.49       0.62         0.48         0.67          0.48           0.66         0.47
11   Import from Mexico             0.46          0.50       0.46         0.49         0.56          0.50           0.56         0.49
12   RP Export to Mexico            0.33          0.48       0.33         0.47         0.52          0.50           0.52         0.50
13   RP Import from Mexico          0.31          0.47       0.32         0.46         0.42          0.50           0.42         0.49




                                                                       48
       Table 3. Share of Employment at Internationally Engaged Firms for Industries without and with AD Filings 1993-1997

            Firm Characteristics within Industries without AD Filings 1993‐1997 and Industries with AD Filings 1993‐1997
                                                Weighted by Employment

                                          without an AD filing 1993‐1997               with an AD filing 1993‐1997
                                            1993                  2009                 1993                  2009

                                          Prevalence           Prevalence            Prevalence            Prevalence
                                       (indicator [0,1])    (indicator [0,1])     (indicator [0,1])     (indicator [0,1])



                                      Mean      Std Dev     Mean     Std Dev     Mean      Std Dev     Mean      Std Dev
 1   Employment*                      30458     652166      15161    230346      24584     387623      14052     208621
 2   Export                             0.66       3.55       0.64      3.35       0.84       4.81       0.78       4.42
 3   Import                             0.60       3.67       0.59      3.43       0.79       5.38       0.75       4.65
 4   Related‐Party (RP) Export          0.56       3.72       0.54      3.47       0.74       5.76       0.69       4.94
 5   Related‐Party (RP) Import          0.48       3.75       0.49      3.49       0.66       6.20       0.59       5.28
 6   Export to China                    0.36       3.60       0.48      3.48       0.56       6.50       0.60       5.25
 7   Import from China                  0.35       3.56       0.49      3.48       0.41       6.45       0.60       5.26
 8   RP Export to China                 0.18       2.88       0.33      3.27       0.29       5.92       0.33       5.03
 9   RP Import from China               0.18       2.86       0.38      3.38       0.22       5.46       0.41       5.28
10   Export to Mexico                   0.46       3.74       0.55      3.47       0.64       6.29       0.70       4.90
11   Import from Mexico                 0.38       3.63       0.42      3.44       0.55       6.52       0.52       5.36
12   RP Export to Mexico                0.31       3.46       0.41      3.43       0.47       6.54       0.52       5.36
13   RP Import from Mexico              0.28       3.36       0.33      3.28       0.37       6.32       0.38       5.20




                                                                         49
                     Table 4. Undervaluation and MNC Investment
               (Results based on Data from Bureau of Economic Analysis)

                              (1)               (2)              (3)           (4)          (5)
                                           Related-Party    Exporters to                   non-
 Dependent variable:   Total Affiliates     Exporters       Headquarters    Exporters    Exporters

Lagged DV                  0.969**           0.977**          0.988**        0.970**     0.976**
                           (0.014)           (0.014)          (0.018)        (0.015)     (0.014)

Undervaluation             0.212**           0.257**           0.221*         0.189        0.077
                           (0.081)           (0.088)           (0.107)       (0.104)      (0.088)

Constant                   0.943**           -0.099*           0.115*         0.064      1.117**
                           (0.081)           (0.048)           (0.049)       (0.059)     (0.071)

Observations                 368               368              368            368         368
R-squared                   0.947             0.935            0.917          0.934       0.932
Countries                    123               123              123            123         123

                                            ΔRelated-
                                              Party         ΔExporters to                 Δnon-
 Dependent variable:   ΔTotal Affiliates    Exporters       Headquarters    ΔExporters   Exporters

Undervaluation             0.275**           0.305**           0.244*        0.249**       0.122
                           (0.064)           (0.078)           (0.096)       (0.088)      (0.071)

Constant                   0.840**           -0.149**          0.096*        -0.003      1.050**
                           (0.050)            (0.040)          (0.041)       (0.047)     (0.052)

Observations                 368               368              368            368         368
R-squared                   0.382             0.620            0.618          0.555       0.663
Countries                    123               123              123            123         123
Note: The table reports the results of OLS estimates of the logged number and changes in the
logged number of foreign affiliates of U.S. multinationals. The sample is the population of U.S.
multinationals with majority owned affiliates taken from the quinquennial benchmark surveys
over the period 1994-2009. All models include year dummies. **p<.01, *p<.05.




                                                       50
Table 5. Bilateral Real Exchange Rate Undervaluation and Trade Disputes, 1980-2011

                          (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)
                                                             1997-
                      All product   dumping     dumping      2011
                        filings      granted     denied     sample
Disputest-1            0.269***     0.181**     0.171**    0.195**
                        (0.074)     (0.072)     (0.082)    (0.098)


Undervaluationt-1      0.805***     0.828***     0.462     1.002***
                        (0.243)      (0.223)    (0.405)     (0.302)


GDP/capitat-3          0.564***     0.430***    0.68***    0.455***
                        (0.158)      (0.147)     (0.26)     (0.161)


Polityt-1               0.053**     0.048**     -0.017     0.096***
                        (0.023)     (0.024)     (0.041)     (0.034)

Bilateral Trade        -1.169***    -1.53***    1.212**    -1.92***
Balancet-2              (0.275)      (0.303)     (0.59)     (0.489)

Capital Account         -0.010**    -0.009**     -0.006    -0.19***
Opennesst-1              (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.09)     (0.006)

Bilateral Invest        -0.616**    -0.565**    -0.587     -0.9***
Treatyt-1                (0.314)     (0.264)    (1.092)    (0.304)

First-stage
Disputest-3           -16.107***    -1.808***   -3.32***   -17.0***
                        (2.816)       (0.649)    (0.231)    (0.558)
Disputest-4                         -2.396***
                                      (0.572)
Log-likelihood         -1345.717     -1001.4    -154.81    -549.13
Observations             2798          2716      2798       1472
Countries                 109           109       109        109
Vuong statistic           3.74         4.63      17.63       2.75
Note: The table reports the results of panel zero-inflated negative binomial estimates of annual
bilateral antidumping filings in the United States (model 1), and dumping claim granted (model
2) and claims denied (model 3), where the grant or the denial is coded as a 1 and all other cases
are coded as zeros. Model 4 examines filings over the period 1997-2001. The variables are
defined in the text.

                                                   51
                                         Table 6. Undervaluation, Imports, and Trade Disputes
                                               (1)          (2)            (3)        (4)            (5)           (6)
                                                                                                 dumping      dumping
                                                                                   Investment     granted       denied
Disputest-1                                  0.269***     0.196***     0.147**      0.241***        0.133         0.010
                                              (0.091)      (0.063)      (0.071)      (0.073)      (0.090)       (0.211)
Undervaluationt-1                              0.395       -0.489*       0.081        0.470         0.258        -0.485
                                              (0.256)      (0.279)      (0.388)      (0.348)      (0.477)       (1.078)
U.S. Arm’s Length Importst-1                   0.757      4.126***     4.471***     3.526***     4.541***         2.833
                                              (0.653)      (1.271)      (1.599)      (1.195)      (1.757)       (4.240)
U.S. Related Party Importst-1                0.966***       0.282        -0.068                    -0.839        -1.383
                                              (0.350)      (0.482)      (0.596)                   (0.910)       (2.665)
Undervaluationt-1 x                                      -6.442***    -7.603***                 -8.094***        -2.770
  U.S. Related Party Importst-1                            (1.861)      (2.449)                   (2.989)       (9.463)
Undervaluationt-1 x                                      22.433***    24.508***       6.248*    22.445***       23.782
 U.S. Arm's Length Importst -1                             (5.234)      (7.121)       (3.211)     (8.437)      (25.447)
GDP/capitat-3                                                          0.557***      0.439***    0.631***      1.123**
                                                                        (0.120)       (0.132)     (0.132)       (0.567)
Polityt-1                                                              0.071**        0.075**     0.079**        -0.063
                                                                        (0.028)       (0.035)     (0.036)       (0.115)
Capital Account Opennesst-1                                           -0.019***     -0.020***   -0.022***        -0.027
                                                                        (0.005)       (0.006)     (0.006)       (0.020)
Bilateral Investment Treaty                                              -0.444      -0.708**      -0.457    -16.846***
                                                                        (0.299)       (0.316)     (0.343)       (0.539)
U.S. Inward FDIt-1                                                                   -137.936
                                                                                     (84.055)
Undervaluationt-1 x U.S. Inward FDIt-1                                              -408.022*
                                                                                    (235.290)
First-stage                                 -16.915***   -17.109***   -16.301***   -16.552***   -17.097***   -2.615***
Disputest-3                                   (0.446)      (0.397)      (0.486)       (0.501)     (0.575)     (0.698)
Log-likelihood                               -583.651     -565.603     -528.109      -528.340    -414.919     -44.729
Observations                                   1580         1580         1472           1337       1472         1472
Countries                                       113          113          109           108         109         109
Vuong statistic                                3.242        3.079        2.397         2.327       2.007       2.358
Note: See notes to the prior table.


                                                                      52
   Table 7. Undervaluation, Imports, and Antidumping Filings against Chinese Firms

                                        (1)         (2)         (3)
Disputest-1                                       0.072*       0.008
                                                  (0.040)     (0.034)

Undervaluationt-1                    1.610**       0.743      -6.607**
                                     (0.639)      (0.687)      (2.719)

U.S. Arms' Length Importst-1                                 4.473***
                                                              (1.336)

U.S. Related Party Importst-1                                 -6.914**
                                                               (2.944)

Constant                             1.578***    1.212***     -0.254
                                      (0.147)     (0.252)     (0.609)

 Log-likelihood                        -85.097     -82.363     -31.347
 Observations                            33          32           15
Note: The table reports the results of negative binomial estimates of annual antidumping filings
against China by complainants in the United States. The independent variables are country-year
values corresponding to China. The undervaluation index is defined in the text; higher values
indicate greater real exchange rate undervaluation relative to the U.S. dollar. Related imports and
arm’s length imports measure U.S. imports from China by affiliated and unaffiliated parties,
respectively, as a share of U.S. GDP.




                                                    53
