NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GOLDEN YEARS OR FINANCIAL FEARS? DECISION MAKING AFTER RETIREMENT
SEMINARS
Steven G. Allen
Robert L. Clark
Jennifer Maki
Melinda Sandler Morrill
Working Paper 19231
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19231

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2013

This research was supported by a grant from the FINRA Investor Education Foundation. All results,
interpretations and conclusions expressed are those of the author(s) alone, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the FINRA Investor Education Foundation or any of its affiliated companies. No portion
of this work may be reproduced, cited, or circulated without the express written permission of the
author(s). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Steven G. Allen, Robert L. Clark, Jennifer Maki, and Melinda Sandler Morrill. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Golden Years or Financial Fears? Decision Making After Retirement Seminars
Steven G. Allen, Robert L. Clark, Jennifer Maki, and Melinda Sandler Morrill
NBER Working Paper No. 19231
July 2013
JEL No. J14,J26,J32
ABSTRACT
Many organizations provide retirement planning seminars to their employees as a benefit to help them
make better informed retirement decisions. This study examines the participants in 85 seminars conducted
by five companies in 2008 and 2009 to determine how much learning takes place and whether employees
adjust retirement plans. Using surveys conducted before and after the seminars, we find that financial
literacy and knowledge of retirement program parameters are significantly higher after the seminar.
Employees with the largest increases in knowledge were most likely to change their planned retirement
age and planned age of claiming Social Security benefits.

Steven G. Allen
Jenkins Graduate School of Management
NC State University
2124 Nelson Hall
P.O.Box 7229
Raleigh, NC 27695-7229
and NBER
steve_allen@ncsu.edu
Robert L. Clark
Poole College of Management
Box 7229
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695
and NBER
robert_clark@ncsu.edu

Jennifer Maki
Center for Healthcare Economics & Policy
FTI Consulting
1101 K Street
NW Suite B100
Washington, DC 20005
jamaki@ncsu.edu
Melinda Sandler Morrill
Department of Economics
North Carolina State University
Box 8110
Raleigh, NC 27695-8110
melinda_morrill@ncsu.edu

I. Introduction
As retirement approaches, an older worker faces a series of important and irreversible
choices including when to retire from her current job and when to start collecting Social
Security. These decisions have become much more complicated as defined contribution plans
largely replaced defined benefit plans and as financial options facing investors become more
complex. These actions will strongly affect individuals’ income levels in retirement, the
sensitivity of income to economic fluctuations, and the ability to maintain consumption
throughout retirement.
To make the transition into retirement successfully, workers must rely on their financial
knowledge and obtain information about retirement programs offered by employers and the
government. Without accurate information and sufficient financial literacy, some older workers
will make suboptimal employment and investment choices that will have adverse consequences.
Most lifecycle models of economic behavior assume that individuals have basic financial literacy
and make resource allocation decisions to develop saving/consumption plans along with
work/retirement choices to maximize lifetime utility.
Economists and other social science researchers have recently examined the level of
financial literacy and its role in economic decision making. The general conclusion of this
research, recently surveyed by Hastings, Madrian and Skimmyhorn (2012), is that individuals
have quite low levels of financial literacy. This would make them more likely to make suboptimal resource allocation decisions. Individuals with low levels of financial literacy have
difficulty with paying bills on time, saving, and diversifying, as shown in the many research
studies cited by Hastings et al. Low levels of financial literacy are also associated with lower

2

wealth (see Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007, 2011; Gustman, Steinmeir and Tabatabai, 2012; van
Rooij, Lusardi and Alessie, 2012).
This paper addresses two key questions. First, can financial literacy programs increase
knowledge? And second, if steps are taken to increase financial literacy and pension
understanding, will there be changes in retirement plans? While it is interesting to see an
association between low literacy levels and certain types of decisions, this does not necessarily
imply that improving financial literacy will lead to a revision in retirement plans. Low literacy
levels could reflect other variables (such as intelligence, attitudes, or preferences) that do not
show up in household surveys but more truly determine choices. A few studies have attempted
to determine whether changes in knowledge base can lead to changes in decisions. For instance,
Liebman and Luttmer (2011) conducted a field experiment where a sample of older workers
received information about Social Security provisions in the mail; these workers were 4
percentage points more likely than the control group to be in the labor force one year later.
Financial literacy programs can take many forms and can occur in many different
settings. This study focuses on financial education and retirement planning programs in the
workplace. Since individuals spend substantial time at work and since much of what they need
to know to develop retirement plans is related to employer-provided benefits, the workplace is
well-suited for financial education programs. The programs that we have studied are provided
by the employer at no cost to the employee and are conducted during the workday on company
time.
In this study, we examine the retirement planning programs offered by employers to their
older employees and assess their impact on financial literacy and retirement plans. There is a
sizable literature on retirement planning (recent examples include Benitez-Silva and Dwyer,

3

2005, and Chan and Stevens, 2008) and the choice of when to claim Social Security benefits (see
Behaghel and Blau, 2012, and references therein), but the role of financial literacy is
underexplored. A related literature finds that those with access to seminars save more and have
higher wealth (e.g., Bayer, Bernheim, and Scholz, 2009; Bernheim and Garrett, 2003; Lusardi,
2005), but does not explicitly consider how seminars alter retirement plans.
We study how worker knowledge changes after completion of a retirement seminar and
whether the changes in knowledge actually lead to changes in retirement plans. We build upon
previous work by Clark, Morrill and Allen (2012a, 2012b) that examined retirement plans of
workers in three companies that did not have retirement planning seminars. That study finds
employees who mistakenly think that Social Security or pension eligibility is later than it really
is plan to retire later than well informed workers. The results are more mixed for those who
mistakenly thought they were eligible earlier than they really were; this type of mistake on full
Social Security benefit eligibility is associated with earlier retirement whereas mistakes
regarding early Social Security eligibility and private pension eligibility were unrelated to
planned retirement age.
This paper demonstrates an increase in employees’ knowledge about pension plan
parameters and financial matters resulting from attending a pre-retirement planning workshop.
We then explore whether attendees make changes in their plans for retirement and receipt of
Social Security benefits. Our findings indicate that participants increase their financial and
pension literacy, and on the basis of new knowledge many alter their retirement plans.
II. Financial Literacy and Retirement Decisions
When individuals enter the labor force, they immediately begin making important choices
about their lifetime consumption and saving profiles. Lifecycle theory suggests that individuals

4

set retirement goals and targets early in their careers. In order to achieve these retirement goals,
workers select labor supply, saving and investment behavior consistent with their goals. As new
information becomes available, people will re-optimize their consumption and saving patterns,
and they may alter their retirement expectations using this new knowledge. The primary
retirement goals that workers must set include the age of retirement and their levels of retirement
income. A fundamental principle in retirement planning is that younger retirement ages and
higher retirement incomes require more saving and less consumption throughout one’s working
life. Younger retirement ages may require more risk-taking as well.
While considerable attention has been paid to the undersaving of American workers,
much less attention has been focused on how older workers make decisions concerning the
allocation of their resources as they enter into retirement. Workers must decide when and how to
enter into retirement, and how to best use the resources available to them. Limited available
evidence suggests that older workers do not have sufficient financial literacy needed to make the
many choices that must be made as they transition from work to retirement (Bernheim 1995,
1998; Hilgert and Hogarth 2002; Lusardi and Mitchell 2006, 2007). Incorrect or insufficient
knowledge can lead to suboptimal choices. For this reason, programs that increase financial
literacy and retirement program knowledge have the potential to improve retirement decisions
and produce better retirement outcomes (Clark and d’Ambrosio 2003; Clark, et al., 2006; Lusardi
2008). Pre-retirement planning seminars held in the workplace can efficiently address the
numerous questions that individuals approaching retirement share, thereby reducing human
resources costs.
Some of the most important decisions older workers must make include: (1) What age to
retire from a career jobs? (2) When retiring from a career job, whether to request a lump sum

5

distribution from a defined benefit plan or accept a life annuity from the plan? (3) What age to
start receiving Social Security benefits? (4) Whether to annuitize the account balances in a
401(k) plan? In making these important decisions, individuals must rely on their own financial
literacy and understanding of financial mathematics and have accurate knowledge about their
employers’ and national retirement programs. Workers can acquire the needed knowledge to
make these key decisions in various ways, and one resource often available is employersponsored pre-retirement planning programs.
Many large employers offer some type of planning seminar for retirement eligible
employees. Sabelhaus, Brogdan, and Holden (2008) report that 46 percent of pension
participants covered by defined contribution plans work for companies that provide resources to
assist participants in retirement choices. Thirty percent of participants have the opportunity to
attend employer seminars and workshops, and almost 85 percent of these attendees rely on this
information to ‘some’ or a ‘great’ extent in making their retirement decisions. In a plan sponsor
survey, Wray (2008) finds that 31 percent of employers offer seminars focusing on retirement
assets and income planning. While not universal, employer-provided retirement planning
programs are common, accessible to perhaps one-third of the labor force.
Although many business leaders and analysts believe these programs are beneficial to
employees and increase their financial knowledge, relatively little formal analysis of employer
programs has been conducted. Thus, not much is known about the effectiveness of workplace
education and its ability to alter the retirement decisions of employees. To address these
important issues, we examined the pre-retirement programs of five large national employers.
The principal objective of the research is to assess whether these programs are successful in

6

improving workers’ knowledge as they approach retirement. We also examine whether, on the
basis of participating in a workplace educational event, employees alter their retirement plans.
III. Research Methodology
To evaluate employer-provided pre-retirement planning programs, we assembled a team
of five large employers ranging in size from 8,000 to 40,000 employees. Four of the firms have
sites throughout the United States; their home offices are in New Jersey, North Carolina,
Oklahoma, and Washington. Each of the employers offers defined benefit plans (three
employers have cash balance plans), each offers health insurance to active and retired workers,
and each offers supplemental defined contribution plans (all but one have an employer match).
The employee populations of these companies vary by gender, education, earnings, and
geographic location.
We worked with each employer in the spring of 2008 to develop an evaluation process
for their pre-retirement planning programs. Our methodology included the development of two
surveys. The first survey was to be completed by each participant prior to the start of the
program. The objective was to obtain baseline socioeconomic data about the individual and
his/her household, as well as information concerning retirement plans and investment strategies.
Employees also answered questions about their financial literacy and their knowledge of
employer and national retirement programs, described in detail in Section IV.
At the conclusion of the seminar, participants were asked to complete a second survey.
This time, participants answered additional questions concerning the program, the employee’s
assessment of the seminar, and its value. The knowledge and literacy questions were repeated, to
see if the participants’ overall knowledge of retirement programs and financial markets had
improved. Seminar participants were also again asked about their retirement plans, so we can
observe any changes in plans that individuals made due to the seminar. Three of the employers
7

used hard-copy surveys. The program leaders at each of these companies extended the length of
their programs to allow participants 15 to 20 minutes prior to the start of the seminar to complete
Survey One and similar time at the end of the program to complete Survey Two. The other two
employers used electronic surveys; in this case, a link to the electronic Survey One was sent via
email to participants about a week prior to the seminar and a link to Survey Two was e-mailed to
the participants immediately following the seminar. Attendees were given approximately two
weeks to complete Survey Two. This research is based on participant surveys from 85 seminars
that incorporated our surveys into their programs between June 2008 and December 2009. We
merged the responses from the five employers into a single data set which we call Participants
Attending Retirement Seminars (PARS). Table 1 presents basic statistics about each employer,
their retirement planning seminars, and the sample size in PARS.1
[Table 1]
Seminars varied in scope and duration across the employers. During the research period,
Employer A held 31 seminars that were 4 hours long with approximately 500 total attendees.
Employer B and Employer E both had all day seminars. Employer D had 12 seminars that were
two and half days in duration and covered 281 employees. In 2008, the Employer C seminars
were a full day, but in 2009 the seminars were reduced to a half day. Thus, we were able to

1

We do not conduct analysis at the employer-level and have kept the identities of the employers masked.

Although it is interesting to note the similarities and differences among the seminars presented by the
employers, with such a small sample of employers one should be cautious about attributing differences
observed to differing seminar characteristics with only a limited set of employee control variables.
Similarly, although our data do span the start of The Great Recession, because the employers held
seminars at different times and the population of attendees may have been affected by the macroeconomic
conditions at the time of the seminar, the data are not well suited to a study of the effects of the recent
recession on retirement planning.

8

develop a unique data set that included seminars ranging in length from one half day to two and
half days. Some seminars took place during a significant economic decline and some in the
early stages of the economic recovery.2 One should therefore be cautious in interpreting any
aggregate differences observed between the outcomes at each employer, since many aspects of
the seminar, time period, survey, and sample differ. All regression estimates include employer
fixed effects, but those are not reported or interpreted as part of the analysis.
During the 18 month data collection period, over 1,500 individuals attended the seminars
of these five employers. We received completed responses from 1,182 for a response rate of
approximately 76 percent. In the analysis, we restrict the sample to participants with valid
responses for age, gender, education, and tenure (dropping 13, 11, 8, and 9 observations,
respectively. The sample was restricted to those born between 1943 and 1959, thus participants
were approximately age 50 to 65 at the time of the seminars (dropping an additional 39
observations).3 We also restrict the sample to those respondents that had a valid response for at
least five out of the ten knowledge questions (dropping 34 observations) and who had a valid
response for planned retirement age (dropping 228 observations).4 The final sample size for our

2

Goda, Shoven, and Slavov (2012) find a weak negative correlation between the stock market decline in

2008 and planned retirement age, but suggest that the relationship is not driven by wealth shocks.
3

The age-50 restriction was applied to limit the sample to individuals approaching retirement decisions.

Most of the employers only invite retirement eligible employees to these programs so, in fact, this results
in only a small number of observations being deleted from the sample. The upper age limit was applied to
limit the sample to those who had not yet attained the normal retirement age for Social Security. In
addition, we felt that workers over age 65 had already made the decision to delay retirement and that they
would most likely have very different responses to these programs than workers age 50 to 65.
4

Item non-response for retirement age was high because “don’t know” was an allowable response in

several versions of the survey.

9

analysis is 840, as shown in Table 1.
We examine the impact of pre-retirement planning programs offered between June 2008
and December 2009.5 The usual process followed by the employers is that retirement-eligible
employees are invited individually to participate in these programs by their employer: invitations
are issued, attendance is tracked, and there are high participation rates. Because of the high
demand by employees to participate in the programs, several employers limit participation to
once every five years or so. These programs are on-going and the employers expect that over a
number of years, most eligible employees will attend one of these programs. Thus, the
participants in the programs we observe should roughly reflect the population of older workers at
these employers on average.
While our results clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of financial education at the five
employers studied, there are two important caveats to the external generalizability of our
findings. First, there always is a possibility of selection issues associated with participation in
various types of educational events. For example, only workers with certain characteristics
might attend these programs. Thus, attendance only by persons who desired to participate could
suggest that statistical analysis might overstate the impact of financial education seminars for the
population at large. In contrast to past studies of voluntary seminars or benefit fairs, the
programs we examine are more structured. While attendance is voluntary, employees receive
specific invitations from their employers and attendance is recorded. When questioned, the
leaders of the various programs in our study reported to us that nearly all workers invited to
participate actually attend the programs and, over time, all retirement eligible workers are invited
to attend one of these programs. Therefore, this type of selection bias should be minimal in our
5

At least one of the authors attended a seminar offered by each of the five employers.

10

study.6 Nevertheless, we only observed seminars offered between June 2008 and December
2009, so it is possible that these programs may have attracted a non-representative sample of the
workforce during the 18 months of our project. The leaders of the various employer-provided
programs did not report any obvious selection bias among the participants during the study
period. The second reason our results may not be generalizable to the full population of workers
is that our sample necessarily is employed at larger firms that offer formal pre-retirement
planning seminars and have generous pension and retirement benefits. Appendix Table A-1
presents a comparison of our sample (described below) to the nationally representative Health
and Retirement Study (HRS) data. As expected our sample has higher levels of education, more
years of service, higher earnings, and more financial literacy than the HRS sample.
IV. Survey Design and the PARS Sample
The basic framework of each of the surveys was similar across the firms; however, some
components of the surveys were customized for each employer. The surveys mentioned the
specific employer by name, where appropriate, and people were asked about their own
employer-specific retirement benefits by name. Questions concerning retirement saving accounts
differed somewhat between private-sector versus public/nonprofit employers (i.e., questions
concerned 401(k) plans in the private sector and 403(b) and 457 plans in the public sector). In
addition, several employers requested that specific questions be added to the survey to help them
better understand how their employees were using the human resource programs and accessing
the help lines offered by their 401(k) and 403(b) providers.

6

The programs offered by three of the employers have been presented over a number of years. In

contrast, the programs by two of the employers were implemented during our study period and thus a full
cycle of retirees has not had a chance to attend one of the programs.

11

The objectives of Survey One were to determine employee understanding levels
regarding their employer’s pension and health benefits, their knowledge of national retirement
plans such as Social Security and Medicare, their financial literacy, and their current retirement
plans. To assess the current level of knowledge regarding national retirement plans, the survey
asked about Social Security early and normal retirement ages as well as early retirement
penalties, cost of living increases, and the age of eligibility for Medicare. In addition, participants
were asked benefit and eligibility questions concerning their employer defined benefit plans and
their own 401(k) or 403(b) accounts.
This survey also included several questions related to basic financial literacy. Survey One
also asked participants the age that they expected to retire, when they expected to start Social
Security benefits, what the expected level of benefits would be, and what benefits they expected
to receive from their employer-provided retirement plans. Questions probed employee intentions
concerning annuitization of pension assets and work plans after they retired from their current
employer. Finally, Survey One contained a series of economic and demographic questions
concerning current income, wealth, age, marital status, and the work, income, and retirement
benefits of any spouse or partner.
The primary objectives of Survey Two were to determine how participants evaluated the
seminar, whether they enhanced their knowledge of retirement programs, and whether the new
information changed their retirement plans. To assess the employees’ impression of the seminars,
the first section of Survey Two asked respondents if the program provided useful information, if
the information was presented at the right level for them, if the presenters were of high caliber, if
they felt better able to make retirement decisions after completing the program, and whether they
valued the program as an employee benefit. The next two sections of Survey Two repeated many

12

Survey One questions concerning retirement intentions and knowledge. By comparing the
answers given across both surveys, we assess the change in the respondent’s knowledge about
retirement programs, financial literacy, and whether participants changed their retirement plans.
Means of various demographic, economic, and retirement plans characteristics are shown
in Table 2. The sample is composed of 840 workers age 50-65 with a mean age of 57.8 years.
Males represented 54 percent of the employees, while 76 percent of respondents are married, and
they have an average of 25 years of service with their current employer. In general, these are
relatively high earners with above-average wealth.
[Table 2]
V. Did Participant Financial Literacy Rise?
The primary objectives of our research were to answer two key questions concerning
workplace financial education programs. First, do employer-provided retirement planning
programs increase financial literacy and knowledge about company and national retirement
programs? Second, if financial literacy is increased, how does this enhanced knowledge affect
workers’ retirement plans? To examine the impact of financial education programs, we use the
PARS data described above, which includes merged survey responses from the five employers.
To examine the level of financial literacy and knowledge of retirement programs prior to
the seminar, the participants were asked a series of financial literacy and retirement program
questions. The following analysis is based on 10 of these questions. The questions, along with a
summary of correct answers and percent answering correctly are reported in Table 3. As
reported in the bottom row of Table 3, the average number of correct responses prior to the
seminar is 6.2; afterwards the average number of correct answers rose to 7.5, indicating a
substantial level of learning among program participants. In general, the questions on which the

13

lowest percentage of respondents gave the correct answers (P2 to P5) are those questions that
relate to Social Security eligibility ages and how Social Security benefits vary with age and over
time.7
[Table 3]
The average knowledge score after the seminar for the entire sample is significantly
higher than the average score prior to the seminar. Figure 1 shows the distribution of
participants’ knowledge scores (the number of correct answers) before and after the seminar.
Prior to the seminar, 39 participants score a perfect 10 while 431 participants have scores of six
or lower. After the seminar, 125 participants have correct answers for all 10 questions and only
204 have a score of six or fewer.8
[Figure 1]
Figure 2 shows the change in knowledge achieved during the seminar. Overall, 565
participants (67 percent of the sample) improved their knowledge scores. The knowledge score is
unaffected for 174 individuals (21 percent of the sample), while 101 respondents (12 percent of
7

It should not be surprising that many older workers do not know the basic eligibility and plan

characteristics of national retirement programs. Key parameters of Social Security, Medicare, and pension
regulations are based on legislation passed at different points in time and have different objectives. As a
result, many alternative ages are specified in these programs that determine access to retirement income.
A recent study (US GAO 2007) summarized these many different retirement age-related rules ranging
from age 55, the age of eligibility for drawing certain pensions without penalties if leaving an employer,
to age 70 ½ which is the age for mandatory withdrawals from pension plans to avoid tax penalties. While
confusion over these ages is understandable, the retirement income of workers depends on their
knowledge of these ages and the timing of their retirement decisions.
8

Some critical variables in the index changed between Survey One and Survey Two. In results not

shown, 31 percent of the responses in Survey One on the age at which one can begin receiving normal
Social Security benefits were too low and 20 percent were too high. Both of these percentages dropped
considerably in Survey Two; 20 percent were too low and 10 percent were too high.

14

the sample) show a slight decrease in their financial knowledge. Panel B illustrates the
knowledge gain sorted by the base level of financial knowledge from Survey One. Most
importantly, those with initial low scores achieve substantial increases in their knowledge of
retirement plans. Of the 431 individuals with low pre-seminar knowledge scores (6 or fewer
correct answers), 357 (83 percent) improve their knowledge scores with 40 percent achieving
increases of 3 or more additional correct answers. For this reason, we conclude that the preretirement planning seminars did increase financial literacy for almost all participants, with large
gains among those with relatively little knowledge prior to the event.
[Figure 2]
It should be emphasized that the gains in knowledge are observed across all economic
and demographic characteristics of the participants. Table 4 shows the knowledge index by
subsets of the sample based on various employee characteristics. There is a 1.3 point gain on a
10 point scale in the mean score of the entire population. Younger participants, those aged 50-61,
have a greater increase in their knowledge scores than the older participants, a gain so large that
it eliminates the age difference in knowledge observed prior to the program. Knowledge gains
also are slightly larger for those with 20 or fewer years of service than those with more than 20
years of service. Women have larger gains in knowledge than men but still have a lower
knowledge score than men after the program.
[Table 4]
Interestingly, people with lower self-assessed knowledge scores prior to the seminar have
a much larger gain in mean scores than those with a higher initial self-assessed level of
knowledge (1.50 compared to 1.06). This is another indication that the programs are beneficial to
those with relatively little knowledge of their retirement plans. There also is evidence that those

15

with some college learn more from the seminars than those with no more than a high school
education. Workers with some college start with a higher initial level of knowledge than those
who have less education (6.44 to 5.01) and the gap widens even further (7.81 to 6.16) after the
workshops. This implies that education and retirement planning programs have complementary
effects on learning. Overall, these data provide important statistical support for the conclusion
that workplace education is effective in increasing financial literacy for older workers and the
gains are often greater for those that enter the event with the lowest levels of financial literacy.
Table 4 also shows how knowledge scores changed in each of the five companies.
Employer E had the largest increase in knowledge scores (1.75 points). This employer
introduced the seminars during our study period and invited all employees age 50 and older to
attend. Scores increased by 1.35 points or more at employers A, B, and D. The score increase
was lowest at Employer C (0.59 points), but that may be partly attributable to a relatively high
score in Survey One.
VI. Did Greater Knowledge Change Retirement Plans?
After participating in the workplace educational event and increasing their financial
literacy, how do workers respond? Does enhanced knowledge result in changes to planned
retirement behavior and the management of retirement wealth? Table 5 compares responses
between Survey One and Survey Two for four key variables: planned retirement age, planned
age to begin receiving Social Security benefits, plans for working after retirement, and the
decision to annuitize. Although mean planned retirement age increases only slightly due to
movements in both directions, 31.1 percent of seminar participants changed planned retirement
age (as measured by their expected age of retirement on Survey Two in comparison to their
expected age of retirement as indicated on Survey One). Figure 3 demonstrates graphically how

16

planned retirement age changed between Survey One and Survey Two. There is a tendency
toward later planned retirement after Survey Two among those who initially had planned to retire
before age 65.9
[Table 5]
[Figure 3]
Mean planned Social Security claiming age was also influenced; 36.7 percent of
respondents indicated a change in the age they plan to start receiving Social Security benefits, of
which 67.6 percent indicate plans to postpone benefit receipt.10 This variation is reasonable as
individuals are constrained in the front end (i.e., it is not possible to claim Social Security earlier
than at age 62) while one can theoretically postpone retirement indefinitely.11 Figure 4
9

Appendix Table A-2 details the change in planned retirement age between Survey One and Survey Two.

Among those who initially planned to retire at age 62 to 64 in Survey One, 21 percent reported a later
planned retirement date in Survey Two whereas only 8 percent report an earlier date. Among those who
planned to retire at age 65 in Survey One, we find that 14 percent plan to retire earlier and 25 percent plan
to retire later after Survey Two. At an initial planned retirement age 66 and higher there is slightly more
movement toward an earlier retirement (14 percent) than there is movement toward later retirement (11
percent).
10

Of the 89 individuals that report in Survey Two an earlier planned claiming age than stated in Survey

One, the average decline 2.34 years, with the largest change being a drop of 6 years. Of the 186
individuals which reported plans to postpone claiming Social Security, the largest change was by 11
years, with a mean of 2.31 years.
11

There is some tendency for retirement and Social Security claiming decisions to be made in tandem as

presented in Appendix Table A-3. Among the 163 employees who decided to delay retirement, 53
percent also said that they planned to delay Social Security claiming. Most of the remaining respondents
reported no change in planned Social Security claiming, and nine percent reported earlier planned Social
Security claiming ages. Among the 66 respondents who said they planned to retire earlier, 36 percent
said they would claim Social Security earlier and 18 percent said they would delay Social Security
claiming.

17

graphically depicts how the age at which the individual plans to begin drawing on Social
Security changed between Survey One and Survey Two. There was over an 10 percentage point
increase in the number of attendees indicating plans to work after retirement, while the number
indicating uncertainty regarding plans to work after retirement dropped by 10 percentage point.
These changes in age at which to draw on retirement benefits and plans to work after retirement
may be due to a better understanding of retirement income needs and total expected retirement
wealth.
[Figure 4]
Table 5 highlights other changes which include a shift in plans regarding pension and
supplemental retirement saving account distributions. Prior to the seminar, there was
considerable uncertainty regarding whether to annuitize account balances in supplemental
retirement plans and whether to take lump sum distributions from the defined benefit plans. Post
seminar, fewer respondents indicate uncertainty regarding these important decisions. Before the
seminar, approximately 19 percent of the sample planned to annuitize some or all of their
supplement plan funds. This increased to 26 percent after the seminar, with the proportion that
had not decided declining by 10 percentage points. However, almost half of the participants were
still undecided in regards to annuitization. Pre-seminar, approximately 27 percent of the
employees were certain that they want to take a lump sum distribution of their defined pension
benefit while 62 percent were uncertain. Responses to this set of questions post-seminar indicate
little change. These results suggest that deciding whether to take a lump sum distribution from
one’s pension or to annuitize one’s 401(k) balance are complicated decisions that require
substantial consideration.

18

Are these changes in retirement plans associated with improved financial knowledge and
better understanding of pension plan parameters? To address this question, we use the following
framework. Before attending the retirement planning seminar, each worker has a planned
retirement age based on a host of factors including expected longevity, wealth, expected future
earnings potential, features of public and private pensions, and spousal retirement plans. During
the seminar, the employee obtains information from the various presentations, has a chance to
ask questions, and discusses retirement issues informally with other attendees. In response to
this expanded set of information, the worker will either confirm his or her original choice of
retirement age or make an adjustment toward earlier or delayed retirement.
Formally, we model this thought process with a linear equation where the planned
retirement age (R) is a function of knowledge (Info) at a given point in time and personal
characteristics (X) related to retirement decision making (e.g., age, gender, earnings and marital
status will be reasonable proxy variables for longevity, future earnings, wealth and household
decision making). Before the seminar (t = 1), we write that the planned retirement age in period
1, R1, is a linear function of demographic characteristics, X, and the information set, Info.
(1)
The planned retirement age after the seminar, R2, is the planned retirement age in period 1 plus
any revision to the retirement plan that is made as a function of demographic characteristics, X,
and the change in knowledge.
(2)
In the short time between Survey One and Survey Two, we assume that Xi2=Xi1=Xi. Rearranging
equation (2), we find that the change in planned retirement age is a function of demographic

19

characteristics and the change in the information set. Equation (3) is our main regression
equation:
Δ

(3)

The change in planned retirement age, R, will depend on: (a) how people with given values of X
reevaluate their retirement decisions (α2 and β2); (b) the effect of changes in the information set,
(γ2 ∆Info); and (3) random noise that we cannot capture in our model or data (ε2).
In practice, workers have a probability density function for expected retirement age
instead of a 100 percent probability at a single age. We assume that workers report the age that
has the highest p-value of occurring. Changes in the probability density function would still be a
function of X and changes in Info. Empirically we estimated three closely related probit models:
the probability that R2 does not equal R1, the probability that R2>R1, and the probability that
R1>R2.
To estimate the impact of the learning that took place at the seminar on planned
retirement age, this study focuses on the participant knowledge scores in the PARS data. We
start with an aggregate index of knowledge based on the 10 items in Table 3; this variable is
scaled to be between zero and ten. Because our focus is on planned retirement age, we also
break down this index into its four major components: (1) knowledge about Social Security and
Medicare eligibility, (2) general knowledge of public programs, (3) overall financial knowledge,
and (3) company-specific knowledge. Finally, we examine the role of each individual variable in
the knowledge score index as an independent variable. In effect this means that each knowledge
variable can have its own coefficient, whereas the aggregate index constrains the coefficients of
all 10 variables to be the same.

20

Table 5 and Figure 3 suggest that information received during the pre-retirement seminar
did have an effect on the participant’s planned retirement age. In Table 6, we explore the effect
of this increase in financial literacy on planned retirement age by estimating the probability of a
change in planned retirement age based on the three different measures of learning. Panel A
explores the effects of an increase of financial literacy using an aggregate measure of the change
in financial knowledge (based on responses to knowledge questions before and after the seminar)
while controlling for demographics, wealth, and the individual’s employer. The change in
knowledge score variable indicates the change in the total number of correct responses for the 10
knowledge score questions. Column (1) presents the average marginal effects from a probit
regression on the probability of a change expected retirement age. Results indicate that an
increase in the aggregate knowledge score is associated with an increase in the probability of a
change in expected retirement age.
[Table 6]
Columns (2) and (3) further define the change by presenting the average marginal effects
of a regression on the probability of a delay in expected retirement and the probability of an
earlier expected retirement, respectively. In Column (2), the change in the knowledge score
variable is positive and statistically significant which indicates that a change in knowledge score
is associated with increased probability of delaying retirement. In Column (3), the change in
knowledge score is small and statistically insignificant, indicating that a change in the aggregate
knowledge score did not lead to an increase in the probability of an earlier planned retirement.
Table 6, Panel B presents a similar analysis, but disaggregates the change in knowledge
score to four distinct groups to better understand which areas of learning impact retirement plans.
Results presented in Table 6, Column (1) indicate that both learning about public program

21

eligibility and company-specific retirement plans lead to an increase in the probability of a
change in planned retirement age. Knowledge about the age at which an individual is eligible to
receive Social Security may have a significant impact on retirement plans if one’s prior
understanding of the eligibility for these programs was incorrect. Accordingly, a better
understanding of company specific retirement guidelines including pension plan distributions
and retiree health benefits may also influence retirement plans.
In Table 6, Column (2), Panel B, we see that learning about public program eligibility is
associated with an increase in the probability of a delay in planned retirement. In the
specification presented in Table 6, Column (3), we see that learning about investment
diversification and inflation is associated with decrease in the probability of earlier retirement. A
better understanding of inflation could influence the employee’s perception of retirement wealth
which might make it less likely he would move up his planned retirement age.
Table 6, Panel C further disaggregates the change in knowledge score by presenting the
change in response to each of the 10 questions. By doing so, we can determine how learning
about each individual item influenced retirement plans. In Column (1), we see that the effect of
leaning about public program eligibility is driven by learning about the age at which the
individual can receive full Social Security benefits and the age at which an individual will be
eligible for Medicare. As Social Security provides a significant source of retirement income for
the individual and health insurance is costly, a better understanding of eligibility for these two
important programs is likely to influence retirement plans.12 The results in Column (1) also
show that learning about employer pension eligibility is positively associated with a greater
12

Supporting the claim that Medicare eligibility influences planned retirement behavior, Kopczuk and

Song (2008) use administrative files from the Master Beneficiary File to show that there are a relatively
large number of individuals who claim retirement benefits around their 65th birthday.

22

probability of a change in planned retirement age. The Social Security eligibility coefficients
for the delayed retirement probit in Column (2) are similar to those in Column (1). They have
the same sign as in Column (1), but are of smaller magnitude. The similarity between the results
presented in these two columns is due to the fact that of those that do change expected retirement
age, they tend to do so by delaying retirement.
In Column (3), Table 6, Panel C, we see that two of the three questions included in the
“Public Program – General” index are independently statistically significant at the ten percent
level but of opposite sign. Learning that the reduction in Social Security benefits due to claiming
early retirement is permanent is, paradoxically, associated with an increase in the probability of
earlier retirement. Learning that Social Security benefits are increased by the rate of inflation is
associated with a decrease in the probability of earlier retirement. For those who thought that
benefits increased more rapidly than inflation, this information would have a negative impact on
the individual’s perceived retirement wealth which could entice him to consider an earlier date of
retirement than currently planned. This is somewhat consistent with the results for the financial
knowledge question on inflation and retirement income. Those who learned how inflation can
erode real income were less likely to change their planned retirement age to be earlier. The
relationship between knowledge and retirement plans is complex and depends on the direction of
knowledge errors. By disaggregating the knowledge score index and exploring each component
individually, we see how each piece of knowledge influences the individual’s planned retirement
age.
Another key decision facing individuals is when to take up Social Security benefits.
Although the life-cycle framework can be used to model retirement decision making, some
behaviors are inconsistent with this approach. One such example is the spike in Social Security

23

claiming which occurs at the full retirement age (NRA). Behaghel and Blau (2012) explore the
reasons for the spike in benefits claiming that occurs at age 65 by examining the increase in the
full retirement age.13 They note that the spike may be due to an endorsement effect. As full
retirement age had been 65 since the program began and has only recently been changed,14
individuals may interpret this age as the “recommended” retirement age. It may also be that
individuals are loss adverse and are unwilling to move away from the full retirement age.
Both of these behavioral explanations for the spike at age 65 highlight the potential
impact of learning on planned Social Security claiming behavior. Table 7 replicates the models
of Table 6 for a different retirement decision – the age at which one begins receiving Social
Security benefits. In Table 7, Panel A, we see that changes in the aggregate knowledge score are
associated with higher probability of changing one’s Social Security claiming age, higher
probability of delaying that age and higher probability of an earlier claiming age. When the
aggregate index is broken down into four major components, it is clear that Social Security
knowledge is driving the Panel A results. Table 7, Panel C confirms the role of two key Social
Security parameters: the age at which one is eligible for full or unreduced Social Security
benefits and the Medicare eligibility age. Improved knowledge for the “normal retirement age”
for Social Security is associated with greater probability of changing the Social Security
claiming.15 Improved knowledge in Medicare eligibility is associated with greater probability of

13

In 1983, Social Security reform increased the full retirement age from 65 to 66, in two month

increments, for cohorts born from 1943-1954.
14

The first cohort to experience the increase in full retirement age resulting for the 1983 Social Security

were those reaching their full retirement age in 2004-2009.
15

This is consistent with findings by Song and Manchester (2007) showing that changes in the full

retirement age resulted in a shift of the spike to the new full retirement age among affected cohorts.

24

changing Social Security claiming age and greater probability of planning to claim Social
Security at an earlier age.
[Table 7]
Looking across Tables 6 and 7, misperceptions about the ages of eligibility for normal
Social Security and Medicare are strongly related to changes in retirement plans. Appendix
Table A-4 details the planned retirement and Social Security claiming ages associated with
learning about normal Social Security eligibility. There were 113 people in the sample who
underestimated the eligibility age for normal Social Security in Survey One but correctly
reported the age in Survey Two. Within this group, 12 percent changed their planned retirement
age, 27 percent changed their planned Social Security claiming age and 26 percent changed both.
Of the 83 who overestimated this eligibility age in Survey One, 8 percent changed their planned
retirement age, 28 percent changed their planned Social Security claiming age, and 30 percent
changed both. In other words, over half of those who corrected misperceptions about normal
Social Security eligibility changed their retirement plans.
The means presented in Table 5 indicated that plans for working after retirement and
plans for annuitizing pension wealth also shifted in response to the seminar. However, for both
of these categories the major shift was in a reduction of those reporting “have not yet decided.”
In fact, for the choice of whether to annuitize one’s pension, in Survey Two the modal response
is “have not yet decided.” We did examine how changes in financial literacy and pension
knowledge affected plans to work after retirement. In results not reported (available upon
request), we find again that changes in knowledge are related to changes in retirement plans, but
the patterns are somewhat mixed. While an increase in the aggregate knowledge score reduced

25

the probability of planning not to work after retirement by a very small 0.8 percentage points,
when disaggregating there is no consistent pattern.
VII. Conclusions
Many older workers have a rather low level of financial literacy and understanding of
their retirement programs. Limited or inaccurate information may lead them to make poor
retirement decisions, undermining their ability to achieve retirement income adequacy. We show
how pre-retirement planning programs offered by five large employers improved financial and
pension literacy and how this changed employees’ reported retirement plans.
Employers who offer pre-retirement planning seminars as an employee benefit are
naturally seeking to ensure that these programs are effective and valued by employees. The
feedback we received in Survey Two, conducted immediately after attending a seminar,
indicated participants had a very positive experience and believed that the seminars are helpful.
Some 95 percent of respondents state that the programs provided all or most of the information
needed for them to make important retirement decisions. Eighty-six percent of respondents rate
the programs very good or excellent, and 93 percent find the presenters and program leaders to
be very good or excellent. Eighty-seven percent of respondents report believing that they will be
able to make better retirement choices after participating in the seminar. Importantly, for
companies considering whether to provide such programs to their employees, 72 percent of
individuals report that the programs raised their awareness of the benefits provided by their
employers. Accordingly, participants give high marks to the quality of the programs, believing
that the programs provide the information they needed, and give their employers credit for
offering these programs.

26

The seminars also may be creating value for employers by reducing the transaction costs
of managing pension plans. Many employees will have the same questions which can be
answered more efficiently in a seminar environment than in one-on-one meetings with human
resource staff. Consequently, employers can facilitate the transition into retirement by providing
the means for workers to increase their understanding of key retirement concepts. The results of
this study should provide encouragement to employers considering whether to adopt preretirement planning programs. Based on our assessment of these initial data, employer provided
financial education programs can increase employee knowledge of retirement programs and
assist them in making better retirement choices. This enables their employees to achieve a more
desirable retirement. Also, to the extent that the firm has designed its pension plan to optimize
employee retention and the age structure of its workforce, the seminars enhance the probability
that these corporate goals will be achieved.

REFERENCES
Bayer, Patrick J., B. Douglas Bernheim, and John Karl Scholz. 2009. “The Effects of Financial
Education in the Workplace: Evidence from a Survey of Employers.” Economic
Inquiry 47(4): 605-624.
Behaghel, Luc, and David M. Blau. 2012. “Framing Social Security Reform: Behavioral
Responses to Changes in the Full Retirement Age.”American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy 4(4): 41-67.
Benitez-Silva, Hugo, and Debra S. Dwyer. 2005. “The Rationality of Retirement Expectations
and the Role of New Information.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 87(3): 587592.
Bernheim, Douglas. 1995. “Do households appreciate their financial vulnerabilities? An analysis
of actions, perceptions, and public policy,” in Tax Policy and Economic Growth,
American Council for Capital Formation, Washington, DC, pp. 1-30.
27

Bernheim, Douglas. 1998. “Financial illiteracy, education and retirement saving,” in Olivia
Mitchell and Sylvester Schieber (eds.), Living with Defined Contribution Pensions,
University of Pennsylvania press, Philadelphia, pp. 38-68.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Daniel M. Garrett. 2003. “The Effects of Financial Education in the
Workplace: Evidence from a Survey of Households.” Journal of Public Economics 87(78): 1487-1519.
Chan, Sewin, and Ann Huff Stevens. 2008. “What You Don't Know Can't Help You: Pension
Knowledge and Retirement Decision-Making.” The Review of Economics and
Statistics 90(2): 253-266.
Clark, Robert and Madeleine d’Ambrosio. 2003. “Ignorance is Not Bliss,” TIAA-CREF
Research Dialogue.
Clark, Robert L., Madeleine B. d'Ambrosio, Ann A. McDermed, and Kshama Sawant. 2006.
“Retirement Plans and Saving Decisions: The Role of Information and
Education.” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 5(1): 45-67.
Clark, Robert, Melinda Morrill, and Steven Allen. 2011. Evaluating Employer-Provided
Financial Education Programs for Pre-Retirees, Report prepared for the FINRA Investor
Education Foundation. Available online at:
http://www.finrafoundation.org/web/groups/foundation/@foundation/documents/foundati
on/p124011.pdf
Clark, Robert L., Melinda Sandler Morrill, and Steven G. Allen. 2012a. “Effectiveness of
Employer-Provided Financial Information: Hiring to Retiring.” American Economic
Review 102(3): 314-318.
Clark, Robert L., Melinda Sandler Morrill, and Steven G. Allen. 2012b. “The Role of Financial
Literacy in Determining Retirement Plans,” Economic Inquiry, 50(4): 851-866.
Goda, Gopi Shah, John B. Shoven, Sita Nataraj Slavov. 2012. “Does Stock Market
Performance Influence Retirement Intentions?” Journal of Human Resources, 47(4):
1055-1081.

28

Gustman, Alan L., Thomas L. Steinmeier, and Nahid Tabatabai. 2012. “Financial Knowledge
and Financial Literacy at the Household Level.” American Economic Review 102(3):
309-313.
Hastings, Justine S., Brigitte C. Madrian, and William L. Skimmyhorn. 2012. “Financial
Literacy, Financial Education and Economic Outcomes.” National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper No. 18412.
Hilgert, Marianne and Jeanne Hogarth. 2002. “Financial Knowledge, Experience and Learning
Preferences: Preliminary Results from a New Survey on Financial Literacy,” Consumer
Interest Annual 48.
Kopczuk, Wojciech, and Jae Song. 2008. “Stylized Facts and Incentive Effects Related to
Claiming of Retirement Benefits Based on Social Security Administration Data.”
Michigan Retirement Research Center Working Paper 2008-200
Liebman, Jeffrey B., and Erzo F. P. Luttmer. 2011. “Would People Behave Differently If They
Better Understood Social Security? Evidence From a Field Experiment.” National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper No. 17287, August 2011.
Lusardi, Annamaria. 2005. “Saving and the Effectiveness of Financial Education.” Journal of
Financial Transformation, 15: 159-169.
Lusardi, Annamaria.(ed.). 2008. Overcoming the Saving Slump: How to Increase the
Effectiveness of Financial Education and Saving Programs. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2006. “Financial Literacy and Planning:
Implications for Retirement Wellbeing.” Pension Research Council Working Paper n. 1.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2007. “Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The
Roles of Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 54(1): 205-224.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2011. “Financial Literacy and Planning:
Implications for Retirement Wellbeing.” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 17078, May 2011

29

Sabelhaus, John, Michael Brogdan, and Sarah Holden. 2008. Defined Contribution Plan
Distribution Choices at Retirement: A Survey of Employees Retiring Between 2002 and
2007. Washington, DC: Investment Company Institute.
http://www.ici.org/pdf/rpt_08_dcdd.pdf
Song, Jae, and Joyce Manchester. 2007. “Have People Delayed Claiming Retirement Benefits?
Responses to Changes in Social Security Rules.” Social Security Bulletin 67(2): 1-23.
United States Government Accountability Office (USGAO). 2007. Federal Policies Offer Mixed
Signals on When to Retire, Washington, DC: USGAO.
van Rooij, Maarten C. J., Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob J. M. Alessie. 2012. “Financial Literacy,
Retirement Planning and Household Wealth.” Economic Journal 122(560): 449-478
Wray, David. 2008. Testimony Before the ERISA Advisory Council Working Group on Spend
Down of Defined Contribution Plan Assets at Retirement. Chicago, IL: Profit
Sharing/401k Council of America, July 16. Available online at:
http://www.psca.org/Portals/0/pdf/July%2016%202008%20 testimony.pdf

30

Figure 1. Knowledge Score Pre and Post- Seminar

Notes: Aggregate knowledge scores for respondents in the PARS data who answered at least
five out of ten questions in both Survey One (before the seminar) and Survey Two (after the
seminar). Missing or blank responses are treated as incorrect.

31

Figure 2. Changes in Knowledge Scores Pre-Post Seminar
Panel A. All Participants
Change in Knowledge Score
250

Number of Respondents

212
200

174

164

150
97

100

72
52

50

26

23
1

2

3

‐5

‐4

‐3

12

1

1

7

8

0
‐2

‐1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Panel B. Separately by High and Low Pre-Seminar Knowledge

Notes: Aggregate knowledge scores for respondents in the PARS data who answered at least
five out of ten questions in Survey One (before the seminar) and Survey Two (after the seminar).
Missing or blank responses are treated as incorrect. Low scores were 6 or below, high scores
were 7 or more questions answered correctly.

32

Figure 3: Expected Retirement Age by Survey, Weighted Scatterplot

Notes: The sample consists of the 840 respondents from the PARS dataset. The size of the plot
point indicates the number of respondents indicating the Survey One and Survey Two expected
retirement age combination.

33

Figure 4: Expected Social Security Claiming Age by Survey, Weighted Scatterplot

Notes: The sample is the PARS dataset further limited to those observations with valid Social Security
age responses in both Survey One and Survey Two (N= 728). The size of the plot point indicates the

number of respondents indicating the Survey One and Survey Two expected retirement age
combination.

34

Table 1. Description of Employers and Seminars
Employer
(survey method)

Industry

Requirements to
attend

Seminar
length

Seminar
description

Number of
Seminars

Number
attending
a seminar

Total
Final
survey
PARS
responses sample

Employer A
(hard copy)

Medical
technology

Retirement-eligible

½ day

Run by Ayco

31

500*

472

351

Employer B
(electronic)

University

Immediately prior
to retirement

Full day

In house

4

130

71

64

27

333

295

156

Employer C
(hard copy)

Energy

Retirementeligible, only once
per 5 years

2008: Full day
2009: ½ day

2008: In-house
with outside
speakers
2009: In-house
only

Employer D
(hard copy)

Forest
products

Retirement-eligible

2 ½ days

In-house with
outside speakers

12

281

165

105

Employer E
(electronic)

Energy

Any employee over
age 50

Full day

In-house with
outside speakers

7

314

179

162

85

1,559*

1,182

840

Totals

Notes: The survey response is calculated as those responding to both Survey One and Survey Two. The total response rate to the
surveys was 75.8 percent. The PARS data is limited to those who were born between 1943 and 1959 and who had valid responses to
at least five out of ten knowledge questions, gender, age, tenure, education, and planned retirement age.
*We were not able to obtain an exact count of seminar attendees for several of the Employer A seminars. The estimated number of
attendees reported here is based on discussions with seminar leaders and from projecting the response rate for seminars where
attendance was reported.

Table 2. PARS Data Descriptive Statistics
Mean or Percent
Age
57.8
Male
54.1%
Married
76.3%
Years of Service
24.7
Some College
82.4%
Covered by a Pension Plan
93.2%
Own Home
92.9%
Self-Assessed Knowledge (1-7)*
4.1
Years from Planned Retirement (Before)
4.6
Years from Planned Retirement (After)
4.9
Wealth and Earnings Variables:
Earnings -- Medium ($50K-$100K)
43.6%
Earnings -- High ($100K+)
31.4%
401(k) Account Balance -- Medium (1-5 Years of
61.9%
Current Salary)
401(k) Account Balance -- High (More Than 5
18.2%
Years of Current Salary)
*Sample size for this question was less than 840 due to missing response.
Notes: Sample size is 840 respondents from the PARS dataset. All variables reported here are
measured before the seminar. See Table 1 for a description of the dataset.

Table 3. Participant Knowledge Before and After the Seminar
Percent Answering
Correctly
Before
After
Seminar Seminar
Financial Knowledge Questions
F1 True or false? “Buying a single company stock usually provides a safer
return than a diversified portfolio.” False
F2 Assume that your retirement income increases by 2% per year and that the
annual rate of inflation is 4% per year. After one year, will you be able to:
a) buy more goods and services?
b) buy fewer goods and services?
c) buy exactly the same amount of goods and services?
d) don’t know
Public Programs Questions
P1 What is the earliest age that you can start Social Security benefits? 62
P2 What is the age that you can receive a full or unreduced Social Security
benefit (“normal retirement age”)? 66
P3 If you start Social Security benefits at the earliest possible age, you will
receive a benefit that is __ percent of the benefit you would have received at
the normal retirement age. 75%
P4 Is the reduction in Social Security benefits for early retirement permanent
or does the reduction end when you reach the normal retirement age?
Permanent
P5 After you start receiving Social Security benefits, these benefits are:
a) the same for the rest of my life
b) increased annually by the rate of inflation
c) increased annually but by less than the rate of inflation
d) increased annually but by more than the rate of inflation
e) Don’t know
P6 What is the earliest age that you will be eligible for Medicare? 65
Company-Specific Questions
C1 Can you take a lump sum distribution of some or all of your pension plan
(do not include income for your 401(k) account)?
Yes (all five companies)
C2 Does your company offer you the opportunity to stay in the company
health plan after you retire?
Yes (all five companies)

84%

91%

82%

85%

74%

82%

44%

66%

25%

41%

64%

80%

37%

53%

68%

83%

73%

84%

68%

88%

6.2
Average Knowledge Score (Out of 10)
Notes: Sample is 840 respondents from the PARS dataset, see Table 1 for a description.

37

7.5

Table 4. Participant Index of Knowledge Pre and Post-Seminar
Participant
Characteristic
Full Sample

840

Age

686

Gender

Education

Earnings

Years of Service

Self-assessed
knowledge
(scale of 1-7)

N

Categories

Before
Seminar
6.19

After
Seminar
7.52

Difference
1.33***

Ages 50-61

6.12

7.53

1.41***

149

62 and Over

6.57

7.50

0.93***

454

Male

6.80

7.93

1.13***

386

Female

5.48

7.04

1.56***

148

HS or Less

5.01

6.16

1.15***

682

Some College

6.44

7.81

1.37***

205

50K or Less

4.81

6.06

1.25***

630

More than 50K

6.64

8.00

1.36***

258

20 or Less

6.12

7.60

1.48***

582

More than 20

6.23

7.49

1.26***

480

Level 1 to 4

5.69

7.19

1.50***

334

Level 5 to 7

7.03

8.09

1.06***

Knowledge Score by Company
Employer A

351

5.62

7.01

1.39***

Employer B

66

5.44

6.79

1.35***

Employer C

156

6.87

7.46

0.59***

Employer D

105

7.41

8.96

1.55***

Employer E

162

6.28

8.03

1.75***

Notes: Sample is 840 respondents from the PARS dataset, see Table 1 for a description. Entries
in these columns are mean number of questions answered by the participants in each category.
***indicates statistically significant at the 1% level

38

Table 5. Respondents’ Retirement Plans Pre- and Post-Seminar

Survey One
(Before the Seminar)
Planned Retirement Age: 31.1% Changed
Median Planned Retirement Age
Mean Planned Retirement Age

62
62.3

Survey Two
(After the Seminar)
62
62.6

Planned Age to Claim Social Security (SS): 36.7% Changed
Median Age Planned SS Claiming
Mean Age Planned SS Claiming

65
64.2

65
64.5

Plans for Working after Retirement
Expect to Work after Retiring

39.3%

49.4%

36.9%

26.9%

Planning to Annuitize Some
or all 401(k) Balance

19.2%

26.3%

Have Not Decided on Annuitization
of 401(k) Balance

55.7%

45.4%

Plan to Take Lump Sum
Distribution of Entire Pension

26.8%

24.8%

Have not Decided on Lump Sum

61.7%

56.8%

Have Not Decided on Working
after Retirement
Annuitization or Lump Sum Distributions

Notes: Sample is 840 respondents from the PARS dataset, see Table 1 for a description.

39

Table 6. Changes in Planned Retirement Age Due to Changes in Respondent Knowledge

Panel A:
Change in Aggregate Knowledge Score (0-10)
Panel B: Changes in…
Public Program – Eligibility (P1, P2, P6)
Public Program – General (P3, P4, P5)
Financial Knowledge Score
Company Specific Knowledge Score
Panel C: Changes in…
P1: Early Social Security eligibility
P2: Normal Social Security eligibility
P3: Benefit reduction at age 62
P4: Permanence of benefit reduction
P5: Social Security indexation
P6: Medicare eligibility
F1: Stock diversification and risk
F2: Change in F2: Inflation and real income
C1: Eligible for lump sum distribution
C2: Retiree health insurance

Any Change
(1)

Delay
(2)

Earlier
(3)

0.019**
(0.009)

0.017**
(0.008)

0.001
(0.006)

0.041**
(0.017)
-0.005
(0.017)
-0.009
(0.034)
0.043*
(0.024)

0.030*
(0.015)
-0.003
(0.015)
0.024
(0.031)
0.028
(0.021)

0.010
(0.011)
-0.003
(0.010)
-0.039**
(0.020)
0.014
(0.014)

-0.039
(0.033)
0.071**
(0.028)
-0.053*
(0.030)
0.056
(0.036)
-0.004
(0.029)
0.083***
(0.029)
0.020
(0.051)
-0.036
(0.048)
0.008
(0.034)
0.070**
(0.033)

-0.039
(0.030)
0.064**
(0.025)
-0.046*
(0.027)
0.024
(0.032)
0.020
(0.026)
0.058**
(0.027)
0.053
(0.045)
0.003
(0.045)
0.009
(0.030)
0.039
(0.030)

-0.002
(0.022)
0.007
(0.018)
-0.009
(0.018)
0.037*
(0.022)
-0.031*
(0.017)
0.026
(0.019)
-0.040
(0.035)
-0.050*
(0.029)
-0.006
(0.021)
0.033
(0.021)

Notes: The sample is 840 respondents from the PARS dataset, see Table 1 for a description. Coefficients
are estimated from a probit model and average marginal effects are presented. Each panel consists of
three regressions with alternative dependent variables as follows: Column (1) probability of a change in
planned retirement age; Column (2) probability of a delay in planned retirement age; and Column (3)
probability of earlier planned retirement age. All regressions include controls for age, gender, marital
status, tenure, education, earnings, 401(k) account balance, and company fixed effects. Robust standard
errors are in parentheses. ***indicates statistically significant at the 1% level, ** indicates statistically
significant at the 5% level, and * indicates statistically significant at the 10% level.

40

Table 7. Changes Planned Age to Claim Social Security Due to Changes in Knowledge

Panel A:
Change in Aggregate Knowledge Score
Panel B: Changes in…
Public Program – Eligibility (P1, P2, P6)
Public Program – General (P3, P4, P5)
Financial Knowledge Score
Company Specific Knowledge Score
Panel C: Changes in…
P1: Early Social Security eligibility
P2: Normal Social Security eligibility
P3: Benefit reduction at age 62
P4: Permanence of benefit reduction
P5: Social Security indexation
P6: Medicare eligibility
F1: Stock diversification and risk
F2: Inflation and real income
C1: Eligible for lump sum distribution
C2: Retiree health insurance

Any Change
(1)

Delay
(2)

Earlier
(3)

0.038***
(0.010)

0.018**
(0.009)

0.020**
(0.007)

0.084***
(0.020)
0.013
(0.019)
-0.013
(0.038)
0.033
(0.026)

0.033*
(0.018)
0.017
(0.017)
-0.022
(0.033)
0.013
(0.023)

0.051**
(0.014)
-0.005
(0.012)
0.006
(0.028)
0.017
(0.016)

-0.013
(0.037)
0.151***
(0.033)
0.027
(0.034)
0.019
(0.040)
-0.003
(0.032)
0.093***
(0.035)
0.015
(0.056)
-0.015
(0.055)
0.026
(0.038)
0.028
(0.037)

-0.050
(0.034)
0.108***
(0.029)
-0.020
(0.030)
0.042
(0.037)
0.035
(0.028)
0.025
(0.031)
-0.017
(0.054)
-0.012
(0.050)
0.007
(0.034)
0.008
(0.033)

0.037
(0.026)
0.045*
(0.025)
0.047**
(0.022)
-0.030
(0.026)
-0.033
(0.021)
0.067***
(0.026)
0.033
(0.039)
-0.002
(0.037)
0.017
(0.024)
0.014
(0.025)

Notes: The sample is the PARS data (see Table 1 for a description) further limited to those observations
with valid Social Security age responses in both Survey One and Survey Two (N= 728). Coefficients are
estimated from a probit model and average marginal effects are presented. Each panel consists of three
regressions with alternative dependent variables as follows: Column (1) probability of a change in
planned age to claim Social Security benefits; Column (2) probability of a delay in planned age to claim
Social Security benefits; and Column (3) probability of earlier planned age to claim Social Security
benefits. All regressions include controls for age, gender, marital status, tenure, education, earnings,
401(k) account balance, and company fixed effects. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
***indicates statistically significant at the 1% level, ** indicates statistically significant at the 5% level,
and * indicates statistically significant at the 10% level.

41

Supplemental Data Appendix
TABLE A-1. PARS and HRS Sample Comparison
PARS

Health and Retirement Study
Full
Sample

Aged 50-70
Currently
Employed

Age
Male

57.8
54.1%

66.6
44.2%

59.8
46.2%

Aged 50-70
Currently
Employed,
Has Pension
59.2
43.3%

Married
Widowed
Years of Service

76.3%
2.5%
24.7

60.6%
15.9%
11.7

64.7%
4.1%
11.9

63.4%
1.7%
12.8

Some College
82.4%
20.1%
27.8%
31.4%
Own Home
92.9%
83.8%
87.0%
88.0%
Years from Planned
4.6
6.9
7.2
7.0
Retirement (Before)
Wealth and Earnings Variables:
Earnings -- Medium
43.6%
10.7%
2.3%
34.7%
($50K-$100K)
31.4%
2.8%
5.6%
9.5%
Earnings -- High
($100K+)
Financial Literacy Variables:
Stock Risk
84.4%
59.2%
66.6%
69.1%
Inflation
82.4%
79.8
83.6%
85.5%
Observations
840
1,077
314
161
Notes: The PARS dataset is described in the text and in Table 1. The Health and Retirement Study
sample is from the 2008 RAND HRS Data File. The financial literacy questions were asked in
2004 financial planning module of the HRS. This table presents the mean values for participant
response for those that participated in the HRS 2008 survey for comparison to the PARS sample.
Some rows vary in sample size due to missing data. Survey weights were used to account for
complex survey design.
RAND Data File Citation: RAND HRS Data, Version L. Produced by the RAND Center for the
Study of Aging, with funding from the National Institute on Aging and the Social Security
Administration. Santa Monica, CA (December 2011).

42

Table A-2: Matrix of Planned Retirement Age by Survey
Planned Age
Before\After

<62

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

Total

<62

208

23

3

0

4

2

1

0

0

1

242

62

13

179

7

4

23

6

1

0

0

1

234

63

0

6

22

3

3

1

1

0

0

0

36

64

0

2

3

7

13

0

0

0

0

0

25

65

2

15

3

2

97

29

5

0

1

4

158

66

0

0

0

0

6

74

3

0

0

2

85

67

0

0

0

0

3

8

16

0

0

5

32

68

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

7

1

5

15

69

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

70

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

12

13

Total

223

225

38

17

149

120

28

8

2

30

840

Notes: The numbers in each cell represent the total number of respondents that had that before/after
planned retirement age combination. “Before” ages (Survey One) are by row; “After” ages (Survey Two)
are presented in columns. The shaded boxes indicate no change in planned retirement age. The sample is
840 respondents from the PARS dataset, see the text and Table 1 for a description.

43

Table A-3: Changes in Planned Retirement Age and SS Claiming Age
Planned Retirement Age

Planned SS
Claiming Age

Earlier

Same

Later

Total

Earlier

24

50

15

89

Same

30

361

62

453

Later

12

88

86

186

Total

66

499

163

728

Notes: The sample is the PARS data (see Table 1 for a description) further limited to those observations
with valid Social Security age responses in both Survey One and Survey Two (N= 728). The numbers in
each cell represent the total number of respondents that had that planned retirement age and planned
Social Security claiming age combination. The shaded boxes indicate movement in sync between Social
Security claiming age and planned retirement age. “Earlier” indicates a change to an earlier age (i.e.,
where age as stated on Survey Two is less than the age stated on Survey One). “Same” indicates that the
age on Survey One is the same as age on Survey Two. “Later” indicates a change to a later age (i.e.,
where the age on Survey Two is greater than the age stated on Survey One).

Table A-4: Learning about Normal Social Security Eligibility and Changes in Planned
Retirement Age and SS Claiming Age
Initial
Response

No
Change

Change Retirement
Age Only

Change Social Security
Claiming Age Only

Change
Both

Total in
Category

Too Low

40/35.4%

13/11.5%

31/27.4%

29/25.7%

113

Too High

28/33.8%

7/8.4%

23/27.7%

25/30.1%

83

Notes: The sample is the PARS data (see Table 1 for a description) further limited to those observations
with valid Social Security age responses in both Survey One and Survey Two (N= 728). The numbers in
each cell represent the total number of respondents that had the respective planned retirement age and
planned Social Security claiming age combination.

44

