                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                         DEFLATION RISK

                                         Matthias Fleckenstein
                                         Francis A. Longstaff
                                            Hanno Lustig

                                         Working Paper 19238
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19238


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2013




We are grateful for the comments of Chris Downing, Xavier Gabaix, Huston McCulloch, James Mauro,
Mike Rierson, Bradley Yim, and seminar participants at New York University and the Wharton School
at the University of Pennsylvania. All errors are our responsibility. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Matthias Fleckenstein, Francis A. Longstaff, and Hanno Lustig. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Deflation Risk
Matthias Fleckenstein, Francis A. Longstaff, and Hanno Lustig
NBER Working Paper No. 19238
July 2013
JEL No. E31,G13

                                                ABSTRACT

We study the nature of deflation risk by extracting the objective distribution of inflation from the market
prices of inflation swaps and options. We find that the market expects inflation to average about 2.5
percent over the next 30 years. Despite this, the market places substantial probability weight on deflation
scenarios in which prices decline by more than 10 to 20 percent over extended horizons. We find that
the market prices the economic tail risk of de- flation very similarly to other types of tail risks such
as catastrophic insurance losses. In contrast, inflation tail risk has only a relatively small premium.
De- flation risk is also significantly linked to measures of financial tail risk such as swap spreads, corporate
credit spreads, and the pricing of super senior tranches. These results indicate that systemic financial
risk and deflation risk are closely related.


Matthias Fleckenstein                        Hanno Lustig
UCLA Anderson School of Management           UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza                                     110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C413
Los Angeles                                            Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
matthias.fleckenstein.2012@anderson.ucla.edu           and NBER
                                                       hlustig@anderson.ucla.edu
Francis A. Longstaff
UCLA
Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu
                            1. INTRODUCTION


Deﬂation has played a central role in the worst economic meltdowns experienced
in U.S. history. Key examples include the deﬂations associated with the Panic
of 1837, the Long Depression of 1873–1896, and the Great Depression of the
1930s. In light of this, it is not surprising that deﬂation is now one of the
most-feared risks facing participants in the ﬁnancial markets. In recent years,
the ﬁnancial press has increasingly raised concerns about a global deﬂationary
spiral and has used terms such as “nightmare scenario” or “looming disaster”
to describe the growing threat.1 Furthermore, addressing the risk of deﬂation is
one of the primary motivations behind a number of actions taken by the Federal
Reserve in the past several years such as the quantitative easing programs.2

     Despite the severe potential eﬀects of deﬂation, relatively little is known
about how large the risk of deﬂation actually is, or about the economic and
ﬁnancial factors that contribute to deﬂation risk. The primary reason for this
may simply be that deﬂation risk has traditionally been very diﬃcult to measure.
For example, as shown by Ang, Bekaert, and Wei (2007) and others, econometric
models based on the time series of historical inﬂation perform poorly even in
estimating the ﬁrst moment of inﬂation. In addition, while surveys of inﬂation
tend to do better, these surveys are limited to forecasts of expected inﬂation over
shorter horizons and provide little or no information about the tail probability
of deﬂation.

     This paper presents a simple market-based approach for measuring deﬂation
risk. This approach allows us to solve directly for the market’s assessment of the
probability of deﬂation for horizons of up to 30 years using the prices of inﬂation
swaps and options. In doing this, we ﬁrst use standard techniques to infer the
risk-neutral density of inﬂation that underlies the prices of inﬂation calls and
puts. We then use maximum likelihood to estimate the inﬂation risk premium
embedded in the term structure of inﬂation swap rates using methods familiar
from the aﬃne term structure literature. Finally, we solve for the actual or

1
 For example, see Coy (2012), “Five Charts that Show that Deﬂation is a Grow-
ing Threat,” www.businessweek.com/articles/1012-06-05/ﬁve-charts-that-show-
deﬂation-is-a-growing-threat, Lange (2011), “Nightmare Scenario: U.S. Deﬂa-
tion Risks Rising,” www.reuters.com/article/2011/10/16/us-economy-deﬂation-
idUSTRE79P7FV201110126, and Carney (2010), “Deﬂation: Looming Disaster
for Banks,” www.cnbc.com/id/39648704/Deﬂation Looming Disaster for Banks.
2
 For example, see Bernanke (2012), “Monetary Policy since the Onset of the
Crisis,” www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20120831a.htm.


                                        1
objective distribution of inﬂation by inverting the risk-premium-adjusted char-
acteristic function of the risk-neutral density. A key advantage of this approach
is that we recover the entire distribution of inﬂation rather than just the ﬁrst
moment or expected inﬂation. This is important since this allows us to measure
the probability of tail events such as deﬂation.

     The shape of the distribution of inﬂation varies signiﬁcantly for shorter hori-
zons, but is much more stable for longer horizons. Inﬂation risk premia are
slightly negative for horizons of one to ﬁve years, but increase to about 30 basis
points for a 30-year horizon.
      We ﬁnd that the market expects inﬂation of close to 2.5 percent for horizons
from 10 to 30 years. The volatility of inﬂation is roughly two percent for shorter
horizons, but is about one percent or less for horizons of ten years or more.
Thus, the market views inﬂation as having a strongly mean reverting nature.
The distribution of inﬂation is skewed towards negative values and has longer
tails than a normal distribution.

     We solve for the probability of deﬂation over horizons ranging up to 30 years
directly from the distribution of inﬂation. The empirical results are very striking.
We ﬁnd that the market places a signiﬁcant amount of weight on the probability
that deﬂation occurs over extended horizons. Furthermore, the market-implied
probability of deﬂation can be substantially higher than that estimated by policy
makers. For example, in a speech on August 27, 2010, Federal Reserve Chairman
Ben S. Bernanke stated that “Falling into deﬂation is not a signiﬁcant risk for the
United States at this time.”3 On the same date, the market-implied probability
of deﬂation was 15.11 percent for a two-year horizon, 5.36 percent for a ﬁve-
year horizon, and 2.84 percent for a ten-year horizon. These probabilities are
clearly not negligible. On average, the market-implied probability of deﬂation
during the sample period was 11.44 percent for a two-year horizon, 5.34 percent
for a ﬁve-year horizon, 3.29 percent for a ten-year horizon, and 2.33 percent
for a 30-year horizon. The risk of deﬂation, however, varies signiﬁcantly and
these probabilities have at times been substantially larger than the averages. In
particular, the probability of deﬂation exhibits jumps which tend to coincide with
major events in the ﬁnancial markets such as the ratings downgrades of Spain in
2010 or the downgrade of U.S. Treasury debt by Standard and Poors in August
2011.

    Deﬂation is clearly an economic tail risk and changes in deﬂation risk may
reﬂect the market’s fears of a meltdown scenario.4 Thus, a natural next step is
3
 See Bernanke (2010), “The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy,” www.feder
alreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/2010speech.htm.
4
    Note that we are interpreting tail risk as including more than just event risk or

                                           2
to examine whether deﬂation risk is related to other serious types of tail risk in
the ﬁnancial markets or in the macroeconomy in general. Focusing ﬁrst on the
pricing of deﬂation risk, we ﬁnd that the ratio of the risk-neutral probability of
deﬂation to the objective probability of deﬂation is on the order of three to one.
This ratio is very similar to that of other types of tail risk. For example, Froot
(2001) ﬁnds that the ratio of the price of catastrophic reinsurance to expected
losses ranges from two to seven. Driessen (2005), Berndt, Duﬃe, Douglas, Fer-
guson, and Schranz (2005), Giesecke, Longstaﬀ, Schaefer, and Strebulaev (2011)
estimate that the ratio of the price of expected losses on corporate bonds to
actual expected losses is on the order of two to three. These ﬁndings are also
consistent with models with rare consumption disasters, such as that pioneered
by Rietz (1989) and further developed by Longstaﬀ and Piazzesi (2004), Barro
(2006), and Gourio (2008), which were explicitly engineered to produce high
risk-neutral probabilities for rare consumption disasters such as the Great De-
pression. Recently, Barro has argued that this class of models can account for
the equity premium when calibrated to the 20th Century experience of developed
economies. Gabaix (2012) and Wachter (2013) have extended these models to
incorporate a time-varying intensity of consumption disasters. This extension
delivers bond and stock market return predictability similar to what is observed
in the data.
     We next consider the relation between deﬂation risk and speciﬁc types of
ﬁnancial and macroeconomic tail risks that have been described in the litera-
ture. In particular, we consider a number of measures of systemic ﬁnancial risk,
collateral revaluation risk, sovereign default risk, and business cycle risk and in-
vestigate whether these are linked to deﬂation risk. We ﬁnd that a number of
systemic risk variables are signiﬁcantly related to the probability of deﬂation.
For example, the risk of deﬂation increases as the price of protection on super
senior tranches increases. This is intuitive since the types of economic meltdown
scenarios that would result in losses on super senior tranches would likely be
associated with sharp declines in the level of prices. Similarly, we ﬁnd that de-
ﬂation risk increases as the credit and liquidity risks faced by the ﬁnancial sector
increase. Thus, economic tail risk increases as the ﬁnancial sector becomes more
stressed. We also ﬁnd that the risk of deﬂation increases as the unemployment
rate increases. This is consistent with a number of classical macroeconomic the-
ories about the relation between prices and employment. Overall, these results
provide support for the view that the risk of severe macroeconomic shocks in
which deﬂation occurs is closely related to tail risks in ﬁnancial markets. Thus,
jump risk. Event or jump risks are adverse economic events that occur relatively
suddenly. In contrast, tail risk can also include extreme scenarios with severe
economic consequences which may unfold over extended periods. The modeling
framework used in this paper is consistent with both types of risks.


                                         3
option prices are highly informative about the probability the market imputes
to these rare disaster states, arguably more informative than quantity data (see,
for example, recent work by Backus, Chernov, and Martin (2011) using equity
options). Our inﬂation option ﬁndings imply that market participants mostly
expect deﬂation in the U.S. in these disaster states. This is consistent with U.S.
historical experience in which depressions/deﬂationary spirals have been associ-
ated with major collapses in the ﬁnancial system.

     Finally, we also compute the probabilities of inﬂation exceeding various
thresholds. The results indicate that while the probability of inﬂation in the
near term is relatively modest, the long-term probabilities of inﬂation are much
higher. Interestingly, we ﬁnd that the ratio of the probability of inﬂation ex-
ceeding ﬁve percent under the risk-neutral measure is only about 1.4 times that
under the actual measure. Thus, inﬂation tail risk is priced much more modestly
than is deﬂation tail risk.
     Our results also have important implications for Treasury debt manage-
ment. In particular, whenever the Treasury issues Treasury Inﬂation Protected
Securities (TIPS), the Treasury essentially writes an at-the-money deﬂation put
and packages it together with a standard inﬂation-linked bond. The returns on
writing these deﬂation puts are potentially large because of the substantial risk
premium associated with deﬂation tail risk. If the Treasury is better suited to
bear deﬂation tail risk than the marginal investor in the market for inﬂation
protection, then providing a deﬂation put provides an extra source of revenue for
the Treasury that is non-distortionary. There are good reasons to think that the
Treasury is better equipped to bear deﬂation risk, not in the least because the
Treasury and the Federal Reserve jointly control the price level.5

     This paper contributes to the extensive literature on estimating the prop-
erties of inﬂation. Important papers on estimating inﬂation risk premia and
expected inﬂation include Hamilton (1985), Barr and Campbell (1997), Evans
(1998, 2003), Campbell and Viceira (2001), Bardong and Lehnert (2004), Bura-
schi and Jiltsov (2005), Ang, Bekaert, and Wei (2007, 2008), Adrian and Wu
(2007), Bekaert and Wang (2010), Chen, Liu, and Cheng (2010), Christensen,
Lopez, and Rudebusch (2010, 2011), Gurkaynak and Wright (2010), Gurkay-
nak, Sack, and Wright (2010), Pﬂueger and Viceira (2011a, 2011b), Chernov
and Mueller (2012), Haubrich, Pennachi, and Ritchken (2012), Faust and Wright
(2012), Grishchenko and Huang (2012), and many others. Key papers on de-
ﬂation include Hamilton (1992), Fisher (1933), Cecchetti (1992), Atkeson and

5
 Since the ratio of risk-neutral to actual probabilities is much larger for deﬂa-
tion than for high-inﬂation scenarios, this same logic is not as applicable to the
standard inﬂation protection built into TIPS.


                                        4
Kehoe (2004), Kilian and Manganelli (2007), and Campbell, Sunderam, and Vi-
ceira (2013).
     Two important recent papers have parallels to our work. Christensen, Lopez,
and Rudebusch (2011) ﬁt an aﬃne term structure model to the Treasury real
and nominal term structures and estimate the value of the implicit deﬂation
option embedded in TIPS prices. Our research signiﬁcantly extends their results
by estimating deﬂation probabilities for horizons out to 30 years directly using
market inﬂation option prices. Kitsul and Wright (2012) also use inﬂation options
to infer the risk-neutral density for inﬂation, but do not formally solve for the
objective density of inﬂation. Our results corroborate and extend their innovative
work.

      The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 brieﬂy dis-
cusses the history of deﬂation in the United States. Section 3 provides an intro-
duction to the inﬂation swap and options markets. Section 4 presents the inﬂation
model used to value inﬂation derivatives. Section 5 discusses the maximum like-
lihood estimation of the inﬂation model. Section 6 describes the distribution of
inﬂation. Section 7 considers the implications of the results for deﬂation proba-
bilities and the pricing of deﬂation risk. Section 8 examines the relation between
deﬂation risk and other types of ﬁnancial and macroeconomic tail risks. Section
9 presents results for the probabilities of several inﬂation scenarios. Section 10
summarizes the results and makes concluding remarks.


                   2. DEFLATION IN U.S. HISTORY


The literature on deﬂation in the U.S. is far too extensive for us to be able to
review in this paper. Key references on the history of deﬂation in the U.S. include
North (1961), Friedman and Schwartz (1963), and Atack and Passell (1994). We
will simply observe that deﬂation was a relatively frequent event during the
19th Century, but has diminished in frequency since then. Bordo and Filardo
(2005) report that the frequency of an annual deﬂation rate was 42.4 percent
from 1801–1879, 23.5 percent from 1880–1913, 30.6 percent from 1914–1949, 5.0
percent from 1950–1969, and zero percent from 1970–2002. The ﬁnancial crisis
of 2008–2009 was accompanied by the ﬁrst deﬂationary episode in the U.S. since
1955.

     Economic historians have identiﬁed a number of major deﬂationary episodes.
Key examples include the crisis of 1815–1821 in which agricultural prices fell by
nearly 50 percent. The banking-related Panic of 1837 was followed by six years of
deﬂation in which prices fell by nearly 30 percent. The post-Civil-War greenback
period experienced a number of severe deﬂations and the 1873–1896 period has


                                        5
been called the Long Depression. This period experienced massive amounts of
corporate bond defaults and Friedman and Schwartz (1963) estimate that the
price level declined by 1.7 percent per year from 1875 to 1896. The U.S. suﬀered
a severe deﬂationary spiral during the early stages of the Great Depression in
1929–1933 as prices rapidly fell by more than 40 percent.

     Although Atkeson and Kehoe (2004), Bordo and Filardo (2005), and others
show that not all deﬂations have been associated with severe declines in economic
output, a common thread throughout U.S. history has been that deﬂationary
episodes are typically associated with turbulence or crisis in the ﬁnancial system.


     3. THE INFLATION SWAPS AND OPTIONS MARKETS


In this section, we begin by reviewing the inﬂation swaps market. We then
provide a brief introduction to the relatively new inﬂation options market.

3.1 Inﬂation Swaps
As discussed by Fleckenstein, Longstaﬀ, and Lustig (2012), U.S. inﬂation swaps
were ﬁrst introduced in the U.S. when the Treasury began auctioning TIPS
in 1997 and have become increasingly popular among institutional investment
managers. Pond and Mirani (2011) estimate the notional size of the inﬂation
swap market to be on the order of hundreds of billions.

     In this paper, we focus on the most widely-used type of inﬂation swap which
is designated a zero-coupon swap. This swap is executed between two counter-
parties at time zero and has only one cash ﬂow which occurs at the maturity date
of the swap. For example, imagine that at time zero, the ten-year zero-coupon
inﬂation swap rate is 300 basis points. As is standard with swaps, there are no
cash ﬂows at time zero when the swap is executed. At the maturity date of the
swap in ten years, the counterparties to the inﬂation swap exchange a cash ﬂow
of (1 + .0300)10 − IT , where IT is the relative change in the price level between
now and the maturity date of the swap. The timing and index lag construction
of the inﬂation index used in an inﬂation swap are chosen to match precisely the
deﬁnitions applied to TIPS issues.
     The zero-coupon inﬂation swap rate data used in this study are collected
from the Bloomberg system. Inﬂation swap data for maturities ranging from one
to 30 years are available for the period from July 23, 2004 to October 5, 2012.
Data for inﬂation swaps with maturities of 40 and 50 years are available beginning
later in the sample. Recent research by Fleming and Sporn (2012) concludes that
“the inﬂation swap market appears reasonably liquid and transparent despite
the market’s over-the-counter nature and modest activity.” They estimate that

                                        6
realized bid-ask spreads for customers in the inﬂation swap market are on the
order of three basis points. Conversations with inﬂation swap traders conﬁrm
that these instruments are fairly liquid with typical bid-ask spreads consistent
with those reported by Fleming and Sporn. To guard against any possibility of
using illiquid or stale prices in the sample, however, we only include an inﬂation
swap rate when that rate has changed from the previous day. Table 1 presents
summary statistics for the inﬂation swap rates.

     As shown, average inﬂation swap rates range from 1.758 percent for one-
year inﬂation swaps, to a high of 2.903 percent for 30-year inﬂation swaps. The
volatility of inﬂation swap rates is generally declining in the maturity of the
contracts. The dampened volatility of long-horizon inﬂation swap rates suggests
that the market may view inﬂation as being strongly mean-reverting in nature.
Table 1 also shows that there is evidence of deﬂationary concerns during the
sample period. For example, the one-year swap rate reached a minimum of
−4.545 percent during the height of the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis amid serious fears
about the U.S. economy sliding into a full-ﬂedged depression/deﬂation scenario.

3.2 Inﬂation Options

The inﬂation options market had its inception in 2002 with the introduction of
caps and ﬂoors on the realized inﬂation rate. While trading in inﬂation options
was initially muted, the market gained considerable momentum as the ﬁnancial
crisis emerged and total interbank trading volume reached $100 billion.6 While
the inﬂation options market is not yet as liquid as, say, the stock index options
market, the market is suﬃciently liquid that active quotations for inﬂation cap
and ﬂoor prices for a wide range of strikes have been readily available in the
market since 2009.

     In Europe and the United Kingdom, insurance companies are among the
most active participants in the inﬂation derivatives market. In particular, much
of the demand in ten-year and 30-year zero percent ﬂoors is due to pension funds
trying to protect long inﬂation swaps positions. In contrast, insurance companies
and ﬁnancial institutions that need to hedge inﬂation risk are the most active
participants on the demand side in the U.S. inﬂation options market.

     The most actively traded inﬂation options are year-on-year and zero-coupon
inﬂation options. Year-on-year inﬂation options are caps and ﬂoors that pay the
diﬀerence between a strike rate and annual inﬂation on an annual basis. Zero-
coupon options, in contrast, pay only one cash ﬂow at the expiration date of
the contract based on the cumulative inﬂation from inception to the expiration
6
 For a discussion of the inﬂation derivatives markets, see Jarrow and Yildirim
(2003), Mercurio (2005), Kerkoﬀ (2005), and Barclay’s Capital (2010).


                                        7
date. To illustrate, assume that the realized inﬂation rate over the next ten years
was two percent. A ten-year zero-coupon cap struck at one percent would pay
a cash ﬂow of max(0, 1.020010 − 1.010010) at its expiration date. In this paper,
we focus on zero-coupon inﬂation options since their cash ﬂows parallel those of
zero-coupon inﬂation swaps.

     As with inﬂation swaps, we collect inﬂation cap and ﬂoor data from the
Bloomberg system. Data are available for the period from October 5, 2009 to
October 5, 2012 for strikes ranging from negative two percent to six percent in
increments of 50 basis points. We check the quality of the data by insuring that
the cap and ﬂoor prices included satisfy standard option pricing bounds such as
those described in Merton (1973) including put-call parity, monotonicity, intrinsic
value lower bounds, strike price monotonicity, slope, and convexity relations. To
provide some perspective on the data, Table 2 provides summary statistics for
call and put prices for selected strikes.
     As illustrated, inﬂation cap and ﬂoor prices are quoted in basis points, or
equivalently, as cents per $100 notional. Interestingly, inﬂation option prices are
not always monotonically increasing in maturity. This may seem counterintuitive
given standard option pricing theory, but is it important to recognize that the
inﬂation rate is a macro variable rather than the price of a traded asset.7 For
most maturities, we have about 25 separate cap and ﬂoor prices with strikes
varying from negative two percent to six percent from which to estimate the
risk-neutral density of inﬂation.


                          4. MODELING INFLATION


In this section, we present the continuous time model used to describe the dy-
namics of inﬂation under both the objective and risk-neutral measures. We also
describe the application of the model to the valuation of inﬂation swaps and
options.
4.1 The Inﬂation Model

We begin with a few key items of notation. For notational simplicity, we will
assume that all inﬂation contracts are valued as of time zero and that the initial
price level at time zero is normalized to one.8 Furthermore, time zero values of
state variables are unsubscripted. Let It denote the relative change in the price
7
 We observe that similar nonmonotonic behavior occurs with interest rate options
such as interest rate caps, ﬂoors, and swaptions; see Longstaﬀ, Santa-Clara, and
Schwartz (2001).
8
    Since the initial price level equals one, we will further simplify notation by not

                                           8
level from time zero to time t.
    Under the objective measure P , the dynamics of the price level are given by,

                                        √
                         dI = I X dt + I V dZI ,                                (1)
                        dX = κ (Y − X) dt + σ dZX ,                             (2)
                        dY = (α − β Y ) dt + η dZY ,                            (3)
                         dV = μ dt + s dZV .                                    (4)

In this speciﬁcation, Xt represents the instantaneous expected inﬂation rate.
The state variable Yt represents the long-run trend in expected inﬂation towards
which the process Xt reverts. The process Vt represents the stochastic volatility
of realized inﬂation. An important implication of stochastic volatility is that ex-
treme declines in the price level can occur during periods of high volatility, which
may resemble large downward jumps. Thus, this speciﬁcation is consistent with
the intuition of deﬂation representing an economic tail risk or event risk. Clearly,
the same argument also holds for inﬂation. Rather than fully parameterizing the
dynamics for V at this stage, we leave the drift and diﬀusion terms μ and s
unspeciﬁed and allow for the possibility that they may depend on a vector of
additional state variables.9 The processes ZI , ZX , ZY , and ZV are Brownian
motions. The correlation between dZX and dZY is ρ dt, the correlation between
dZI and dZV is θ dt, and the remaining correlations are assumed to be zero. This
primarily aﬃne speciﬁcation has parallels to the long-run risk model of Bansal
and Yaron (2004) and allows for a wide range of possible time series properties
for realized inﬂation.
     Under the risk-neutral valuation measure Q, the dynamics of the price level
are given by

                                             √
                         dI = I X dt + I         V dZI ,                        (5)
                        dX = λ (Y − X) dt + σ dZX ,                             (6)
                        dY = (φ − γ Y ) dt + η dZY ,                            (7)
                        dV = μ dt + s dZV ,                                     (8)

showing the dependence of valuation expressions on the initial price level I.
9
 Although we model V as being driven by a (possibly vector) Brownian motion,
the model could easily be extended to allow for a jump-diﬀusion speciﬁcation
for the stochastic volatility of the inﬂation process. This speciﬁcation would be
completely consistent with our empirical approach.


                                         9
where the parameters λ, φ, and γ that now appear in the system of equations al-
low for the possibility that the market incorporates time-varying inﬂation-related
risk premia into asset prices. In particular, the model allows the risk-neutral dis-
tributions of X, Y , and I to diﬀer from the corresponding distributions under
the objective measure. Thus, the model permits a fairly general structure for
inﬂation risk premia. On the other hand, the model assumes that variation in
the state variable V is not priced in the market. This assumption appears to be a
modest one and has the important advantage of making the analysis much more
tractable. We acknowledge, however, that more general types of risk premium
speciﬁcations are possible.
     Finally, let rt denote the nominal instantaneous riskless interest rate. We
can express this rate as rt = Rt +Xt where Rt is the real riskless interest rate and
Xt is expected inﬂation. For tractability, we also assume that Rt is uncorrelated
with the other state variables It , Xt , Yt , and Vt .
4.2 Valuing Inﬂation Swaps

     From the earlier discussion, an inﬂation swap pays a single cash ﬂow of
IT − F at maturity date T , where F is the inﬂation swap price set at initiation
of the contract at time zero. Note that F = (1 + f)T where f is the inﬂation
swap rate. The Appendix shows that the inﬂation swap price can be expressed
in closed form as


                 F (X, Y, T ) = exp (−A(T ) − B(T )X − C(T )Y ) ,               (9)

where


                                                    
            σ2         2      −λT     1       −2λT
     A(T ) = 2    T − (1 − e      )+    (1 − e      )
            2λ         λ             2λ
                       
               σηρ            2                1
           −             γ(T − (1 − e−λT ) +     (1 − e−2λT ))
             γλ(λ − γ)        λ              2λ
                                                                       
                   1               1                1
           − λ(T − (1 − e−λT ) − (1 − e−γT ) +         (1 − e−(γ+λ)T ))
                   λ              γ              γ+λ
                         
                 η2               2               1
           + 2            γ 2 (T − (1 − e−λT ) +    (1 − e−2λT ))
             2γ (λ − γ)2          λ              2λ
                       1              1                1
           − 2γλ(T −     (1 − e−λT ) − (1 − e−γT ) +      (1 − e−(γ+λ)T ))
                       λ              γ              γ +λ

                                        10
                                                       
                        2               1
               + λ2 (T − (1 − e−γT ) +    (1 − e−2γT ))
                        γ              2γ
                      φ                γ             γ
               +            ((γ − λ)T − (1 − e−γT ) + (1 − e−γT )),          (10)
                   γ(λ − γ)            λ             λ




                                 −(1 − eλT )
                       B(T ) =               ,                               (11)
                                     λ

                                 γ(1 − e−λT ) − λ(1 − e−γT )
                       C(T ) =                               ,               (12)
                                         γ(λ − γ)

4.3 Valuing Inﬂation Options

Let C(X, Y, V, T ) denote the time zero value of a European inﬂation cap or
call option with strike K. The payoﬀ on this option at expiration date T is
max(0, IT − (1 + K)T ). The Appendix shows that the value of the call option at
time zero can be expressed as

                                           ∗
              C(X, Y, V, T ) = D(T ) E Q [max(0, IT − (1 + K)T )],           (13)

where D(T ) is the price of a riskless discount bond with maturity T , and the
expectation is taken with respect to the adjusted risk-neutral measure Q∗ for
inﬂation deﬁned by the following dynamics,


                        √
         dI = I X dt + I V dZI ,                                             (14)
        dX = (λ (Y − X) + σ 2 B(T − t) + ρσηC(T − t)) dt + σ dZX ,           (15)
        dY = (α − β Y + η 2 C(T − t) + ρσηB(T − t))) dt + η dZY ,            (16)
        dV = μ dt + s dZV .                                                  (17)

The adjustment to the risk-neutral measure arises because the inﬂation rate
is correlated with the riskless interest rate and allows us to discount the option
cash ﬂow outside of the expectation.10 This adjusted measure has been referred to
10
  See Jamshidian (1989) and Longstaﬀ (1990) for a discussion of this adjustment
to the risk-neutral measure.

                                          11
variously as a certainty-equivalent measure or a forward measure in the literature.
The Appendix also shows that under this measure, the expected value of IT
equals the inﬂation swap price F . In this paper, we focus primarily on the
adjusted risk-neutral density which will be implied from inﬂation option prices.
To streamline the discussion, however, we will typically refer to the implied
density simply as the risk-neutral density. A similar representation holds for the
value of an inﬂation ﬂoor or put option P (X, Y, V, T ) with payoﬀ at expiration
date T of max(0, (1 + K)T − IT ).

4.4 The Distribution of the Price Level
From the dynamics given above, an application of Itô’s Lemma implies that the
log of the relative price level can be expressed as,


                                  T
                        ln IT =    0   Xs ds
                                  1 T         T
                             −         Vs ds +     Vs dZV .                    (18)
                                  2 0           0



The Appendix shows that this can be expressed as



                                  ln IT = uT + wT ,                            (19)
                                  ln IT = vT + wT ,                            (20)


under the (adjusted) risk-neutral and objective measures, respectively, where
uT and vT are normally distributed random variates. The terms uT and vT are
simply the value of the integral on the right hand side in the ﬁrst line in Equation
(18) under the respective measures, where the distribution of this integral is
diﬀerent under each of the two measures. It is important to observe that both
uT and vT are independent of the value of wT , where wT represents the term
on the second line in Equation (18). This latter feature, in conjunction with the
explicit solutions for the densities of uT and vT provided in the Appendix, will
allow us to solve directly for the objective density of ln IT given the risk-neutral
density.


                         5. MODEL ESTIMATION


In identifying the distribution of inﬂation, we follow a simple three-step approach
using techniques familiar from the empirical options and aﬃne term-structure

                                           12
literatures. First, we solve for the risk-neutral distribution of inﬂation embedded
in the prices of inﬂation caps and ﬂoors having the same maturity but diﬀering
in their strike prices. Second, we identify the inﬂation risk premia by maximum
likelihood estimation of an aﬃne model of the term structure of inﬂation swaps.
Third, we make the transformation from the implied risk-neutral distribution to
the objective distribution of inﬂation.
5.1 Solving for the Risk-Neutral Distribution

There is an extensive literature on the estimation of risk-neutral distributions
from option prices. Key examples include Banz and Miller (1978), Breeden and
Litzenberger (1978), Longstaﬀ (1995), Aït-Sahalia and Lo (1998), and others.
One stream of this literature suggests the use of nonparametric representations
of the risk-neutral density. The majority of the literature, however, is based
on using general parametric speciﬁcations of the risk-neutral density. We will
adopt this latter approach since the results obtained using general parametric
speciﬁcations tend to be more stable and robust. Furthermore, the use of a
general parametric speciﬁcation will allow us to apply standard techniques to
invert the characteristic function and solve for the actual or objective density for
inﬂation.
     In modeling the risk-neutral distribution, it is important to allow for very
general types of densities while preserving suﬃcient structure for the results to be
interpretable. Accordingly, we assume that the density h(z) of the continuously-
compounded inﬂation rate z = ln(IT )/T under the (adjusted) risk-neutral mea-
sure is a member of the ﬁve-parameter class of generalized hyperbolic densities.
As shown by Ghysels and Wang (2011), this broad class of distributions nests
many of the distributions that appear in the ﬁnancial economics literature in-
cluding the normal, gamma, Student t, Cauchy, variance gamma, normal inverse
Gaussian, normal inverse chi-square, generalized skewed t, and hyperbolic distri-
butions. The generalized hyperbolic density is given by

                                                      
                   (a2 − b2 )q/2 d−q eb(z−c) Kq−1/2 (a d2 + (z − c)2 )
          h(z) = √                 √                                  ,       (21)
                   2πaq−1/2 Kq (d a2 − b2 ) ( d2 + (z − c)2 )1/2−q

where a, b, c, d, and q are parameters, and Kq ( · ) denotes the modiﬁed Bessel
function (see Abramowitz and Stegun (1965), Chapter 10).

     We solve for the implied risk-neutral density in the following way. For each
date and horizon, we collect prices for all available inﬂation caps and ﬂoors.
Typically, we have prices for roughly 25 caps and ﬂoors with strike prices ranging
from negative two percent to six percent in steps of 50 basis points. Next, we
solve for the ﬁve parameter generalized hyperbolic density that results in the

                                        13
best ﬁt to the set of cap and ﬂoor prices, while requiring that the model exactly
match the corresponding inﬂation swap rate.11 With this latter condition, there
are essentially four free parameters that can be optimized to ﬁt the cross-section
of option prices. To value the options, we numerically integrate the product of
the option payoﬀ and the density. The optimization algorithm solves for the
parameter vector that minimizes the sum of squared pricing errors, where each
option receives equal weight. We then repeat this process for each day in the
sample period and for each horizon of option expirations, one, two, three, ﬁve,
seven, ten, 20, and 30 years.12 Although not shown, the algorithm is able to ﬁt
the inﬂation cap and ﬂoor prices very accurately. In particular, the model prices
are typically within several percent of the corresponding market prices and would
likely be well within the actual bid-ask spreads for these options.

5.2 Maximum Likelihood Estimation

As shown in Equation (9), the closed-form solution for inﬂation swap prices
depends only on the two state variables X and Y that drive expected inﬂation.
An important advantage of this feature is that it allows us to use standard aﬃne
term structure modeling techniques to estimate X and Y and their parameters
under both the objective and risk-neutral measures. In doing this, we apply
the maximum likelihood approach of Duﬃe and Singleton (1997) to the term
structure of inﬂation swaps for maturities ranging from one to 30 years (but not
for the 40 and 50 year maturities).

     Speciﬁcally, we assume that the two-year and 30-year inﬂation swap rates
are measured without error. Thus, given a parameter vector Θ, substituting
these maturities into the log of the inﬂation swap expression in Equation (9)
results in a system of two linear equations


                  ln F (X, Y, 2) = −A(2) − B(2)X − C(2)Y,                     (22)
                 ln F (X, Y, 30) = −A(30) − B(30)X − C(30)Y,                  (23)

in the two state variables X and Y . This means that X and Y can be ex-
pressed as explicit linear functions of the two inﬂation swap prices F (X, Y, 2)
11
   This latter condition implicitly requires that the moment generating function
for the density be ﬁnite. This requirement places some mild restrictions on the
parameters which are incorporated in the ﬁtting algorithm.
12
   We solve for the density of each option expiration horizon separately since the
model allows for a general inﬂation speciﬁcation rather than a speciﬁc representa-
tion. Thus, we place no a priori restrictions on the term structure of risk-neutral
densities possible at a speciﬁc date.


                                        14
and F (X, Y, 30). Let J denote the Jacobian of the mapping from the two swap
rates into X and Y .
     At time t, we can now solve for the inﬂation swap rate implied by the model
for any maturity from the values of Xt and Yt and the parameter vector Θ.
Let t denote the vector of diﬀerences between the market value and the model
value of the inﬂation swaps for the other maturities implied by Xt , Yt , and the
parameter vector Θ. Under the assumption that t is conditionally multivariate
normally distributed with mean vector zero and a diagonal covariance matrix
Σ with main diagonal values vj (where the subscripts denote the maturities of
the corresponding inﬂation swaps), the log of the joint likelihood function LLKt
of the two-year and 30-year inﬂation swap prices and t+Δt conditional on the
inﬂation swap term structure at time t is given by

                                                             
                                   1          (Xt+Δt − μXt )2
   = − ln(2πσX σY 1 − ρXY ) −
                               2(1 − ρ2XY )           2
                                                     σX
                                                               
              (Xt+Δ − μXt )    (Yt+Δt − μYt )       (Yt+Δt − μYt )2
     − 2ρXY                                     +                     ,                               (24)
                  σX                σY                   σY2

                                                                   
where the conditional moments μXt , μYt , σX , σY , and ρXY = σXY / σX 2 σ 2 of
                                                                          Y
Xt+Δt and Yt+Δt are given in the Appendix. The total log likelihood function is
given by summing LLKt over all values of t.

     We maximize the log likelihood function over the 22-dimensional parameter
vector Θ = {κ, σ, α, β, η, ρ, λ, φ, γ, v1 , v3 , v4 , v5 , v6 , v7 , v8 , v9 , v10 , v12 , v15 , v20 , v25 }
using a standard quasi-Newton algorithm with a ﬁnite diﬀerence gradient. As a
robustness check that the algorithm achieves the global maximum, we repeat the
estimation using a variety of diﬀerent starting values for the parameter vector.
Table 3 reports the maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters and their
asymptotic standard errors. The ﬁtting errors from the estimation are all rela-
tively small with the typical standard deviation ranging from roughly six to to
ten basis points, depending on maturity.

5.3 Solving for the Objective Distribution
In solving for the objective distribution of inﬂation, we follow Heston (1993),
Duﬃe, Pan, and Singleton (2000), and many others by inverting the character-
istic function of the objective distribution. Let Φ(x; ω) denote the characteristic
function for the density function h(x),

                                                 ∞
                                   Φ(x; ω) =      −∞
                                                       eiωx h(x) dx.                                  (25)

                                                    15
Recall from the earlier discussion that the log of the relative price level can be
expressed as uT + wT under the risk-neutral measure, and as vT + wT under the
objective measure, where wT is independent of uT and vT . Using the properties
of characteristic functions, it is easily shown that

                                          Φ(uT + wT ; ω) Φ(vT ; ω)
                   Φ(vT + wT ; ω) =                                .           (26)
                                                Φ(uT ; ω)

Thus, given the densities for uT and vT , once we can identify the characteristic
function of the price uT +wT under the risk-neutral measure, we can immediately
solve for the characteristic function of the log of the relative price level uT + wT
under the objective measure. Given this characteristic function φ(vT + wT ), we
can recover the cumulative density function Ψ(ln(IT )/T ) of the realized inﬂation
rate using the Gil-Pelaez inversion integral,

                                      ∞
                       1  1               Im[e−iωz φ(vT + wT ; ω)]
                 Ψ(z) = −                                          dω,         (27)
                       2 π        0                  ω

where Im[ · ] represents the imaginary component of the complex-valued ar-
gument. Once the cumulative distribution function for the inﬂation rate z =
ln(IT )/T is determined, the cumulative distribution function for the relative
price level IT is obtained by a simple change of variables.


               6. THE DISTRIBUTION OF INFLATION


As a preliminary to the analysis of deﬂation risk, it is useful to ﬁrst present the
empirical results for inﬂation risk premia, expected inﬂation, inﬂation volatility,
and the higher moments of inﬂation.
6.1 Inﬂation Densities

To provide some perspective on the nature of the inﬂation density under the
objective measure, Figure 1 plots the time series of densities of inﬂation for
several horizons. As shown, there is considerable variation in the shape of the
inﬂation distribution for the shorter horizons. In contrast, the distribution of
inﬂation for longer horizons is more stable over time.

6.2 Inﬂation Risk Premia
We measure the inﬂation risk premium by simply taking the diﬀerence between
the ﬁtted inﬂation swap and expected inﬂation rates. This is the way in which
many market participants deﬁne inﬂation risk premia. When the inﬂation swap

                                            16
rate is higher than expected inﬂation, the inﬂation risk premium is positive,
and vice versa. There is no compelling theoretical reason why the inﬂation risk
premium could not be negative in sign. In this case, the risk premium might well
be viewed as a deﬂation risk premium.

     Table 4 presents summary statistics for the average inﬂation risk premia
for horizons ranging from one year to 30 years. Figure 2 plots the time series
of inﬂation risk premia for a number of horizons. As shown, the average risk
premia are slightly negative for horizons out to ﬁve years, but are positive for
longer horizons and reach a value of about 30 basis points at the 30-year horizon.
The inﬂation risk premia vary signiﬁcantly through time, although the volatility
of inﬂation risk premia for longer horizons is slightly higher than for shorter
horizons.

     These inﬂation risk premia estimates are broadly consistent with previous
estimates obtained using alternative approaches by other researchers. For exam-
ple, Haubrich, Pennachi, and Ritchken (2012) estimate the ten-year and 30-year
inﬂation risk premia to be 51 and 101 basis points, respectively. Buraschi and
Jiltsov (2005) and Campbell and Viceira (2001) estimate the ten-year inﬂation
risk premium to be 70 and 110 basis points, respectively. Ang, Bekaert, and Wei
(2008) estimate the ﬁve-year inﬂation risk premium to be 114 basis points. In
addition, the fact that all of the estimated risk premia take negative values at
some point during the sample period is consistent with the ﬁndings of Campbell,
Shiller, and Viceira (2009), Bekaert and Wang (2010), Campbell, Sunderam, and
Viceira (2013), and others.
     Finding that inﬂation risk premia change signs through time is an intriguing
result. Intuitively, one way to think about why the risk premium could change
signs is in terms of the link between inﬂation and the macroeconomy. For ex-
ample, when inﬂation risk is perceived to be counter-cyclical, the market price
of inﬂation risk should be positive. This is the regime in which aggregate supply
shocks (e.g. oil shocks) account for most of the variation in output: high inﬂation
coincides with low output growth. Thus, investors pay an insurance premium
when buying inﬂation protection in the market.
     But this line of reasoning suggests that the sign of the inﬂation risk premium
could be negative when inﬂation risk was perceived to have become pro-cyclical.
In that regime, inﬂation innovations tend to be positive when the average in-
vestor’s marginal utility is high. Hence, a nominal bond provides insurance
against bad states of the world, whereas a real bond does not. In this case,
investors receive an insurance premium when buying inﬂation hedges. When ag-
gregate demand shocks account for most of the variation in output growth, then
we would expect to see pro-cyclical inﬂation: high inﬂation coincides with high
output growth.

                                        17
     The variation in the sign of the inﬂation risk premium also raises a num-
ber of interesting questions about optimal monetary policy. Since the Treasury
seems constrained to issue mostly nominal bonds, it strictly prefers lower inﬂa-
tion risk premia. Higher inﬂation risk premia increase the costs of government
debt ﬁnancing, funded by distortionary taxes. In particular, when inﬂation risk
premia are negative, issuing nominal bonds is very appealing. However, since the
level of expected inﬂation is related to the size of the inﬂation risk premium, the
government may have the ability to inﬂuence the risk premium to some degree
by how it targets inﬂation.

6.3 Expected Inﬂation
To solve for the expected inﬂation rate for each horizon, we use the inﬂation
swap rates observed in the market and adjust them by the inﬂation risk premium
implied by the ﬁtted model. Table 5 presents summary statistics for the expected
inﬂation rates for the various horizons.
     The results indicate that the average term structure of inﬂation expectations
is monotonically increasing during the 2004–2012 sample period. The average
one-year expected inﬂation rate is 1.776 percent, while the average 30-year ex-
pected inﬂation rate is 2.597 percent. The table also shows that there is time
variation in expected inﬂation, although the variation is surprisingly small for
longer horizons. In particular, the standard deviation of expected inﬂation ranges
from 1.348 percent for the one-year horizon to less than 0.20 percent for horizons
of ten years or longer. To illustrate the time variation in expected inﬂation more
clearly, Figure 3 plots the expected inﬂation estimates for the ﬁve-year, ten-year,
and 30-year horizons.

     It is also interesting to contrast these market-implied forecasts of inﬂation
with forecasts provided by major inﬂation surveys. As discussed by Ang, Bekaert,
and Wei (2007), these surveys of inﬂation tend to be more accurate than those
based on standard econometric models and are widely used by market practi-
tioners. Furthermore, these inﬂation surveys have also been incorporated into
a number of important academic studies of inﬂation such as Fama and Gib-
bons (2004), Chernov and Mueller (2012) and Haubrich, Pennachi, and Ritchken
(2012).

     We obtain inﬂation expectations from four surveys: the University of Michi-
gan Survey of Consumers, the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Pro-
fessional Forecasters (SPF), the Livingston Survey, and the survey of market par-
ticipants conducted by Bloomberg. The sample period for the forecasts matches
that for the inﬂation swap data in the study. The Appendix provides the back-
ground information and details about how these surveys are conducted.



                                        18
     Table 6 reports the average values of the various surveys during the sample
period and the corresponding average values for the market-implied forecasts.
These averages are computed using the month-end values for the months in
which surveys are released. Thus, monthly averages are compared with monthly
averages, quarterly averages with quarterly averages, etc. As shown, the average
market-implied forecasts of inﬂation tend to be a little lower than the survey
averages for shorter horizons. The market-implied forecasts, however, closely
parallel those from the surveys for longer horizons. While it would be interesting
to compare the relative accuracy of the market-implied and survey forecasts, our
sample is too short to do this rigorously.
6.4 Inﬂation Volatility and Higher Moments

Table 7 reports the average values of the estimated volatility, skewness, and excess
kurtosis of the continuously-compounded inﬂation rate for horizons ranging from
one year to 30 years. The average inﬂation volatility estimates range from a
high of about 2.258 percent at the two-year horizon to a low of about 0.693
percent at the 30-year horizon. The dampened volatility at the longer horizons
is consistent with a scenario in which inﬂation is anticipated to follow a mean
reverting process.
    The distribution of inﬂation is typically negatively skewed for all horizons.
The negative skewness is particularly pronounced for horizons of less than ten
years, but is still evident in the distribution of inﬂation over a 30-year horizon.
The median excess kurtosis coeﬃcients are all positive (with the exception of the
30-year horizon), indicating that the distribution of inﬂation has heavier tails
than a normal distribution.


                            7. DEFLATION RISK


We turn now to the central issue of measuring the risk of deﬂation implied by
market prices and studying the properties of deﬂation risk. First, we present
descriptive statistics for the implied deﬂation risk. We then examine how the
market prices the tail risk of deﬂation and contrast the results with those found
in other markets.
7.1 How Large is the Risk of Deﬂation?

Having solved for the characteristic function for the inﬂation distribution, we
can apply standard inversion techniques to solve for the cumulative distribution
function for inﬂation. In turn, we can then directly compute the probability
that the average realized inﬂation rate over a speciﬁc horizon is less than zero,
which represents the risk of deﬂation. Table 8 provides summary statistics for

                                        19
the estimated probabilities of deﬂation over the various horizons. To provide
some additional perspective, Figure 4 graphs the time series of probabilities of a
deﬂation over one-year, two-year, ﬁve-year, and ten-year horizons.

    As shown, the market places a surprisingly large weight on the possibility
that deﬂation may occur over extended horizons. In particular, the average
probability that the realized inﬂation rate will be less than or equal to zero is
17.25 percent for a one-year horizon, 11.44 percent for a two-year horizon, 5.34
percent for a ﬁve-year horizon, 3.29 percent for a ten-year horizon, and ranges
from two to three percent for longer horizons.
     What is perhaps more striking is that the probability of deﬂation varies
signiﬁcantly over time and reaches relatively high levels during the sample period.
For example, the probability of deﬂation reaches a value of 44.37 percent for a
one-year horizon, 23.04 percent for a two-year horizon, and 11.39 for a ﬁve-year
horizon. At other times, the market assesses the probability of deﬂation at any
horizon to be only on the order of one to two percent. This variation in the
probability of deﬂation is due not only to changes in expected inﬂation, but also
to changes in the volatility of inﬂation.

     These probabilities are broadly consistent with the historical record on inﬂa-
tion in the U.S. For example, based on the historical inﬂation rates from 1800 to
2012, the U.S. has experienced deﬂation over a one-year horizon 65 times, which
represents a frequency of 30.5 percent. Considering only nonoverlapping periods,
the U.S. has experienced a two-year deﬂation 41 times, a ﬁve-year deﬂation 19
times, a ten-year deﬂation 11 times, and a 30-year deﬂation three times. These
translate into frequencies of 24.0 percent, 14.4 percent, 10.6 percent, and 3.1
percent, respectively.13

      Figure 4 also shows that the deﬂation probabilities for the shorter horizons
have occasional jumps upward. These jumps tend to occur around major ﬁnan-
cial events such as those associated with the European Debt Crisis. For example,
the Eurozone experienced major turmoil during April and May of 2010 as con-
cerns about the ongoing solvency of Portugal, Italy, Ireland, Greece, and Spain
become more urgent and a number of bailout plans were put into place. Spain’s
debt was ﬁrst downgraded by Fitch on May 29, 2010. Similarly, the ﬁve-year de-
ﬂation probability nearly doubles during the last week of September 2010 which
coincides with the downgrade of Spain by Moody’s. In addition, the one-year
deﬂation probability spikes again in early August of 2011, coinciding with the
downgrade of U.S. Treasury debt by Standard and Poors. We will explore the
13
  Historical inﬂation rates are tabulated by Sahr (2012), oregonstate.edu/cla/
polisci/faculty-research/sahr/infcf17742007.pdf. More recent inﬂation rates are
reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.


                                        20
link between deﬂation risk and major ﬁnancial risk more formally later in the
paper.
     Although not shown, we also calculate the partial moment in which we take
the expected value of inﬂation conditional on the inﬂation rate being less than
or equal to zero. This partial moment provides a measure of the severity of
a deﬂation, conditional on deﬂation occuring over some horizon. For example,
ﬁnding that this partial moment was only slightly negative would argue that a
deﬂationary episode was likely to be less severe, while the opposite would be true
for a more negative value of this partial moment. The results indicate that the
expected severity of a deﬂation is typically very substantial with these conditional
moments increasing from about −1.60 percent for a one-year deﬂation, to −1.85
for a ﬁve-year horizon, and then decreasing to −1.15 percent for a 20-year horizon.
On average, the expected value of deﬂation over all of the horizons is −1.56
percent. Note that a deﬂation of −1.56 percent per year would translate into
a decline in the price level of 7.6 percent over a ﬁve-year period, 15.5 percent
over a ten-year period, and 27.0 percent over a 20-year period. These would
represent protracted deﬂationary episodes comparable in severity to many of
those experienced historically in the U.S.
7.2 Pricing Deﬂation Tail Risk

Although we have solved for the inﬂation risk premium embedded in inﬂation
swaps earlier in the paper, it is also interesting to examine how the market prices
the risk that the tail event of a deﬂation occurs. This analysis can provide insight
into how ﬁnancial market participants view the risk of events that may happen
infrequently, but which may have catastrophic implications.

      A number of these types of tail risks have been previously studied in the
literature. For example, researchers have investigated the pricing of catastrophic
insurance losses such as those caused by hurricanes or earthquakes. Froot (2001)
ﬁnds that the ratio of insurance premia to expected losses in the market for
catastrophic reinsurance ranges from about two to seven during the 1989 to 1998
period. Lane and Mahul (2008) estimate that the pricing of catastrophic risk in
a sample of 250 catastrophe bonds is about 2.69 times the actual expected loss
over the long term. Garmaise and Moskowitz (2009) and Ibragimov, Jaﬀee, and
Walden (2009) oﬀer both empirical and theoretical evidence that the extreme
left tail catastrophic risk can be signiﬁcantly priced in the market.
     The default of a corporate bond is also an example of an event that is rel-
atively rare for a speciﬁc ﬁrm, but which would result in an extremely negative
outcome for bondholders of the defaulting ﬁrm. The pricing of default risk has
been considered in many recent papers. For example, Giesecke, Longstaﬀ, Schae-
fer, and Strebulaev (2011) study the pricing of corporate bond default risk and

                                        21
ﬁnd that the ratio of corporate credit spreads to their actuarial expected loss is
2.04 over a 150-year period. Similarly, Driessen (2005) and Berndt, Duﬃe, Dou-
glas, Ferguson, and Schranz (2005) estimate ratios using data for recent periods
that range in value from about 1.8 to 2.8.

     Following along the lines of this literature, we solve for the ratio of the risk-
neutral probability of deﬂation to the objective probability of deﬂation. This
ratio provides a simple measure of how the market prices the tail risk of deﬂation
and has the advantage of being directly comparable to the ratios discussed above.

     Table 9 presents the means and medians for the ratios for the various hori-
zons. As shown, the mean and median ratios range from between one and two to
slightly higher than ﬁve. The overall average of the ratios is 3.321 and the overall
median of the ratios is about 3.166. These values are in the same ballpark as
those for the diﬀerent types of tail risk discussed above. These ratios all indicate
that the market is deeply concerned about ﬁnancial and economic tail risks that
may be diﬃcult to diversify or may be strongly systematic in nature.


                 8. WHAT DRIVES DEFLATION RISK?


A key advantage of our approach is that by extracting the market’s assessment of
the objective probability of deﬂation, we can then examine the relation between
these probabilities and other ﬁnancial and macroeconomic factors. In particular,
we can study the relation between the tail risk of deﬂation and other types of
tail risk that may be present in the markets.

     In doing this, we will focus on four broad categories of tail risk that have
been extensively discussed in the literature. Speciﬁcally, we will consider the links
between deﬂation risk and systemic ﬁnancial system risk, collateral revaluation
risk, sovereign default risk, and business cycle risk.
      The link between systemic risk in the ﬁnancial system and major economic
crisis is well established in many important papers including Bernanke (1983),
Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1996), and others. Systemic risk in the ﬁnancial
system is widely viewed as having played a central role in the recent global
ﬁnancial crisis and represents a motivating force behind major regulatory reforms
such as the Dodd-Frank Act. We use a number of measures of systemic risk in
the analysis.

     First, we use a measure of the ﬂight-to-liquidity risk in the market which
is computed as the spread between a one-year zero-coupon Refcorp bond and a
corresponding maturity zero-coupon Treasury bond. This variable is introduced
in Longstaﬀ (2004) as a measure of the premium that market participants place

                                         22
on Treasuries because of their role as the “safest” asset in the ﬁnancial markets
during episodes when investors fear that massive losses will occur in less liquid
markets. We obtain the data for the ﬂight-to-liquidity spread from the Bloomberg
system.

     Second, we use data on the pricing of super senior tranches on a basket of
corporate debt to measure the risk of a major systemic collapse in the credit
markets. Speciﬁcally, we collect data on the points-up-front pricing on the ﬁve-
year 10-15 percent tranche on the CDX IG index. This index is computed as an
average of the ﬁve-year CDS spreads for 125 U.S. ﬁrms with investment grade
ratings. The 10-15 percent tranche would only experience losses if the total
credit losses on the index exceeded 10 percent of the total notional of an equally-
weighted basket of the underlying debt obligations of these ﬁrms. As shown by
Coval, Jurek, and Staﬀord (2009) and Giesecke, Longstaﬀ, Schaefer, and Strebu-
laev (2011), a major meltdown that would produce losses of this magnitude in a
portfolio of investment grade corporate debt would be a very rare tail event. The
points-up-front price for this tranche represents the market price to compensate
investors for taking the risk of this extreme scenario.14 We obtain data on the
pricing of the super senior tranche from the Bloomberg system.
    Third, we use the spread between the one-year Libor rate and a one-year
Treasury bond as a proxy for the systemic credit and liquidity risk embedded in
the Libor rate. The data are from the Bloomberg system.

     Fourth, we use the ﬁve-year swap spread as a measure of the systemic credit
and liquidity stresses on the ﬁnancial system. As discussed by Duﬃe and Sin-
gleton (1997), Liu, Longstaﬀ, and Mandell (2006), and others, the swap spread
reﬂects diﬀerences in the relative liquidity and credit risk of the ﬁnancial sector
and the Treasury. We obtain ﬁve-year swap spread data from the Bloomberg
system.
     We also considered a number of other measures of systemic risk such as the
average CDS spread for both major U.S. and non-U.S. banks and ﬁnancial ﬁrms.
These measures, however, were highly correlated with the other measures such
as swap spreads and provided little incremental information.

     Recent economic theory has emphasized the role that the value of collateral
plays in propagating economic downturns. Key examples include Kiyotaki and
Moore (1997) who show that declines in asset values can lead to contractions
in the amount of credit available in the market which, in turn, can lead to
further rounds of declines in asset values. Bernanke and Gertler (1995) describe
14
  For a description of the CDX index tranche markets and the pricing of CDO
tranches, see Longstaﬀ and Rajan (2008) and Longstaﬀ and Myers (2013).


                                        23
similar interactions between declines in the value of assets that serve as collateral
and severe economic downturns. Collateral revaluation risk, or the risk of a
broad decline in the market value of leveraged assets, played a major role in
the Great Depression as the sharp declines in the values of stock and corporate
bonds triggered waves of defaults among both speculators and banks. A similar
mechanism was present in the recent ﬁnancial crisis as sharp declines in real estate
values led to massive defaults by “underwater” mortgagors. In the context of
this study, we explore the relation between deﬂation probabilities and valuations
in several major asset classes that may represent important sources of collateral
in the credit markets: stocks and bonds. In addition, we also include measures
of the volatility of these asset classes since these measures provide information
about the risk that large downward revaluations in these forms of collateral may
occur.

    The ﬁrst of these proxies for collateral revaluation risk is the VIX index of
implied volatility for options on the S&P 500. This well-known index is often
termed the “fear index” in the ﬁnancial press since it reﬂects the market’s assess-
ment of the risk of a large downward movement in the stock market. We collect
VIX data from the Bloomberg system.
      The second measure is the Merrill Lynch MOVE index of implied volatil-
ities for options on Treasury bonds. This index is essentially the ﬁxed income
counterpart of the VIX index. This index also captures the market’s views of
the likelihood of a large change in the prices of Treasury bonds, which are widely
used as collateral for a broad variety of credit transactions. This data is also
obtained from the Bloomberg system.

     The third measure is simply the time series of daily returns on the S&P 500
index (price changes only). This return series reﬂects changes in the value of one
of the largest potential sources of collateral in the macroeconomy. We compute
these returns from S&P 500 index values reported in the Bloomberg system.

     The fourth measure is the spread between the yield for the Moody’s Baa-
rated index of corporate bonds and the yield on ﬁve-year Treasury bonds. Vari-
ation in this credit spread over time reﬂects changes in the market’s assessment
of default risk in the economy as well as the pricing of credit risk. We collect
data on the Baa-Treasury spread from the Bloomberg system.

     Another major type of economic tail risk stems from the risk that a sovereign
defaults on its debt. As documented by Reinhart and Rogoﬀ (2009) and many
others, sovereign defaults tend to be associated with severe economic crisis sce-
narios.

    As a measure of the tail risk of a sovereign default by the U.S., we include


                                         24
in the analysis the time series of sovereign CDS spreads on the U.S. Treasury.
Ang and Longstaﬀ (2012) show that the U.S. CDS spread reﬂects variation in
the valuation of major sources of tax revenue for the U.S. such as capital gains
on stocks and bonds. This data is also obtained from the Bloomberg system.

     Finally, to capture the eﬀect of traditional types of business cycle risk or
economic downturn risk, we also include a number of key macroeconomic vari-
ables that can be measured at a monthly frequency. In particular, we include the
monthly percentage change in industrial production as reported by the Bureau
of Economic Analysis, the monthly change in the national unemployment rate
as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and the change in the Consumer
Conﬁdence Index reported by the University of Michigan. The link between the
business cycle and its eﬀects on output and employment are well established
in the macroeconomic literature and forms the basis of many classical theories
including the Phillips curve.
     Since these measures of systemic, collateral, and sovereign default risk are
all available on a daily basis, we begin our analysis by regressing daily changes in
the deﬂation probabilities on daily changes in these variables (the macroeconomic
variables, which are only observed monthly, will be included in later regressions).
In doing this, it is important to note that while these variables were chosen as a
measure of a speciﬁc type of tail risk, most of these variables may actually reﬂect
more than one type of tail risk. Thus, the eﬀects of the variables in the regression
should be interpreted carefully since the diﬀerent types of tail risk need not be
mutually exclusive.
     Table 10 presents summary statistics for the regression results. The results
indicate that the variables proxying for systemic risk are often statistically sig-
niﬁcant for a number of the horizons. In particular, the coeﬃcient for the super
senior tranche price is signiﬁcant for four of the horizons. The sign of this co-
eﬃcient is uniformly positive in sign for all but the longest horizons, which is
clearly consistent with the intuition that an increase in the extreme type of tail
risk reﬂected in the tranche price would be associated with an economic melt-
down in which deﬂation occured. The Libor spread is positive and signiﬁcant for
the two shortest horizons. The positive sign of this eﬀect is also consistent with
our intuition about the eﬀects of a systemic ﬁnancial crisis on the macroeconomy.
The ﬁve-year swap spread has some of the strongest eﬀects in the regression. In
particular, it is signiﬁcant for ﬁve of the ten horizons. Interestingly, the signs
of the signiﬁcant coeﬃcients are all positive, with the exception of the short-
est horizon. This is again consistent with an economic scenario in which stress
in the ﬁnancial sector leads to an increase in the perceived risk of an adverse
macroeconomic shock in which price levels decline.
    Surprisingly, Table 10 shows that neither of the two volatility variables has

                                        25
much explanatory power for changes in deﬂation risk. In contrast, both S&P
500 index returns and changes in the Baa credit spread are often signiﬁcant. For
example, the stock market return is signiﬁcant for the one-year, two-year, and
30-year horizons. In each of these three cases, the sign is negative, indicating
that an increase in the stock market reduces fears about deﬂation. This is again
very intuitive and completely consistent with a simple collateral revaluation in-
terpretation. The Baa credit spread is also signiﬁcant for three of the horizons.
The signs of the signiﬁcant coeﬃcients for the one-year and two-year horizons
are both positive, indicating that deﬂation risk increases as credit fears in the
economy increase. It is also interesting to note that the sign of the coeﬃcients for
this variable become negative for all longer horizons. Thus, the long-run eﬀects
of increased credit risk on deﬂation risk are somewhat counterintuitive.

     Finally, Table 10 shows that the eﬀect of an increase in U.S. CDS spreads
on deﬂation risk is relatively limited. The coeﬃcient for changes in U.S. CDS
spreads is only signiﬁcant for the one-year and 15-year horizons. In addition, the
signs of these two signiﬁcant coeﬃcients diﬀer from each other.

     The overall R2 s from the regressions are fairly modest, ranging from just
under two percent to more than nine percent. Note, however, that these re-
sults are based on daily changes in these variables. Thus, given the challenges
in measuring tail risks, the explanatory power of these regressions is far from
negligible.

     Turning now to regressions in which we include the macroeconomic variables,
we observe that since our sample period is relatively short, it is important to use
a parsimonious speciﬁcation. Accordingly, we regress monthly changes in the
deﬂation probabilities (using the last deﬂation probability for each month) on a
selected set of variables. Speciﬁcally, as proxies for systemic risk, we include only
monthly changes in the super senior prices and the ﬁve-year swap spread. As the
proxy for collateral revaluation risk, we include only the change in the Baa credit
spread. We then include the monthly percentage change in industrial production,
the change in the unemployment rate, and the change in the Michigan Consumer
Conﬁdence Index. The regression results for horizons ranging from one to 20
years (there are too few observations for the 30-year horizon) are summarized in
Table 11.

      The results in Table 11 are consistent with those reported in Table 10. In
particular, several of the proxies for systemic and collateral revaluation tail risk
are again signiﬁcant. The coeﬃcient for the super senior tranche variable is
signiﬁcant for three of the horizons, with those for the one-year and two-year
horizons again having a positive sign. The coeﬃcient for the Baa credit spread
is signiﬁcant for four of the horizons. All four of these coeﬃcients are positive in
sign, indicating that increases in credit risk are associated with an increased risk

                                         26
of deﬂation.
      The results for the macroeconomic variables are somewhat surprising. Far
from being strongly related to deﬂation risk, none of the coeﬃcients for changes
in industrial production or the consumer conﬁdence index are signiﬁcant. The
only macroeconomic variable that is signiﬁcantly related to changes in deﬂation
risk is the change in the unemployment rate which is signiﬁcant and positive for
three of the horizons. The positive sign of these coeﬃcients is intuitive since it
indicates that deﬂation risk increases as the unemployment rate increases. This
is also consistent with classical macroeconomic theory about the relation between
price levels and unemployment such as the Phillips curve.
     In summary, the empirical results indicate that there is a strong relation
between tail risk in ﬁnancial markets and the risk of deﬂation. In particular,
a number of the proxies for systemic ﬁnancial risk and the value of potentially
collateralizable ﬁnancial assets are signiﬁcantly linked to deﬂation risk. These
results underscore the importance of understanding the role that the ﬁnancial
sector plays in economic downturns such as the recent ﬁnancial crisis that began
in the subprime structured credit markets. In contrast, these results suggest that
more traditional macroeconomic variables such as industrial production may play
less of a role in the risk of economic tail events such as a deﬂationary spiral.


                            9. INFLATION RISK


Although the focus of this paper is on deﬂation risk, it is straightforward to
extend the analysis to other aspects of the distribution of inﬂation. As one last
illustration of this, we compute the probabilities that the inﬂation rate exceeds
values of four, ﬁve, and six percent using the techniques described earlier. Table
12 reports summary statistics for these probabilities.

     As shown, the market-implied probabilities of experiencing signiﬁcant inﬂa-
tion are uncomfortably large. Speciﬁcally, the average probability of inﬂation
exceeding four percent is less that 15 percent for the two shortest horizons, but
increases rapidly to nearly 30 percent for horizons ranging from ten to 30 years.
Figure 5 plots the time series of probabilities that inﬂation exceeds four percent
for several horizons. These plots also show that the probability of inﬂation in
the long run appears substantially higher than in the short turn. This is exactly
the opposite from the risk of deﬂation which tends to be higher in the short run.

     Table 12 also shows that the average probability of an inﬂation rate in excess
of ﬁve percent is substantial. An average inﬂation rate of ﬁve percent or more
over a period of decades would rival any inﬂationary scenario experienced by
the U.S. during the past 200 years. Finally, the results show that the market

                                        27
anticipates that there is roughly a three percent probability of inﬂation averaging
more than six percent over the next several decades.
     As we did earlier for deﬂation tail risk, we can also examine the pricing of
inﬂation tail risk by computing the ratio of the probability of inﬂation (in excess
of ﬁve percent) under the risk-neutral measure to the corresponding probability
under the actual measure. Table 13 provides summary statistics for the ratios.
     As illustrated, inﬂation tail risk is priced at all horizons. The magnitude of
the inﬂation risk premium, however, is signiﬁcantly smaller than is the case for
deﬂation tail risk. In particular, the average ratio is only 1.463 and the median
ratio is 1.441. These values are less than half of the corresponding value of 3.321
and 3.166 shown in Table 9 for deﬂation tail risk. Thus, these results suggest
that the market requires far less compensation for the risk of inﬂation that it
does for the risk of deﬂation. This is consistent with the view that deﬂations
are associated with much more severe economic scenarios than are inﬂationary
periods.

     Consumption disaster models can replicate the key facts about nominal bond
return predictability provided that inﬂation jumps in a disaster (see Gabaix
(2012)). As a result of these inﬂation jumps in disaster states, the risk-neutral
probability of a large inﬂation is much higher than the actual probability, and
the nominal bond risk premium increases as a result. Our results point in the
opposite direction. We actually ﬁnd direct evidence from inﬂation options that
market participants are pricing in large deﬂation in disaster states, because the
risk-neutral probability of a deﬂation is much larger than the actual probabil-
ity. This actually makes nominal bonds less risky because they provide a hedge
against large consumption disasters.


                             10. CONCLUSION


We solve for the objective distribution of inﬂation using the market prices of in-
ﬂation swap and option contracts and study the nature of deﬂation risk. We ﬁnd
that the market-implied probabilities of deﬂation are substantial, even though
the expected inﬂation rate is roughly 2.5 percent for horizons of up to 30 years.
We show that deﬂation risk is priced by the market in a manner similar to that of
other major types of tail risk such as catastrophic insurance losses or corporate
bond defaults. By embedding a deﬂation ﬂoor into newly issued TIPS, the Trea-
sury insures bondholders against deﬂation. Our ﬁndings imply that the Treasury
receives a generous insurance premium in return. In contrast, the market appears
much less concerned about inﬂation tail risk.

    In theory, economic tail risks such as deﬂation may be related to other ﬁnan-

                                        28
cial and macroeconomic tail risks. We study the relation between deﬂation risk
and a number of measures of systemic ﬁnancial risk, collateral revaluation risk,
sovereign credit risk, and business cycle risk. We ﬁnd that there is a signiﬁcant
relation between deﬂation risk and measures capturing stress in the ﬁnancial sys-
tem and credit risk in the economy. These results support the view that the risk
of economic shocks severe enough to result in deﬂation is fundamentally related
to the risk of major systemic shocks in the ﬁnancial markets.




                                       29
                                REFERENCES


Abramowitz, Milton, and Irene A. Stegun, 1965, Handbook of Mathematical
Function, Dover Publications, New York, NY.

Adrian, Tobias, and Hao Z. Wu, 2009, The Term Structure of Inﬂation Expec-
tations, Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Aït-Sahalia, Yacine, and Andrew Lo, 1998, Nonparametric Estimation of State-
Price Densities Implicit in Financial Asset Prices, Journal of Finance 53, 499-547.

Ang, Andrew, Geert Bekaert, and Min Wei, 2007, Do Macro Variables, Asset
Markets, or Surveys Forecast Inﬂation Better? Journal of Monetary Economics
54, 1163-1212.

Ang, Andrew, Geert Bekaert, and Min Wei, 2008, The Term Structure of Real
Rates and Expected Inﬂation, Journal of Finance 63, 797-787.
Atack, Jeremy, and Peter Passell, 1994, A New Economic View of American
History, New York: W. W. Norton and Co.

Atkeson, Andrew, and Patrick J. Kehoe, 2004, Deﬂation and Depression: Is
there an Empirical Link?, American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings
94, 99-103.

Backus, David, Mikhail Chernov, and Ian Martin, 2011, Disasters Implied by
Equity Index Options, Journal of Finance 66, 1969-2012.
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Res-
olution of Asset Pricing Puzzles, Journal of Finance 59, 1481-1509.

Banz, Rolf, and Merton H. Miller, 1978, Prices for State Contingent Claims:
Some Estimates and Applications, Journal of Business 51, 653-672.

Barclay’s Capital, 2010, Global Inflation-Linked Products, A User’s Guide.

Bardong, Florian, and Thorsten Lehnert, 2004, TIPS, Break-Even Inﬂation, and
Inﬂation Forecasts, The Journal of Fixed Income 14, 15-35.

Barnes, Michelle L., Zvi Bodie, Robert K. Triest, and J. Christina Wang, 2009,
TIPS Scorecard: Are TIPS Accomplishing what They were Supposed to Accom-
plish? Can They be Improved?, Financial Analysts Journal
Barr, David G., and John Y. Campbell, 1997, Inﬂation, Real Interest Rates, and
the Bond Market, Journal of Monetary Economics 3, 361-383.



                                        30
Barro, Robert J., 2006, Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth
Century, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 823-866.
Bekaert, Geert, and X. S. Wang, 2010, Inﬂation Risk and the Inﬂation Risk
Premium, Working paper, Columbia University.

Berndt, Antje, Rohan Douglas, Darrell Duﬃe, Mark Ferguson, and David Sch-
ranz, 2005, Measuring Default Risk Premia from Default Swap Rates and EDFs,
Working paper, Stanford University.

Bordo, Michael D, and Andrew J. Filardo, 2005, Deﬂation in a Historical Per-
spective, Working paper No. 186, Bank for International Settlements.
Breeden, Douglas T., and Robert H. Litzenberger, 1978, Prices of State Contin-
gent Claims Implicit in Options Prices, Journal of Business 51, 621-651.

Buraschi, Andrea, and Alexei Jiltsov, 2005, Inﬂation Risk Premia and the Ex-
pectations Hypothesis, Journal of Financial Economics 75, 429-490.

Campbell, John Y., Robert Shiller, and Luis Viceira, 2009, Understanding Inﬂa-
tion-Indexed Bond Markets, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Spring),
79-120.
Campbell, John Y., Adi Sunderam, and Luis M. Viceira, 2013, Inﬂation Risk
or Deﬂation Hedges? The Changing Risks of Nominal Bonds, Working paper,
Harvard University.
Campbell, John Y., and Luis M. Viceira, 2001, Who Should Buy Long Term
Bonds?, American Economic Review 91, 99-127.

Cecchetti, Stephen, 1992, Prices During the Great Depression: Was the Deﬂation
of 1930–1932 Really Unanticipated?, American Economic Review 62, 141-156.
Chen, R., B. Liu, and X. Cheng, 2010, Pricing the Term Structure of Inﬂation
Risk Premia: Theory and Evidence from TIPS, Journal of Empirical Finance
17, 702-721.
Chernov, Mikhail, and Philippe Mueller, 2012, The Term Structure of Inﬂation
Expectations, Journal of Financial Economics 106, 367-394.

Christensen, Jens H. E., Jose A. Lopez, and Glenn D. Rudebusch, 2010, Inﬂation
Expectations and Risk Premiums in an Arbitrage-Free Model of Nominal and
Real Bond Yields, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 42, 143-178.

Christensen, Jens H. E., Jose A. Lopez, and Glenn D. Rudebusch, 2011, Pricing
Deﬂation Risk with U.S. Treasury Yields, Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank
of San Francisco.

                                     31
Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, and Robert Goldstein, 2002, Do Bonds Span the Fixed
Income Markets? Theory and Evidence for Unspanned Stochastic Volatility,
Journal of Finance 57, 1685-1730.

Coval, Joshua, Jakub W. Jurek, and Erik Staﬀord, 2009, Economic Catastrophe
Bonds, American Economic Review 99, 628-666.
D’Amico, Stefania, Don H. Kim, and Min Wei, 2010, Tips from TIPS: The
Informational Content of Treasury Inﬂation-Protected Security Prices, Finance
and Economics Discussion Series 2010-19, Federal Reserve Board.

Duﬃe, Darrell, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1997, An Econometric Model of the
Term Structure of Interest Rate Swap Yields, Journal of Finance 52, 1287-1323.

Duﬃe, Darrell, Jun Pan, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 2000, Transform Analysis
and Asset Pricing for Aﬃne Jump-Diﬀusions, Econometrica 68, 1343-1376.
Driessen, Joost, 2005, Is Default Event Risk Priced in Bonds?, Review of Finan-
cial Studies 18, 165-195.

Evans, Martin D., 1998, Real Rates, Expected Inﬂation, and Inﬂation Risk Pre-
mia, Journal of Finance 53, 187-218.
Evans, Martin D., 2003, Real Risk, Inﬂation Risk, and the Term Structure, The
Economic Journal 113, 345-389.

Fama, Eugene F., and Michael Gibbons, 1984, A Comparison of Inﬂation Fore-
casts, Journal of Monetary Economics 13, 327-348.

Faust, Jon, and Jonathan H. Wright, 2012, Forecasting Inﬂation, Working paper,
Johns Hopkins University.
Fisher, Irving, 1933, The Debt-Deﬂation Theory of the Great Depression,
Econometrica 1, 337-357.

Fleckenstein, Matthias, Francis A. Longstaﬀ, and Hanno Lustig, 2012, Why Does
the Treasury Issue TIPS? The TIPS–Treasury Puzzle, Journal of Finance, forth-
coming.

Fleming, Michael, and John Sporn, 2012, An Analysis of OTC Interest Rate
Derivatives Transactions: Implications for Public Reporting, Appendix: Trading
Activity and Price Transparency in the Inﬂation Swap Market, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York Staﬀ Reports.

French, Kenneth R., 1983, A Comparison of Futures and Forward Prices, Journal
of Financial Economics 12, 311-342.


                                      32
Friedman, Milton and Anna Schwartz, 1963, A Monetary History of the United
States, 1867–1960. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Froot, Kenneth A., The Market for Catastrophe Risk: A Clinical Examination,
Journal of Financial Economics 60, 529-571.

Gabaix, Xavier, 2012, Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework
for Ten Puzzles in Macro-Finance, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127,
645-700.

Garmaise, Mark J., and Tobias Moskowitz, 2009, Catastrophic Risk and Credit
Markets, Journal of Finance 64, 657-707.
Ghysels, Eric, and Fangfang Wang, 2011, Some Useful Densities for Risk Man-
agement and their Properties, Working paper, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill.
Giesecke, Kay, Francis A. Longstaﬀ, Stephen Schaefer, and Ilya Strebulaev, 2011,
Corporate Bond Default Risk: A 150-Year Perspective, Journal of Financial
Economics 102, 233-250.

Gourio, Francois, 2008, Disasters and Recoveries, American Economic Review
98, 68-73.

Grishchenko, Olesya V., and Jing-zhi Huang, 2012, Inﬂation Risk Premium: Evi-
dence from the TIPS Market, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Divisions
of Research & Statistics and Monetary Aﬀairs, Federal Reserve Board.
Gurkaynak, Refet, Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright, 2010, The TIPS Yield
Curve and Inﬂation Compensation, American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
nomics 2, 70-92.
Gurkaynak, Refet, and Jonathan H. Wright, 2010, Macroeconomics and the Term
Structure, Journal of Economic Literature, forthcoming.

Hamilton, James D., 1985, Uncovering Financial Market Expectations of Inﬂa-
tion, Journal of Political Economy 93, 1224-1241.

Hamilton, James D., 1992, Was the Deﬂation During the Great Depression An-
ticipated? Evidence from the Commodity Futures Market, American Economic
Review 82, 157-178.
Haubrich, Joseph, George Pennacchi, and Peter Ritchken, 2012, Inﬂation Expec-
tations, Real Rates, and Risk Premia: Evidence from Inﬂation Swaps, Review of
Financial Studies 25, 1588-1629.
Heston, Steven L., 1993, A Closed-Form Solution for Options with Stochastic

                                      33
Volatility, with Applications to Bond and Currency Options, Review of Financial
Studies 6, 327-343.
Ibragimov, Rustam, Dwight Jaﬀee, and Johan Walden, 2011, Diversiﬁcation Dis-
asters, Journal of Financial Economics 99, 333-348.

Jamshidian, Farshid, 1989, An Exact Bond Option Formula, Journal of Finance
44, 205-209.

Jarrow, Robert, and Y. Yildirim, 2003, Pricing Treasury Inﬂation Protected
Securities and Related Derivatives Using an HJM Model, Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis 38, 409-430.
Kerkhof, Jeroen, 2005, Inﬂation Derivatives Explained, Fixed Income Quantita-
tive Research, Lehman Brothers (July), 1-80.

Kilian, Lutz, and Simone Manganelli, 2007, Quantifying the Risk of Deﬂation,
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 39, 561-590.

Kitsul, Yuriy, and Jonathan H. Wright, 2012, The Economics of Options-Implied
Inﬂation Probability Density Functions, Working paper, Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity.
Lane, Morton, and Olivier Mahul, 2008, Catastrophe Risk Pricing, An Empirical
Analysis, Policy Research Working Paper 4765, The World Bank.

Liu, Jun, Francis A. Longstaﬀ, and Ravit E. Mandell, 2006, The Market Price
of Risk in Interest Rate Swaps, Journal of Business 79, 2337-2360.

Longstaﬀ, Francis A., 1990, The Valuation of Options on Yields, Journal of
Financial Economics 26, 97-121.
Longstaﬀ, Francis A., 1995, Option Pricing and the Martingale Restriction, Re-
view of Financial Studies 8, 1091-1124.

Longstaﬀ, Francis A., 2004, The Flight-to-Liquidity Premium in U.S. Treasury
Bond Prices, Journal of Business 77, 511-526.
Longstaﬀ, Francis A., and Andrew Ang, 2012, Systemic Sovereign Default Risk:
Lessons from the U.S. and Europe, Working paper, UCLA.

Longstaﬀ, Francis A., and Brett Myers, 2013, How Does the Market Value Toxic
Assets?, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.

Longstaﬀ, Francis A., and Monika Piazzesi, 2004, Corporate Earnings and the
Equity Premium, Journal of Financial Economics 74, 401-421.



                                      34
Longstaﬀ, Francis A., and Arvind Rajan, 2008, An Empirical Analysis of the
Pricing of Collateralized Debt Obligations, Journal of Finance 63, 509-563.
Longstaﬀ, Francis A., Pedro Santa-Clara, and Eduardo S. Schwartz, 2001, The
Relative Valuation of Caps and Swaptions: Theory and Empirical Evidence, The
Journal of Finance 56, 2067-
Mercurio, Fabio, 2005, Pricing Inﬂation-Indexed Derivatives, Quantitative Fi-
nance 5, 289-302.

Merton, Robert C., 1973, Theory of Rational Option Pricing, Bell Journal of
Economics and Management Science 4, no. 1., 141-183.
North, Douglass C., 1961, The Economic Growth of the United States, 1790–
1860, Prentice Hall.

Pﬂueger, Carolin E., and Luis M. Viceira, 2011a, Inﬂation Indexed Bonds and the
Expectations Hypothesis, Annual Review of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Pﬂueger, Carolin E., and Luis M. Viceira, 2011b, An Empirical Decomposition of
Risk and Liquidity in Nominal and Inﬂation-Indexed Government Bonds, Work-
ing paper, Harvard University.
Rietz, Thomas A., 1988, The Equity Risk Premium: A Solution, Journal of
Monetary Economics 22, 117-131.

Pond, Michael, and Chirag Mirani, 2011, Barclays Capital, Market Strategy
Americas, June 3, 12-14.

Roll, Richard, 1996, U.S. Treasury Inﬂation-Indexed Bonds: The Design of a
New Security, Journal of Fixed Income (December), 9-28.
Roll, Richard, 2004, Empirical TIPS, Financial Analysts Journal 60 (Jan-Feb),
31-53.

Wachter, Jessica, 2013, Can Time-Varying Risk of Rare Disasters Explain Ag-
gregate Stock Market Volatility?, Journal of Finance 68, 987-1035.
Wright, Jonathan H., 2011, What Does Monetary Policy Do at the Zero Lower
Bound?, Working paper, Johns Hopkins University.




                                      35
                                        APPENDIX


A.1. The Inﬂation Swap Rate.

From Equation (1), the relative price level index at time T can be expressed as

                      T                           T             T√
          IT = exp     0    Xs ds       exp − 12    0   Vs ds +   0     Vs dZV (s) .   (A1)


The cash ﬂow associated with a zero-coupon inﬂation swap at time T is simply
IT − F (X, Y, T ) where F (X, Y, T ) is the inﬂation swap price at the initiation of
the contract at time zero. Since the present value of the inﬂation swap is zero at
inception we have,

                                 T                              
                  E Q exp −         0
                                        rs ds (IT − F (X, Y, T )) = 0.                 (A2)


Substituting in for rt and IT gives,


          T       
 E Q exp − 0 Rs ds
                                                             
    Q
            T         T                
                                        1 T
                                                T√
   E exp − 0 Xs ds exp 0 Xs ds exp − 2 0 Vs ds + 0 Vs dZV (s)

             T                 
     Q
 − E exp − 0 Xs ds F (X, Y, T )    = 0,                     (A3)


which implies

                                               T        T √              
                            E Q exp − 12       0
                                                 Vs ds +  0
                                                              Vs  dZ V (s)
           F (X, Y, T ) =                            T                     ,         (A4)
                                          EQ   exp − 0 Xs ds
                                      1
                       =               T      .                                      (A5)
                            EQ   exp − 0 Xs ds


                                                             T
Let H(X, Y, τ ) denote the value of the expectation E Q [exp( t Xs ds)], where
τ = T − t. Standard results imply that this expectation satisﬁes the partial
diﬀerential equation

                                               36
                   1 2
                   2 σ HXX      + ρσηHXY + 12 η 2 HY Y
                    + λ(Y − X)HX + (φ − γY )HY − XH = Hτ ,                       (A6)

subject to the terminal condition H(X, Y, 0) = 1. We conjecture a solution of
the form H(X, Y, τ ) = exp(A(τ ) + B(τ )X + C(τ )Y ). Taking derivatives of this
expression and substituting into Equation (A6) results in a system of three linear
ﬁrst order ordinary diﬀerential equations for the horizon dependent functions
A(τ ), B(τ ), and C(τ ),



                      B  + λB = −1,                                             (A7)
                      C  + γC = λB,                                             (A8)
                      A = 12 σ 2 B 2 + ρσηBC + 12 η 2C 2 + φC.                  (A9)

These three equations are readily solved by the use of an integrating factor and
direct integration. Substituting the solutions into the expression for H(X, Y, τ ),
substituting H(X, Y, τ ) into Equation (A5), and then evaluating as of time zero
(τ = T ) gives the expression for the inﬂation swap price in Equation (9).
A.2 Inﬂation Option Prices

Let C(X, Y, V, T ) denote the price at time zero of a European call option on the
price level at time T with strike K. The cash ﬂow at the option expiration date
is max(0, IT − (1 + K)T ). The present value of this cash ﬂow can be expressed
as

                                 T                               
                   E Q exp −      0
                                      rs ds max(0, IT − (1 + K)T ) ,            (A10)

which can be written as


              T                          T                               
 E Q exp −     0
                   Rs ds       E Q exp −    0
                                                Xs ds max(0, IT − (1 + K)T ) , (A11)


after substituting in for rt . Let N (I, X, Y, τ ) denote the value of the expectations
           T
E Q [exp(− t Xs ds) max(0, IT − (1 + K)T )]. Note that we show the explicit
functional dependence of N(I, X, Y, τ ) on I since It need not equal one for t > 0.
The value of N(I, X, Y, τ ) satisﬁes the following partial diﬀerential equation,

                                            37
     1 2
                     √
     2I V   NII + θsI V NIV + 12 s2 NV V + 12 σ 2 NXX + ρσηNXY + 12 η 2NY Y
      + IXNI + μNV + λ(Y − X)NX + (φ − γY )NY − XN = Nτ ,
                                                                                   (A12)


subject to the terminal condition N(I, X, Y, V, 0) = max(0, IT − (1 + K)T ). We
conjecture that the solution is of the form



      N(I, X, Y, V, τ ) = exp(A(τ ) + B(τ )X + C(τ )Y )M(I, X, Y, V, τ ).          (A13)


Substituting in this expression into the partial diﬀerential equation in Equation
(A12) and simplifying gives


 1 2
                 √
 2I V   MII + θsI V MIV + 12 s2 MV V + 12 σ 2 MXX + ρσηMXY + 12 η 2 MY Y
 + IXMI + μMV + (σ 2 B(τ )) + ρσηC(τ ) + λ(Y − X)MX
 + (η 2 C(τ ) + ρσηB(τ ) + φ − γY )MY + [ 12 σ 2 B 2 (τ ) + ρσηB(τ )C(τ ) + 12 η 2 C 2(τ )
 + λ(Y − X)B(τ ) + (φ − γY )C(τ ) − X − A − B  X − C  Y ]M = Mτ .
                                                                                   (A14)


From Equations (A7) through (A9) the term in brackets multiplying M is zero.
Without the M term in the partial diﬀerential equation, however, the solution
to the partial diﬀerential equation can be expressed as

                                            ∗
                  M(I, X, Y, V, τ ) = E Q [max(0, IT − (1 + K)T )],                (A15)

where the expectation is taken with respect to the density of IT implied by the
dynamics,


                                   √
              dI = I X dt + I       V dZI ,                                        (A16)
                                        2
             dX = (λ (Y − X) + σ B(τ ) + ρσηC(τ )) dt + σ dZX ,                    (A17)
             dY = (α − β Y + η 2 C(τ ) + ρσηB(τ )) dt + η dZY ,                    (A18)
             dV = μ dt + s dZV .                                                   (A19)

                                            38
Since


                                 T           
                     Q
         D(T ) = E       exp −   0
                                      rs ds        ,                                    (A20)
                                 T               
               = E Q exp −       0    Rs ds            exp(A(T ) + B(T )X + C(T )Y ).   (A21)

combining these results implies


               C(X, Y, V, T ) = D(T ) E Q∗ [max(0, IT − (1 + K)T )].                    (A22)

Note that under this measure, the expected value of the price level equals the
inﬂation swap price F . This follows since the cash ﬂow from an inﬂation swap
at time T is IT − F . Under the Q∗ measure, however, the present value of this
                               ∗
cash ﬂow is given by D(T )E Q [IT − F ]. Since the initial value of the inﬂation
                                       ∗
swap contract is zero, this implies E Q [IT ] = F .

A.3 The Distribution of the Price Level

From Equation (A1), ln IT can be expressed as

                                            T
                             ln IT =          0
                                                  Xt dt + wT ,                          (A23)

where wT represents the terms that involve Vt . Let uT denote the value of the
integral of Xt is the above expression under the objective measure P . Under P ,
solving the stochastic diﬀerential equation for Yt gives

                                                                  t
               Yt = Y e−βt + (α/β)(1 − e−βt ) + ηe−βt              0e
                                                                     βs
                                                                          dZY (s).      (A24)

Likewise, solving for Xt gives

                                       t                          t
             Xt = Xe−κt + κe−κt         0
                                          eκs Ys ds + σe−κt         0
                                                                        eκs dZX (s).    (A25)

Substituting Equation (A24) into the above equation, interchanging the order of
integration, and evaluating terms gives the following expression for Xt


                                            κ
        Xt = Xe−κt + (α/β)(1 − e−κt ) +        (Y − α/β)(e−βt − e−κt )
                                          κ−β
                      t                                    t
           + κ/(κ − β) 0 e−βt eβs − e−κt eκs dZY (s) + σe−κt 0 eκs dZX (s). (A26)

                                                  39
Taking the integral of Xt , interchanging the order of integration, and evaluating
terms gives


   T
    0
        Xt dt = X(1 − e−κ )/κ + (α/β)(T − (1 − e−κT )/κ)
                  κ
              +       (Y − α/β)((1 − e−βT )/β − (1 − e−κT )/κ)
                κ−β
                           T
              + κη/(κ − β) 0 (1 − e−β(T −t))/β − (1 − e−κ(T −t) )/κ dZY (t)
                 T
              + σ 0 (1 − e−κ(T −t) )/κ dZX (t).                         (A27)


Thus, uT is a normally distributed random variable with mean



             X(1 − e−κ )/κ + (α/β)(T − (1 − e−κT )/κ)
              + (κ/(κ − β))(Y − α/β)((1 − e−βT )/β − (1 − e−κT )/κ),               (A28)


and variance


                                                                     
            κ2 η 2        1      2      1       σ2     2κρση      1    1
                             −      +        + 2 +                  −       T
          (κ − β)2 β 2          βκ κ2           κ     κ(κ − β) β       κ
                                                      
              2κ2η 2          1      1          2κρση
        +                        −        − 2              (1 − e−βT )
            β(κ − β)2 βκ β 2                 β κ(κ − β)
                             
                  κ2 η 2
        +                        (1 − e−2βT )
            2β(κ − β)2 β 2
                                                                  
              2κη 2         1      1       2σ 2      2ρση     2     1
        +                       −       − 3 +                   −        (1 − e−κT )
            (κ − β)2 βκ κ2                  κ      κ(κ − β) κ β
                                                   
                  η2            σ2         ρση
        +                   +       − 2               (1 − e−2κT )
            2(κ − β)2 κ 2κ3            2κ (κ − β)
                                                          
                   −2κ2 η 2                   2κρση
        +                            +                       (1 − e−(β+κ)T ).        (A29)
            βκ(β + κ)(κ − β)2           κ(β + κ)(κ − β)β


A similar argument shows that vT is a normally distributed random variable with
mean

                                            40
                                                     
          −λT               φ η2   ρση σ 2  ρση                               
 X(1 − e        )/λ +         − 2−    − 2 −                   T − (1 − e−λT )/λ
                            γ  γ   λγ  λ     γλ
                                                                               
        λ            φ η2       ρση        η 2 e−λT      ρσηe−λT     η 2 λe−γT
  +             Y − + 2+             −                 +           + 2
      λ−γ            γ   γ       λγ    (λ − γ)(γ + λ)    λ(γ + λ)   2γ (λ − γ)
          −λT              −λT
                                     
    (1 − e      )/γ − (1 − e     )/λ
                                                                 
                η 2e−λT        ρσηe−λT      σ 2 e−λT    ρσηe−λT
  + −                       +            +           −
          2(λ − γ)(γ + λ)      λ(γ + λ)        2λ2     2λγ(λ − γ)
   λT                             
    (e − 1)/λ − (1 − e−λT )/λ
                                                 
             η 2λ2 e−λT            ρσηλe−λT
  +                          +
       2γ 2 (γ + λ)(λ − γ) γ(λ − γ)(γ + λ)
   γT                             
    (e − 1)/γ − (1 − e−λT )/λ .                                               (A30)



and variance



                                                                   
          λ2 η 2        1      2      1       σ2     2λρση      1    1
                           −      +        + 2+                   −        T
        (λ − γ)2 γ 2 γλ λ2                    λ     λ(λ − γ) γ       λ
                                                    
            2λ2 η 2         1      1          2λρση
      +                        −        − 2              (1 − e−γT )
          γ(λ − γ)2 γλ γ 2                 γ λ(λ − γ)
                           
                λ2 η 2
      +                        (1 − e−2γT )
          2γ(λ − γ)2 γ 2
                                                                
            2λη 2         1      1       2σ 2      2ρση      2    1
      +                       −       − 3 +                    −        (1 − e−λT )
          (λ − γ)2 γλ λ2                  λ      λ(λ − γ) λ γ
                                                 
                η2            σ2         ρση
      +                   +       − 2               (1 − e−2λT )
          2(λ − γ)2 λ 2λ3            2λ (λ − γ)
                                                        
                 −2λ2 η 2                   2λρση
      +                            +                       (1 − e−(γ+λ)T ).         (A31)
          γλ(γ + λ)(λ − γ)2           λ(γ + λ)(λ − γ)γ



A.4 The Conditional Moments
Integrating the dynamics for X and Y under the P measures gives the following
expressions for the conditional means and variances

                                          41
 μYt = Yt e−βΔt + (α/β)(1 − e−βΔt ),                                         (A32)
                                            κ
 μXt = Xt e−κΔt + (α/β)(1 − e−κΔt ) +            (Yt − α/β)(e−βΔt − e−κΔt ), (A33)
                                         κ−β
       η2
  σY =    (1 − e−2βΔt ),                                                     (A34)
       2β
                                                                                
         κ2 η 2      1       −2βΔt       2           −(β+κ)Δt     1       −2κΔt
 σX =                  (1 − e      )−         (1 − e          )+    (1 − e      )
       (κ − β)2 2β                     β+κ                       2κ
                                                            
       2κρση        1         −(β+κ)Δt      1        −2κΔt
     +                  (1 − e         )−      (1 − e      )
       κ−β β+κ                             2κ
       σ2
     +    (1 − e−2κΔt ),                                                     (A35)
       2κ                                                  
        κη 2      1        −2βΔt      1           −(β+κ)Δt
σXY =               (1 − e       )−       (1 − e           )
       κ − β 2β                     β+κ
        ρση
     +        (1 − e−(β+κ)Δt).                                               (A36)
       β+κ

A.5 The Inﬂation Surveys

The data from the University of Michigan Survey of Consumers consist of one and
ﬁve year ahead inﬂation forecasts. The series is released at monthly frequency
and reports the median expected price change over the next twelve months and
the next ﬁve years, respectively. A detailed description of how the survey is
conducted is available at http:// www.sca.isr.umich.edu/documents.php?c=i. In
contrast to the Livingston survey and the Survey of Professional Forecasters,
the participants in the University of Michigan Survey of Consumers are actual
consumers (households) and not professionals. The time between the conduct
of the survey and release is up to three weeks. The University of Michigan
reports that a review of the estimates of inﬂation expectations indicated that
for comparisons over time, the median, rather than the mean, may be a more
reliable measure of the central tendency of the response distribution due to the
changing inﬂuence of extreme responses. Therefore, we use the median survey
forecasts throughout our analysis.
The Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters is
conducted on a quarterly basis. The questionnaires are sent to the participants
at the end of January, at the end of April of the second quarter, at the end
of July for the third quarter, and at the end of October for the fourth quar-
ter. The survey results are published in the middle of February, May, August,
and November, for the ﬁrst, second, third, and fourth quarter, respectively. In
contrast to the Livingston survey, participants in the SPF forecast changes in

                                       42
the quarterly average CPI-U levels. A detailed description of how the sur-
vey is conducted is available at http://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-
data/real-time-center/survey-of-professionalforecasters/spf-documentation.pdf.

The Livingston survey is conducted twice a year, in June and in December, usu-
ally in the middle of the month. Participants include economists from industry,
government, and academia. The surveys taken in June consist of two annual aver-
age CPI forecasts: for the current year, and for the following year. The December
surveys include three annual average forecasts: for the current year, for the next
year, and for the year after. The participants forecast non-seasonally-adjusted
CPI level six and twelve months in the future. A detailed description of how the
Livingston survey is conducted is available at: http://www.philadelphiafed.org/
research-and-data/real-time-center/livingston-survey/livingston-documentation
.pdf. For the Livingston surveys, there is a lag of up to four and three weeks
between the time the survey and when the results are disseminated.
Finally, Bloomberg provides one-year-ahead forecasts at the monthly frequency
compiled from more than 80 professionals. Participants include economists from
Bank of America, BNP Paribas, JP Morgan, and many others. Detailed infor-
mation on the composition of each forecast index can be found in the Bloomberg
system under US CPI Forecast Index.




                                       43
Figure 1. Inﬂation Densities. This ﬁgure plots the time series of inﬂation
densities for horizons of one year (upper left), two years (upper right), ﬁve years
(lower left), and ten years (lower right).




                                        44
                100                                       100



                 50                                        50
Basis Points




                  0                                           0



               −50                                        −50



               −100                                      −100
                       2006     2008     2010     2012            2006     2008     2010     2012




                100                                       100



                 50                                        50
Basis Points




                  0                                           0



               −50                                        −50



               −100                                      −100
                       2006     2008     2010     2012            2006     2008     2010     2012




                Figure 2. Inﬂation Risk Premia. This ﬁgure plots the time series of inﬂation
                risk premia for horizons of one year (upper left), ﬁve years (upper right), ten years
                (lower left), and 30 years (lower right).




                                                         45
           6                                       6

           4                                       4

           2                                       2
Percent




           0                                       0

          −2                                   −2

          −4                                   −4

          −6                                   −6
               2006   2008    2010     2012            2006   2008     2010     2012




           6                                       6

           4                                       4

           2                                       2
Percent




           0                                       0

          −2                                   −2

          −4                                   −4

          −6                                   −6
               2006   2008    2010     2012            2006   2008     2010     2012




      Figure 3. Expected Inﬂation. This ﬁgure plots the time series of expected
      inﬂation for horizons of one year (upper left), ﬁve years (upper right), ten years
      (lower left), and 30 years (lower right).




                                              46
          50                                     50


          40                                     40


          30                                     30
Percent




          20                                     20


          10                                     10


           0                                         0
               2010       2011           2012            2010      2011           2012




          50                                     50


          40                                     40


          30                                     30
Percent




          20                                     20


          10                                     10


           0                                         0
               2010       2011           2012            2010      2011           2012




      Figure 4. Deﬂation Probabilities. This ﬁgure plots the time series of deﬂa-
      tion probabilities for horizons of one year (upper left), two years (upper right),
      ﬁve years (lower left), and ten years (lower right).




                                                47
          40                                      40



          30                                      30
Percent




          20                                      20



          10                                      10



           0                                          0
               2010       2011            2012            2010     2011            2012




          40                                      40



          30                                      30
Percent




          20                                      20



          10                                      10



           0                                          0
               2010       2011            2012            2010     2011            2012




      Figure 5. Inﬂation Probabilities. This ﬁgure plots the time series of proba-
      bilities that inﬂation is greater than or equal to four percent for horizons of one
      year (upper left), two years (upper right), ﬁve years (lower left), and ten years
      (lower right).




                                                 48
                                                               Table 1

Summary Statistics for Inflation Swap Rates. This table reports summary statistics for the inflation swap rates for the indicated
maturities. Swap maturity is expressed in years. Inflation swap rates are expressed as percentages. The sample consists of daily observations
for the period from July 23, 2004 to October 5, 2012.



       Swap                                       Standard
       Maturity                     Mean          Deviation         Minimum              Median          Maximum                  N


       1                            1.758              1.369             −4.545            2.040              3.802            2141
       2                            1.930              1.087             −3.605            2.191              3.460            2141
       3                            2.088              0.853             −2.047            2.293              3.351            2141
       4                            2.219              0.688             −1.228            2.390              3.342            2141
       5                            2.324              0.575             −0.570            2.468              3.310            2141
       6                            2.403              0.492             −0.080            2.521              3.310            2141
       7                            2.472              0.424              0.402            2.575              3.229            2141
       8                            2.530              0.375              0.639            2.613              3.195            2141
       9                            2.577              0.331              0.904            2.651              3.135            2141
       10                           2.621              0.295              1.146            2.685              3.145            2141
       12                           2.677              0.278              1.280            2.738              3.160            2141
       15                           2.739              0.278              1.161            2.797              3.330            2141
       20                           2.801              0.290              1.069            2.865              3.360            2141
       25                           2.848              0.302              1.211            2.911              3.390            2141
       30                           2.903              0.300              1.454            2.959              3.500            2141
       40                           2.784              0.246              1.454            2.819              3.377            1016
       50                           2.781              0.261              1.465            2.830              3.500             842
                                                                  Table 2

Summary Statistics for Inflation Caps and Floors. This table reports the average values for inflation caps and floors for the indicated
maturities and strikes. The average values are expressed in terms of basis points per $100 notional. Option Maturity is expressed in years.
Ave. denotes the average number of caps and floors available each day from which the risk-neutral density of inflation is estimated. N denotes
the number of days for which the risk-neutral density of inflation is estimated. The sample consists of daily observations for the period from
October 5, 2009 to January 23, 2012.



                            Average Floor Value by Strike                             Average Cap Value by Strike

 Option
 Maturity       −2    −1        0      1     2      3       4      5     −1       0        1      2     3      4      5    6    Ave.     N


 1               7     14      27    54    105    181    294     398    237    153        91     41     17     7      4     2    25.6   572
 2              19     29      48    92    184    334    544     749    523    349       204     96     43    22     13     9    25.9   593
 3              27     39      61   111    229    444    751    1050    831    572       342    162     72    38     24    17    26.5   500
 5              36     49      76   134    282    599   1058    1565   1456   1045       658    325    154    70     42    29    25.9   577
 7              32     46      76   144    311    697   1261    1954   2040   1518      1014    545    230   133     79    55    25.7   434
 10             31     49      85   170    368    843   1561    2536   2752   2111      1478    846    413   198    120    76    25.7   566
 12             28     44      80   164    376    900   1704    2862   3119   2424      1732   1005    482   236    126    75    26.4   531
 15             24     39      73   156    376    967   1918    3332   3536   2793      2035   1191    560   274    142    84    26.2   569
 20             21     36      69   157    408   1121   2278    3959   3985   3254      2467   1473    690   326    172    94    25.1   488
 30             15     31      75   205    629   1807   2786    5812   4614   4117      3428   2163   1154   573    309   187    21.5   215
                                             Table 3

Maximum Likelihood Estimation of the Inflation Swap Model. This table reports the max-
imum likelihood estimates of the parameters of the inflation swap model along with their asymptotic
standard errors. The model is estimated using daily inflation swap prices for the period from July
23, 2004 to October 5, 2012.



                                                                            Standard
            Parameter                                  Value                   Error


            κ                                      1.041346                 0.477189
            σ                                      0.037872                 0.000544
            α                                      0.089929                 0.002182
            β                                      3.540201                 0.087404
            η                                      0.006448                 0.000007
            λ                                      1.063634                 0.005859
            φ                                      0.000708                 0.000001
            γ                                      0.000001                 0.000000
            ρ                                    −0.1667560                 0.004911
            v1                                   0.00001107               0.00000081
            v3                                   0.00000089               0.00000024
            v4                                   0.00000153               0.00000034
            v5                                   0.00000187               0.00000040
            v6                                   0.00000174               0.00000037
            v7                                   0.00000179               0.00000038
            v8                                   0.00000187               0.00000040
            v9                                   0.00000218               0.00000047
            v10                                  0.00000254               0.00000057
            v12                                  0.00000202               0.00000043
            v15                                  0.00000129               0.00000030
            v20                                  0.00000076               0.00000022
            v25                                  0.00000050               0.00000018
                                                               Table 4

Summary Statistics for Inflation Risk Premia. This table reports summary statistics for the estimated inflation risk premia for the
indicated horizons. Horizon is expressed in years. The inflation risk premia are measured in basis points. The inflation risk premia are
estimated using the period from July 23, 2004 to October 5, 2012.



                                                Standard
       Horizon                    Mean          Deviation        Minimum             Median          Maximum                 N


       1                          −1.92              5.47           −25.66             −1.36               9.95            2141
       2                          −3.80             11.18           −54.46             −2.42              20.07            2141
       3                          −3.94             14.84           −72.08             −1.95              27.47            2141
       4                          −2.91             17.16           −82.27             −0.45              33.24            2141
       5                          −1.22             18.71           −88.07              1.50              38.05            2141
       6                           0.83             19.79           −91.26              3.78              42.27            2141
       7                           3.04             20.57           −92.86              6.11              46.05            2141
       8                           5.30             21.17           −93.48              8.44              49.50            2141
       9                           7.57             21.63           −93.46             10.77              52.70            2141
       10                          9.79             22.00           −93.04             13.09              55.67            2141
       12                         14.02             22.56           −91.04             17.44              61.10            2141
       15                         19.62             23.12           −88.63             23.11              67.72            2141
       20                         26.56             23.68           −84.40             30.20              75.78            2141
       25                         30.26             24.01           −82.32             33.95              80.15            2141
       30                         30.62             24.23           −83.04             34.37              80.96            2141
                                                              Table 5

Summary Statistics for Expected Inflation. This table reports summary statistics for the expected inflation rate for the indicated horizons.
Horizon is expressed in years. Expected inflation rates are expressed as percentages. The sample consists of daily observations for the period
from July 23, 2004 to October 5, 2012.



                                                  Standard
        Horizon                    Mean           Deviation         Minimum              Median           Maximum                  N


        1                           1.776             1.348             −4.399             2.051              3.882             2141
        2                           1.968             1.031             −3.317             2.281              3.588             2141
        3                           2.127             0.775             −1.650             2.284              3.497             2141
        4                           2.248             0.597             −0.746             2.351              3.496             2141
        5                           2.336             0.475             −0.054             2.422              3.452             2141
        6                           2.395             0.386              0.496             2.468              3.427             2141
        7                           2.442             0.314              0.908             2.492              3.327             2141
        8                           2.477             0.259              1.143             2.514              3.199             2141
        9                           2.501             0.213              1.441             2.525              3.130             2141
        10                          2.523             0.177              1.595             2.536              3.143             2141
        12                          2.537             0.151              1.702             2.540              3.035             2141
        15                          2.543             0.134              1.652             2.547              2.960             2141
        20                          2.536             0.124              1.609             2.560              2.896             2141
        25                          2.545             0.117              1.761             2.571              2.776             2141
        30                          2.597             0.084              2.165             2.616              2.716             2141
                                          Table 6

Comparison of Survey Forecasts with Market-Implied Forecasts. This table reports the
average values of the survey forecasts for the indicated forecast horizon along with the corresponding
average of the market-implied expected inflation for the same horizon. The averages of the market-
implied expected inflation estimates are taken using month-end values for months in which surveys
are released. Inflation forecasts are expressed as percentages. The sample period is July 2004 to
September 2012.



                                                                      Market-
       Forecast                                       Survey           Implied
       Horizon                   Survey              Forecast         Forecast             N


       1 Year                    Michigan                2.91              1.79           99
                                 Bloomberg               2.53              1.79           99
                                 SPF                     2.22              1.80           33
                                 Livingston              4.71              1.60           16


       2 Years                   SPF                     2.32              1.99           33
                                 Livingston              3.53              1.67            8


       3 Years                   SPF                     2.30              2.08           29


       5 Years                   Michigan                2.39              2.31           29


       10 Years                  Michigan                3.24              2.53           99
                                 SPF                     2.49              2.53           33
                                 Livingston              2.44              2.52           16
                                        Table 7

Summary Statistics for the Volatility, Skewness, and Kurtosis of the Inflation Distribu-
tion. This table reports the average values of the standard deviation and skewness coeﬃcient, and
the median excess kurtosis coeﬃcient for the annualized inﬂation rate for the indicated horizons.
The standard deviation is expressed as a percentage. Horizon is expressed in years. The sample
consists of daily observations for the period from October 5, 2009 to January 23, 2012.



                                                                   Median
                                Average            Average         Excess
       Horizon                 Volatility         Skewness        Kurtosis            N


       1                           2.171           −2.376            3.095           572
       2                           2.258           −1.251            8.107           593
       3                           2.226           −1.115           13.390           500
       5                           2.165           −1.480           18.364           577
       7                           2.016           −1.230            9.789           434
       10                          1.831           −1.207            8.263           566
       12                          1.525           −0.913            6.165           531
       15                          1.241           −0.722            3.429           569
       20                          1.076           −0.513            1.873           488
       30                          0.693           −0.160           −0.006           215
                                                               Table 8

Summary Statistics for Deflation Probabilities. This table reports summary statistics for the probability of the average inflation rate
being below zero for the indicated horizons. Horizon is expressed in years. Probabilities are expressed as percentages. The sample consists of
daily observations for the period from October 5, 2009 to January 23, 2012.



                                                  Standard
        Horizon                    Mean           Deviation         Minimum              Median          Maximum                   N


        1                           17.25               8.75              1.88             17.57              44.37              572
        2                           11.44               5.29              2.07             11.33              23.04              593
        3                            4.28               1.94              1.33              3.63               8.89              500
        5                            5.34               1.60              2.67              5.17              11.39              577
        7                            2.93               0.62              1.89              2.80               5.93              434
        10                           3.29               0.77              2.40              2.90               5.86              566
        12                           2.28               0.20              1.95              2.25               3.31              531
        15                           2.97               0.28              2.62              2.93               4.61              569
        20                           2.32               0.12              1.98              2.32               3.31              488
        30                           2.33               0.17              1.85              2.32               3.35              215
                                             Table 9

Summary Statistics for the Pricing of Deflation Tail Risk. This table reports the means
and medians of the ratio of the probability of deflation under the risk-neutral Q measure divided by
the probability of deflation under the actual P measure. Horizon is expressed in years. The sample
consists of daily observations for the period from October 5, 2009 to January 23, 2012.



                                                       Mean                 Median
               Horizon                                 Ratio                 Ratio


               1                                       1.632                  1.345
               2                                       2.163                  1.797
               3                                       5.165                  4.393
               5                                       3.057                  3.068
               7                                       4.477                  4.374
               10                                      3.167                  3.011
               12                                      3.437                  3.360
               15                                      3.089                  3.094
               20                                      4.022                  3.707
               30                                      4.246                  4.257

               All                                     3.321                  3.166
                                                                   Table 10

Results from the Regression of Daily Changes in Deflation Probabilities on Financial Tail Risk Variables. This table reports
the results from the regression of daily changes in the deflation probabilities for the indicated horizon on the daily changes in the following
variables: the flight-to-liquidity spread (the one-year Refcorp-Treasury yield spread), the super senior tranche price (the points-up-front price
for the 10-15 percent CDX IG index tranche), the Libor spread (the one-year Libor-Treasury spread), the five-year swap spread, the VIX index,
the Merrill Lynch MOVE index of implied Treasury volatility, the return on the S&P 500 index, the Baa spread over the five-year Treasury
rate, and the spread for a five-year CDS contract on the U.S. Treasury. Horizon is expressed in years. The t-statistics are based on the
Newey-West estimator of the covariance matrix (five lags). The superscript ∗∗ denotes significance at the five-percent level; the superscript ∗
denotes significance at the ten-percent level. The sample consists of monthly observations for the period from October 2009 to January 2012.



                    Flight to     Super       Libor      Swap                   Trsy     SP 500       Baa        Trsy
   Horizon          Liquidity     Senior     Spread     Spread        VIX        Vol     Return     Spread       CDS             R2       N


   1                   −0.19       1.89∗       2.32∗∗    −1.96∗∗     −1.14     −1.31      −3.45∗∗     1.96∗∗    −1.79∗        0.088     550
   2                   −0.41       2.75∗∗      1.91∗     −1.33       −2.02∗∗    0.03      −3.16∗∗     2.70∗∗    −0.66         0.063     585
   3                   −1.04       0.30        1.40      −0.18       −0.21     −0.69      −0.67      −0.08       1.63         0.018     439
   5                   −0.95       1.55       −0.16       1.82∗      −0.97      0.66       0.10      −1.02       1.05         0.034     563
   7                   −0.49       1.77∗      −1.18       1.76∗      −1.62      1.12      −1.39      −1.03      −0.70         0.091     364
   10                  −0.74       1.28       −0.05       2.33∗∗     −1.04     −0.21      −0.74      −1.01       0.69         0.027     551
   12                  −0.31       0.75        0.32       1.25        0.80     −0.83       1.19      −1.54       1.37         0.015     495
   15                   0.25       1.05        0.26       0.61        0.26     −1.46       1.02      −1.69∗      2.03∗∗       0.024     554
   20                   2.01∗∗    −0.54       −1.35       0.28       −0.69      1.09      −1.06      −1.57       1.47         0.030     439
   30                   0.77      −2.02∗∗     −0.69       3.34∗∗     −1.30     −0.10      −1.65∗     −2.69∗∗     0.55         0.078     203
                                                                Table 11

Results from the Regression of Monthly Changes in Deflation Probabilities on Financial and Macroeconomic Variables. This
table reports the results from the regression of monthly changes in the deflation probabilities for the indicated horizons on the monthly changes
in the following variables: the super senior tranche price (the points-up-front price for the 10-15 percent CDX IG index tranche), the five-year
swap spread, the Baa spread over the five-year Treasury rate, the percentage change in industrial production, the unemployment rate, and the
Michigan consumer confidence index. Horizon is expressed in years. The t-statistics are based on the Newey-West estimator of the covariance
matrix (two lags). The superscript ∗∗ denotes significance at the five-percent level; the superscript ∗ denotes significance at the ten-percent
level. The sample consists of monthly observations for the period from October 2009 to January 2012.



                             Super          Swap            Baa         Indus                         Cons
      Horizon                Senior        Spread        Spread          Prod         Unempl          Conf                  R2         N


      1                       2.24∗∗          1.60         1.84∗         0.76            1.63         0.70                0.540        28
      2                       2.10∗∗          0.90         4.15∗∗        0.65            1.88∗        1.38                0.643        28
      3                       1.21            0.56         1.05          1.22            2.00∗        1.04                0.432        26
      5                      −0.02            1.02         1.20         −0.90           −0.57        −0.95                0.336        28
      7                       1.07            1.49         0.67          0.02            1.10         0.99                0.239        26
      10                     −0.61            1.39         1.76∗         0.64            0.27        −0.47                0.256        28
      12                     −0.71            1.64         2.03∗         0.60            1.32        −1.02                0.423        26
      15                     −0.64            1.20         1.38          0.63            1.95∗        0.88                0.385        28
      20                      1.95∗           1.44        −0.71         −0.10            1.10        −0.06                0.388        26
                                                                 Table 12

Summary Statistics for the Probabilities of Inflationary Scenarios. This table reports summary statistics for the probability of the
average inflation rate being above the indicated thresholds for the respective horizons. Horizon is expressed in years. Probabilities are expressed
as percentages. The sample consists of daily observations for the period from October 5, 2009 to January 23, 2012.



                       Probability Inflation > 4.00           Probability Inflation > 5.00          Probability Inflation > 6.00

    Horizon            Mean        Min.       Max             Mean       Min.        Max            Mean       Min.       Max              N


    1                  10.38       1.75       33.40            4.09       0.48      13.80             1.42      0.47      6.06           572
    2                  14.16       4.36       31.76            5.72       2.19      13.07             1.82      0.77      3.82           593
    3                  24.69      16.23       40.92           10.33       6.49      19.53             2.88      1.62      6.67           500
    5                  17.02       6.95       26.47            6.75       3.07      10.72             1.83      1.01      4.04           577
    7                  26.54      20.81       33.52           10.94       8.36      14.07             2.78      1.95      4.37           434
    10                 25.21      19.36       29.03           10.28       8.16      12.21             2.54      2.01      3.36           566
    12                 30.19      25.13       32.98           12.43      10.13      13.90             2.97      2.36      3.76           531
    15                 24.23      17.11       26.90            9.74       6.86      10.92             2.27      1.80      2.55           569
    20                 29.49      22.38       32.53           12.06       8.91      13.41             2.81      2.08      3.13           488
    30                 29.45      22.79       33.69           12.04       9.10      13.97             2.81      2.12      3.30           215
                                             Table 13

Summary Statistics for the Pricing of Inflation Tail Risk. This table reports the means and
medians of the ratio of the probability of inflation exceeding five percent under the risk-neutral Q
measure divided by the corresponding probability under the actual P measure. Horizon is expressed
in years. The sample consists of daily observations for the period from October 5, 2009 to January
23, 2012.



                                                      Mean                  Median
               Horizon                                Ratio                  Ratio


               1                                        1.386                 1.349
               2                                        1.462                 1.420
               3                                        1.137                 1.239
               5                                        1.741                 1.722
               7                                        1.399                 1.393
               10                                       1.359                 1.377
               12                                       1.362                 1.401
               15                                       1.505                 1.556
               20                                       1.665                 1.700
               30                                       1.758                 1.749

               All                                      1.463                 1.441
