NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PHYSICIAN AGENCY AND COMPETITION:
EVIDENCE FROM A MAJOR CHANGE TO MEDICARE CHEMOTHERAPY REIMBURSEMENT POLICY
Mireille Jacobson
Tom Y. Chang
Joseph P. Newhouse
Craig C. Earle, M.D.
Working Paper 19247
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19247
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2013

Mary Price provided excellent programming to create the original cohort used in this work. We thank
Ernie Berndt, Srikanth Kadiyala, Emmett Keeler, David I. Levine, Tom McGuire, Giuseppe Ragusa,
Heather Royer, James P. Smith, Tim Vogelsang and seminar participants at USC’s Sol Price School
of Public Policy and the NBER Spring Health Care Program meetings for many helpful comments.
Support for this analysis was made possible by grants from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation’s
Changes in Health Care Financing and Organization (HCFO) program and the National Cancer Institute,
1R01CA152043-01. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19247.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Mireille Jacobson, Tom Y. Chang, Joseph P. Newhouse, and Craig C. Earle, M.D.. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Physician Agency and Competition: Evidence from a Major Change to Medicare Chemotherapy
Reimbursement Policy
Mireille Jacobson, Tom Y. Chang, Joseph P. Newhouse, and Craig C. Earle, M.D.
NBER Working Paper No. 19247
July 2013
JEL No. I1,I11
ABSTRACT
We investigate the role of physician agency and competition in determining health care supply and
patient outcomes. A 2005 change to Medicare fees had a large, negative impact on physician profit
margins for providing chemotherapy treatment. In response to these cuts, physicians increased their
provision of chemotherapy and changed the mix of chemotherapy drugs they administered. The increase
in treatment improved patient survival. These changes were larger in states that experienced larger
decreases in physician profit margins. Finally while physician response was larger in more competitive
markets, survival improvements were larger in less competitive markets.
Mireille Jacobson
Paul Merage School of Business
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697-3195
and NBER
jacobson@nber.org
Tom Y. Chang
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
3670 Trousdale Parkway, room 308
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0804
tychang@usc.edu

Joseph P. Newhouse
Division of Health Policy Research and Education
Harvard University
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115-5899
and NBER
newhouse@hcp.med.harvard.edu
Craig C. Earle, M.D.
Cancer Care Ontario and the Ontario Institute for
Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre
2075 Bayview Avenue, G-Wing, Room 106
Toronto, Ontario
Canada, M4N 3M5
craig.earle@ices.on.ca

Understanding how physicians respond to financial incentives is a key health care
policy issue. In the presence of asymmetric information, physicians may distort demand in socially sub-optimal but personally beneficial ways. In the U.S. context,
debate over this issue centers on physician-induced demand (PID) – the provision
of excessive care in response to financial incentives (McGuire (2000); Chandra et al.
(2012)).
As the theoretical literature on PID makes clear, however, the relationship between
administered price changes and the volume of physician services is a priori ambiguous
and depends on the relative strength of the income and substitution e↵ects (McGuire
and Pauly 1991).1 When the substitution e↵ect dominates, physicians reduce the
volume of services in response to a price reduction. When the income e↵ect dominates,
the physician’s supply curve will have a negative slope such that volume increases as
fees fall. The case of extremely large income e↵ects corresponds to a model of “literal
target income,” where changes in administered prices are fully o↵set by changes in
volume (assuming full o↵set is feasible).
The empirical literature supports the importance of physician agency, with the majority of papers finding a negative relationship between changes in fees and the supply
of medical care, i.e. volume o↵sets (Rice and Labelle (1989); Rice (1983); Rice (1984);
Christensen (1992); Yip (1998); Nguyen and Derrick (1997); Grant (2009); Gruber
et al. (1999)).2 Importantly the existing literature has found no direct evidence that
such changes a↵ect patient health, although few studied measure outcomes.3
We contribute to the literature on volume o↵sets in two ways. First, using a
very general theoretical model of physician utility, we show that physician agency
can distort the provision of services away from the fully informed consumer’s optimal
level of care in either direction. That is, physicians may provide excessive care or
may ration care below the optimal amount. The implication of this theoretical point
1
This conclusion from McGuire and Pauly (1991) comes out of a model where physicians maximize
utility that depends positively on net revenue and leisure and negatively on the amount of demand
inducement.
2

Clemens and Gottlieb (2012); Hurley et al. (1990); Hurley and Labelle (1995); Escarce (1993)
are notable exceptions that find a positive relationship between fees and the quantity of health care.
3

Clemens and Gottlieb (2012) is again an exception. Most evidence is indirect, drawn from the
observation, for example, that elective C-sections have more complications than vaginal delivery.

1

is that a fee cut that generates an income e↵ect that dominates the substitution
e↵ect can remedy an underprovision of care. Furthermore, we show that although
the response to a payment change should be smaller in less competitive markets, the
welfare e↵ects will be larger. The intuition is that in more competitive markets, those
patients who need care are more likely to get it and care is at the ’flat of the curve.’
Second, we analyze an important empirical case, a 2005 change to Medicare fees
that likely had a large impact on the income of a particular specialist group, oncologists. Specifically, we study a major reform to Medicare reimbursement policy for
physician-administered (Part B) drugs, primarily injectable and intravenous oncology, rheumatology, urology and infectious disease agents. Unlike orally administered
drugs, i.e. pills, physicians purchase Part B drugs from wholesalers, administer them
in their clinics, and are reimbursed for them directly by payers. The 2005 reform,
which replaced a reimbursement system based on list prices with one based on national
average transaction prices, sought to remedy well known Medicare overpayments for
Part B drugs. For chemotherapy, reimbursements averaged 29% above transaction
prices in 1997 (Office of Inspector General (1997a)) and was 22% above by 2004, even
after an initial fee reduction took e↵ect (Government Accountability Office (2004)).
Beginning in 2005, margins were administratively set at 6% above the national average
transaction price for each drug. Thus, margins fell by nearly a factor of five, although
this reduction was not uniform across drugs. Since chemotherapy accounted for over
three-quarters of oncologist practice revenues in 2005 (Akscin and Barr (2007)), the
drug mark-up accounted for more than half of their reported net income (Butcher
(2008)), and because Medicare is the primary payer for many cancers, the reform
almost assuredly represented a large negative shock to oncologist income.4
Our empirical analysis centers on comparing Medicare beneficiaries diagnosed with
lung cancer in the few months before to the few months after the reform took e↵ect.
After demonstrating that the observable characteristics of lung cancer patients were
smooth across the payment change, we show that those diagnosed just after relative
4
Oncologists maintained that Medicare fees for other services, e.g., evaluation and management
and drug administration, did not cover their expenses. However, GAO has found that these payments
exceed expenses by 4% on average, which is similar to the mark-up received by other specialists
(Government Accountability Office (2001)).

2

to just before the change were about 10% more likely to be treated with chemotherapy within 30 and 90 days of diagnosis. The change lines up with the timing of the
2005 reform and is specific to the physician’s office setting in contrast to the hospital
outpatient setting, where the payment change did not take e↵ect until 2006 Barlas
(2011). Furthermore, we show the mix of drugs used to treat patients changed in ways
predicted by economic theory: drugs that lost the most margin were used less frequently among the chemotherapy-treated population and conversely, expensive drugs
favored by the reform’s 6% margin on all drugs, were used more often than previously.
Further, we find that the treatment changes improved survival: the likelihood
of death at 3, 6, and 9 months from diagnosis declined by 2–3%, suggesting that,
consistent with the clinical literature, lung cancer may be undertreated in the elderly
(Davido↵ et al. (2010); Booth C. M. et al. (2010)). Indeed, despite similar relative
treatment increases, the improvement in survival was 1.5 to 3 times larger in above
vs. below median Medicare age patients, those most likely to be undertreated. We
exploit geographic heterogeneity in treatment responses (Jacobson et al. (2011)) to
show that survival improved more in states with larger treatment increases. We also
exploit pre-reform prescribing patterns to show that both the treatment increase and
survival improvements were larger in areas that experienced a larger decrease in profit
margins. As best as we know, this is among the first evidence that physician agency
can a↵ect health outcomes, not just treatment. Finally, consistent with our model, we
find that, although the treatment change was more muted in less competitive counties
(measured by the HHI or the number of patients per provider), survival improvements
were larger. These results suggest that the competitive environment a↵ects both the
size of physician response and patient welfare. To our knowledge, physician market
power has not been studied in the context of changes in administered prices, perhaps
because it was assumed to not be relevant to administered price regimes.

1

Institutional Background

Although Medicare did not o↵er a drug benefit for oral drugs (pills) until 2006, Medicare Part B, which covers physician services, has from inception covered physicianadministered drugs such as IV chemotherapy, anti-nausea, and pain medicine used in
3

cancer treatment. Rather than writing a prescription for these drugs that the patient
fills at a pharmacy, the physician injects or infuses these drugs in an office or clinic
and then bills Medicare for them.5 Since at least the mid-1990s, it was well understood that Medicare overpaid for many chemotherapy and other Part B drugs (Office
of Inspector General (1997b); Office of Inspector General (1997a)). The Medicare
Prescription Drug, Improvement and Modernization Act (MMA) of 2003 aimed to
resolve the overpayment issue and reduce Medicare spending by redesigning the way
Medicare reimburses physician-administered (Part B) drugs.
Prior to the reform, Medicare reimbursed physicians and outpatient hospital clinics for these drugs as a percentage of the average wholesale price (AWP), a list price,
published in several catalogues, that reflects neither wholesale nor average prices
(Berndt and Newhouse (2012)).6 From 1998 to 2003, reimbursements were 95% of
AWP. To smooth the transition to a new payment system, the MMA reduced reimbursements to 85% of AWP in 2004. In principle manufacturers could have changed
list prices between 2003 and 2004 (or in other years); in practice, such changes were
rare. Most importantly for our purposes, the AWP exceeded physician acquisition
costs for many drugs from 13% to 34% (Government Accountability Office (2004)).
Some agents, such as paclitaxel, a chemotherapy drug commonly used to treat lung,
breast, and ovarian cancer, were reimbursed at prices that vastly exceeded acquisition costs (Government Accountability Office (2004)). The reform replaced the
AWP-based system with a new average sales price (ASP) payment system, whereby
Part B drugs are reimbursed based on the national average of manufacturers’ sales
prices, including rebates, from two quarters prior plus a 6% mark-up.7 In 2005 the
reform a↵ected physician’s offices, the primary setting for chemotherapy treatment,
and in 2006 the outpatient hospital setting, the other main setting for chemotherapy.
5

In contrast, some private insurers deliver the drug to the physician’s office or clinic and just pay
the physician a fee for administration.
6

In the trade, AWP is sometimes referred to as “Ain’t What’s Paid.”

7

The ASP calculation does not take into account 340(B) discounts for Medicaid patients. Since
about 2009 it is believed that hospitals began leveraging these discounts to purchase oncology drugs
for all their patients and thereby increase the mark-ups they receive on oncology drugs administered
to Medicare and commercially insured patients. This is a relatively recent practice that is unlikely
to have occurred during our study period.

4

When this policy took e↵ect on January 1, 2005, the profit margins for many
chemotherapy drugs were reduced substantially. Fees for chemotherapy administration were increased in 2004 but reduced again in 2005, though the reduction did
not fully o↵set the 2004 increase (Government Accountability Office (2004)). Importantly, the administration fee changes were small in dollar terms (on the order of $50
to $100 per session) compared with the 2004 to 2005 drug reimbursement change,
which could total hundreds and even thousands of dollars for a monthly dose of some
commonly infused drugs.8
Two health policy papers have evaluated the claim by community oncologists that
the policy change would make it too expensive to treat Medicare beneficiaries, forcing
them to shift some patients to hospital settings where they would face unnecessary
treatment delays (Community Oncology Alliance (2006)). The papers find to the
contrary; wait times, travel distance and treatment setting (outpatient hospital or
physician office) did not change in response to the payment change (Friedman J.
Y. et al. (2007); Shea et al. (2008)). Neither paper evaluates treatment outcomes.
Moreover, both studies – one, a web-survey of a convenience sample of patients undergoing chemotherapy (Friedman J. Y. et al. (2007)) and the other a 5% sample of
claims from beneficiaries with leukemia, lymphoma or breast, colorectal, lung cancer
receiving chemotherapy – condition on treatment, a potentially important margin of
adjustment.
Indeed, our prior work shows that the likelihood of chemotherapy treatment for
lung cancer patients changed in response to the reform (Jacobson et al. (2010)).
Our findings are consistent with analyses of aggregate chemotherapy billing data by
the Medicare Payment Advisory Committee (MedPAC (2006)). Other work finds
important extensive margin responses. For example, in prostate cancer treatment,
androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT) or medical castration, which was subject to
AWP-reimbursement, declined while surgical castration, which did not face a payment
change, increased (Weight et al. (2007)). Although analysis of ADT suggests that the
decline was largest among those for whom the benefits were unclear (Shainian et al.
(2010)), these welfare implications may not generalize to other cancers.9
8

Many regimens are given in 3-week cycles, meaning patients receive 1.33 treatments per month.

9

Colla et al. (2012) finds that in response to the reform chemotherapy treatment declined in the

5

An obvious question is whether these treatment changes were driven by physicians
or patients; since Medicare beneficiaries face 20% coinsurance for Part B services, a
decline in drug prices could have increased patient demand. In practice, however,
about 90% of beneficiaries have supplemental insurance that pays this coinsurance
(Kaiser Family Foundation (2010)). And anecdotal evidence suggests that oncologists
were less likely to collect the coinsurance from the remaining patients when reimbursements were based on AWP, implying that out-of-pocket spending increased for some
beneficiaries even as average drug costs declined for Medicare (Mullen (2007)). On
balance, any e↵ects from patient demand should be negligible.

2

Health Care Supply

In this section we present a model of physician behavior in markets where physicians
care about both their private utility as well as the welfare of their patients.
Let there be J physicians operating in a market k 2 {1, K} that serves a continuum
of patients of measure one. A physician j 2 {1, J} has local monopoly power over
a fraction ⌘j of patients in market k and can provide each patient a single unit of
service q, which yields patient i a benefit b distributed over ( 1, 1) such that b(q)

is a continuous, decreasing convex function. In addition, the distribution of patients
each physician sees is identical to each other and to the overall distribution of types
in the market.
The physician earns a fixed price p and pays a fixed cost c for each unit of service
provided. Each unit of care requires a unit of physician time such that e(q), the
disutility of physician e↵ort, is an increasing and convex function with e(0) = 0.
Physician utility is assumed to be positive in net income with diminishing marginal
returns. In addition, physicians are assumed to care directly about patient welfare.
Assuming additive separability, the physician utility function can then be written as
U (q) = V (⇡)

e(q) + ↵⌘

Z

q/⌘

b(x)dx,

0

last 14 days of life.

6

(1)

where ⇡ = (p

c)q and ↵ represents the weight physicians place on patient benefit.

Thus, a physician trades o↵ her private utility from income with the disutility from
of e↵ort as well as her concern for patient welfare.
For notational simplicity, we define the profit margin m = (p

c). Then the first

order condition for the physician is given by
mV⇡

eq + ↵b(q/⌘) = 0.

(2)

Note that while concern for patient welfare (↵b(q/⌘)) pushes physicians towards
providing what, from the patient’s perspective, is the optimal level of care q P ,10 in
general physicians may either under or over provide care relative to this optimum.
To determine physician response to profit margin (m) changes, we take the derivative of equation 2 with respect to m. Rearranging, we get the following relationship:
qm =

V⇡ + V⇡⇡ ⇡
.
eqq + ↵⌘ b0

(3)

Note that in general qm can be positive or negative. That is, it cannot be determined ex-ante whether an increase in profitability leads to an increase or decrease in
service provision. This ambiguity of changes in m on the quantity of service provided
is a standard characteristic of PID (see for instance McGuire and Pauly (1991) and
McGuire (2000)), and in the case of a fee cut is driven by the tradeo↵ between decreasing marginal returns (the substitution e↵ect) and the increasing marginal returns to
income (the income e↵ect). So if decreased returns to e↵ort dominates, a cut in margins leads to a reduction in e↵ort (i.e. services provided). But when the income e↵ect
dominates, a decrease in margins can generate a negatively sloped supply curve. In
this case, a fee cut can lead to an increase in physician e↵ort. Thus the change in the
marginal utility of income (i.e. the relative magnitudes of V⇡ and V⇡⇡ ) provides some
guidance as to the sign of the response. When the magnitude of the income e↵ect
V⇡⇡ is small, then the substitution e↵ect dominates and physicians display a positive
elasticity. But when V⇡⇡ is large, it reduces the impact of the substitution e↵ect, and
if large enough, can lead to a negative elasticity of health care. In addition, regardless
10

In the limit ↵ ! 1, q ⇤ ! q P .

7

of the sign of qm , physician response is attenuated by the weight physician’s place on
patient welfare ↵, and in the limit ↵ ! 1, qm ! 0.

As implied by the name, the literature frames physician-induced demand (PID)
as the inducement of excess demand, and not the idea that physicians would “hold

down” demand. But as the FOC in equation 2 makes clear, whether the equilibrium
quantity q ⇤ is above or below the patient bliss point q P is ambiguous: physician selfinterest can distort the provision of services away from q P in either direction. In
principle, though not in practice, PID could be defined as influencing patient demand
away from q P (either through under or over provision). Influencing patient demand
towards q P could be defined as “useful agency.” Importantly, whether changes in
care are helpful or harmful to patient welfare depends not only on the direction of
the change but also the original level of service relative to q P .
While the idea of PID is complex,11 for the purposes of this paper we define it
based on the concept of distortions away from the care that would be demanded by
the mythical, fully informed patient. Specifically we refer to the provision of services
to a patient who receives a non-positive benefit (i.e. b  0) as physician induced
demand (PID). If, on the other hand, the patient would have received a net positive
benefit from a service, we call such a distortion physician rationing (PR).

2.1

Market concentration and physician agency

Proposition 1 For small ↵ ⇡ 0, if there is an internal solution to the FOC in
equation 2, the magnitude of the elasticity of market response to changes in profit
margin will be negatively correlated with market concentration.
Proof. See Appendix.
Proposition 2 For small ↵ ⇡ 0, the magnitude of the change in patient benefit in a
market will be positively correlated with market concentration.
Proof. See Appendix.
11

See McGuire (2000) for a detailed discussion of this issue.

8

2.2

Summary of predictions

In equilibrium, physicians may under or over provide care relative to what would be
demanded if all consumers were perfectly informed (q P ). In response to changes in
profit margins m, the direction of physician response is ambiguous and determined by
the tradeo↵ between increasing marginal returns and a wealth e↵ect. Additionally,
the sign of any change in patient welfare cannot be determined by the sign of the
change in the amount of care provided but depends also on the initial level of care.
In terms of market response to changes in m, the magnitude of the treatment
change (e.g., the share of patients receiving care) is negatively correlated with market concentration. In contrast, changes in average welfare are positively correlated
with market concentration. While the relationship between market concentration and
physician response is driven mostly by the mean physician market share ⌘¯k = J1 ⌃Jj=1 ⌘j
(e.g. the physician to population ratio), the welfare response is driven by both the
mean and distribution of physician market shares ⌘j . The mean physician market
share determines how many additional patients get treated, the distribution of physician market shares determine who gets treated. In short, although the treatment
response to a payment change will be larger in more competitive markets, the welfare
e↵ects will be smaller.

3

Data and Methods

To study the impact of physician profit margin changes on health care supply and
patient well being, we analyze Medicare claims for beneficiaries who had at least
one claim in a physician’s office or an outpatient-hospital setting with a lung cancer
diagnosis (ICD-9 162.0-162.9) between 2003 and 2005 (N=878,923). For these beneficiaries, we have all claims for physicians’ services, hospital outpatient care, durable
medical equipment, short-stay, long-stay and skilled nursing facility services, and hospice care for 2002 to 2006.12 These claims capture only Medicare fee-for-service, the
care a↵ected by the reform. Although in principle care in Medicare Advantage (MA)
12

These data come from the Medicare Carrier, Outpatient, Durable Medical Equipment (DME),
Medicare Provider Analysis and Review (MedPAR) and Hospice files.

9

plans, Medicare-approved private health plans that are paid a lump-sub on a riskadjusted per-enrollee per month basis, could serve as a control, there is no comparable
source of treatment data for this population.13 Dates of death for our analytic cohort
(defined below) are from the Medicare Vital Status File through 2012.
A claim with a lung cancer diagnosis may not indicate cancer but could capture
a miscoded diagnosis code or evaluation for a suspected cancer that is subsequently
deemed benign. To isolate lung cancer cases, we restrict to Medicare beneficiaries
with two or more non-institutional (i.e., physician, durable medical equipment or
outpatient hospital) claims separated by at least 28 days but no more than 365 days
or one institutional (short-stay, long-stay, skilled nursing facility or hospice) claim
with a lung cancer diagnosis. This is a common approach to defining cancer in claims
data that has been shown to have high sensitivity (i.e., identify a high proportion
of actual cancer cases) and very high specificity (i.e., exclude beneficiaries without
cancer) in Medicare claims data (e.g., see Warren et al. (1999); Ramsey et al. (2009);
Vera-Llonch et al. (2011)). To isolate lung cancer treatments, we exclude beneficiaries
with more than one confirmed primary cancer. We use the first claim with a lung
cancer diagnosis to date the onset of disease. To ensure new diagnoses and thus
treatment trajectories that were not influenced by prior clinical decisions, we restrict
to beneficiaries with no cancer-related claims history in the 12 prior months.14
We eliminate the roughly 5% of beneficiaries in the fee-for-service claims who were
enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan at some point during the study period and thus
lacked complete treatment and billing information. The lung cancer cohort included
216,119 beneficiaries enrolled in Medicare Parts A and B who were diagnosed between
January 2003 and November 2005. We further restrict the primary analytic cohort
to the 132,768 beneficiaries diagnosed between February 2004 and November 2005 to
capture 11 months of data on either side of the payment change.
Chemotherapy treatment is identified using relevant diagnosis and billing codes
13

Although national MA data are unavailable, we had access to Kaiser Northern California’s MA
data to use as a control. However, the FFS treatment response to the MMA in Northern California
was small, making this comparison less relevant. We do not have a good explanation for geographic
variation in the response, although such variation is widespread in Medicare (Skinner (2012)).
14

Patients for whom we could not verify a 12-month cancer free period are eliminated.

10

(Warren et al. (2002)).15 Beneficiary date of death is drawn from the Medicare Vital
Status File, which we had updated through June 30, 2012.

3.1

Analytic Approach

To assess whether the January 2005 payment change plausibly a↵ected treatment and
health outcomes, we take both a graphical and regression-based approach that initially
analyzes patients by month of diagnosis relative to the reform. To begin, we plot
estimated month-relative-to-reform (January 2005) fixed e↵ects along with 95 percent
confidence intervals from a regression of the likelihood a newly diagnosed lung cancer
patient received any chemotherapy treatment, chemotherapy treatment by setting
(e.g., physician’s office), treatment with specific agents conditional on receiving any
chemotherapy, all within 30 days of diagnosis. We choose a 30-day treatment period
because it enables us to relatively cleanly define treatment (diagnosed post-reform)
and control (diagnosed pre-reform) cohorts.16 The month-relative-to-reform fixed
e↵ects are simply the set of coefficients from the following regression:
Yism =

0

+ Xism + µs +

m m⇤

+ ✏ism ,

(4)

where Yism is the treatment or survival outcome of individual i residing in state s
and diagnosed in month m, Xism are a set of patient characteristics including gender,
race/ethnicity (7 categories), patient age and its square, pre-cancer comorbidities, as
measured by the Deyo-Charlson score (Deyo et al. (1992); Charlson et al. (1987)),
an indicator for metastatic disease at diagnosis, defined as 30 days from the date of
diagnosis17 ; µs are state fixed e↵ects, m m⇤ are month-relative-to-reform fixed e↵ects
15

We use ICD-9-CM procedure code 99.25 or diagnosis codes V58.1, V66.2 or V67.2, diagnosisrelated group code 410, or HCPC codes 96400-96549, J9000-J9999 or Q0083 through Q0085, C8953C8955 (2006 only), G0345-G0362 and revenue center codes 0331, 0332 and 0335.
16

Longer treatment windows capture cohorts diagnosed in the pre-reform period but receiving
care in the post-reform period. We show results for these groups in sensitivity checks.
17

To confirm metastasis we require one institutional claim or two or more non-institutional claims
separated by at least 28 and no more than 365 days with a secondary cancer diagnosis [ICD-9 codes:
197-199]. Although this algorithm is likely to miss many beneficiaries with secondary cancer, it does
have reasonable specificity (Earle et al. (2002)). Results are not sensitive to excluding this measure.

11

(e.g. mx

m⇤ =

1 in December 2004 and +1 in February 2005) with January 2005
is an error term. Plotting these month fixed e↵ects helps verify that

omitted, and ✏ism
the time-series patterns are consistent with a causal impact of the reform. In addition,
we use these plots to guide the specification of models estimating the magnitude of
the reform’s impact. We focus on a window of 11 months prior to and 11 months

post reform, which was chosen to balance the number of pre-reform months with the
limited post-reform data available to us, although using all 24 months of pre-reform
data yields similar results.18 We show results for shorter windows - 9 months on either
side of the reform - to hone in on the policy change.
We use the same basic regression framework and visual approach to analyze both
the characteristics of the cohorts diagnosed before and after January 2005 and the
likelihood of death within 3, 6, 9, or 12 months of diagnosis. The goal in analyzing
characteristics is to establish that individuals diagnosed just before relative to just
after the payment change are similar on observable dimensions, a key identifying
assumption for our analysis. For the survival analysis, we separately obtained dates
of death from administrative records through June 30, 2012 to minimize any right
truncation bias. Because of the low rate of lung cancer survival, this follow-up period
captures almost 90% of deaths in both cohorts..
Consistent with the plots, we model the e↵ect of the January 2005 switch to
ASP-based payments using week rather than month of diagnosis as follows:
Ȳt =

0

+

1

⇤ post +

2

⇤ (t

t⇤ ) +

3

⇤ (t

t⇤ ) ⇤ post + X̄t + ✏ct ,

(5)

where Ȳt is an outcome such as the mean rate of chemotherapy treatment for
beneficiaries diagnosed in week t, post is an indicator equal to 1 after the payment
change and 0 otherwise, (t t⇤ ) is a linear function of time relative to the reform, t⇤ ,
that controls for smooth trends in outcomes around the time of the payment change
and that we allow to di↵er on either side of the payment change. These regressions
control for the share of patients by week that were male, the share by race/ethnicity,
the median age and median age squared, the mean Deyo-Charlson score, and the
18

In principle we have 12 months of post-reform data but the cohort counts show a sharp drop o↵
in December, suggesting the data were incomplete.

12

share with metastatic disease. We computed Newey-West standard errors, which
allow for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation in the error of an unknown form up
to a lag of 52 weeks (Newey and West (1987)). We allowed for this long a lag to
account for correlation of annual events that a↵ect treatment, such as the Christmas
holidays. However, inference is not meaningfully a↵ected by alternative lag structures.
In sensitivity checks, we estimate regressions that include month-relative to January
2005 trends or that omit these trends but include calendar month fixed e↵ects to
control for cyclicality in treatment timing.

4
4.1

Results
Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 shows demographic characteristics for our analytic sample overall and by
diagnosis before versus after January 2005. As mentioned above, we focus on the
11 months before and after the payment change – from February 2004 to November 2005. Median age at diagnosis was 74 years. Just over half the patients were
male, 88% were white, and 9% were black. Patients had an average Deyo-Charlson
comorbidity score of 1.08, meaning one non-cancer comorbidity in the year leading
up to diagnosis, and almost 29% had metastatic disease documented in claims within
1 month of diagnosis.19 While the Charlson score and the proportion male are statistically di↵erent for the pre and post-reform cohorts, neither di↵erence (0.02 more
comorbidities or 0.4% fewer males) is meaningful in magnitude. There were no other
di↵erences in observable demographic characteristics.
We formally test the stability of patient characteristics, since our research design
assumes newly diagnosed patients are similar just before and after ASP implementation, by estimating variants of equation (1) with these characteristics as dependent
variables. The coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals for the month relative to reform fixed e↵ects are shown in Figure 1a-e. With the possible exception
of the comorbidity score, which is noisy, these characteristics (e.g., share metastatic,
19

We use a 1-month period to define metastasis since our models capture monthly treatment.
Given this relatively short period, this measure should yield conservative estimates of metastasis.

13

white, male and log age) are smooth across the reform (time 0). The estimated
discontinuities in these variables on January 2005 are in Appendix Table 1. As expected, the estimates tend to be small and indistinguishable from zero. When the
estimates are distinguishable from zero (specifically, log age and the share of patients
of other/unknown race), they are modest in size. To the extent that the gap in age
is real, it should bias us against finding improvements in survival. On balance we
interpret the results in Figure 1 and Appendix Table 1, as evidence that a key identifying assumption of the empirical approach – the stability of the population of newly
diagnosed lung cancer patients across the reform – is satisfied.
Table 1 and Figure 2 provide evidence that the reform had bite by showing payment changes for several drugs commonly used to treat lung cancer. Payment rates
declined after the reform for carboplatin, paclitaxel, and etoposide. The changes
were most striking for carboplatin and paclitaxel; reimbursement rates for a standard
monthly dose declined from over $2,270 to $225 for paclitaxel and from $1,845 to
$930 for carboplatin. As shown in Figure 2, the changes in quarterly carboplatin and
paclitaxel reimbursements occurred around the time the new payment system took
e↵ect (time 0)). The large discrepancy between payment rates and acquisition costs
for these drugs was identified as early as 1997. In 2001, the General Accounting Office
(now the Government Accountability Office) reported widely available discounts of
about 20% below AWP for both drugs (Government Accountability Office (2001)); a
later analysis showed that 2004 paclitaxel reimbursements were six times higher than
cost (Government Accountability Office (2004)). Payments were relatively flat for
docetaxel, a high-priced drug at about $2,500 per standardized monthly dose, and
gemcitabine at $1,300 per monthly dose, indicating the reform di↵erentially a↵ected
drugs, depending on the pre-reform mark-up.
A complication in the payment change is that carboplatin went o↵ patent in
October 2004, the quarter before ASP implementation. Because of the lag in Average
Sales Price determination – quarterly reimbursements are based on wholesale prices
two quarters prior – carboplatin likely maintained a margin above the 6% mandated
by the legislation for at least the first quarter of 2005.20 To ensure that our results for
20
Upon its patent expiration in October 2004, at least 5 generic manufacturers had secured FDA
approval to enter the carboplatin market. The gradual decline in carboplatin’s payment rates in

14

chemotherapy are not driven entirely by carboplatin, where the observed changes in
reimbursement combine the e↵ects of the patent expiration and the payment reform,
we examine both chemotherapy use of regimens with and without carboplatin.
Table 2 provides summary statistics for our key outcomes of interest. These
descriptive statistics indicate significant changes in the likelihood of chemotherapy
treatment after the payment change. Whereas 16.6% of patients diagnosed in the 11
months prior to the reform received chemotherapy within 1 month of diagnosis, those
diagnosed in the 11 months after were almost 2 percentage points (or 11% o↵ the prereform base) more likely to receive chemotherapy within 1 month of diagnosis. Nearly
three-quarters of this increase (1.5 percentage points) was among patients receiving
regimens without carboplatin. In addition, this increase came almost entirely from
treatment in physician offices rather than outpatient hospital clinics, which were not
subject to a reimbursement change in 2005. The relative increase in chemotherapy
treatment was similar within 3 months (a 3.2 percentage point increase o↵ a prereform base of 26%) as was the composition of the changes across settings.
Conditional on treatment within 1 month of diagnosis, the percent of patients
receiving carboplatin declined from almost 56 to 53, and the percent receiving paclitaxel declined from 30 to 26, consistent with the large payment decline for these
drugs. Since carboplatin and paclitaxel are often given in combination and because
carboplatin likely retained a margin above 6% for a few quarters, some of carboplatin’s decline may be driven by the sharp reduction in paclitaxel’s profitability.
Trends in use of etoposide were comparatively flat while use of docetaxel, a relatively
high-priced alternative to palitaxel, increased 1.3 percentage points o↵ a base of just
8.3%, possibly reflecting the incentive from the uniform 6% margin on all drugs.21
Among cohorts diagnosed in the 11 months prior to January 2005, 33.7% died
within 3, 46.7% within 6, 52.4% within 9, and 61.6% within 12 months of diagnosis.
Figure 2, which may capture switching to generics, suggests it maintained a margin above 6% for
longer than the first quarter of 2005.
21

Although the rise in prescription drug shortages began around 2005, the rise
in oncology drug shortages occurred much later, around 2008.
For details see
http://healtha↵airs.org/blog/2012/05/29/prescription-drug-shortages-reconsidering-the-role-ofmedicare-payment-policies/ Paclitaxel and Carboplatin were not in short supply until 2009 and
2010, respectively. Thus, shortages are unlikely to explain the drug switching observed here.

15

For cohorts diagnosed in the 11 months after January 2005, the proportion dying was
1-2 percentage points (3%-4%) lower in each of these four periods.

4.2

Changes in Treatment

Figures 3a-3d show the regression-adjusted mean changes in the likelihood that patients received any chemotherapy, any chemotherapy regimen excluding carboplatin,
any chemotherapy in a physician’s office, and any chemotherapy in an outpatient
clinic by month of diagnosis relative to January 2005. With the exception of the
outpatient clinic setting (Fig 3d), which did not face a payment change until 2006, all
the panels show a discrete increase in the likelihood of chemotherapy treatment for
lung cancer patients diagnosed just after relative to just before January 2005 (time
0). The timing of the increase and that most of the increase came in physician offices,
the only setting subject to the payment reform in 2005, suggest that the switch to the
ASP system drove the change. The similarity when carboplatin is excluded confirms
that the increase in treatment is not driven by the sustained margin on this drug.
Table 3 shows estimates of the discontinuous jump in chemotherapy treatment for
those diagnosed just after January 2005. The estimates are based on the specification
in (5) using 11 months (col 2) or 9 months (col 3) on either side of the payment change.
The overall change in the likelihood of chemotherapy treatment rates within 1 month
of diagnosis is about 1.5 percentage points. O↵ a base of 16.6% of those diagnosed
prior to the reform who receive treatment within one month, this represents about a
9% increase in the likelihood of treatment in response to the reform. When we look
at treatment that does not include carboplatin, the relative increase is much larger
– almost 20% (1.2 to 1.4 percentage points o↵ a base of 7.3%). This implies that
the overall change in chemotherapy treatment is not driven solely by the interaction
between the payment reform and the patent expiration of carboplatin. In addition,
the increase is driven by treatment in the physician’s office setting, which was the
setting subject to the reform. As shown in Appendix Table 2, the results are largely
insensitive to the use of relative month trends (cols 1 and 2) or calendar month fixed
e↵ects (cols 3 and 4) instead of relative-week trends. The main di↵erence is that the
e↵ects are slightly larger when calendar month instead of relative-week or relative-

16

month trends are used, suggesting a 10% increase in treatment and an increase in
treatment in the outpatient setting. However, the patterns in Figure 3 suggest that
the specification with relative trends that are allowed to vary on either side of January
1, 2005 more appropriately captures treatment trendfs before and after the reform.
Figures 4a-4d and Table 4 consider chemotherapy service counts within thirty
days of diagnosis. Changes in service counts, unlike the likelihood of treatment,
combine both extensive and intensive margin changes. The trends in Figure 4 are
analogous to those in Figure 3 but appear larger, at least outside of the outpatient
clinic setting, where the change was essentially zero. As shown in Table 4, the mean
number of chemotherapy services within 30 days was 1 prior to the reform; among
those diagnosed after the reform, services increased almost 33%. Given the 9% increase in treatment on the extensive margin, these results suggest that chemotherapy
services likely increased even among those who would have received treatment absent
the reform. As on the extensive margin, the increase occurs in patients receiving
treatments that do not contain carboplatin, implying that the interaction of the reform and carboplatin’s patent expiration cannot fully explain our main treatment
result. The increase in physician offices accounts for almost all (about 94% or 0.916
*0.347/0.339) of the change. Services increase somewhat in the outpatient clinic
setting as well, about 1.3%, although this change is modest compared to the 34%
increase in physician offices. As with the likelihood of any treatment, models with
relative-month trends or calendar month fixed e↵ects (Appendix Table 3) yield results
that are similar, albeit larger without linear time trends.
As a more formal test of a structural break in treatment, we adopt an approach
from the time series literature. Specifically, we employ a Quandt likelihood ratio
(QLR) test (Quandt 1960) that tests for structural breaks at all possible dates between
two time periods, ⌧0 to ⌧1 . Operationally, the test is a modified set of sequential
Chow tests based on equation (2), where a post-period is defined at each cuto↵ date
⌧ between the two time periods, i.e. post = 1(t ⌧ ⇤ ) is an indicator equal to zero for
all weeks before ⌧ ⇤ and one for all subsequent weeks; this indicator is also interacted
with the linear trend. Under the null hypothesis of no break, the coefficients on post⌧
and post⌧ ⇤ (t t⇤ ) are jointly equal to zero. The QLR statistic, also known as the
sub-Wald statistic, is just the maximal of the F-statistics testing the null of no break
17

at all dates between ⌧0 to ⌧1 ; it provides an estimate of the structural break date. To
implement this test, we adopt the conventional choice for ⌧0 to ⌧1 of 0.15T and 0.85T
or -34 weeks and + 33 weeks relative to the first week, i.e. week 0, in January 2005.
In this way, the post period cuto↵ or break date, ⌧ ⇤ , is sequentially defined over the
inner 70% of the 96 week sample. We take the critical values of the QLR statistic for
the endpoints 0.15T and 0.85T and two restrictions tested from Stock and Watson
(2003), which are adapted from Andrews (2003).22
Appendix Figure 1 plots the F-statistics testing for a break at -34 to +33 weeks
relative to week 0. We show these tests for the following 30-day treatment series:
any chemotherapy, chemotherapy that does not include carboplatin, chemotherapy
in a physician’s office, and chemotherapy in an outpatient hospital setting. Based on
the QLR statistic, a structural break in treatment occurs two weeks prior to January
2005 for any chemotherapy treatment (App Fig 1a) and treatment in a physician’s
office (App Fig 1c). Excluding Carboplatin, the break occurs 1 week prior to ASP
implementation (App Fig 1b). The pre-implementation break is not worrisome given
that we are analyzing 30-day treatment and patients diagnosed at the end of 2004
likely began treatment after the new payment system took e↵ect on January 1 rather
than during the Christmas holidays. In all three cases, the maximal F-statistic exceeds
the 1% critical value of 7.78, implying we can reject the null of no structural break
in treatment. In contrast, we cannot reject the null at any point for chemotherapy
treatment in the outpatient setting (Appendix Fig 1d).
The results above indicate that chemotherapy treatment within 30 days of diagnosis increased on both the extensive and intensive margins. As another check, we
analyze the likelihood of treatment within 90 days of diagnosis. The 90 day period
captures those diagnosed just before the reform but who were a↵ected by the reform
if they survived past implementation. Consistent with this, Appendix Figures 2a2c show a gradual increase in 90-day treatment for those cohorts diagnosed within
three to one months prior to the reform. The change flattens out for those cohorts
diagnosed just after the reform, suggesting that the earlier increase captures partial
exposure to the reform. As indicated in Appendix Table 4, once this gradual rise is
22
The QLR critical values are larger than the critical value for a single F-test; they are e↵ectively
corrected for multiple-hypothesis testing induced by searching over many F-tests.

18

accounted for (via an indicator for diagnosis in the quarter prior to the reform), the
increase in 90-day treatment for those fully exposed to the reform, i.e. diagnosed in
2005, was about 11% overall and almost 15% in the physician’s office-setting. In a
parallel fashion, Figure 3d shows that cohorts diagnosed in the last few months of
2005 experienced an increase in the likelihood of treatment in the outpatient setting,
after the payment reform took e↵ect in this setting. In other words, the treatment
response to the payment change in the physician’s setting is not unique.
We next analyze changes in the types of drugs used. Figure 5a-5e show regressionadjusted changes in the probability that chemotherapy-treated patients received carboplatin, paclitaxel, docetaxel, etoposide and gemcitabine, the most commonly prescribed agents in our sample. Patients treated within 30 days of diagnosis were less
likely to receive a mix of agents that included carboplatin or paclitaxel. The timing
of the decline in use of these agents preceded the introduction of the average sales
price payment system by about 3 months, which may reflect the quarterly purchasing
common among oncologists.23 Given the publicity the reform received among oncologists, physicians likely understood that the reduction in payment rates for these drugs
would be large and were reducing their inventory of these agents in advance. Failure
to do so could have meant a considerable loss of income. In contrast to the pattern
for paclitaxel, the probability of receiving docetaxel, an expensive agent implicitly
favored by the 6% margin on all drugs, increased modestly for patients receiving
chemotherapy treatment. The increase preceded the reform by about a month, further evidence that physicians were rearranging their stock of agents in anticipation
of the ASP system. The likelihood of receiving etoposide or gemcitabine and other
less commonly used agents did not change systematically.
Table 5 quantifies the changes illustrated in Figure 5 but first considers the unconditional change in use within 30 days. Whereas carboplatin use did not change
unconditionally, use of paclitaxel, the drug that lost the most margin, declined by
about 10% and docetaxel and etoposide increased by about 30% and 9%, respectively.
These changes combine the change in chemotherapy treatment and the choice of drugs.
Conditional on any treatment, physicians were less likely to give patients carboplatin
23

We thank the community oncologist from Phoenix, AZ who first relayed this fact to us.

19

or paclitaxel after ASP implementation. The probability that chemotherapy-treated
patients received carboplatin declined 3 to 4 percentage points. The decline in the
probability of receiving paclitaxel was more dramatic – about 6 to 7 percentage points
or over 20%. Some physicians switched patients to docetaxel, an expensive agent favored by the 6% uniform mark-up. The docetaxel increase was about 2.6 percentage
points or over 30% o↵ a base of 8.3%. Accounting for pre-reform switching increases
the magnitude of these changes (see Appendix Table 5). The change for etoposide
is small, indistinguishable from zero and changes sign as the study window narrows.
The estimate for gemcitabine is larger in relative terms (0.7 percentage points o↵ a
base of 10%), but based on Fig 5e may not reflect a policy-related change.

4.3

Changes in Survival

The results above demonstrate that chemotherapy treatment increased on both the
intensive and likely extensive margin for lung cancer patients diagnosed just after
relative to just before the reform. The mix of drugs administered also changed, with
drugs that lost the most margin used less and expensive agents favored by the 6%
average margin used slightly more. Although cancer treatment is constantly evolving,
no other change in management was so suddenly implemented that could account for
changes of the magnitude we observed. Evidence for adjuvant chemotherapy was
emerging in the mid-2000s but the timing of major presentations and publications on
this subject are unlikely to have caused a sudden change in practice in January 2005
(Le Chevalier (2003); Arriagada R. et al. (2004); Winton T. et al. (2004); Winton
T. et al. (2005); Struass G. et al. (2004); Struass G. et al. (2006); Struass G. et al.
(2008); Douillard J. et al. (2005); Douillard J. et al. (2006)). Furthermore, evidence
on uptake of adjuvant chemotherapy suggests utilization was stable across the policy
change (Booth C. M. et al. (2010)), and our own data (not shown) show no increase in
the use of cisplatin-based regimens, as would be expected if the di↵usion of adjuvant
chemotherapy were to explain our findings.
The treatment changes shown here beg the question of what happened to patient
welfare. We have one important measure of welfare – survival – that we exploit
to address this issue. A limitation is that we cannot measure changes in quality

20

of life, which could deteriorate in response to harsh chemotherapy treatment (e.g.,
see Ballatori et al. (2007)). Despite the common view that chemotherapy decreases
quality of life, however, a recent randomized trial in patients with advanced lung
cancer found that, compared to placebo, chemotherapy not only increased survival
but also improved some measures of quality of life (e.g., the worsening of pain and
coughing up of blood) while leaving others unchanged (Belani C. P. et al. (2012)).
To begin, Appendix Figure 3 plots the unadjusted Kaplan-Meier survival curves
for patients diagnosed in the 11 months before and after the reform. The median survival based on the Kaplan-Meier estimator was 261 and 284 days for those diagnosed
in the pre and post-reform periods, respectively, a di↵erence of about 3 weeks. To
assess whether this di↵erence is related to the reform, Figures 6a-6d plot by month of
diagnosis relative to the January 2005 reform, the regression-adjusted mean changes
in the proportion of patients dying within 3, 6, 9 and 12 months of diagnosis. These
figures show a discrete decline in the likelihood of dying within each interval for the
post-reform cohorts. The decline, at least for death within 3 and 9 months, corresponds closely to the timing of ASP implementation and the previously demonstrated
increase in chemotherapy utilization.
Table 6 quantifies the mortality changes in Figure 6a-6d. Among patients diagnosed just after relative to just before the reform, the likelihood of death within 3
months of diagnosis decreased about 1 percentage point or about 4% relative to the
base of 33.9% dying in this interval. The results are virtually identical using patients
diagnosed 9 months before to 9 months after the payment change (col 3) or using
alternative specifications (see Appendix Table 6). At 6 months from diagnosis, the
reduction in the likelihood of death is about 1.6 percentage points or 3.4% relative
to the base rate of 46.9%. At 9 months the e↵ect is 1.1 percentage points, a relative
decrease in mortality of about 2.1%. At 1 year, the survival e↵ects seem to disappear. While the reductions in the likelihood of death at 3 to 9 months post-diagnosis
are seemingly small, these estimates average survival across all patients, whereas the
reform increased chemotherapy in less than 2 out of every 100 patients. The reform
also changed the intensity of treatment and the drugs used, making it difficult to
isolate the specific source of the survival change.
We take several approaches to testing whether the survival changes were caused
21

by the reform rather than capturing patterns unaccounted for by the week trends in
the two periods. First, we take advantage of substantial geographic variation in the
response to the payment change. Jacobson et al. (2011) shows that after the reform
the likelihood of chemotherapy treatment was virtually unchanged in some states
(e.g., CA and MO), increased more than twice the national average in others (e.g.,
MN, CT) and even declined in a few states (e.g., OK, ID). If reform-related changes
in chemotherapy improved survival, these e↵ects should be concentrated in the most
responsive states. To this end, Figures 7a-7d show the likelihood of death within
3-12 months of diagnosis for patients in states with above median 30-day treatment
response; Figures 7e-7h show analogous plots for states with below median response.
As expected, declines in the likelihood of death at 3, 6, and 9 months are greater
for the above-median response states than for the whole sample. The below-median
response states show no clear break in survival for cohorts diagnosed just after relative
to just before the reform. Table 7 confirms the visual patterns: while the likelihood
of death declined by 3%-6% within 3-6 months of diagnosis and 1.5%-3% within 9
months of diagnosis in the most responsive states survival declined, if anything, in the
least responsive states. More plausibly, based on the plots and the estimated changes
within 6-9 months of diagnosis, survival in the last responsive states was una↵ected
by the reform. These results support the view that the increase in chemotherapy
generated by the reform improved survival.
As a second approach, we stratify states based on whether they had above or below
median pre-reform rates of paclitaxel use in chemotherapy-treated patients. Heavy
reliance on paclitaxel pre-reform meant that the payment change had larger bite,
i.e. doctors in these areas had greater exposure to the payment cuts. As shown in
Appendix Figures 4a-4c, 30-day chemotherapy treatment changes are quite sharp in
states with high pre-reform reliance on paclitaxel. Treatment also increased in states
with lower pre-reform paclitaxel use (see Appendix Figures 4e-4g) but the plots are
considerably noisier and the estimates in Appendix Table 7 are more sensitive to
the study window. Moving from the 11 to 9-month study window, the estimated
treatment changes increase slightly in above-median states but fall by as much as
65% in below-median states. Based on 9-months on either side of the reform, 30-day
chemotherapy treatment rates increased by 2.4 percentage points or 14% in states with
22

above-median pre-reform use of paclitaxel but only 3% in states with below median
use. These treatment di↵erences, which are statistically significant using the 9-month
study window, translate into survival di↵erences, as shown in Appendix Figures 5a-5h
and the second panel of Appendix Table 7. The decline in the likelihood of dying
within 3-9 months is sharper in the above versus below median pre-reform paclitaxel
use states. While the likelihood of death declined by 4%-6% within 3-9 months
in the above-median states, the estimated changes for the below-median states are
small, often positive and, with the exception of one estimate at 1-year out, never
statistically distinguishable from zero. Across states with high and low pre-reform
rates of paclitaxel use, the di↵erences in survival are statistically distinguishable at 3
months when using the short study window and at 6 and 9 months for both the long
and short study windows.24
As a final approach to assessing the credibility of the survival e↵ects, we split
the sample by above and below median age patients. Since older patients are more
likely to be undertreated (Davido↵ et al. (2010); Booth C. M. et al. (2010)), they
should benefit most from increased treatment. Appendix Figures 6a-6d and 6e-6h
show changes in the likelihood of chemotherapy use for above and below-median
age patients, respectively. Appendix Figures 7a-7d and 7e-7h show changes in the
likelihood of death, for the same groups. Although treatment increases sharply for
both groups (in all but the outpatient setting), a sharp reform-related decline in
survival is clearest for the above-median age patients. Table 8 and Appendix Table 8
show the estimated changes in treatment and survival. Above-median age patients,
who are almost half as likely to receive chemotherapy within 30 days, experience
about an 8% increase in the likelihood of treatment; the increase is about 11% for the
younger group. In contrast, the survival e↵ects are substantially larger for the older
group. The likelihood of death within 3 months declines by about 0.6 percentage
points for the younger group but 2.3 percentage points for the older group. At 6 and
9 months of diagnosis, the declines are 2.6-3.2 percentage points in the older group
and 1.2-2 percentage points in the younger group. Relative to baseline survival, these
changes represent a decrease in the likelihood of death within 3-9 months of 5-6%
24
Using the long study window, the 6-month di↵erence is only distinguishable at the 10% level.
All other 6-9 month di↵erences are significant well below the 5% level.

23

for the older group compared to 2-4% for the younger group. The di↵erences in
treatment and survival at 3-9 months across above and below median age patients
are statistically distinguishable.25

4.4

Market Concentration Interactions

To test whether the changes in treatment and survival are related to market concentration, we compare the response of low concentration (i.e. more competitive) and
high concentration (i.e. less competitive) markets in response to the policy change.
Our primary measure of market concentration is a county level Herfindahl-Hirshman
Index (HHI) for chemotherapy providers. Specifically we calculate the HHI as the sum
of each provider’s share of a county’s chemotherapy administrations pre-reform.26 Following the US DOJ Horizontal Merger Guidelines (2010), we define a county as high
concentration if the HHI is greater than 0.25. As an alternative measure, we calculate the pre-reform ratio of patients to providers in a county, and define a country as
highly concentrated if a county’s ratio is above the median value for all counties.
We show the change in chemotherapy treatment for patients in high concentration
counties in Figures 8a-8d and for medium/low concentration counties in Figures 8e8h. On the extensive margin, we see no compelling evidence of a change in treatment
probabilities in high concentration markets but a sharp increase right after the reform
in less concentrated counties. When we consider service counts, a mix of intensive and
extensive margin changes, we see a small increase in treatment in more concentrated
markets (Appendix Figures 8a -8d) and again a sharper and larger increase in less
concentrated markets. These visual patterns are confirmed in Table 9 and Appendix
Table 9, where estimates of the change in chemotherapy treatment on the extensive
margin are small and generally insignificant in high concentration counties but imply
about a 12% increase in 30-day treatment probabilities in less concentrated counties.
Chemotherapy service counts increase by about 20% in more concentrated markets
25

Using the 9-month window, the chemotherapy di↵erence is only distinguishable at the 10% level.

26

Since we have any billing-provider, irrespective of whether she is an oncologist, we restrict
to those who billed for chemotherapy for any patient in the unrestricted sample of over 800,000
beneficiaries. Because we have only a patient’s county, providers can contribute to the HHI of
multiple counties.

24

– indicating some change in treatment patterns in response to the reform – but by
almost 40% in less concentrated markets. The di↵erences in treatment rates and
service counts are in all cases statistically di↵erent across market types.
In contrast to the more modest treatment changes in highly concentrated markets,
Figures 9a-9h show that the likelihood of death within 3-9 months declined in both
market types. The last panel of Table 9 shows that survival improved more in both
absolute and relative terms in more concentrated markets. The likelihood of death
within 6 months declines by about 2.2 percentage points or 4.6% in highly concentrated counties but 1.4 or 3% in less concentrated counties. This survival di↵erence
across markets is statistically significant, although only using the long study window.
At 9 months the di↵erence is starker, with a 1.9 percentage point or 3.5% decline in
highly concentrated markets and a 0.007 percentage point or 1.3% decline in competitive markets. This di↵erence is statistically significant for both study windows.
These patterns are broadly confirmed using a less formal definition of concentration – above vs. below median patients per providers. The likelihood of chemotherapy
treatment increases modestly in counties with above median patients per providers
(Appendix Figures 9a-9d) but more starkly in more competitive counties with below
median patients per providers (Appendix Figures 9e-9h). As shown in Appendix Table 10, the extensive margin (any treatment) increases are about 1.3 percentage points
or 7.5% in more concentrated (i.e., above median patients per provider) counties and
1.7% or 11% in less concentrated (i.e., below median patients per provider) counties,
although these di↵erences are not statistically distinguisable. The same basic pattern
is found for service counts (Appendix Figures 10a-10h). The comparison for survival
is flipped. The visual patterns show a break in survival in more concentrated counties
(Appendix Figures 11a-11d) but seem to reflect cyclical changes in less concentrated
counties (Appendix Figures 11e-11h). The last panel of Appendix Table 10 confirms
these assessments, though the estimates are somewhat unstable across study windows. Using the narrow 9-month window, which more credibly isolates the impact
of the reform, the likelihood of death within 6 months of diagnosis declines by 2.2
percentage points or 4.6% in more concentrated counties but by an insignificant 0.3
percentage points or 0.6% in less concentrated counties. At 9 months from diagnosis,
the likelihood of death declines by 5% in more concentrated markets but is positive
25

(but insignificant) in less concentrated markets. These di↵erences in survival at 3, 6
and 9 months are statistically distinguishable across market types.

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we find that among U.S. oncologists, physician agency is an important
determinant of both the supply of heath care and patient outcomes. We find that a
decrease in profit margins led to an increases in care, as measured by chemotherapy
rates on both the intensive and extensive margins. The decrease in profit margins
for chemotherapy drugs also led physicians to change the mix of drugs they use,
shifting away from drugs that were more profitable before the reform to those that
were relatively more profitable post-reform.
More surprisingly, given the widespread assumption that the key issue with physician agency is the inducement of unwarranted demand, we find that the increases in
chemotherapy care improved survival. Cross-sectionally, the treatment and survival
increases were larger in areas where the pre-reform mix of chemotherapy drugs meant
a larger average decrease in margins from the reform. These results indicate that, in
the presence of significant physician agency e↵ects, an over-generous payment scheme
can lead to physician rationing - i.e. the underprovision of care - and that better
aligning payments to costs can lead to better outcomes at lower total cost. While
we discuss under-provision in terms of rationing, the results are also consistent with
doctors mistakenly believing they were providing the optimal amount of care prior
to the reform and thus intentionally providing excess care post-reform. This alternative scenario is consistent with our model, but, if true, suggests an additional policy
lever. Specifically e↵orts to promote evidence-based medicine might have improved
outcomes even in the absence of payment reform, although without the cost-savings
generated by the reform.
We also investigated the interaction between physician agency and the competitive
environment. Consistent with our model, we found that increases in care were larger
in more competitive (i.e. less concentrated) markets, while increases in survival rates
were higher in less competitive (i.e. more concentrated) markets. This result suggest
that while competition among providers can lead to less rationing of care, it also
26

makes them more responsive to financial incentives.

References
Akscin, J. and T. R. Barr (2007). Key practice indicators in office-based oncology
practices: 2007 report on 2006 data. Journal of Oncology Practice 3 (4), 200–203.
Andrews, D. W. (2003). Tests for parameter instability and structural change with
unknown change point: A corrigendum. Econometrica 71 (1), 395–397.
Arriagada R. et al. (2004). Cisplatin-based adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with
completely resected non-small-cell lung cancer. New England Journal of Medicine,
351–360.
Ballatori, E., F. Roila, B. Ruggeri, M. Betti, S. sarti, G. Soru, G. Cruciani, M. D.
Maio, B. Andrea, and R. Deuson (2007). The impact of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting on health-related quality of life. Supportive Care in Cancer 15 (2),
179–185.
Barlas, S. (2011). Hospital outpatient pharmacies win higher medicare payments for
2011. Pharmacy and Therapeutics 36 (1), 11–21.
Belani C. P. et al. (2012). Quality of life in patients with advanced non-small-cell
lung cancer given maintenance treatment with pemetrexed versus placebo (h3emc-jmen): Results from a randomised, double-blind, phase 3 study. The Lancet
Oncology 13 (3), 292–299.
Berndt, E. and J. P. Newhouse (2012). Pricing and reimbursement in u.s. pharmaceutical markets. In P. M. Danzon and S. Nicholson (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook
of the Economics of the Biopharmaceutical Industry, pp. 201–265. Oxford UP.
Booth C. M. et al. (2010). Adoption of adjuvant chemotherapy for non-small-cell lung
cancer: a population-based outcomes study. Journal of Clinical Oncology 28 (21),
3472–3478.
Butcher, L. (2008, April). Insurers and oncologists forge a better cancer drug policy.
Managed Care Magazine.
Chandra, A., D. M. Cutler, and Z. Song (2012). Who ordered that? the economics
of treatment choices in medical care. In P. P. Barros, T. G. McGuire, and M. V.
Pauly (Eds.), Handbook of Health Economics. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

27

Charlson, M. E., P. Pompei, K. L. Ales, and C. R. MacKenzie (1987). A new method
of classifying prognostic comorbidity in longitudinal studies: Development and
validation. Journal of Chronic Disease 40 (5), 373–383.
Christensen, S. (1992). Volume responses to exogenous changes in medicare’s payment
policies. Health Services Research 27 (1), 65–79.
Clemens, J. and J. Gottlieb (2012). Do physicians’ financial incentives a↵ect medical
treatment and patient health? SIEPR Discussion Paper 11-017.
Colla, C. H., N. E. Morden, J. S. Skinner, J. R. Hoverman, and E. Meara (2012).
Impact of payment reform on chemotherapy at the end of life. Journal of Oncology
Practice 8 (3s), e6s–e13s.
Community Oncology Alliance (2006). Community oncology alliance gathers in washington to address crisis in access to cancer care. Medical News Today.
Davido↵, A. J., M. Tang, B. Seal, and M. J. Edelman (2010). Chemotherapy and survival benefit in elderly patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. Journal
of Clinical Oncology 28, 2191–2197.
Deyo, R. A., D. C. Cherkin, and M. A. Ciol (1992). Adapting a clinical comorbidity index for use with icd-9 cm administrative databases. Journal of Clinical
Epidemiology 45 (6), 613–619.
Douillard J. et al. (2005). Anita: Phase iii adjuvant vinorelbine (n) and cisplatin (p)
versus observation (obs) in completely resected (stage i-iii) non-small-cell lung cancer (nsclc) patients (pts): Final results after 70-month median follow-up. Journal
of Clinical Oncology 23(16S June 1 Supplement)(Abstr. 7013).
Douillard J. et al. (2006). Adjuvant vinorelbine plus cisplatin versus observation in
patients with completely resected stage ib-iiia non-small-cell lung cancer (anita): a
randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncology 7 (9), 719–727.
Earle, C. C., A. B. Nattinger, and A. L. Potosky (2002). Identifying cancer relapse
using seer-medicare data. Medical Care 40 (8 Supplemental), IV: 75–81.
Encaoua, D. and A. Jacquemin (1980). Degree of monopoly, indices of concentration
and threat of entry. Internation Economic Review 21 (1), 87–105.
Escarce, J. (1993). Medicare patients’ use of overpriced procedures before and after the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1987. American Journal of Public
Health 83 (3), 346–355.
28

Friedman J. Y. et al. (2007). The medicare modernization act and reimbursement
for outpatient chemotherapy: do patients perceive changes in access to care? Cancer 110 (10), 2304–2312.
Government Accountability Office (2001). Medicare physician fee schedule: Practice
payments to oncologists indicate need for overall refinements. GAO-02-53 .
Government Accountability Office (2004). Medicare chemotherapy payments: new
drug and administration fees are closer to providers’ costs. GAO-05-142R.
Grant, D. (2009). Physician financial incentives and cesarean delivery: New conclusions from the healthcare cost and utilization project. Journal of Health Economics 28 (1), 244–250.
Gruber, J., J. Kim, and D. Mayzlin (1999). Physician fees and procedure intensity:
the case of cesarean delivery. Journal of Health Economics 18 (4), 473–490.
Hurley, J. and R. Labelle (1995). Relative fees and the utilization of physician’s
services in canada. Health Economics 4, 419–438.
Hurley, J., R. Labelle, and T. Rice (1990). The relationship between physician fees
and the utilization of medical services in ontario. Advances in Health Economics
and Health Services Research 11, 49–78.
Jacobson, M., C. C. Earle, and J. P. Newhouse (2010). How medicare’s payment cuts
for cancer chemotherapy drugs changed patterns of treatment. Health A↵airs 29,
1391–1399.
Jacobson, M., C. C. Earle, and J. P. Newhouse (2011). Geographic variation in physicians’ response to a reimbursement change. New England Journal of Medicine 365,
2049–2052.
Kaiser Family Foundation (2010). Kaiser family foundation medicare chartbook.
Le Chevalier, T. (2003). Results of the randomized international adjuvant lung cancer
trial (ialt): cisplatin-based chemotherapy (ct) vs no ct in 1867 patients (pts) with
resected non-small cell lung cancer (nsclc). Proceedings of the American Society of
Clinical Oncology 22 (Abstr 6).
McGuire, T. G. (2000). Physician agency. In A. J. Culyer and J. P. Newhouse (Eds.),
Handbook of Health Economics, pp. 462–217. North-Holland.
McGuire, T. G. and M. V. Pauly (1991). Physician response to fee changes with
multiple payers. Journal of Health Economics 10 (4), 385–410.
29

MedPAC (2006). Report to the congress: e↵ects of medicare payment changes on
oncology services.
Mullen, P. (2007, June). The arrival of average sales price. Biotechnology Healthcare,
48–53.
Newey, W. and K. West (1987). A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroscedastic and
autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 55, 703–708.
Nguyen, N. X. and F. W. Derrick (1997). Physician behavioral response to a medicare
price reduction. Health Services Research 3, 283–298.
Office of Inspector General (1997a, December). Department of health and human
services. excessive medicare payment for prescription drugs, no. oei-03-97-00290.
Office of Inspector General (1997b, December). Department of health and human
services. excessive medicare payment for prescription drugs, no. oei-03-97-00290.
Ramsey, S. D., J. F. Scoggins, D. K. Blough, C. L. McDermott, and C. M. Reyes
(2009). Sensitivity of administrative claims to identify incident cases of lung cancer:
a comparison of 3 health plans. Journal of Managed Care Pharmacy 15 (8), 659–
668.
Rice, T. (1983). The impact of changing medicare reimbursement rates on physicianinduced demand. Medical Care 21, 803–815.
Rice, T. (1984). Physician-induced demand for medical care: New evidence from the
medicare program. Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research 5,
129–160.
Rice, T. and R. Labelle (1989). Do physicians induce demand for medical services?
Journal of Health Politics Policy Law 14, 587–600.
Shainian, V. B., Y. Kuo, and S. Gilbert (2010). Reimbursement policy and androgendeprivation therapy for prostate cancer. New England Journal of Medicine 363,
1822–1832.
Shea, A. M., L. H. Curtis, B. G. Hammill, L. D. DiMartino, A. P. Abernethy, and
K. A. Schulman (2008). Association between the medicare modernization act of
2003 and patient wait times and travel distance for chemotherapy. JAMA 300 (2),
189–196.

30

Skinner, J. (2012). Causes and consequences of regional variations in health care.
In P. P. Barros, T. G. McGuire, and M. V. Pauly (Eds.), Handbook of Health
Economics, Volume 2. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson (2003). Introduction to Econometrics. Pearson
Education, Inc.
Struass G. et al. (2004, July). Randomized clinical trial of adjuvant chemotherapy
with paclitaxel and carboplatin following resection in stage ib non-small cell lung
cancer (nsclc): Report of cancer and leukemia group b (calgb) protocol 9633. Journal of Clinical Oncology 22 (14S).
Struass G. et al. (2006, June). Adjuvant chemotherapy in stage ib non-small cell
lung cancer (nsclc): Update of cancer and leukemia group b (calgb) protocol 9633.
Journal of Clinical Oncology 24 (18S).
Struass G. et al. (2008). Adjuvant paclitaxel plus carboplatin compared with observation in stage ib non-small-cell lung cancer: Calgb 9633. Journal of Clinical
Oncology 26 (31), 5043–5051.
Vera-Llonch, M., D. Weycker, and A. Glass (2011). Healthcare cost in patients with
metastatic lung cancer receiving chemotherapy. BMC Health Services Research 11,
305.
Warren, J. L., E. Feuer, A. L. Potosky, G. F. riley, and C. F. Lynch (1999). Use of
medicare hospital and physician data to assess breast cancer incidence. Medical
Care 37 (5), 445–456.
Warren, J. L., L. C. Harlan, A. Fahey, B. A. Virnig, J. L. Freeman, C. N. Klabunde,
G. S. Cooper, and K. B. Knoft (2002). Utility of the seer-medicare data to identify
chemotherapy use. Medical Care 40 Supplemental, IV:55–61.
Weight, C. J., E. J. Klein, and J. S. Jones (2007). Androgen deprivation falls as orchiectomy rates rise after changes in reimbursement in the u.s. medicare population.
Cancer 110, 2304–2312.
Winton T. et al. (2004, July). A prospective randomised trial of adjuvant vinorelbine
(vin) and cisplatin (cis) in completely resected stage 1b and ii non small cell lung
cancer (nsclc) intergroup jbr.10. Journal of Clinical Oncology 22 (14S).
Winton T. et al. (2005). Vinorelbine plus cisplatin vs. observation in resected nonsmall-cell lung cancer. New England Journal of Medicine 352 (25), 2589–2597.

31

Yip, W. C. (1998). Physician response to medicare fee reductions: Changes in the
volume of coronary artery bypass graft (cabg) surgeries in the medicare and private
sectors. Journal of Health Economics 17, 675–699.

32

Change in Observables by Month of Diagnosis
Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
Fig 1b. Comorbidity Score

Fig 1c. Share White

.05
0
-.05

-12 -9

-3

0

3

6

9

12

Fig 1e. Log Age Diagnosed

0

.05

.1

Fig 1d. Share Male

-6

-.05

Difference Relative to January 2005

.1

Fig 1a. Share Metastatic

-12 -9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12 -9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

Month Relative to Jan 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference

Lower Bound 95% CI

Upper Bound 95% CI
Graphs by characteristic

Nominal Reimbursement Per Monthly Dose
0
1000
2000
3000

Figure 2. Change in Nominal Quarterly Chemotherapy
Payments Rates for Select Drugs Relative to January 2005

-12

-8

-4
0
4
Quarter Relative to January 2005

8

Carboplatin

Paclitaxel

Docetaxel

Etoposide

Gemcitabine HCL

12

Change in the Share Given Chemotherapy by Month of Diagnosis
Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
Fig 3b. Excluding Carboplatin

Fig 3c. Physician's Office

Fig 3d. Outpatient

-.04 -.02

0

.02 .04

-.04 -.02

0

.02 .04

Fig 3a. All Settings

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

Month Relative to January 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference

Lower Bound 95% CI

Upper Bound 95% CI

Graphs by setting

Percent Change in Chemotherapy Service Count by Month of Diagnosis
Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
Fig 4b. Excluding Carboplatin

Fig 4c. Physician's Office

Fig 4d. Outpatient

-.2

-.1

0

.1

-.2

-.1

0

.1

Fig 4a. All Settings

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

Month Relative to January 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference
Upper Bound 95% CI

Graphs by setting

Lower Bound 95% CI

0

3

6

9

12

Change in the Use of Specific Agents by Month of Diagnosis
Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
Fig 5b. Paclitaxel

Fig 5c. Docetaxel

-.1

-.05

0

.05

.1

.15

Fig 5a. Carboplatin

-12 -9

-3

0

3

6

9

12

Fig 5e. Gemcitabine HCl

-.1

-.05

0

.05

.1

.15

Fig 5d. Etoposide

-6

-12 -9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12 -9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

Month Relative to January 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference

Lower Bound 95% CI

Upper Bound 95% CI

Graphs by Type

Change in the Proportion Dying by Month of Diagnosis
Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
Fig 6b. Death Within 6 Months

Fig 6c. Death Within 9 Months

Fig 6d. Death Within 12 Months

-.06 -.03

0

.03 .06

-.06 -.03

0

.03 .06

Fig 6a. Death Within 3 Months

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

Month Relative to Jan 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference
Upper Bound 95% CI
Graphs by period

Lower Bound 95% CI

6

9

12

Change in Share Dying by Month of Diagnosis in Most Responsive States
Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
Fig 7b. Death Within 6 Months

Fig 7c. Death Within 9 Months

Fig 7d. Death Within 12 Months

-.06 -.03

0

.03 .06

-.06 -.03

0

.03 .06

Fig 7a. Death Within 3 Months

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

Month Relative to Jan 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference

Lower Bound 95% CI

Upper Bound 95% CI
Graphs by period

Change in Share Dying by Month of Diagnosis in Least Responsive States
Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
Fig 7f. Death Within 6 Months

Fig 7g. Death Within 9 Months

Fig 7h. Death Within 12 Months

-.06 -.03

0

.03 .06

-.06 -.03

0

.03 .06

Fig 7e. Death Within 3 Months

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

Month Relative to Jan 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference
Upper Bound 95% CI
Graphs by period

Lower Bound 95% CI

6

9

12

Change in Share Given Chemotherapy in High Concentration Counties
Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
Fig 8b. Excluding Carboplatin

Fig 8c. Physician's Office

Fig 8d. Outpatient

-.05

0

.05

.1

-.05

0

.05

.1

Fig 8a. All Settings

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

Month Relative to January 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference

Lower Bound 95% CI

Upper Bound 95% CI

Graphs by setting

Change in Share Given Chemotherapy in Low Concentration Counties
Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
Fig 8f. Excluding Carboplatin

Fig 8g. Physician's Office

Fig 8h. Outpatient

-.04 -.02

0

.02 .04

-.04 -.02

0

.02 .04

Fig 8e. All Settings

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

Month Relative to January 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference
Upper Bound 95% CI

Graphs by setting

Lower Bound 95% CI

0

3

6

9

12

Change in Share Dying in High Concentration Counties
Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
Fig 9c. Death Within 9 Months

Fig 9d. Death Within 12 Months

Fig b. Death Within 6 Months

-.1

-.05

0

.05

-.1

-.05

0

.05

Fig 9a. Death Within 3 Months

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

Month Relative to Jan 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference

Lower Bound 95% CI

Upper Bound 95% CI
Graphs by period

Change in Share Dying in Low Concentration Counties
Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
Fig 9f. Death Within 6 Months

Fig 9g. Death Within 9 Months

Fig 9h. Death Within 12 Months

-.06 -.03

0

.03 .06

-.06 -.03

0

.03 .06

Fig 9e. Death Within 3 Months

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

Month Relative to Jan 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference
Upper Bound 95% CI
Graphs by period

Lower Bound 95% CI

6

9

12

Table 1. Sample Characteristics overall and in the11 Months Pre versus Post Jan 2005 Reform*
Overall
N=132,768

Pre
N=66,501

Post
N=66,267

74.0 (8.35)

74.0 (8.32)

74.1 (8.38)

0.513

0.516

0.510

White

0.877

0.876

0.877

African-American

0.089

0.090

0.088

Asian

0.0108

0.0105

0.011

Other/Unknown

0.0091

0.0087

0.0095

Hispanic

0.0102

0.0104

0.0099

Native American

0.0039

0.0038

0.0039

1.07 (1.30)

1.06 (1.30)

1.08 (1.31)

0.289

0.289

0.289

Age at Diagnosis – mean (sd)
Share Male
Distribution by Race/ethnicity

Deyo-Charlson Score – mean (sd)
Metastasis within 1 month

Quarterly Reimbursement Rates Per Standard Monthly Dose ($)
carboplatin

1540 (153)

1845 (29)

930 (261)

paclitaxel

1590 (294)

2272 (70.9)

225 (9.28)

docetaxel

2657 (58.4)

2732 (74.8)

2506 (6.87)

etoposide

77.6 (27.8)

111(36.8)

11.4(0.369)

gemcitabine

1311 (13.5)

1313 (20.6)

1305 (1.71)

* The pre-period is Feb-Dec 2004 and the post-period is Jan-Nov 2005. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Percentages may
not sum to one due to rounding. Reimbursement rates are from the CMS website. The sample includes Medicare beneficiaries
diagnosed with  lung  cancer  from  Feb  2004  to  Nov  2005.  Chemotherapy  “excluding  carboplatin”  means  the  share  receiving  
chemotherapy but not carboplatin. The Deyo-Charlson score is a comorbidity index measured in the year prior to a cancer
diagnosis.

Table 2. Summary Outcomes Overall and in the 11 Months Pre versus Post Reform*
Overall
Pre
Post
N=132,768
N=66,501
N=66,267
Share of Patients Receiving Chemotherapy Within …
1 month
0.175

0.166

0.185

1 month, excluding carboplatin

0.080

0.073

0.087

1 month, physician’s office

0.140

0.130

0.149

1 month, outpatient hospital

0.0285

0.0295

0.0275

3 months

0.279

0.263

0.295

3 months, excluding carboplatin

0.103

0.093

0.113

3 months, physician’s office

0.228

0.213

0.244

3 months, outpatient hospital

0.067

0.065

0.069

Chemotherapy Drugs Conditional on Treatment within 1 month
Share carboplatin

0.543

0.557

0.531

Share paclitaxel

0.285

0.315

0.257

Share docetaxel

0.090

0.083

0.096

Share etoposide

0.208

0.211

0.206

Share gemcitabine

0.092

0.100

0.085

3 months

0.333

0.337

0.328

6 months

0.458

0.467

0.449

9 months

0.516

0.525

0.507

12 months

0.605

0.616

0.594

0.110

0.100

0.120

Patients Dying Within…

No date of death

* The pre-period is Feb-Dec 2004 and the post-period is Jan-Nov 2005. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Percentages may
not sum to one due to rounding. Reimbursement rates are from the CMS website. The sample includes Medicare beneficiaries
diagnosed with lung cancer from Feb 2004 to Nov 2005. Chemotherapy “excluding carboplatin” means the share receiving
chemotherapy but not carboplatin. The Deyo-Charlson score is a comorbidity index measured in the year prior to a cancer
diagnosis.

!

Table 3. Changes in Chemotherapy Treatment After the January 2005 Payment Change
Before
Feb/04
Apr/04
Jan/05
–Nov/05
–Sept/05
Share  of  Patients  Receiving  Chemotherapy  Treatment…
within 1 month of Diagnosis

0.166

0.015
(0.003)

0.014
(0.002)

within 1 month, excluding carboplatin

0.073

0.014
(0.002)

0.012
(0.002)

within 1 month, in  a  Physician’s  Office  

0.130

0.016
(0.003)

0.016
(0.003)

within 1 month, in an outpatient hospital clinic

0.028

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

48

96

72

Number of Observations (weeks)

Notes: Means in column 1 are for the dependent variable prior to ASP implementation, Feb-Dec 2004. Columns 2 - 3 present
estimates from separate time-series regressions. Estimates are the coefficients on an indicator for the pot-reform/ASP payment
period. Regressions control for mean patient characteristics (see Table 1) and relative-week trends that are allowed to differ on
either side of the payment change. Excluding carboplatin”  means  the  share  of  patients  treated  with  chemotherapy and without
carboplatin. Newey-West standard errors allowing for autocorrelation up to 52-week lags are given in parentheses.

Table 4. Change in Chemotherapy Service Counts after the January 2005 Payment Change
Before
Feb/04
Apr/04
Jan/05
–Nov/05
–Sept/05
Percent Change in  Monthly  Chemotherapy  Service…
within 1 month of Diagnosis

1.00

0.339
(0.046)

0331
(0.044)

within 1 month, excluding carboplatin

0.304

0.203
(0.025)

0.209
(0.022)

within 1 month, in  a  Physician’s  Office  

0.916

0.347
(0.047)

0.340
(0.046)

within 1 month, in an outpatient hospital clinic

0.087

0.013
(0.003)

0.013
(0.004)

48

96

72

Number of Observations (weeks)
Notes: See notes to Table 3.

Table 5. Changes in Types of Chemotherapy Drugs
Before
Jan/05

Feb/04
–Nov/05

Apr/04
–Sept/05

carboplatin

0.092

0.001
(0.001)

0.0017
(0.0017)

paclitaxel

0.053

-0.0053
(0.0014)

-0.0051
(0.002)

docetaxel

0.014

0.0043
(0.002)

0.0037
(0.002)

etoposide

0.035

0.0032
(0.001)

0.0044
(0.001)

gemcitabine

0.017

0.0002
(0.0008)

0.001
(0.0007)

carboplatin

0.557

-0.039
(0.008)

-0.026
(0.008)

paclitaxel

0.300

-0.074
(0.007)

-0.061
(0.006)

docetaxel

0.083

0.026
(0.004)

0.026
(0.006)

etoposide

0.210

-0.005
(0.010)

0.004
(0.007)

gemcitabine

0.100

0.007
(0.003)

0.008
(0.004)

48

96

72

Share  of  Patients  Receiving…  

Share of Chemotherapy-treated  Patients  Receiving…  

Number of Observations (weeks)
Notes: See notes to Table 3

Table 6. Change in the Share of Patients Dying within 3, 6, 9 or 12 Months of Diagnosis
Mean
Feb/04
Apr/04
Before Jan/05
–Nov/05
–Sept/05
Share  of  Patients  Dying  within…
3 months of diagnosis

0.339

-0.009
(0.004)

-0.010
(0.005)

6 months of diagnosis

0.469

-0.016
(0.002)

-0.016
(0.004)

9 months of diagnosis

0.527

-0.011
(0.002)

-0.011
(0.004)

1 year of diagnosis

0. 619

-0.001
(0.003)

-0.001
(0.003)

48

96

72

Number of Observations (weeks)
Notes: see notes to Tables 3.

Table 7. Change in the Share of Patients Dying: Above vs. Below Median Responsive States
Above Median Response
Mean

Feb/04
–Nov/05

Below Median Response

Apr/04
–Sept/05

Mean

Feb/04
–Nov/05

Apr/04
–Sept/05

Change  in  Share  Dying  within…
3 months

0.338

-0.011
(0.006)

-0.023
(0.003)

0.340

0.014
(0.002)

0.014
(0.003)

6 months

0.466

-0.015
(0.004)

-0.023
(0.004)

0.473

0.003
(0.005)

0.006
(0.007)

9 months

0.524

-0.008
(0.004)

-0.017
(0.004)

0.531

-0.0001
(0.006)

0.003
(0.007)

1 year

0. 615

-0.0001
(0.003)

-0.007
(0.004)

0.623

0.009
(0.007)

0.007
(0.008)

48

96

72

48

96

72

Obs (weeks)

Notes: Means in column 1 and 4 are for the dependent variable for states with above or below median changes in
chemotherapy treatment in the period prior to the reform. See notes to Tables 3 for other details.

Table 8: Change in Treatment and Survival: Above vs. Below Median Age Patients
Above Median Age Patients
Mean

Feb/04
Apr/04
–Nov/05 –Sept/05

Below Median Age Patients
Mean

Feb/04
Apr/04
–Nov/05 –Sept/05

Share  of  Patients  Receiving  Chemotherapy  Treatment  within…
0.119

0.014
(0.002)

0.014
(0.003)

0.210

0.024
(0.003)

0.020
(.003)

3 months of diagnosis

0.397

-0.023
(0.006)

-0.024
(0.005)

0.285

-0.0059
(0.0035)

-0.0063
(0.0036)

6 months of diagnosis

0.530

-0.029
(0.004)

-0.032
(0.005)

0.411

-0.015
(0.002)

-0.020
(0.0023)

9 months of diagnosis

0.588

-0.026
(0.003)

-0.031
(0.004)

0.470

-0.012
(0.003)

-0.017
(0.003)

1 year of diagnosis

0. 675

-0.015
(0.002)

-0.018
(0.003)

0.567

0.002
(0.003)

-0.006
(0.0038)

Observations (weeks)

48

96

72

48

96

72

1 month of diagnosis
Share of Patients Dying  Within…

Notes: Means in column 1 and 4 are for the dependent variable for patients above versus below the median age
patient at diagnosis in the period prior to the reform, Feb-Nov 2004. See notes to Table 3 for other details.

Table 9. Change in Treatment and Survival: Counties with a High vs. Low Concentration of
Providers Administering Chemotherapy Treatment
High Concentration Counties

Low Concentration Counties

Mean

Mean
Pre-Jan

Feb/04
Apr/04
–Nov/05 –Sept/05

Feb/04
Apr/04
–Nov/05 –Sept/05

Chemotherapy Treatment within 1 month…
Share Receiving Any

0.169

Percent Change in Services

0.973

-0.0004
(0.005)
0.203
(0.045)

0.001
(0.007)
0.185
(0.045)

0.165
1.01

0.020
(0.002)
0.389
(0.031)

0.019
(0.003)
0390
(0.030)

Share  Dying  Within…
3 months of diagnosis

0.351

-0.017
(0.006)

-0.010
(0.004)

0.337

-0.006
(0.0036)

-0.008
(0.004)

6 months of diagnosis

0.482

-0.028
(0.008)

-0.022
(0.006)

0.466

-0.012
(0.002)

-0.014
(0.002)

9 months of diagnosis

0.541

-0.027
(0.008)

-0.019
(0.005)

0.524

-0.004
(0.003)

-0.007
(0.002)

1 year of diagnosis

0. 635

-0.008
(0.008)

0.0003
(0.006)

0.616

0.006
(0.005)

0.0001
(0.002)

Observations (weeks)

48

96

72

48

96

72

Notes: Means in column 1 and 3 are for the dependent variable for patients in counties with low vs. high
concentration in the period prior to the reform, Feb-Nov 2004. The mean for service counts is without logs. High
concentration is defined as an HHI greater than 0.25. See notes to Table 3 for other details.

Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1
j
Proof. Let sjm = qm
/⌘j the change in the share of patients treated by physician j in

response to a change in m. Then for ↵ ⇡ 0, equation 3 can be rewritten as
V⇡ + V⇡⇡ ⇡
.
sjm ⇠
=
⌘j eqq

(6)

Denote the inverse of the change in the share of patients treated as h(⌘j ) = || s1j || =
m
eqq
||.
The
market
level
measure
of
h
is
then
given
by
the
weighed
⌘j  where  ⌘ || V⇡ +V
⇡⇡ ⇡
averages of the individual h(⌘j ):
Hm = ⌃Jj=1 ⌘j h(⌘j ).

(7)

An internal solution for equation 2 implies that  is invariant with respect to ⌘,
so Hm can be rewritten as
Hm = ⌃Jj=1 ⌘j ⌘j  = ⌃Jj=1 ⌘j ⌘j .

(8)

So the change in the share of patients treated in a market m is equivalent to a scaled
version of the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI). And since HHI belongs to the
family of “allowable” concentration indices as described in Encaoua and Jacquemin
(1980), Hm will be positively correlated to any other such allowable concentration
index (e.g. the entropy index).
Then since Hm is positively correlated to market concentration, its inverse (i.e.
the magnitude of the change in the share of patients treated in a market) will be
negatively correlated with measures of market concentration.

Proof of Proposition 2
Proof. The change in patient welfare generated by a physician j’s response to a
j
. The magnitude of the market level
change in profit margin m is given by b(q j /⌘j )qm
j
||, which
change in patient welfare can thus be written as Wm = ⌃Jj=1 ⌘j ||b(q j /⌘j )qm

for small ↵ ⇡ 0 can be rewritten as
⇡⇡ ⇡
||.
Wm ⇠
= ⌃Jj=1 ⌘j h(⌘j ) where h(⌘j ) = b(q j /⌘j )|| V⇡ +V
eqq

(9)

Encaoua and Jacquemin (1980) show that for a concentration index defined as
⇣(↵1 ,0 , ↵N ) = ⌃N
i=1 ↵i g(↵i ),

(10)

where the ↵i s represents the market share of firm i, if g(↵) is any arbitrary function
that is weakly increasing in ↵, if ↵g(↵) is convex in ↵, it belongs to a family of
“allowable” concentration indices. Such allowable indices (which include HHI and
the entropy index) satisfies the following properties: it is invariant to permutations of
market shares between firms i, it satisfies the Lorentz condition that a mean pressuring
spread increases ", and the concentration of symmetric firms decreases in the number
of firms. Thus it is sufficient to show that h(⌘) is increasing in ⌘ and ⌘h(⌘) is convex
in ⌘ to prove the proposition.
To show h(⌘) is weakly increasing in ⌘, we take the derivative of h with respect
to ⌘ and get
dh
=
d⌘

q j 0 V⇡ + V⇡⇡ ⇡
b ||
||.
⌘2
eqq

(11)

Then since b0  0, equation 11 is positive and h(⌘) is weakly increasing in ⌘.
To show convexity of ⌘h(⌘) we take the second derivative and get (after some
simplification) the expression
(q j )2 00 V⇡ + V⇡⇡ ⇡
d2 (⌘h)
=
b ||
||.
d⌘ 2
⌘3
eqq
Since by assumption b00 > 0,

d2 (⌘h)
d⌘ 2

(12)

> 0.

Two-Payer Model
In this section, we analyze the model presented in the paper, with the addition of a
second, private payer. Here we show that the two propositions in the paper hold in a

two payer model, and generate two addition predictions regarding how the share for
public vs. private patients a↵ects physician response to a fee cut.
In addition the assumptions of the main model, we incorporate a second payer for
medical care. In each market k, for patients of type b, a fraction

are public (i.e.

Medicare) patients while the remaining (1
) are private payers. Notationally, we
denote the number of public patients treated by q and the number of private payer
patients treated by q 0 . Similarly the profit margin for treating each type of patient is
denoted by m and m0 respectively.
Physician utility function can then be written as
U (q) = V (⇡)

0

e(q + q ) + ↵⌘[

Z

q/⌘

b(x)dx + (1
0

)

Z

q 0 /⌘(1

)

b(x)dx], (13)
0

where ⇡ = mq + m0 q 0 and ↵ represents the weight physicians place on patient benefit.
The FOCs for utility maximization are then given by
mV⇡
m0 V⇡

eq + ↵b(q/⌘ ) = 0

eq + ↵b(q 0 /⌘(1

)) = 0.

(14)
(15)

As before concern for patient welfare (↵b) pushes physicians towards providing
what, from the patient’s perspective, is the optimal level of care q P , but in general
physicians may either under or over provide care relative to this optimum: in the
limit ↵ ! 1, q ⇤ ! q P .
To determine physician response in q to a change in profit margin m, we take
the derivative of equation 14 with respect to m. Rearranging, we get the following
relationship:
qm =

0
(V⇡⇡ mm0
V⇡ + V⇡⇡ ⇡ + qm
eqq + ⌘↵ bq

eqq )

(16)

As before qm can be positive or negative. That is, it cannot be determined ex-ante
whether an increase in profitability leads to an increase or decrease in provision of
the service experiencing a price cut. But now qm is driven by the tradeo↵ between
decreasing marginal returns (the substitution e↵ect) and the increasing marginal returns to income (the income e↵ect), as well as “cross-service e↵ects” (i.e. changes in

the marginal cost of e↵ort of q due to changes in q 0 ).
0
⇡ 0, equation 16 is identical to equation 3, with
Note that in the case where qm

⌘ , the Medicare market share, taking taking the place of overall market share ⌘.
This is the case described in McGuire and Pauly (1991): “When income e↵ects are
absent and either the marginal utility of leisure is unchanged... we get a surprising

conclusing: there will be no e↵ects” on the quantity of service provided to the private
payer in response to a change in public payer margins. In such a case the ”bite of
a price cut will decline with market share”. That is doctors in markets with higher
share of Medicare patients will be more a↵ected by the price cut than those in low
Medicare patient share markets.
In this case, in addition to proposition 1 and 2, and we get the following corollaries:
k
is increasing in .
Corollary 3 If Proposition 3 holds, Hm

Proof. Since

d⌘
d

=

d
d

= 0,

k
dHm
d

= ⌃Jj=1 ⌘j ⌘j > 0

Corollary 4 If Proposition 4 holds, Wmk is increasing in .
Proof.

k
dWm
d k

= ⌃Jj=1 (

qj
2

0

(V⇡⇡ mm
)b0 || V⇡ +V⇡⇡ ⇡+qmeqq

0

eqq )

||. Since b0 < 0,

k
dWm
d k

<0

These corollaries simply state that when the the share of public patients is larger, a
cut in public patient margins will have a larger impact on physician behavior.
0
|| >> 0),
In the case where there are significant “cross service e↵ects” (i.e. ||qm
the expressions that describe physician response are quite complex, and will depend
on the specific values of the various parameters. In such a case, while proposition 1
and 2 hold, the two corollaries need not, and will depend on the specific form of the
utility function, as well as the parameter values.
While the predictions regarding share Medicare patient share and physician response are straightforward, data on the share of Medicare patients vs. private payer
patients is largely unavailable, and so we were unable to empirically test these additional predictions in this paper.

Appendix Figure 1: F-statistics Testing for a Break in Treatment
20

App Fig 1b. Excluding Carboplatin

15
10
5
0

0

5

10

15

F-stat, Excluding Carboplatin

20

App Fig 1a. All Settings

-40

-20

0
time

20

40

-40

-20

20

40

15
10
5
0

0

5

10

15

F-stat, Outpatient Setting

20

App Fig 1d. Outpatient

20

App Fig 1c. Physician's Office

0
time

-40

-20

0
time

20

40

-40

-20

0
time

20

40

Change in the Share Given Chemotherapy Within 90 Days
By Month of Diagnosis Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
App Fig 2b. Excluding Carboplatin

App Fig 2c. Physician's Office

App Fig 2d. Outpatient

-.05

0

.05

-.05

0

.05

App Fig 2a. All Settings

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

Month Relative to January 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference
Upper Bound 95% CI

Graphs by setting

Lower Bound 95% CI

0

3

6

9

12

0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

App Fig 3. Kaplan Meier Unadjusted Survival Curves
Comparing Those Diagnosed 11 Months Pre versus Post Jan 2005

0

100

200

300
Days
pre

400

500

600

post

Note: There is a small discontinuity we cannot explain at about 365 days in both the cohorts diagnosed in
the pre and post periods. Since it is of similar magnitude across cohorts, it should not affect our results.

Change in Share Given Chemotherapy in States with High Paclitaxel Use
Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
App Fig 4b. Excluding Carboplatin

App Fig 4c. Physician's Office

App Fig 4d. Outpatient

-.04 -.02

0

.02 .04

-.04 -.02

0

.02 .04

App Fig 4a. All Settings

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

Month Relative to January 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference

Lower Bound 95% CI

Upper Bound 95% CI

Graphs by setting

Change in Share Given Chemotherapy in States with Low Paclitaxel Use
Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
App Fig 4f. Excluding Carboplatin

App Fig 4g. Physician's Office

App Fig 4h. Outpatient

-.04-.02

0

.02 .04

-.04-.02

0

.02 .04

App Fig 4e. All Settings

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

Month Relative to January 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference
Upper Bound 95% CI

Graphs by setting

Lower Bound 95% CI

0

3

6

9

12

Change in Share Dying by Month of Diagnosis in States with High Paclitaxel Use
Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
App Fig 5b. Death Within 6 Months

App Fig 5c. Death Within 9 Months

App Fig 5d. Death Within 12 Months

-.06 -.03

0

.03 .06

-.06 -.03

0

.03 .06

App Fig 5a. Death Within 3 Months

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

Month Relative to Jan 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference

Lower Bound 95% CI

Upper Bound 95% CI
Graphs by period

Change in Share Dying by Month of Diagnosis in States with Low Paclitaxel Use
Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
App Fig 5f. Death Within 6 Months

App Fig 5g. Death Within 9 Months

App Fig 5h. Death Within 12 Months

-.06 -.03

0

.03 .06

-.06 -.03

0

.03 .06

App Fig 5e. Death Within 3 Months

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

Month Relative to Jan 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference
Upper Bound 95% CI
Graphs by period

Lower Bound 95% CI

6

9

12

Change in Share Given Chemotherapy Among Above Median Age Patients
Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
App Fig 6b. Excluding Carboplatin

App Fig 6c. Physician's Office

App Fig 6d. Outpatient

-.04 -.02

0

.02 .04

-.04 -.02

0

.02 .04

App Fig 6a. All Settings

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

Month Relative to January 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference

Lower Bound 95% CI

Upper Bound 95% CI

Graphs by setting

Change in the Share Given Chemotherapy Among Below Median Age Patients
Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
App Fig 6f. Excluding Carboplatin

App Fig 6g. Physician's Office

App Fig 6h. Outpatient

-.04 -.02

0

.02 .04

-.04 -.02

0

.02 .04

App Fig 6e. All Settings

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

Month Relative to January 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference
Upper Bound 95% CI

Graphs by setting

Lower Bound 95% CI

0

3

6

9

12

Change in Share Dying Among Above Median Age Patients
Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
App Fig 7b. Death Within 6 Months

App Fig 7c. Death Within 9 Months

App Fig 7d. Death Within 12 Months

-.06 -.03

0

.03 .06

-.06 -.03

0

.03 .06

App Fig 7a. Death Within 3 Months

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

Month Relative to Jan 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference

Lower Bound 95% CI

Upper Bound 95% CI
Graphs by period

Change in Share Dying Among Below Median Age Patients
Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
App Fig 7f. Death Within 6 Months

App Fig 7g. Death Within 9 Months

App Fig 7h. Death Within 12 Months

-.06 -.03

0

.03 .06

-.06 -.03

0

.03 .06

App Fig 7e. Death Within 3 Months

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

Month Relative to Jan 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference
Upper Bound 95% CI
Graphs by period

Lower Bound 95% CI

6

9

12

Percent Change in Chemotherapy Service Count in High Concentration
Counties Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
App Fig 8b. Excluding Carboplatin

App Fig 8c. Physician's Office

App Fig 8d. Outpatient

-.2 -.1

0

.1

.2

-.2 -.1

0

.1

.2

App Fig 8a. All Settings

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

Month Relative to January 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference

Lower Bound 95% CI

Upper Bound 95% CI

Graphs by setting

Percent Change in Chemotherapy Service Count in Low Concentration
Counties Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
App Fig 8f. Excluding Carboplatin

App Fig 8g. Physician's Office

App Fig 8h. Outpatient

-.2

-.1

0

.1

-.2

-.1

0

.1

App Fig 8e. All Settings

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

Month Relative to January 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference
Upper Bound 95% CI

Graphs by setting

Lower Bound 95% CI

0

3

6

9

12

Change in Share Given Chemotherapy in Above Median Patients Per
Doctor Counties Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
App Fig 9b. Excluding Carboplatin

App Fig 9c. Physician's Office

App Fig 9d. Outpatient

-.05

0

.05

-.05

0

.05

App Fig 9a. All Settings

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

Month Relative to January 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference

Lower Bound 95% CI

Upper Bound 95% CI

Graphs by setting

Change in Share Given Chemotherapy in Below Median Patients Per
Doctor Counties Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
App Fig 9f. Excluding Carboplatin

App Fig 9g. Physician's Office

App Fig 9h. Outpatient

-.04 -.02

0

.02 .04

-.04 -.02

0

.02 .04

App Fig 9e. All Settings

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

Month Relative to January 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference
Upper Bound 95% CI

Graphs by setting

Lower Bound 95% CI

0

3

6

9

12

Percent Change in Chemotherapy Service Count in Above Median Patients Per
Doctor Counties Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
App Fig 10b. Excluding Carboplatin

App Fig 10c. Physician's Office

App Fig 10d. Outpatient

-.2

-.1

0

.1

-.2

-.1

0

.1

App Fig 10a. All Settings

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

Month Relative to January 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference

Lower Bound 95% CI

Upper Bound 95% CI

Graphs by setting

Percent Change in Chemotherapy Service Count in Below Median Patients Per
Doctor Counties Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
App Fig 10f. Excluding Carboplatin

App Fig 10g. Physician's Office

App Fig 10h. Outpatient

-.2

-.1

0

.1

-.2

-.1

0

.1

App Fig 10e. All Settings

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

Month Relative to January 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference
Upper Bound 95% CI

Graphs by setting

Lower Bound 95% CI

0

3

6

9

12

Change in Share Dying in Above Median Patients Per
Doctor Counties Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
App Fig 11b. Death Within 6 Months

App Fig 11c. Death Within 9 Months

App Fig 11d. Death Within 12 Months

-.05

0

.05

-.05

0

.05

App Fig 11a. Death Within 3 Months

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

Month Relative to Jan 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference

Lower Bound 95% CI

Upper Bound 95% CI
Graphs by period

Change in Share Dying in Below Median Patients Per
Doctor Counties Relative to the January 2005 ASP Implementation Date
App Fig 11f. Death Within 6 Months

App Fig 11g. Death Within 9 Months

App Fig 11h. Death Within 12 Months

-.06 -.03

0

.03 .06

-.06 -.03

0

.03 .06

App Fig 11e. Death Within 3 Months

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

6

9

12

-12

-9

-6

-3

0

3

Month Relative to Jan 2005
Reg-adjusted Difference
Upper Bound 95% CI
Graphs by period

Lower Bound 95% CI

6

9

12

Appendix Table1. Discontinuity in Observable Characteristics of Patients, Pre and Post Reform
Mean Before
Jan/05

Feb/04
–Nov/05

Apr/04
–Sept/05

Log Age at Diagnosis

74.1

0.0096
(0.0008)

0.010
(0.001)

Share Male

0.516

-2.76X10-18
(5.47X10-17)

-7.78X10-18
(3.56X10-17)

Distribution by Race/ethnicity
White

0.875

-0.0030
(0.0032)

-0.0010
(0.0024)

African-American

0.091

0.0026
(0.0031)

0.0013
(0.0023)

Asian

0.0108

0.0010
(0.0062)

0.0003
(0.0007)

Other/Unknown

0.009

-.0007
(0.0003)

-.00082
(0.00046)

Hispanic

0.0103

0.0002
(0.0004)

0.0008
(0.0005)

Native American

0.0038

-0.0002
(0.0004)

-0.00082
(0.00034)

Metastatic at Diagnosis

0.289

-9.86X10-18
(2.09X10-17)

1.12X10-18
(3.04X10-17)

Deyo-Charlson Score

1.06

-0.006
(0.010)

-0.016
(0.013)

48

96

72

Number of Observations (weeks)

Notes: Means in column 1 are for the dependent variable for the period before ASP implementation. All cells in columns 2 - 3
present estimates from separate time-series regressions. Estimates are the coefficients on an indicator for the period that the ASP
payment scheme was in effect. Regressions control for other mean patient characteristics (see Table 1), i.e. except the one used as
the dependent variable or any race variables when any race category is a dependent variable, and relative-week trends that are
allowed to differ on either side of the payment change. Newey-West standard errors allowing for autocorrelation up to 52-week
lags are given in parentheses.

Appendix Table 2. Specification Checks of Reform-related changes in Chemotherapy Treatment within 1
months of Diagnosis
Relative month trends
Feb/04
Apr/04
–Nov/05
–Sept/05
0.0150
0.0134
(0.003)
(0.002)

within 1 month of Diagnosis

Calendar month fixed effects
Feb/04
Apr/04
–Nov/05
–Sept/05
0.0175
.0183
(0.001)
(0.002)

excluding carboplatin

0.0140
(0.002)

.0121
(0.002)

.0126
(0.001)

.0126
(0.001)

in  a  Physician’s  Office  

0.0166
(0.003)

0.0154
(0.002)

0.0181
(0.001)

0.017
(0.002)

in an outpatient hospital clinic

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

0.002
(0.001)

0.002
(0.001)

Number of Observations (weeks)

96

72

96

72

Notes: Each cell is based on a separate regression. Estimates are the coefficients on an indicator for the period that the ASP
payment scheme was in effect. Regressions control for other mean patient characteristics (see Table 1). Columns (1) and (2)
include relative-month trends that are allowed to differ on either side of the payment change and columns (3) and (4) include
calendar month fixed effects. Newey-West standard errors allowing for autocorrelation up to 52-week lags are given in
parentheses.

Appendix Table 3. Specification Check of Percent Change in Chemotherapy Treatment Service Counts
Within 1 Month of Diagnosis After the January 2005 Payment Change
Relative month trends

Calendar month fixed
effects

Mean
within 1 month

1.00

0.342
(0.047)

0328
(0.046)

0.445
(0.009)

.439
(0.013)

excluding carboplatin

0.304

0.206
(0.024)

0.208
(0.022)

0238
(0.006)

0.214
(0.007)

in  a  Physician’s  Office  

0.916

0.350
(0.048)

0.338
(0.048)

0.445
(0.009

0.435
(0.014)

in an outpatient hospital
clinic

0.087

0.013
(0.003)

0.012
(0.005)

0.036
(0.002)

0.040
(0.002)

96

72

96

72

Number of Obs (weeks)

Notes: Each cell is based on a separate regression. Estimates are the coefficients on an indicator for the period that the ASP
payment scheme was in effect. Regressions control for other mean patient characteristics (see Table 1). Means in column (1) are
for the dependent variable for the period before ASP implementation. Columns (2) and (3) include relative-month trends that are
allowed to differ on either side of the payment change and columns (4) and (5) include calendar month fixed effects. NeweyWest standard errors allowing for autocorrelation up to 52-week lags are given in parentheses.

Appendix Table 4. Changes in Chemotherapy Treatment Within 3 Months of Diagnosis After the January
2005 Payment Change: February 2004- November 2005
Mean

Relative week
trends

Relative month
trends

Calendar month
fixed effects

within 3 months

0.263

0.007
(0.0037)

0.029
(0.003)

0.007
(0.0040)

0.029
(0.003)

0.031
(0.001)

.035
(0.001)

excluding carboplatin

0.093

0.015
(0.002)
0.014
(0.003)

0.023
(0.003)
0.031
(0.003)

0.015
(0.003)
0.014
(0.004)

0.023
(0.003)
0.031
(0.003)

0.019
(0.001)
0.031
(0.001)

0.020
(0.001)
0.035
(0.001)

-0.007
(0.002)

-0.0004
(0.002)

-0.007
(0.002)

-0.0004
(0.002)

0.004
(0.001)

0.004
(0.001)

N
96

Y
96

N
96

Y
96

N
96

Y
96

in  a  Physician’s  
Office

0.212

in an outpatient
hospital clinic

0.066

Quarter prior to reform indicator
Number of Obs (weeks)

Notes: Means in column 1 are for the dependent variable for the period before ASP implementation. All cells in columns 2 - 7
present estimates from separate time-series regressions. Estimates are the coefficients on an indicator for the period that the ASP
payment scheme was in effect. Regressions control for mean patient characteristics (see Table 1). Columns (2) and (3) include
relative-week trends and (4) and (5) relative-month trends that are allowed to differ on either side of the payment change.
Columns (6) and (7) include calendar month fixed effects. Newey-West standard errors allowing for autocorrelation up to 52week lags are given in parentheses.

Appendix Table 5. Specification Checks of Reform-related changes in Chemotherapy Types within 1
months of Diagnosis: February 2004- November 2005
Relative week
Relative month trends Calendar month fixed
trends
effects
Share  of  Chemotherapy  Treated  Patients  Receiving…  
carboplatin

-0.039
(0.008)

-0.047
(0.012)

-0.038
(0.008)

-0.046
(0.013)

-0.019
(0.005)

-0.029
(0.005)

paclitaxel

-0.074
(0.007)

-0.084
(0.010)

-0.073
(0.008)

-0.083
(0.010)

-0.059
(0.003)

-0.068
(0.002)

docetaxel

0.026
(0.004)

0.036
(0.005)

0.026
(0.004)

0.036
(0.005)

0.014
(0.002)

0.013
(0.003)

etoposide

-0.005
(0.010)

-0.025
(0.007)

-0.003
(0.010)

-0.023
(0.007)

-0.004
(0.004)

-0.007
(0.003)

gemcitabine

0.007
(0.003)

0.007
(0.003)

0.007
(0.003)

0.008
(0.004)

-0.019
(0.002)

-0.014
(0.002)

N

Y

N

Y

N

Y

96

96

96

96

96

96

Quarter prior to reform
indicator
Number of Obs (weeks)

Notes: Each cell is based on a separate regression. Estimates are the coefficients on an indicator for the period that the ASP
payment scheme was in effect. Regressions control for other mean patient characteristics (see Table 1). Columns (1) and (2)
include relative-week trends and (3) and (4) relative-month trends that are allowed to differ on either side of the payment change.
Columns (5) and (6) include calendar month fixed effects. Odd columns also include an indicator for the 3 months leading up to
the reform. Newey-West standard errors allowing for autocorrelation up to 52-week lags are given in parentheses.

Appendix Table 6. Specification Checks of Reform-related changes in the Likelihood of Death
Relative month trends
Calendar month fixed effects
Feb/04
Apr/04
Feb/04
Apr/04
Share  Dying  within…  
–Nov/05
–Sept/05
–Nov/05
–Sept/05
3 months of diagnosis

-0.009
(0.004)

-0.010
(0.005)

-0.012
(0.002)

-0.011
(0.002)

6 months of diagnosis

-0.015
(0.002)

-0.015
(0.003)

-0.020
(0.002)

-0.020
(0.003)

9 months of diagnosis

-0.011
(0.00

-0.010
(0.003)

-0.021
(0.003)

-0.022
(0.003)

1 year of diagnosis

-0.0005
(0.003)

-0.0001
(0.003)

-0.026
(0.002)

-0.025
(0.002)

96

72

96

72

Number of Observations (weeks)

Notes: Each cell is based on a separate regression. Estimates are the coefficients on an indicator for the period that the ASP
payment scheme was in effect. Regressions control for other mean patient characteristics (see Table 1). Columns (1) and (2)
include relative-month trends that are allowed to differ on either side of the payment change and columns (3) and (4) include
calendar month fixed effects. Newey-West standard errors allowing for autocorrelation up to 52-week lags are given in
parentheses.

Appendix Table 7. Change in Treatment and Survival: States with Above vs. Below Pre-reform Rates of
Paclitaxel Use Among Patients Receiving Any Chemotherapy Treatment
Above Median Rates of
Paclitaxel Use
Mean
Pre-Jan
2005

Feb/04
–Nov/05

Apr/04
–Sept/05

Below Median Rates of
Paclitaxel Use
Mean
Pre-Jan
2005

Feb/04
–Nov/05

Apr/04
–Sept/05

Share  of  Patients  Receiving  Chemotherapy  Treatment  within…
1 month of diagnosis

0.177

0.018
(0.003)

0.024
(0.003)

0.154

0.014
(0.005)

0.005
(0.002)

1 month, excluding carboplatin

0.076

0.016
(0.002)

0.017
(0.003)

0.071

0.015
(0.003)

0.008
(0.003)

1  month,  in  a  Physician’s  
Office

0.142

0.018
(0.003)

0.024
(0.003)

0.117

0.019
(0.004)

0.014
(0.002)

1 month, in outpatient hospital
clinic

0.026

-0.001
(0.001)

0.001
(0.002)

0.029

0.0001
(0.002)

0.0004
(0.001)

3 months of diagnosis

0.341

-0.005
(0.006)

-0.014
(0.004)

0.337

-0.001
(0.004)

-0.002
(0.003)

6 months of diagnosis

0.473

-0.021
(0.005)

-0.028
(0.007)

0.464

-0.005
(0.008)

-0.006
(0.006)

9 months of diagnosis

0.533

-0.019
(0.004)

-0.026
(0.004)

0.521

0.002
(0.007)

0.003
(0.006)

1 year of diagnosis

0. 625

-0.008
(0.003)

-0.013
(0.004)

0.612

0.012
(0.007)

0.006
(0.004)

48

96

72

48

96

72

Share  Dying  Within…

Number of Obs (weeks

Notes: Means in column 1 and 3 are for the dependent variable for patients in states with above versus below the median rates of
relative paclitaxel use in the pre-reform period. Estimates in columns 2 and 4 are from separate time-series regressions for
patients from each group and are the coefficients on an indicator for the period that the ASP payment scheme was in effect.
Regressions control for mean patient characteristics and relative-week trends that are allowed to differ on either side of the
payment change. Newey-West standard errors allowing for autocorrelation up to 52-week lags are given in parentheses.

Appendix Table 8. Change in Treatment and Survival: Above vs. Below Median Age Patients
Above Median Age Patients
Mean
Pre-Jan
2005

Feb/04
–Nov/05

Apr/04
–Sept/05

Below Median Age Patients
Mean
Pre-Jan
2005

Feb/04
–Nov/05

Apr/04
–Sept/05

Share  of  Patients  Receiving  Chemotherapy  Treatment  within…
1 month of diagnosis

0.119

0.014
(0.002)

0.014
(0.003)

0.210

0.024
(0.003)

0.020
(.003)

1 month, excluding carboplatin

0.054

0.013
(0.002)

0.011
(0.002)

0.014

0.016
(0.002)

0.013
(0.001)

1  month,  in  a  Physician’s  
Office

0.094

0.014
(0.002)

0.016
(0.002)

0.164

0.024
(0.004)

0.023
(0.004)

1 month, in outpatient hospital

0.018

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

0.036

0.003
(0.001)

0.004
(0.002)

48

96

72

48

96

72

Observations (weeks)

Notes: Means in column 1 and 4 are for the dependent variable for patients above versus below the median age patient at
diagnosis in the period prior to the reform. see notes to Tables 2-4. See notes to Tables 2-4 for more details.

Appendix Table 9. Change in Treatment and Survival: Counties with a High vs. Low Concentration of
Providers Administering Chemotherapy Treatment
Counties with High Provider
Concentration
Mean

Feb/04
–Nov/05

Apr/04
–Sept/05

Counties with Low Provider
Concentration
Mean

Feb/04
–Nov/05

Apr/04
–Sept/05

Share  of  Patients  Receiving  Chemotherapy  Treatment  within…
1 month of diagnosis

0.169

-0.0004
(0.005)

0.001
(0.007)

0.165

0.020
(0.002)

0.019
(0.003)

1 month, excluding carboplatin

0.076

0.004
(0.003)

0.002
(0.005)

0.073

0.016
(0.001)

0.014
(0.002)

1  month,  in  a  Physician’s  
Office

0.122

0.008
(0.005)

0.010
(0.007)

0.132

0.019
(0.003)

0.019
(0.003)

1 month, in outpatient hospital
clinic

0.045

-0.010
(0.002)

-0.009
(0.002)

0.024

0.003
(0.001)

0.004
(0.001)

Percent  Change  in  Chemotherapy  Service  Counts  within…
1 month of diagnosis

0.973

0.203
(0.045)

0.185
(0.045)

1.01

0.389
(0.031)

0390
(0.030)

1 month, excluding carboplatin

0.320

0.089
(0.038)

0.085
(0.026)

0.301

0.232
(0.021)

0.240
(0.014)

1  month,  in  a  Physician’s  
Office

0.821

0.242
(0.045)

0.231
(0.044)

0.933

0.389
(0.034)

0.392
(0.033)

1 month, in outpatient hospital
clinic

0.152

-0.043
(0.024)

-0.049
(0.017)

0.075

0.029
(0.005)

0.028
(0.008)

48

96

72

48

96

72

Observations (weeks)

Notes: Means in column 1 and 3 are for the dependent variable for patients in counties with low vs. high concentration. The mean
for service counts is without logs. High concentration is defined as an HHI greater than 0.25. Estimates in columns 2 and 4 are
from separate time-series regressions for patients from each group and are the coefficients on an indicator for the period that the
ASP payment scheme was in effect. Regressions control for mean patient characteristics and relative-week trends that are
allowed to differ on either side of the payment change. Newey-West standard errors allowing for autocorrelation up to 52-week
lags are given in parentheses

Appendix Table 10. Change in Treatment and Survival: Counties with Above vs. Below Median Numbers
of Patients Per Provider Administering Chemotherapy Treatment
Above Median Patients Per
Provider
Mean
Pre-Jan
2005

Feb/04
–Nov/05

Apr/04
–Sept/05

Below Median Patients Per
Provider
Mean
Pre-Jan
2005

Feb/04
–Nov/05

Apr/04
–Sept/05

Share  of  Patients  Receiving  Chemotherapy  Treatment  within…
1 month of diagnosis

0.173

0.013
(0.004)

0.013
(0.003)

0.159

0.019
(0.001)

0.017
(0.003)

1 month, excluding carboplatin

0.076

0.015
(0.002)

0.014
(0.003)

0.071

0.014
(0.003)

0.010
(0.003)

1  month,  in  a  Physician’s  
Office

0.138

0.017
(0.002)

0.018
(0.004)

0.122

0.019
(0.003)

0.019
(0.003)

1 month, in outpatient hospital
clinic

0.025

-0.0004
(0.001)

-0.0004
(0.001)

0.030

-0.0001
(0.001)

0.001
(0.002)

Percent  Change  in  Chemotherapy  Service  Counts  within…
1 month of diagnosis

1.06

0.336
(0.048)

0.328
(0.061)

0.942

0.400
(0.035)

0383
(0.036)

1 month, excluding carboplatin

0.322

0.185
(0.030)

0.203
(0.029)

0.286

0.258
(0.022)

0.245
(0.017)

1  month,  in  a  Physician’s  
Office

0.987

0.339
(0.043)

0.337
(0.062)

0.844

0.411
(0.036)

0.395
(0.037)

1 month, in outpatient hospital
clinic

0.077

0.019
(0.008)

0.012
(0.007)

0.097

0.013
(0.004)

0.015

-0.009
(0.006)

-0.019
(0.004)

0.335

(0.007)

Share  Dying  Within…
3 months of diagnosis

0.353

-0.002
(0.005)

0.008
(0.005)

6 months of diagnosis

0.474

-0.015
(0.006)

-0.022
(0.006)

0.463

-0.009
(0.004)

-0.003
(0.004)

9 months of diagnosis

0.532

-0.008
(0.006)

-0.028
(0.003)

0.522

-0.004
(0.003)

0.001
(0.005)

1 year of diagnosis

0. 635

-0.008
(0.008)

0.024
(0.003)

0.616

0.008
(0.004)

0.012
(0.004)

48

96

72

48

96

72

Number of Obs (weeks)

Notes: Means in column 1 and 3 are for the dependent variable for patients in counties with above vs. below median number of
patients per provider. Estimates in columns 2 and 4 are from separate time-series regressions for patients from each group and are
the coefficients on an indicator for the period that the ASP payment scheme was in effect. Regressions control for mean patient
characteristics and relative-week trends that are allowed to differ on either side of the payment change. Newey-West standard
errors allowing for autocorrelation up to 52-week lags are given in parentheses

