                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     TAX ASYMMETRIES AND
                 CORPORATE INCOME TAX REFORM




                           Saman Majd


                        Stewart C. Myers




                     Working Paper No. 1924




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                             May 1986




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    Working Paper #1924
                                                    May 1986




                  Tax Asymmetries and Corporate Income Tax Reform




                                      ABSTRACT


            This paper investigates the impact of tax asymmetries (the lack of full

     loss offsets) under current corporate income tax law and a stylized tax reform

     proposal. The government's tax claim on the firm's pretax cash flows is

     modelled as a series of path—dependent call options and valued by option

     pricing procedures and Monte Carlo simulation.

            The tax reform investigated reduces the statutory tax rate, eliminates the

     investment tax credit and sets tax depreciation approximately equal to

     economic depreciation. These changes would increase the effective tax rate on

     marginal investments by firms that    always   pay taxes, but dramatically reduce

      thepotential burden of tax asymmetries. "Stand—alone" investments, which are
     exposed to the greatest burden, are uniformly more valuable under this reform,

     despite the loss of the investment tax credit and accelerated depreciation.
            These general results are backed up by a series of numerical experiments.
     We vary investment risk, inflation (with and without indexing of tax

      depreciation), and investigate how allowing interest on loss carryforwards

      would affect after—tax project value.




Saman Maid                                           Stewert C, Myers
Finance Department                                   M.I.T.
The Wharton School                                   Sloan School of Management
University of Pennsylvania                           50 Memorial Drive
Philadelphia, PA 19104                               Cambridge, MA 02139
1. Introduction1


    Under current (1985) law, corporate income is taxed only when positive.

Although losses can be carried back to generate tax refunds up' to the amount

of taxes paid in the previous three years, losses must be carried forward once

these tax refunds are used up. •The present value per dollar carried forward

is less than the statutory rate for two reasons: (1) the firm may not earn

enough to use the carry—forwards before they expire, and (2) carry—forwards do

not earn interest.

     In previous work, Majd and Myers (1985), we showed that tax asymmetries

can be modelled and valued as contingent claims, using option pricing theory

combined with Monte Carlo simulation. Although the asymmetries' effects

cannot be expressed in conventional summary measures such as effective tax

rates, we did work out impacts on the after—tax net present values (NPVs) of

incremental investment outlays. Tax asymmetries can dramatically reduce

after—tax NPVs for high—risk investments, although the extent of reduction

depends on the tax position of the investing firm. Tax asymmetries are

irrelevant at the margin for a firm with sufficient other income that it

always pays taxes on a marginal dollar of income or loss. fts,mmetries may be

the dominant tax effect for "stand—alone" projects, that is, for cases where

the project and the firm are the same.

     Here we focus on the design of the corporate income tax. We report the

results of a series of numerical experiments comparing current (1985) tax law

with a stylized tax "reform" proposal, with tax asymmetries of course

emphasized. In doing so we have also improved the methods we used previously,

notably by using more realistic and consistent numerical parameters.

      We have also included an intelligent, although not fully optimal, project

 abandonment strategy in the simulations. The abandonment strategy links
project life to ex post profitability. We constructed this link because

fixing project life ex ante does not make sense under uncertainty, and because

the extent to which tax loss carry-forwards can relieve tax asymmetries ought

to depend on decisions about project life.

     The next section briefly reviews prior work by others. Section 3

describes how option pricing concepts can be applied to value the government's

tax claim on risky assets. Since no closed—form option pricing formulas

apply, values must be computed by numerical methods. Section 3, backed up by

an Appendix, also describes our calculations in more detail and presents

after—tax values for a reasonably realistic 'representative project' under

various assumptions about project profitability, risk and the tax position of

the firm owning it. Section 14 investigates how the impact of tax asymmetries

changes when a stylized, reformed tax system is substituted for the 1985

corporate tax law. Section 5 offers some concluding comments.


2. Prior Work

     Formal analysis of the impacts of asymmetric taxation is just beginning

to appear in the finance literature. For example, Cooper and Franks (1983)

recognize that the firm's future tax rates are endogenous under asymmetric

taxation with carry forward privileges. They use a linear programming

framework to analyze the interaction between present and future investment and

financing decisions induced by the tax system. They discuss some of the

factors that limit financial transactions designed to offset tax losses, and

conclude that real investment by corporations can be distorted.

     Ball and Bowers (1983), dalai (1983), Smith and Stultz (1983), Pitts and

Franks (1984), and Green and Talmor (1985) all have noted the analogy between

asymmetric taxes and call options. However, none of these papers has

introduced realistic elements of the law, such as tax loss carry provisions,


                                      —2—
                                                                                         I
nor have   they obtained numerical estimates of   the   impact of   tax asymmetries on

asset values.

     Building on earlier work in Auerbach (1983), Auerbach and Poterba (1986)

investigate the effects of tax asymmetries on corporate investment

incentives. They take the tax position of the firm as exogenous, and use

estimates of the tax lossescarried forward by a sample of corporations to

estimate the probability that the firm will pay taxes in the future. They

compute effective marginal tax rates on new investment using theêe "transition

probabilities."

     The assumption that the future tax position of the firm is exogenous may

be reasonable for incremental investment decisions that, are small compared to

the other assets of the firm. However, this approach cannot handle investment

decisions when the project must "stand alone," or when it is a significant

part of the assets of the firm. Moreover, as Auerbach and Poberba note, using

past data on tax loss carry forwards will not allow them to analyze proposed

changes in tax law, since the change in tax regime will also change the

transition probabilities that they estimate.

     By contrast, we take future pre-tax cash flows of the firm or project as

completely exogenous, and thus can allow the future tax position of the firm

or project to be completely endogenous. This approach can shed light on

effects of proposed changes corporate tax law.


3. Taxes As Contingent Claims


     In the absence of tax loss carry backs or carry forwards, the

government's tax claim is equivalent to a portfolio of European call options,

one on each year's operating cash flow. The heavy line in Figure 1 shows




                                       —3—
taxes paid as a function of taxable income in a given year, and has the same

shape as a call option's payoff at exercise.

     This option payoff function also describes the taxes paid on the income

of a stand-alone project (i.e., taxes paid by a firm undertaking only one

project). But in general the taxes paid on a project's income depend on the

tax position of the firm owning it. Suppose the project is owned by IBM. It

seems safe to say that IBM will not have tax loss carry forwards at any time

in the foreseeable future, and will pay taxes at the margin at the full

statutory rate. Thus, any project losses can be offset against IBM's other

income. The tax system is symmetrical for IBM when it considers an

incremental capital investment project.

     We can express these option analogies more formally. Consider a project

that is the firm's only asset. Let the pre-tax operating cash flow and

depreciation allowance at time t be       and dt respectively. Ignore for now

the investment tax credit (ITC), and assume that the project is all—equity

financed. In the absence of tax loss carry forwards or carry backs, the

project's after-tax cash flow at time t is:


                                  -   r max[y- dt, 0]
                          c
The after—tax cash flow is the difference between the pre—tax operating cash

flow and the government's claim on it. The government's claim is equivalent

 to t European call options on the operating cash flow with exercise prices

 equal to the depreciation allowances.

      Since the government taxes the firm's total income, the incremental

 impact of a new project on the value of the firm depends on the operating cash

 flows of the firm's existing assets and on their correlation with project cash

 flows. The after—tax cash flow for the firm and project is:



                                          14
                  = (y + z)    -   r max[(y +    zt)
                                                       —
                                                               (d + dzt)   01


where zt is the operating cash flow and d2t the depreciation allowance for the

firm without the new project. Because the government's claim is an option,

the value of the tax claim on the sum     of   y and zt is not the sum of the

values of the tax claims on each taken separately.

     Tax loss carry privileges do not change the shape of the contingent tax

payment drawn in Figure 1. If the firm does not begin paying taxes until that

year's taxable income exceeds cumulative tax losses carried forward from

previous years, the vertical dividing line shifts to the right. Carry backs

shift the horizontal dividing line down from zero by the sum of taxes paid

over the last three years.

     Again we can state this formally. Consider the case of unlimited carry

forwards (but without any carry backs). The tax loss carried forward to time

t from the previous period is


                               max[0t1 +   dti     —
                                                       3tt—'      0]


The carry forward depends on the carry forward in the previous period which in

 turn depends on the s.till—eariier carry forward, and so on. The carry forward

at the beginning of the project (time zero) is given. The after—tax cash flow

 becomes:

                           =       -r   max[y —    d       —       0]


 Since      depends on all realized incomes prior to time t, the payoff to the

 government (i.e., the tax paid) also depends on the realized incomes. It is

 straightforward to introduce the ITC and carry backs, and to limit the length

 of time allowed for carry forwards.




                                           —5—
     The carry privileges do not break the correspondence between the

government's tax claims and a series of call options. The government holds a

lottery across many possible options on      Which option it ends up with

depends on the firm's history of operating cash flow,
                                                        y0, y1, .   . .,
This particular form of path—dependency makes it infeasible to use closed—form

option valuation formulas.

     Therefore, with carry-forwards and carry-backs, developing comparative

statics is a numerical rather than analytical exercise.     However, despite the

complexity of the government's contingent claim, we have found no instances in

which carry privileges reverse the normal properties of call options. For

example, we have always found that the present value of the government's tax

claim on a stand—alone project increases with project risk,defined as the

variance rate at which cash flows evolve, and also with project life. The

government is better off if nominal interest rates increase, even if tax

depreciation is indexed to inflation. Of course, all of these results can be

shown analytically, using the Black-Scholes (1973) formula, if carry

privileges are ignored and the government's tax claim is modelled as a series

of non—interacting calls, one for each year's cash flow.-


3.1. Valuing the Government's Tax Claim

     This section describes the numerical procedure used to calculate the

present value (to the corporation) of the taxes paid on a risky project. Our

discussion will be restricted to finding the present value of the taxes paid

on an operating cash flow in year t, y, in the presence of unlimited carry

forwards. The present value of the taxes paid on the stream of operating cash

flows is simply the sum of the values of the claims on each tuture year's

operating income. Extension of the procedure to include carry backs and to

limit the carry forward period is straightforward.


                                     —6—
    We exploit a general property of options first explicitly noted by Cox

and Ross (1976): if the payoff to the option can be replicated by a portfolio

strategy using traded securities, the present value of the option is the

expected payoff forecasted under a risk—neutral stochastic process

(conditional on the current values of the relevant state variables) and

discounted at the risk free rate. In Other words, the option can be valued as

if both it and the underlying asset are traded in a risk neutral world.

     The reason this risk neutral valuation principle works is that options

are not valued absolutely, but only relative to the underlying asset. For

example, the Black—Scholes (1973) formula establishes only the ratio of call

value to stock price. The stock price is marked down for risk because

investors discount forecasted dividends at a risk—adjusted rate. The markdown

of the stock to a current, certainty equivalent value marks down the call

value too, but not the ratio of call value to stock price.

     The call is in fact riskier than the stock it is written on, and if at

any instant investors demand an expected rate of return above the risk—free

rate to hold the stopk, they will demand a still higher return to hold the

call. Suppose the required rate of return on the stock shifts up by enough to

reduce the stock price by one percent. Then the call value will fall by more

than one percent. However, the change in the stock's required return is not

needed to calculate the fall in the call price. The change in stock price is

a sufficient statistic.

     Of course, the assets and options we are analyzing here are not

explicitly traded. That may seem to violate a central assumption of the

Black—Scholes model and its progeny. But we have actually taken only a small

step away from the standard finance theory of capital investment under

uncertainty. That theory assumes the firm maximizes market value, which in



                                     —7—
turn requires capital markets sufficiently complete that investors can find a

security or portfolio of securities to "match" any investment project the firm

may embark on. For every real asset, there must be a trading strategy using

financial assets that generates a perfect substitute for the project in time

pattern and risk characteritics of future cash returns. That assumption is

routinely made for publicly traded firms. Incomplete markets are usually

treated as a second— or third—order problem in light of the exceedingly rich

menu of financial assets and trading strategies.

     If investors can replicate real investment projects by trading in

financial assets, they can also replicate options written on those projects by

trading in the replicating assets and borrowing or lending. The heart of the

classic Black-Scholes (1973) paper is the demonstration that a call's payoff

can be exactly matched by a strategy of buying the underlying stock on margin,

according to a hedging rule for the amount of stock held and the margin amount

at each instant. Hedging rules can be written down for more complex or

compound options. Thus, if markets are complete enough to support a market

value standard for real assets, they are complete enough to support use of

option pricing theory.

     There are other .Jays of justifying option pricing techniques for options

on non-traded assets. For example, the techniques also follow in the

traditional capital asset pricing framework provided that asset returns are

multivariate normal and there is a representative investor with constant

absolute risk aversion.2


3.2. Solution Techniques

     The path dependencies in our problem rule out closed form solutions for

the value of the government's-tax claim. Moreover, these path dependencies

would overwhelm the usual numerical option—valuation routines.


                                      -8-
    Fortunately, the rules for computing taxes are exogenous. Future tax

payments are always unknown, but there are no decisions to be made about

taxes. If the firm has •the opportunity to use carry backs or carry forwards,

it does so at the first opportunity.3 As far as taxes and carry privileges

are concerned, the firm faces only an event tree, not a decision tree.

    We can therefore employ a Monte Carlo simulation technique to approximate

the distribution of the payoff conditional on the prior sequence of operating

cash flow!4 The rule determining the carry back or carry forward at any time

(the path dependent feature in this problem) is specified exogenously, and

depends only on past realizations of the operating cash flow. The Monte Carlo

simulation technique exploits this feature of the problem by simulating the

sequence of cash flows. Each time a value is generated for the cash flow

the tax liability in t and any carry forward to period t+1 are completely

determined.

     The simulation must also update the distributions of future cash flows

every time a value is generated. Different assumptions about the stochastic

process generating the time series of operating cash flow are possible. In

our calculations, we break down operating cash flow as:


              Operating cash flow   Net revenues —   Fixed costs

                                       -
                                            FCt

where 'net revenues' means revenues less variable costs. We assume FCt is
known with certainty, and that the stochastic processes generating each year's

net revenue are perfectly correlated lognormal diffusions. That is, the

forecast error in any ohe year's net revenue causes the same proportional

change in the expectations of all future net revenues, and the same

proportional change in the present value of each year's future net revenues.


                                      —9—
If this assumption seems unduly restrictive, note that it is the usual

justification for using a single risk—adjusted rate to discount a stream of

cash flows. Thus it implicitly underlies standard practice.5

      The world of the simulation, however, is risk neutral. Here is an

example of how forecasting and discounting work in that world. Suppose

forecasted net revenues grow at a rate g and are properly discounted at a rate

r +   p, where r is the risk—free interest rate and p is a risk premium:

                        H
                                                     (i -
                            x0er+&dt
                    0                       r+p—g
In the risk—neutral world of the simulation, discounting is at r but the

growth rate is reduced to g      g —   p.   Note that this does not change the

present value calculated just above: g could be interpreted as a certainty

equivalent growth rate. This rate g would be used in the simulation.

       By generating a large number of simulated cash flows, an approximate

distribution for the government's tax payment in each year is obtained. The

expected value is computed and discounted at the riskless rateS to obtain the

present value of the payment. The present value of the government's claim on

the project is the sum of the present values of the claims on individual cash

flows.


3.3. Limitations of Monte Carlo Simulation for Tax nalysis

       Our method is limited because it cannot capture possible links between

the future tax position of the firm and its investment and financing

decisions.

       Our numerical procedure must take project and firm cash flows as

exogenous. We do not consider whether a future tax loss on a project

undertaken today will affect future investment decisions. We also rule out


                                            —10-
cases in which today's project is managed differently, depending on its (or

the firm's) tax position. This is undoubtedly unrealistic. For example, an

otherwise profitable firm might find it less painful to stick with a losing

project in order to establish an immediate tax loss, for the same reason that

investors in securities often find it worthwhile to realize capital losses

before the end of the tax year.6

     This is one of several ways a firm can react to tax asymmetries. Four

additional examples are: (1) the firm may change its accounting policies to

shift taxable income over time; (2) the firm may seek to acquire another firm

that has taxable income; (3) the firm may choose to 'sell' its tax shields to

another firm by means of a leasing arrangement;7 (14) the firm may issue equity

and buy bonds in order to generate taxable income.8

     We admit that our results are uninteresting if firms can cash in tax

losses at or near face value by these or other transactions. The transactions

are not costless, however, and in many cases fall far short of exhausting the

entire tax loss. Auerbach and Poterba (1986) find that the percentages of a

large sample of nonfinancial corporations with tax loss carryforwards ranged

from about 7 (1981) to 114 (19814). In some industries the percentages were

substantially higher. For example, 30 percent of airline companies had loss

carryforwards in 1981 and 40 percent in 198#. They also find that once a firm

falls into loss carryforwards, there is less than a 10 percent chance of

climbing out in the following year.9 If "selling tax losses" was feasible for

these firms, the selling price was not attractive for 90 percent of them.

     Our analysis, since it assumes operating cash flows are exogenous, gives

a lower bound on.after-tax project value and an upper bound on the impact of

tax asymmetries.10 It shows the potential gain from changing financing or

investment decisions to shift taxes over time or between firms. Since we do



                                      —11—
not analyze these tax—shifting decisions specifically, we cannot give point

estimates of the impact of tax asymmetries under current law. We can make

useful comparisons of corporate tax reform proposals, however. If the

potential cost of tax asymmetries is reduced under a new tax law, that law is

better than the old one, other things equal, because it reduces the real costs

firms are willing to incur to sell carryforwards, and because tax asymmetries

are less likely to distort real investment decisions.


3•24. Example of Numerical Results

     Table 1 and Figure 2 show results for the base—case project which is

described in detail in the Appendix. The project offers exponentially

decaying net revenues, moderate fixed costs, and under certainty would have an

economic life of 12 years. Inflation is i       .06 and the nominal risk free

rate is r =   .08.   The standard deviations of annual forecast errors for

project cash flow are ax      .15, .10 and .25. In this section, we discuss and

plot NPV5 only for the base case ax =    .15.
     Four sets of numbers are shown in the table and plotted in the figure.

These correspond to various extreme assumptions about the firm undertaking the

project.

     Suppose the project is owned by a firm such as Penn Central with such

large tax loss carryforwards that we may assume a zero effective tax rate on

new projects. We will use ZEROTAX as a label for this extreme case in which

pre—tax and after-tax NPV are the same.

     At the other extreme, we can imagine the standard project undertaken by a

firm taxed symmetrically on marginal investment because it is sure to pay

taxes at the margin at the full statutory rate. We label this case SYMTAX.

     The NPVs in Table 1 are calculated under a stylized tax reform law, with

indexed, exponential tax depreciation to scrap value at the end of the


                                        —12—
project's or asset's economic life. The tax rate is -r =   .33.   There is no

investment tax credit. The Appendix reviews tax and numerical assumptions in

more detail.

     The project's values under ZEROTAX and SYMTAX provide two extreme

cases. A third extreme case occurs when the firm and the project are the

same. Tax asymmetries have their maximum impact for stand—alone projects. Of

course, carry backs and carry forwards mitigate the effects of the

asymmetry. We assume three—rear carry backs and 15 year carry forwards (i.e.,

the current (1985) system). Results for stand-alone projects are labelled

ASYMTAX. The ASYMTAX NPVs shown under "Reform" in Table 1 are also plotted in

Figure 2.

     The remaining numbers in Table 1 and Figure 2, labelled NOCARRY, show the

after—tax NFV of the stand—alone project with no carryforwards or carrybacks

of losses allowed. Figure 2 shows that the NOCARRY NPVs are, as expected,

somewhat worse than the ASYMTAX NPVs. Although carry privileges are valuable,

they do not solve the tax asymmetry problem. We will not plot or comment on

NOCARRY NPV5 in the rest of the paper.

     Stand—alone project NPV (ASYMTAX) is always lower than either pre-tax NPV

or NPV under a symmetric tax. A firm forced to take a negative NPV project

would prefer a symmetric tax if it had the choice; second choice is no tax at

 all. A firm with a strongly positive NPV project would prefer no tax, but

 second choice is a symmetric tax. At some pre-tax NPV around zero, the firm

 is indifferent between no tax and symmetric tax. But the asymmetric tax is

 always in third place from the firm's point of view. It is farthest behind

 when pre-tax NPV is about zero.

      In other words, if the firm must have unused tax loss carryforwards, it

 is better to have a lot of them, so that incremental investments effectively



                                         —13—
escape tax. The present value of the government's tax claim on a firm or

stand—alone project is greatest when it is not known whether the firm or

project will have to pay taxes.

     Most of the following discussion focuses on experiments where NOTAX or

SYMTAX NPVs are not too far away from zero. Tax law is most likely to affect

decisions about breakeven or near—breakeven investments. Investments with

high positive or negative NPVs will be taken or rejected regardless of tax.


4. Tax Asymmetries and Tax Reform

     So far we have confirmed the results of our prior work, that tax

asymmetries can have a significant impact on the after-tax value of

incremental investment. Now we arrive at the main goal of this paper, which

is to compare the potential impacts of tax asymmetries under current (1985)

tax law with their impacts under a reformed law with lower marginal rates,

exponential depreciation approximating economic depreciation, and no

investment tax credit.

     Compare the after—tax MPVs shown under "Reform" in Table 2 with the

after-tax NPVs under current law, shown on the right of the table under

"ACRS." The comparisons are easier to grasp in Figures 3A, 38, and 3C, which

plot after-tax NPVs for SYMTAX and ASYMTAX against pretax project

profitability measured by ZEROTAX NPV. Each figure shows NPV5 for a different

standard deviation of project cash flows.

     For a firm facing symmetric taxation on marginal investments, reform

reduces after—tax NPV when pretax NPV is negative or moderately positive.

This reflects the loss of the investment tax credit and accelerated

depreciation. Such a firm is better off when it finds projects with strong

positive NPVs, however, because reform lowers the marginal tax rate.




                                     —14—
     Reform decreases the present value of taxes on stand—alone projects,

except at large negative pre—tax NPVs. In those cases, the project is

abandoned almost immediately, before any taxes are paid under either the

current or reformed tax rules. Notice that the ASYMTAX NPVs equal the NOTAX

NPVs in the top row of the base case and low-risk blocks of Table 2.

    SYNTAX and ASYNTAX NPVs are equal at very high pre—tax NPVs, not shown in

Table 2 and off—scale in Figures 3A, 33, and 3C. When the stand—alone project

is so profitable that it always pays taxes, tax asymmetries are irrelevant.

    But in the interesting cases where pre-bax NEW is moderately positive or

negative, stand-alone projects are worth more under reform despite the loss of

the investment tax credit and accelerated depreciation. They are worth more

relative to projects taxed symmetrically or not taxed at all.   -




    These conclusions hold over a range of cash flow standard deviations, as

Figures 3A, 33, and 3C illustrate. We have also checked to confirm that they

hold for projects with faster and slower tax and economic depreciation, and

that they hold when the option to shorten or extend project life is "turned

off" and project life is fixed at what it would be under certainty.


11.1. Indexing depreciation.

     Table 3 and Figures 1IA, LjB, and IIC show NEWs when reform does not include

indexed tax depreciation. (The definitions of indexed and non-indexed

depreciation are reviewed in the Appendix.) The format is identical to Table

2 except that cash flow standard deviation is held at ax r . 15 and the

inflation rate is varied from .06 (the base case) to .12 and zero. Note that

the "Reform" NEWs calculated under zero inflation match the base case NEWs in

Table 2, except for minor numerical errors introduced by the Monte Carlo

simulation.




                                      —15—
      Without indexing higher inflation naturally means lower after—tax NPVs.

Otherwise the patterna we noted in Table 2 remain in Table 3. Reform hurts

symmetrically—taxed projects when pre—tax NPV is below or around zero, but

helps when pre-tax NPV is strongly positive. Stand-alone projects are uni-

formly helped, both absolutely and relative to symmetrically—taxed projects.


14.2. Paying interest on tax loss carryforwards.

      Paying interest on tax loss carryforwards is a natural remedy for tax

asymmetries. However, it is not necessarily a complete remedy. Paying

interest on carryforwards works if the firm is sure to pay taxes eventually.

If not, the government's option retains value, just as a call option does if

the exercise price increases at the interest rate.

      Table It and Figure 5 show the extent to which the remedy works. Even

with interest on carryforwards, there is a gap between ASYMTAX and SYMTAX

NPV5. Consider the base-case project at a profitability level yielding a pre-

tax NPV of 7.97 and an after-tax NPV under symmetric taxation of 3.21. (See

the   top block of numbers in Table It.) Allowing interest on carryforwards
increases   ASYMTAX NFl! from 1.05 to 1.19. This represents an improvement, but

does not elimiate the effects of the asymmetry. Allowing interest on

carryforwards makes less difference (compared to reform without interest) when

pre-tax value is very low (i.e., ASYMTAX approaches ZEROTAX) or very high

 (i.e., ASYMTAX approaches SYMTAX).

       The other two panels in Table 14 show the impact of   interest on
carryforwards when inflation is zero or 12 percent: allowing interest makes a
 bigger difference to ASYMTAX NFl! when inflation is high, but the effect of the
 asymmetries   remains.

       Allowing interest on loss carryforwards completely removes the burden of

 tax asymmetries only if the stand—alone firm or project is certain to regain


                                       —16—
tax—paying status sooner or later. But on this point full certainty requires

immortality for the firm or project and no limit on the carry—forward

period. In our simulations the investment project may live to year

100—-probably a good approximation of immortality—-but it may be abandoned

much earlier if its ex post performance is poor. The gap between SYNTAX and

ASYNTAX NPVs with interest on carryforwards shows that carryforwards have no

value to dead projects. Now if tax law allowed the firm to add a life

insurance premium as well as interest to unused loss carryforwards, the

potential extra burden of tax asymmetries would be essentially eliminated.

The life insurance premium would equal the probability that the firm

generating the carryforwards would pass away in the next taxyea.


4.3. Uncertainty and abandonment.

     We conclude with a brief comment on the role of uncertainty and

abandonment strategy in our simulation results.

     Figures 3R, 3W, and 3C confirm that the present value of the government's

tax claim on a firm or stand—alone project increases with the risk (standard

deviation) of the firm's or project's cash flows. But not all of the

differences between SYNTAX and ASYNTAX NPV5 can be attributed to risk. Some

would persist under certainty, simply because the stand-alone project may not

be profitable enough, at least in its early years, to use all of the tax

shields allotted to it.

      Panel A of Table 5 gives NPVs when risk disappears. First read across

 the row labelled      0. The ZEROTAX NPV is effectively zero. Under Reform

 tax assumptions, NPV is about —4 percent of project investment for both a

 taxpaying firm (SY1TAX) and the stand—alone project. Now read down the

 columns under "Reform": as risk increases, there is no change in SYNTAX NEWs

 (the small differences reported are due to numerical errors in the Monte Carlo


                                      —17—
simulation), but a steady decrease in after-tax NPVs for the stand-alone

project. At least for projects like thcse'examined in this paper——projects

with smooth downward trends in operating income——tax asymmetries have

virtually no effect in the absence of risk. They increase the tax burden on

incremental investment in risky assets but not on investment in safe assets.

     The results grouped under "ACRS" in Panel A tell a different story. The

present value of the government's tax claim on the stand—alone project is

about -7 percent of project investment (—7.5 vs. -0.6). The present value of

taxes increases further as risk increases, but clearly the largest part of the

damage done to the ASYMTAX NPVs can be traced to deferral of the stand—alone

project's investment tax credit and ACRS writeoffs.

     The NPVs in Panel A of Table 5 were calculated after "turning off" the

option to abandon the project early or to extend its life beyond its optimal

life under certainty. We wanted to show how asymmetric taxation and risk

interact with project life fixed.

     Panel B shows what happens when the option is turned on again. The

option sharply increases pre-tax NPVs as risk increases, because the firm can

bail out of the project, recovering part of the initial capital outlay, if ex

post performance is poor, but continue almost indefinitely if performance is

sufficiently good. The option likewise increases after—tax NPVs, even for the

stand—alone project. In other words, additional risk adds more value to the

option to abandon early or extend than it adds to the government's call

options on project cash flows. The government's options still have

significant value, however. For example, when     =   .25, they are worth 3
percent of project investment under tax reform (34.2 vs. 31.7) and 6.3 percent

of investment under current law (29.3 vs. 23.0). Note that the latter

difference is less' than the comparable difference for    r   0.   Thus, under



                                     -18-
current law, the option to abandon or extend may interact with the

government's call options to reduce the value of those options as risk

increases. That does not, however, affect the main results of this paper,

which rest on comparisons of after-tax NPVs at given risk levels under current

tax law and stylized tax reform. The potential costs and distortions

introduced by tax asymmetries depend on the differences between SYMTAX and

ASYMTAX NPV5 at given levels of investment risk. Under current tax law, these

differences are dramatic regardless of risk and regardless of whether the

option to abandon or extend project life is "turned on." Under our stylized

tax reform the differences are much smaller.


144• Investment in intangible assets.

     Our   tax   reform is too pure for real life. Many of the impurities of

actual tax reform make the potential costs of tax reform worse. For example,

the results presented so far overstate the difference reform might make

because most reform proposals continue to allow corporations to expense

investment in intangibles. Research and development (R & D) outlays are

expensed, for example, as are most startup costs and advertising, which is

sometimes intended to generate payoffs in the medium or long term.

     Under current law, the, present values of tax shields generated by

investment in tangible and intangible assets are roughly the same. That is,

the present value of ACRS writeoffs plus the investment tax credit is roughly

equal to the cost of the asset, and therefore roughly equivalent to writing

off the asset when it is bought. High-tech companies that invest largely in

 R&D or other intangibles are not materially disadvantaged versus smokestack

 companies that invest in tangible capital assets, providing both types of

 companies pay taxes year in and year out at the same marginal rate.




                                         —19—
     For stand—alone projects, however, shifting investment from tangible to

intangible assets makes the burden of tax asymmetries worse. Moreover, that

burden is carried over to tax reform proposals that allow intangible

investments to be expensed.

     In other words, tax reform which sets economically sensible tax

depreciation schedules for tangible assets only will tend to slant investment

towards R&D and other intangibles: high tech companies will gain relative to

smokestack companies as long as both types pay taxes regularly. However, the

potential burden of tax asymmetries on high—tech projects or companies will

remain substantial.


5. Summary

     In this paper we combine option pricing theory with Monte Carlo

simulation to derive numerical estimates of the potential effects of tax

asymmetries. We confirm earlier results showing that asymmetries can have

substantial effects on the after—tax NPV5 of incremental investment

projects. We go on to a more refined and detailed investigation, comparing

current (1985) law with a stylized reform which eliminates the investment tax

credit and sets tax depreciation approximately equal to economic

depreciation. The reformed marginal corporate tax rate is 33   percent.
     This reform would increase the present value of taxes on incremental

investments by firms which always pay taxes, but decrease the present value of

taxes on stand-alone projects. Reform dramatically reduces the potential

burden of tax asymmetries.

     The magnitudeof these shifts in tax burden of course depends on

numerical assumptions. However, the direction of the effects holds up over

all of our experiments. The experiments varied risk, the rate of economic

depreciation, and the ratio of fixed to variable cost. We also generated


                                     —20—
results under reform with and without inflation—indexing of tax depreciation,

and with and without interest on tax loss carry forwards. Although these

measures help, they do not completely eliminate the effects of tax

asymmetries.

     There is more work to be done. For example, we would like to model

uncertain inflation and develop a better understanding of its effects on value

under asymmetric taxation. We expect our general conclusions to continue to

hold, but this will enable us to make better recommendations regarding

inflation indexing and its likely impact on asset values.

     Although our methodology allows us to analyze a wide variety of tax codes

in considerable detail, it requires that the pretax cash flows of the firm or

project are not affected by the tax rules. There are interesting issues

regarding the effect of the tax system on the distributions of future cash

flows that we have not addressed.




                                     —21—
                                      APPENDIX

                 NUMERICAL ASSUMPTIONS MD DESIGN OF SIMULATIONS




   Virtually any a priori belief about the magnitudes of effects of tax
asymmetries   might be confirmed by a cleverly constructed numerical example.

Many of these examples would have at least one practical analog somewhere in

the corporate sector.

    Because our examples are intended to bring out the general effects of tax

reform on tax asymmetries, a "representative" investment project is called

for. Therefore, our numerical examples start with a base—case investment

project reflecting the implicit assumptions of the stylized tax reform

proposal we concentrate on. We want to avoid results which might be construed

as reflecting our choice of an oddball base—case project. Our base project is

therefore regular and unexceptional.



Project Life Under Certainty

    If tax and economic depreciation are exponentially declining, we want

project cash flows to decline in the same way. Ignore taxes, and consider a

project requiring an investment outlay of 1, with expected nominal cash

inflows of         x —   FCC.
                                FC stands for "fixed cost," but for the

moment we set FC 0.




                                        —22—
    If both the asset value and "variable" cash flow x decay at the

expected nominal rate 6, project NPV for economic life    H'is:


             Nfl    —l +   7   r0e_(1ó)tdt +


where r is the nominal risk—free interest rate, p a risk premium, r + p


is the expected opportunity cost of capital, and   e(1fóTh is the present

value of the proceeds from sale of assets at t     H.

    Since our simulations take place in a hypothetical risk—neutral world, we

may as well translate immediately to certainty equivalent flows. The decay

rate of the certainty equivalents of x is 6 E 6 + p . Discounting at

the risk—free rate r:


              NPV   —l + f
                               x0e_Fd)tdt    + e'6 ,                   (A.l)


Since this transformation does not affect NPV or decisions about project life

H, we assume certainty in the following discussion.

    The project summarized by (A.l) is nicely consistent, because the value of

the stream of cash flows x does decline at the assumed rate 6.

However, project or asset life has only a bit part in the story. Remember

that we assume certainty. If NPV > 0, the project would never be

voluntarily shut down; H could only be a date of exogenous physical

collapse. If Nfl     0, the natural base case assumption in a competitive

economy, then dNPV/dH = 0      for any H. In other words, the firm would be

just as happy to shut downat Hl as H100.



                                      —23—
          We can make project life a more interesting variable by introducing fixed

costs, Fcc. Varying FC will allow us to examine how the tax system

interacts with operating leverage. We also give variable cash flow                             a

possibly different decay rate A.


                    NPV    —1 + e_      +6)u +            —(r+A)t
                                                                    dt
                                                       x0e
                                                  0


                                              —   f
                                                  IT



                                                  0
                                                       FC0e —(r—i)td


                                     Cr+d)H o                                  Pc0
                                              +r+x(l_e—(r-f-X)H) — r—i               (1 —

                                                                                            (A. 2)


Note that fixed costs are assumed to increase at the inflation rate i.

      Assuming initial NPV > 0           at some life H, project life is determined
     12
by

            dNPV/dH     —Cr + 6)e16Th + x0e —(r+A)H —                    —Cr—i)H
                                                                FC0e
                              rH
If one multiplies through by e                 and translates to future values         x11 -

and
          FC,

                      dRPV/dH                 — Cr +            0
                                x11 —
                                        FcH                                                 (A.3)


where SV8 is asset value at H. In other words, the project continues as

long as the cash inflow x               exceeds the fixed cost FtJ plus the

opportunity cost of waiting a little longer for SV. The opportunity cost

of waiting is the time value of money r plus the continuing depreciation

rate 5.

          Now imagine a tax czar who models firm's investment decisions as in (A.2)

and who wishes to assign economically sensible depreciation rates and




                                                  —24—
depreciable lives to various asset classes. Asset lives depend on 6, A,

FC0 and x0; x0 is our index of profitability. The Czar would take

6 and A as determined in product and factor markets. Competition would

force profitability towards the level x0 at which NPV                  0. Then, given

operating leverage (FC0), asset life would be determined by (A.3))3

   The starting point for each of our numerical experiments is consistent

with this story. We pick pairs of 6 and depreciable life that roughly

correspond to those in the initial Treasury tax reform proposaiJ4 For each

pair, various initial levels of fixed costs are assumed. For each fixed cost

level, the initial level x0 and decay rate A of cash inflows are set

so that NPV    0 and optimal project life H equals the depreciable life

originally assumed. A numerical example is given in Table A.l.

    These base case projects are only the starting points for our experiments,

which calculate how the present value of the firm's tax liability depends on

profitability levels, cash flow variances, the option to end the project early

or late, and of course, on the specific tax rules.



Taxes and Project Life

    Suppose the firm always pays taxes at the marginal rate 1.                 Under

stylized tax reform:

                             H
              NPV —1 +       I   t(6 + i)e_        6)tdt +   edTh
                             0
                                                                                       (A.4)


                         +   I   (1   —
                                          T)x0e
                                                   )tdt —     1   (1   —
                                                                           T)Fc0e_(r)tdt




                                            —25—
where:

                                Present value of asset at t     H. Since asset
                                values equal tax book value throughout, no tax
                                is paid at the end of project life.


   H
+ I      t(6 + i)e_ )tdt        The present value of tax depreciationj5 The
   0
                                depreciation rate is expressed in real terms
                                as (6 + i). Think of this as indexed
                                depreciation: higher inflation would be
                                reflected in a higher r and a smaller 6,
                                i.e., in slower, possibly negative, decay of
                                nominal asset values. However, higher
                                inflation should not reduce tax depreciation
                                as a fraction of nominal asset value. Thus,
                                we add inflation back to keep the depreciation
                                rate in real terms.




By the way, the present value of non—indexed depreciation is:

                     I   6 i)er+o)tdt
In this case, tax depreciation charges decline at the real rate (6 + i)

even though inflation is positive and reflected in the nominal discount rate.

   The tax rules embodied in Eq. (A.3) describe the "reformed" tax system to

be compared to current (1985) law. The only rule not apparent from Eq. (A.3)

is the treatment of remaining book value at H; we assume it is written off as

a final, lump—sum depreciation allowance.




                                   —26—
   The NPV formula with taxes (A.4) simplifies to:


       NPV
                                   t(iS+j)        (l—T)x0
                                                            ie'>
                                                                                (A.5)

                                   (l—'r)FC
                               —              0
                                     r—i          l_e_(_i I


The condition for optimal project life is:
                                        l-t(&4-i)/(r+6)
      dNPV/dH   xfi —    — SVH(r+ó)[                        I   0               (A.6)



In this setup, the "tax term" in brackets tends to shorten project life)6

However, we do not assume that the tax Czar takes tax effects such as this

into account in setting depreciation rates or asset life classes. For our

experiments, we define depreciation rates, asset lives, etc., in terms of

pre—tax cash flows,



Optimal Abandonment

    When a project description such as that given in Table A.l is handed to

the Monte Carlo simulation, the assumption of a fixed project life H is left

behind. Project life may be cut short if cash flows                 are sufficiently

bad, or extended beyond H if they are sufficiently good. The maximum

project life is set far beyond H, at t — 100.

    The option to choose project life can be modelled as a long—lived American

put, with varying exercise price, written on an asset with a varying dividend

yield)7 The asset is the present value of future project cash flows

assuming those cash flows will continue to evolve stochastically out to the

far distant future. When the put is exercised, subsequent cash flows are




                                       —27—
given up in exchange for the exercise price. In our examples, exercise price

at t equals SV, asset value at t, plus the present value at t of

subsequent fixed costs, which are avoided by abandoning.

    The optimal exercise strategy for the put gives the decision rule for

choosing project life, and the value of the put, usually labelled "abandoment
      I.

value, is incorporated in adjusted project value.
                                                        18


              Adjusted     NPV with no            Abandonment
                 NPV                          +
                           abandonment            (put) value


Abandonment value and the optimal abandonment strategy are calculated

numerically3-9 using pretax cash flows. It would be nice to explore how

taxation affects the abandonment decision, but the computational problems seem

overwhelming once tax loss carry—backs and carry—forwards are introduced. For

example, including carry priviledges in the put valuation program would

require at least two additional state variables, one for tax !aid in the

previous three periods, and another for tax loss carryforwards, Some partial

analyses of how tax asymmetries interact with project life seem feasible, but

we must leave them for further work.



Summary

    The procedures used in our numerical experiments may thus be summed up as

follows.

    1. Choose an asset class described by a depreciation rate   '5   and a

prespecified asset life. Assume an investment outlay of 1.

    2. For various levels of operating leverage, measured by initial fixed

cost FC0, pick the initial cash inflow x0 and its decay rate A so




                                       —28—
that project NPV 0 and H, the optimal abandonment date under certainty,

matches the prespecified life for the asset class. This step sets the decay

rate A and assures that there is an initial cash flow level consistent

with NPV    0 at the assumed fixed life H.


    3. Pick a variance rate a2 for the cash flow realizations

and calculate optimal abandonment strategy and abandonment values. The

abandonment strategy does not depend on the initial value x0, although the

abandonment value does.2°

    4. Calculate the after—tax present value of the project for different

levels of x0 under whatever tax rules are being investigated, assuming

that project life is terminated by the abandonment strategy calculated in

Step 3. (For a few runs step 3 was "turned off" to check that our qualItative

results stand when project life is fixed.)




                                    —29—
TABLE 1: Project net present value as a percent of initial investment.
        Values are shown for symmetric tax (SYMTAX), asymmetric
        tax with and without carry provisions (ASYNTAX and
        NOCARRY), for a range of pre-tax profitability (ZEROTAX).
        The parameters for the calculations correspond to the base
        case described in the Appendix.




                      I    Reform   (indexed)            I

            ZEROTAX   I
                          SYNTAX    ASYNTAX NOCARRY
             —25.03
                          __________________
                           —17.46
                                                         I
                      j              —25.03     —25.03
             —19.86        —14.00    —19.86     —19.86
             —14.49 I      —10.45    —14.66     —14.71   I
              —5.32   I
                            —5.02     —8.02      —8.79
               7.97 I        3.21      1.05      —0.32   I
              20.54   I
                            11.32      9.85       8.19   I
              36.93   I
                            22.06     21.10      19.33   I
              60.22         37.45     36.98      35.05
                                          TABLE Al



                      Numerical Example of a Base—Case Project




Variable definitions



           — pre—tax cash flow revenue — variable cost —         fixed   cost

   x           revenue —   variable   cost, which decays at the nominal rate A

   PC          fixed costs, which increase at the inflation rate i

   r       —   nominal risk—free interest rate
               asset values.            1, the initial outlay. SV decays at
   SV                           SV0
               the néminal rate 6

       2
               variance rate of the realized cash flows

   H           optimal project life under certainty




                                           —30--
Base case values

                   .259                                            A       =   .002

                   .1                                              6       =   .12
   FC0
   II       =12                                                    r           .08

                                                                   1           .06

                                                                   a       =   .15
                                                                       x


Note: in real terms, cash flows decline at A + i                                 .062 per year.




Calculate NPV and check project life

                                        0
        NPV = —l   + e16)1 +                      (1—e —(r+X)H)
                                       r+A

                                            —     FC0       (le'')
                                                 r— I

                                                                                                  (A.6)
              — 1 + .0907 + 1.9778 — 1.0669                        0



dNPV/dH =          —          —                 = 0
              ZR        FCH       (r+ó)SVH
            = .2529 — .2054 — .0474                    0




Abandonment Value

        With 0          .15, and I! =    , the             MW of the project with no

abandonment Is —2.84. The value of the abandonment put with last exercise

date at t = 100, Is +3.13. Thus adjusted NPV (APV) is:

             APV NPV + abandonment value

                        —2.84 + 3.13            .29.




                                                            —3 —
   NPV without abandonment and 11   12 is zero. Thus APV = +.29      is

entirely due to the option to end the project before t = 12   or to extend it

to t13, 14,..., or 100.




                                    —32—
                                      FOOTNOTES


1.
      This paper develops previous work, Majd and Myers (1985).     Comments on

      that paper from Alan Auerbach, Henry Jacoby, Michael Keen and Cohn Mayer

      have significantly improved this paper.

2.    See, for example, Brennan (1979) and Rubinstein (1976).

3.    Since   the value of a call option is convex in the exercise price (see

      Merton (1973)), and no interest is paid on carry forwards, it is always

      optimal to use tax losses as soon as possible.

14•   Boyle (1977) first used a Monte Carlo simulation technique to value a

      European call option on a dividend-paying stock.

5.    See Myers and Turnbull (1977) and Fama (1977).
6.    Constantinecies   (1983) sets forth the conditions for a tax—paying entity

      to realize tax losses immediately and to defer gains as long as possible.

7.    Tax loss carryforwards cannot be "sold" at face value via financial

      leases, for example. A firm with carryforwards can sell tax depreciation

      deductions to a taxable lessor, but the lessor has to pay taxes on the

      lease payments received. The net gain to lessee plus lessor occurs only

      because tax dereciation is accelerated relative to the lease payments.

      See Myers, Dill and Bautista (1976). Even if the firm with carryforwards

      (lessee) captures the full net gain of the lease contract, it cannot

      capture what the depreciation tax shields would be worth to a taxable

      corporation.

8.    Issuing equity to buy bonds will only be effective under certain

      assumptions about debt and taxes. See Cooper and Franks (1983) for a

      discussion of some of the financial transactions designed to exploit the

      firm's tax losses.




                                        _33...
9. The percentages of firms with carryforwards is shown in Auerbach and

    Poterba's Table 1. The percentages are much smaller when weighted by the

    market value of equity, since firms with carryforwards tend to be small

    and poorly performing. The transition probabilities are from their Table

    7.

10. Our simulations of the stand—alone project show the maximum impact for

    tax asymmetries on incremental projects undertaken by a going concern.

    That is, the after—tax NPV of the stand—alone project is not reduced, and

    generally increased, by adding it to other assets subject to corporate

     tax. We make this statement based on simulations in Majd and Myers

     (1985).

11. Interpret H as a precommitted shutdown date. Firms do not precommit, but

     present value calculations usually assume they do. We relax this

     assumption in. the abandonment analysis described below.

12. Second—order conditions are satisfied in our examples.

13. The story now has some latent inconsistencies. First, as we will show,

     taxes may affect asset values and lives. Second, we have not shown that

     second—hand asset values would actually decline at a regular rate        when

           0. They would do so only if we introduced intangible assets, or at
     FCt
     least assets which are not depreciable for tax purposes.

14. Tax Reform for Fairness, Simplicity and Economic Growth, V. 2, U.S.

     Department of the Treasury, November 19811, ch. 8.01.

15. Depreciationtax shields should be discounted at r(1 —       t), the   after—tax

     riskiess rate, since they are safe nominal flows under symmetric

     taxation. See Ruback (1986). Thus, we have overstated the burden of a

     symmetric tax. We accept this bias to ensure comparability with the

     risk—neutral option valuation framework used in our simulation. The pre—



                                      —34—
      tax risk—free rate is standard in that framework. We are not certain

      that it should be when a long or short position on an option is held

      directly by a corporation, rather than by investors in its securities.

      For now, we can only note this as an open issue.

16. We would hardly claim this as a general result. For example, taxes would

      have no effect on project life providing depreciation is completed before

      H. (This is common under current law.) The present value of

      depreciation tax shields is then a tlsunkfl benefit and does not depend on

      H; all tax terms cancel out of the derivative.

17. See Myers and Majd (1985). The dividend yield is just project cash flow

         divided by the present value in t of expected subsequent cash flows




18.
      Xt+l, xt÷2 ,..:.
      yield depends only on time, not on the outcomes L,
                                                           '
                           As in the Myers-Majd paper, the assumption is that

                                                                    .


      MPV with no abandonment is calculated on an underlying asset which lives

      to t r 100, substantially greater than the optimal life under

      certainty. Thus, NPV with no abandonment is less than NEW from (A.2).

      Abandonment value more than makes up for this shortfall, so that Adjusted

      NPV exceeds NPV at the fixed life H. See Table Al for an example.

19. The numerical procedure differs in three ways from that used in Myers and

      Majd (1985). First, the uncertain cash flows       are modelled as a

      process with monthly (t/12) binomial jumps. Second, the present value of

      remaining fixed costs is rolled •into the exercise price. The Myers-Majd

      paper ignored fixed costs. Third, abandonment is not allowed before

      month 13.

      Accuracy of the abandonment value calculations was checked by comparing

      present results to results from the method used in Myers and Majd, and by




                                       —35—
    computing abandonment values numerically for special cases for which

    closed-form solutions are available.

20. The value of the option to extend project life is overstated in our

     simulations because we have not forced the firm to make replacement

     investments. The decision to finally bail out is determined solely by

     the downward trend of tlvariablefl   cash flow relative to fixed cost.
     However, this should not affect the relative sizes of pre—tax and after—
     tax NEWs holding initial profitability and risk constant.




                                          —36—
                                             REFERENCES


Auerbach, A., 1983, "Corporate Taxation in the U.S.," Brookings Papers on

    Economic Activity 2, 451-5O5.

Auerbach, A. and J. Poterba, 1986, "Tax Loss Carryforwards and Corporate Tax

        Incentives," this volume.

Ball, R. and J. Bowers, 1983, "Distortions Created by Taxes Which are Options

    on Value Creation: The Australian Resources Rent Tax Proposal,"

        Australian Journal of Management, Vol. 8, No. 2.

Black, F. and H. Scholes, 1973, "The Pricing of Options and Corporate

        Liabilities," Journal of Political Economy, 81, 637-659.

Boyle, P., 1977, "Options: A Monte Carlo Approach," Journal of Financial

        Economics, 323—338.

Brennan, Fl., 1979, "The Pricing of Contingent Claims in Discrete Time Models,"

        Journal of Finance, 53—68.

Constantinedes, G., 1983, "Capital Market Equilibrium with Personal Tax,"

        Econometrica, 611—636.

Cooper, I., and J. Franks, 1983, "The Interaction of Financing and Investment

        Decisions when the Firm Has Unused Tax Credits," Journal of Finance, 571-

        533.

Cordes, J., and S. Sheffrin, 1983, "Estimating the Tax Advantage of Corporate

        Debt," Journal of Finance, 95—105.

Cox, J., and S. Boss, 1976, "The Valuation of Options for Alternative

        Stochastic Processes," Journal of Financial Economics, 1115_166.

Cox, J., S. Ross, and M. Rubinstein, 1979, "Option Pricing: A Simplified

        Approach," Journal of Financial Economics, 227—228.

Fama,    E., 1977,   "Risk Adjusted Discount Rates and Capital Budgeting under

        Uncertainty," Journal of Financial Economics, 3—24.


                                              r
Galai, D., 1983, "Corporate Income Taxes and the Valuation of Claims on the

     Corporation," UCLA Working Paper #9—83.

Green, R. C., and E. Talmor, 1985, "on the Structure and Incentive Effects of

     Tax Liabilities," Journal of Finance, 140, 1O95—1114.

Majd, 5., and S. Myers, 1985, "Valuing the Government's Tax Claim on Risky

     Corporate Assets," NBER Working Paper No. 1553.

Merton, R. C., 1973, "Theory of Rational Option Pricing," Bell Journal of'

     Economics and Management Science, 111—183.

Myers, S. C., D. A. Dill, and A. J. Bautista, 1976, "Valuation of Financial

     Lease Contracts," Journal of Finance, 799-819.

Myers, S. C. and S. H. Turnbull, 1977, "Capital Budgeting and the Capital

     Asset Pricing Model: Good News and Bad News," Journal of Finance, 321—

     332.

Myers, S., and S. Majd, 1985, "Calculating Abandonment Value Using Option

     Pricing Theory,t' MIT Sloan School of Management Working Paper.

Pitts, C. and J. Franks, 1984, "Asymetric Taxes, Mergers and Risk-Taking,"

     mimeo.

Ruback, H., 1986, "Calculating the Present Value of Riskless Cash Flows,"

     Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Rubinstein, H., 1976, "The Valuation of Uncertain Income Streams and the

     Pricing of Options," Bell Journal of Economics, 407_1425.

Smith, C. and R. H. Stulz, 1985, "The Determinants of Firms' Hedging

      Policies," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 391—405.

U.S. Department of the Treasury, November 1984, Tax Reform for Fairness,

      Simplicity and Economic Growth.




                                        —38—
TABLE 2: Project net present value as a percent of initial investment.
           Values are shown for symmetric tax (SYNTAX), asymmetric
           tax with carry provisions (ASYMTAX) and their difference
           (DIFF), for a range of pre—tax profitability (ZEROTAX).
           Each panel corresponds to different levels of project risk
           (sigma) and compares a stylized tax reform (with indexed
           depreciation) to current law (ACRS)..


Base Case (sigma = 0.15)

                   Reform (indexed)             I
                                                              ACRS              I

 ZEROTAX           SYMTAX  ASYMTAX       DIFF I     SYNTAX    ASYNTAX   DIFF I
______
           I




 —25.03
        ___________________
           I

          —17.46 —25.03 7.57
                             I ___________________ I
                                 —9.60 —25.03                           15.43
  —19.86 I          —14.00    —19.86     5.86         —6.81    —19.86   13.05   I
  —14.49   I        —10.45    —14.66     4.21   I     —4.05    —14.74   10.69   I
   —5.32   I
                     —5.02     —8.02     3.00         —0.89     —9.40    8.51   I
    7.97   I
                      3.21      1.05     2.16   I      4.76     —2.17    6.93
   20.54             11.32      9.85     1.47   I     11.01      5.16    5.85
                                                                                I




   36.93             22.06     21.10     0.96   I     19.48     14.78    4.70   I
   60.22 I           37.45     36.98     0.47         31.83     28.46    3.37   I

Low Risk (sigma = 0.10)

           I        Reform   (indexed)          I              ACRS             I

 ZEROTAX           SYMTAX    ASYMTAX     DIFF       SYMTAX    ASYMTAX    DIFF I
______
 —25.03
        I __________________ I __________________ I
           —17.46 —25.03                 7.57   I     —9.60    —25.03   15.43   I
  —19.86       I
                    —14.00    —19.86     5.86   I     —6.81    —19.86   13.05   I
  —14.67       I
                    —10.53    —14.68     4.15   I     —4.01    —14.68   10.67   I
   —8.94             —6.93     —9.46     2.53   I     —1.57     —9.81    8.24   I
   —0.76             —2.31     —3.95     1.64   I      0.85     —5.82    6.67
    9.63              4.07                             5.27
                                                                                    I




               I
                                3.06     1.01   I               —0.35    5.62
   24.37             13.58     13.09     0.49         12.66      8.12    4.54
   46.59
                                                                                    I



                     28.22     28.05     0.17         24.39     21.14    3.25


High Risk (sigma = 0.25)

               I
                    Reform   (indexed)          I
                                                               ACRS                 I



 ZEROTAX       I
                   SYMTAX    ASYMTAX     DIFF I     SYNTAX    ASYNTAX    DIFF I
______
 —25.03
        __________________
         —17.46
               I
                —25.03
                           I __________________
               I                         7.57   j     —9.60    —25.03   15.43   I
  —19.59       I
                    —13.87    —19.82     5.95         —6.79    —19.93   13.14   I
  —12.04       I
                     —9.25    —14.39     5.14   j     —3.93    —15.44   11.51   I
    9.26       I
                      4.27      0.05     4.22   I      5.78     —3.74    9.52
   30.81 I           18.35     15.01     3.34   I     16.73      8.76    7.97   I
   46.17             28.48     25.82     2.66         24.74     18.02    6.72   I
   66.76   J         42.14     40.05     2.09   I     35.67     30.11    5.56   I
   93.14   I
                     59.67     58.19     1.48   I     49.74     45.51    4.23
TABLE 3: Project net present value as a percent of initial investment.
            Values are shown for symmetric tax (SYNTAX), asymmetric
            tax with carry provisions (ASYNTAX) and their difference
            (DIFF), for a range of pre-tax profitability (ZEROTAX).
            Each panel corresponds to different levels of inflation (i),
            and compares a stylized tax reform (without indexed
            depreciation) to current law (ACRS).


Base Case (1 = 0.06)

            I
                          Reform (not indexed)                    I
                                                                                             ACRS
 ZEROTAX I              SYNTAX       ASYNTAX           DIFF I                 SYNTAX       ASYMTAX           DIFF
______ __________________
  —25.03
            I
              —25.03  5.71
                           __________________
                             —9.60
                          —19.32   —25.03 15.43
                                                                  I                                                     I


  —19.86                  —15.86       —19.86          4.00                      —6.81       —19.86         13.05
  —14.49 I                —12.42       —14.72          2.30                      —4.05       —14.74         10.69
    —5.32 I                —8.47        —9.30          0.83                      —0.89        —9.40          8.51
     7.97                  —1.60        —1.93          0.33                       4.76        —2.17          6.93
    20.54                   5.92         5.76          0.16                      11.01         5.16          5.85
    36.93                  16.23        16.15          0.08                      19.48        14.78          4.70
    60.22                  31.25        31.23          0.02 I                     31.83       28.46          3.37


No Inflation (i = 0)

                I
                          Reform (not indexed)                        I
                                                                                             ACRS
 ZEROTAX I               SYMTAX       ASYMTAX           DIFF                   SYNTAX       ASYMTAX          DIFF
_____________   I       _______________________________________       I       _______________________________________       I
   —25.02       j
                           —17.46       —25.02          7.56 I                    —6.79       —25.02        18.23
   —19.86 I                —14.00       —19.86          5.86                      —4.00       —19.86        15.86
   —14.49 I                —10.46       —14.67          4.21                      —1.14       —14.68        13.54
    —5.21 I                 —5.00        —8.00          3.00 I                      3.32       —8.16        11.48
     8.72 I                   3.68        1.57          2.11                      10.42         0.98         9.44
    20.54                   11.31         9.85          1.46 I                    16.65         8;97         7.68
    36.49                   21.76        20.87          0.89                      25.17        19.37         5.80
    59.88                   37.23        36.83          0.40                      37.74        34.17         3.57


High Inflation (i = 0.12)

                    I
                           Reform (not indexed)                           I
                                                                                              ACRS
  ZEROTAX I               SYNTAX      ASYNTAX           DIFF I                 SYMTAX       ASYNTAX           DIFF
______ __________________
                    I      I __________________    I
   —25.05     —25.05I
                      3.96     —12.26
                           —21.09     —25.05 12.79                        I




   —19.86                  —17.62       —19.86          2.24              I
                                                                                  —9.46       —19.86         10.40
   —14.54   I              —14.27       —14.92          0.65              I
                                                                                  —6.79       —14.85          8.06
    —5.25   I              —10.96       —11.28          0.32              I
                                                                                  —4.34       —10.57          6.23
     9.29   I               —4.17        —4.40          0.23              I
                                                                                   1.10        —4.39          5.49
    20.90   I                2.39         2.26          0.13 J                     6.48         1.51          4.97
    36.57   I               11.96        11.91          0.05 I                    14.41        10.16          4.25
    60.96   I               27.53        27.52          0.01 I                    27.18        23.97          3.21
TABLE 4: Project net present value as a percent of initial investment.
           Values are shown for symmetric tax (SYNTAX), asymmetric
           tax with carry provisions (ASYMTAX), and their difference
           (01FF) for a range of pre—tax profitability (ZEROTAX).
           Each panel corresponds to different levels of inflation (i),
           and compares the stylized tax reform (with indexed deprec-
           iation) with and without interest in carryforwards.


Base Case (i = 0.06)

                Reform (with interest)      Ref on (without interest) I
 ZEROTAX I     SYNTAX   ASYMTAX     DIFF   SYMTAX   ASYNTAX      DIFF
  —25.03       —17.46    —25.O3     7.57    —17.46       —25. 03   7.57
  —19.86       —14.00    —19.86     5.86    —14 •   00   —19.86    5.86
  —14.49 I     —10.45    —14.65     4.20    —10.45       —14.66    4.21 I
   —5.32 I      —5.02     —7.91     2.89     —5.02        —8.02    3.00
    7.97 I       3.21      1.19     2.02      3.21         1.05    2.16   I



   20.54 I      11.32      9.98     1.34     11.32         9.85    1.47
   36.93 I      22.06     21.19     0.87     22.06        21:10    0.96   I



   60.22 I      37.45     37.05     0.40     37.45        36.98    0.47   I




No Inflation (i = 0)

           I    Reform (with interest)      Reform (without interest) I
 ZEROTAX   I   SYNTAX   ASYMTAX     DIFF   SYNTAX   ASYMTAX      01FF I
  —25.02   I
               —17.46    —25.02     7.56    —17.46       —25.02    7.56 I
  —19.86   I
               —14.00    —19.86     5.86    —14.00       —19.86    5.86   I



  —14.49   I
               —10.46    —14.67     4.21    —10.46       —14.67    4.21
   —5.21   I
                —5.00     —7.97     2197     —5.00        —8.00    3.00 I
    8.72   I
                 3.68      1.62     2106      3.68         1.57    2.11   I



   20.54   1
                11.31      9.89     1.42     11.31         9.85    1.46
   36.49        21.76     20.90     0.86     21.76        20.87    0.89
   59.88        37.23     36.85     0.38     37123        36.83    0.40

High Inflation (i = 0.12)
                Reform (with interest)      Reform (without interest) I
 ZEROTAX       SYNTAX   ASYMTAX     01FF   SYNTAX   ASYNTAX      01FF
  —25.05   I   —17.48    —25.05     7.57    —17.48       —25.05    7.57
  —19.86   I
               —14.00    -19. 86    5.86    —14.00       —19.86    5.86
  —14.54   I
               —10.48    —14.68     4.20    —10.48       —14.68    4.20
   —5.25   I
                —4.92     —7 .70    2.78     —4.92        —7.86    2.94
    9.29   I
                 4.12      2.23     1.89      4.12         2.01    2.11
   20.90   I    11.60     10.26     1.34     11.60        10.07    1.53
   36.57   I    21.84     21.04     0.80     21.84        20.90    0.94
   60.96         37.96    37.57     0.39     37.96        37.47    0.49
                                              Table 5

Effects of uncertainty and abandonment strategy on pre—tax and after-tax NPVs

                      NPV as percent of project investment. Ini-

                       tial profitability and other project assump-

                       tions are given in Table Al.



    A. NEWs with project life fixed at 12 years.

                                                   Reform                 ACRS
                 0
                            NOTAXb         SYMTAXb     ASYMTAX   SYMTAXb         ASYMTAX

                            -0.6           —3.7         —3.7     —1.2            —7.5

                 .15         0.3           —3.1         —8.6     —0.7            —17.1

                 .25         1.2           —2.l        —12.5     —0.2            —11.1



    B. NEWs with option to abandon before year 12 or to extend life
        to year 100.
                                                   Reform                 ACRS

                 ax         NOTAXb         SYMTAXb     ASYMTAX   SYMTAXb         ASYMTAX

                            —0.6           —3.7         -3.7     —1.2             —7.5

                 .15        26.8           15.1!        1k. 1     111.2            8.8
                 .25        511.8          311.2        31.7     29.3             23.0

a   We actually used a         r    .001   in the Monte Carlo simulation. Note that the
    option   to abandon early or extend project life become valueless as

     ax +   0.       Thus the figures in the first row of each panel are the same.
b
    The results in these columns should in principle be identical.

    Differences reflect numerical errors introduced by the Monte Carlo

    simulation.
                          Taxable
Taxes                     I ncome=O
 paid                                                               Taxes
                                                                    paid by
                                                                    firm
                                                                  (heavy line)




                                                             • statutory
                                                               tax rate

                            Taxes paid
                           by stand-
                     alone project




    a

                                 Taxes paid             Taxable
                                 by IBM on the          income
                                 same project




Figure 1. Taxes paid as a function of taxable income.
        Figure 2: Project NPV as a function of pretax NPV: Reform with indexed
        depreciation. The parameters are for the base case described in the
        Appendix.




       25



       20
'S.
4.'

'p
E      15
•1'

I>
I)




       10

.9
4,

       5
'I-

 0
4,
£
 V      0
 U
 L
 I
 a.
      —5
>
IL
z
      —10




      —15

            —15          —5               5              15              25

                                     Pre—tax NPV

                  key:   Q zerotax       + symtax      Av asymtax       nocarry
            Figure 3a: Project NPV as a function of pretax NPV: Reform with indexed
            depreciation versus ACRS. The parameters are for the base case described
            in the Appendix.




       40




.-'    30
1
V
E
4.,
m
       20



.2
4.,

.E     10
'4-
 0
4,

 I
 U
 L      0
 I
'Ia.
 >
 &
 Z —10



       —20

            —20                    0                    20                     40

                                       Pie—tax NIN

               key:    0 zerotax       + syntax (reform)      0 asyintax (reform)
                               symtax (acts)      X  asymtax (acrs)
      • Pigure 3b: Project NPV as a function of pretax NPV: Reform with indexed
        depreciation versus ACRS, when cash flow volatility is 10% (other parameters
        are for the base dase described in the Appendix).




      25




      20
/
4'
c
I
F     15
4,
I,
V
>
      10

.9
1
       5
0
4,
C
 V     0
 I)
 I.
 I
 0.
      —5
>
0.
z
      —10




      —15

           —15             —5               5                15               25

                                     Pre—tax NPV

             key:   fl   zerotax    ÷ synitax (reform)       0 asymtax (reform)
                           A symtax (acrs)       $, asyintax (acrs)
          Figure 3c: Project NPV as a function of pretax Nfl: Reform with indexed
          depreciation versus ACRS, when cash flow volatility is 25% (other parameters
          are for the base case described in the Appendix).




     40




     30
4,
c

     20




     —20




     —30

           —30               —10                  10                 30

                                      Pre—tax NFV

             key:     D zerotax      + symtax (reform)         asymtax (reform)
                              symtax (acts)      )< asymtax (acts)
        Figure 4a: Project NPV as a function of pretax Nfl: Reform without indexed
        depreciation versus ACRS. The parameters are for the base case described
        in the Appendix.




       40




I'
4,
       30
 £
 V

 E
'4,
 'I

 V
>      20



24,
.5
       10
II-
0
4,
c
V
U
1..     0
V
a.
'-I
>
0.
z     —10




      —20

        —20                    0                     20                    40

                                   Pie—tax NPV

            key:   Q zerotax       + symtax   (reform)      0 asymtax (reform)
                            symiax (acrs)         it asymtax (acrs)
        • Figure 4b: Project NPV as a function of pretax NPV: Reform without indexed
          depreciation verus ACRS, when inflation is 07. (other parameters are for the
          base case described in the Appendix).




       40




r'4'   30
c
V
E
4,
 I)

 U
 >



24'
5-

SE      10
'I-
 0
4,
 V
 I)
 t.     0
 V
 a.
¼1

>
L
       —10




       —20

             —20                 0                      20                        40

                                      Pre—tax NPV

               key:   o               + syntax   (reform)        0 asymtax   (reform)
                           A syntax   (acrs)         X asymtax   (acrs)
            Figure 4c: Project NPV as a function of pretax NPV: Reform without indexed
            depreciation veràus ACRS, when inflation is 12% (other parameters are for the
            base case described in the Appendix).




       40




F'
4,
       30
C
V
F
4,
II
V
>      20
£
24,
S      10
II-
0
4,
c
V
U
L       0
V
a.
¼,

>
a
z     —10




      —20

        —20                         0                    20                        40

                                        Pre—tax NIN
               key:     U zerotax       + syintax (reform)        0 asymtax   (reform)
                             A symtax (acrs)          X asymtax   (acrs)
            Figure 5: ProjectNPV asa function of pretax NPV: Reform (with indexed
            depreciation) with and without interest on carry forwards. The parameters
            are for the base casedescribed in the Appendix.




       70
                                                                                        —      —




       60

p.'
.IJ

 c     50
 V
 E
4,
 'I    40
 V
 >

       30
2
4,

       20
 I,-
 0
 4,
  £     10
  V
  U
  I.
  V
 'I
  a.



  >
  B.   —1
  z
       —20



       —30

             —30         —10           10              30         50          70

                                        Pie—tax NP'!

              key:      Q zerotax      + symtax (with interest)    0 asymtax (with interest)
                                      asymtax (without interest)
