                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          PHYSICIANS TREATING PHYSICIANS:
                     INFORMATION AND INCENTIVES IN CHILDBIRTH

                                           Erin M. Johnson
                                           M. Marit Rehavi

                                         Working Paper 19242
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19242


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2013




This paper has benefited from comments by: Kate Baicker, David Card, Joe Doyle, Jonathan Ketcham,
Patrick Kline and participants at ASHE, BU/Harvard/MIT Health Seminar, Chicago Harris, Michigan,
NBER SI: Health Care, RAND, SFU and UBC. We also thank Doug Almond, Charlie Brown, Randy
Ellis, Amy Finkelstein, Josh Gottlieb, Tom McGuire, Edward Norton, Jeff Smith, and Heidi Williams
for helpful discussions. We are grateful to Beate Danielsen at Health Information Solutions for performing
the confidential merge, to Louise Hand and Betty Henderson-Sparks at OSHPD for their assistance
in accessing the confidential data, and to Daniela Carusi, MD for sharing her clinical expertise. Rehavi
gratefully acknowledges funding from CIFAR and the Hampton Fund and thanks the RWJ Scholars
program for its financial support in the initial stages of this project. Corresponding author: Erin M.
Johnson, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, phone: 617-715-4836, fax: 617-258-6786,
email: erinmj@mit.edu The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Erin M. Johnson and M. Marit Rehavi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Physicians Treating Physicians: Information and Incentives in Childbirth
Erin M. Johnson and M. Marit Rehavi
NBER Working Paper No. 19242
July 2013
JEL No. I10

                                                 ABSTRACT

This paper provides new evidence on the interaction between patient information and financial incentives
in physician induced demand (PID). Using rich microdata on childbirth, we compare the treatment
of physicians when they are patients with that of comparable non-physicians. We exploit a unique
institutional feature of California to determine how inducement varies with obstetricians' financial
incentives. Consistent with PID, physicians are almost 10 percent less likely to receive a C-section,
with only a quarter of this effect attributable to differential sorting of patients to hospitals or obstetricians.
Financial incentives have a large effect on C-section probabilities for non-physicians, but physician-
patients are relatively unaffected. Physicians also have better health outcomes, suggesting overuse of
C-sections adversely impacts patient health.


Erin M. Johnson
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-523
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
erinmj@mit.edu

M. Marit Rehavi
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
marit.rehavi@ubc.ca
I        Introduction

It has been proposed that as much as $210 billion, or nearly 10 cents of every health
dollar, is spent on “medically unnecessary” treatment (IOM 2012, Table S-1).1 This
overuse is often ascribed to physicians who face financial incentives to over-treat. The
extent to which physicians respond to financial incentives is a longstanding question in
health economics. Much of the debate in this literature has centered on the physician-
induced demand (PID) hypothesis.2 Because patients do not have the necessary medical
knowledge to make independent treatment decisions, physicians both recommend treat-
ments and profit from performing them. The PID hypothesis posits that physicians can
therefore shift patient demand and move treatment quantity in the direction of their own
preferences. Much of the empirical literature on PID estimates the short-run change in
quantity or intensity of treatment in response to shocks to physician incomes (Gruber
& Owings (1996)) or fee changes (Nguyen & Derrick (1997), Yip (1998), Gruber et al.
(1999), Jacobsen et al. (2010)). However, less is known about the overall level of distor-
tion to care due to asymmetric information. This paper combines rich micro-data on the
treatment of patients with differing degrees of medical knowledge with variation in physi-
cians’ financial incentives to measure PID in a stable market and to quantify impacts on
patient health.
        We use new data on physician-mothers giving birth to study the treatment decisions
and health outcomes of medically informed patients. Physician-mothers are identified by
merging confidential California Vital Statistics (VS) data with physician licensure data.
These data allow us to compare the treatment and outcomes of physician-mothers and
their infants with that of comparably educated parents, while controlling for a rich set
    1
     The IOM defines care as unnecessary if it falls into any of the following categories: “beyond evidence-
established levels, discretionary use beyond benchmarks, or unnecessary choice of higher-cost services”
(IOM 2012, p. S-7).
   2
     See McGuire (2000) or Chandra, Cutler & Song (2012) for a review of the literature.


                                                     1
of clinical and demographic information. We supplement the analysis with data from a
second state, Texas.
       Existing studies generally test for inducement by varying either the incentive to induce
(e.g., shocks to physician incomes or fee changes) or the opportunity to induce (e.g., the
degree of patient information). This paper merges the strands of the literature by jointly
examining the opportunity and incentive to induce. We first compare Cesarean section (C-
section) rates of physician-mothers with non-physician mothers. Under PID, we expect
physician-mothers to have lower C-section rates. C-sections are typically more highly
reimbursed than vaginal deliveries and physician-patients are more informed regarding
their need for the procedure. A unique institutional feature of California then allows us
to examine how inducement differs across financial incentive environments. Specifically,
we compare the gap in C-section rates between physician and non-physician mothers
inside and outside of a large system of HMO-owned hospitals. While C-sections are
typically more highly reimbursed than vaginal deliveries under fee-for-service payment
systems, within these HMO-owned hospitals neither the physician nor the hospital has
a financial incentive to perform C-sections. Finally, we compare health outcomes of
physician-mothers and their infants with those of non-physician patients.
       In addition to being well-suited to studying inducement, medical decisions in child-
birth are of interest by their own rights.3 Nearly one in three U.S. births is delivered
by C-section, up from one in five in 1996. Given the difference in costs between C-
sections and vaginal deliveries, this has resulted in annual medical costs from childbirth
that are as much as $3 billion higher today than in 1996. Adding to concerns, the C-
section rate varies considerably across US states (from a low of 22.6% in Alaska to a
   3
     Childbirth is a medical event that occurs for a pre-defined population (pregnant women) within
a finite time frame. There is a finite set of treatment options, and patient outcomes are observable.
Moreover, there is little opportunity for patients to do independent research or seek second opinions once
labor has begun.



                                                    2
high of 39.7% in Louisiana in 2010), without commensurate variation in outcomes. Even
within geographic areas notable variation across hospitals and across physicians has been
documented (Epstein and Nicholson (2009), Kozhimannil et al. (2013)).
   To date, clinical and demographic factors have been unable to fully explain variation
in C-section rates across places, practices, and over time (Baicker, Buckles and Chandra
(2006)). This has led to speculation that non-medical factors are at work.           As the
Chief Obstetrician for Sutter Health noted: “Cesarean birth ends up being a profit center
in hospitals, so there’s not a lot of incentive to reduce them” (LA Times, May 2009).
In addition to financial incentives, maternal preferences, convenience, and malpractice
concerns may also contribute to C-section rates.
   We find that physician-mothers are significantly less likely to have a C-section than
other highly educated patients. In California physician-mothers are 7% less likely to
have a C-section; in Texas there is an 8% difference. This difference stems not from
different preferences for attempting labor, but instead comes almost entirely from the
two-thirds of C-sections that are performed after an attempt at labor (herein “unsched-
uled C-sections”).   Doctors are 11% less likely to be ushered into surgery as a result
of complications arising during labor or the failure of labor to progress. Moreover, even
after accounting for differential sorting of patients to hospitals, physician-mothers have
unscheduled C-section rates that are 9% lower than other educated mothers. After con-
trolling for the attending obstetrician, the difference is just under 8% in Texas.
   We also find a stark difference in the impact of the incentive environment on informed
and uninformed patients. Financial incentives have a large effect on a non-physician’s
probability of receiving a C-section: in hospitals where there is a financial incentive to
perform C-sections, they have much higher C-section rates. However physician-patients
appear to be unaffected by the financial environment on net (they have the same risk-



                                             3
adjusted C-section rates inside and outside of HMO-owned hospitals).        These results
suggest financial incentives are an important determinant of treatment; and that patient
information is an effective counterweight.
     The consequences of these treatment differences are not only financial. Physician-
mothers and their infants have reduced morbidity compared with other patients. More-
over, it appears that physicians achieve these outcomes without using more hospital re-
sources. Controlling for method of delivery (and netting out the substantial cost savings
of fewer C-sections among physician-mothers), the hospital charges for physician-births
are similar to those of non-physicians.
     The remainder of the paper proceeds in five sections. Section II reviews the existing
literature. Section III provides background on the clinical setting. Section IV presents
the data and empirical methodology, Section V presents the results, and VI concludes.



II      Previous Literature

The concept of induced demand is first attributed to Evans (1974). McGuire (2000)
defines PID as:

       “when the physician influences a patient’s demand for care against the physi-
       cian’s interpretation of the best interests of the patient.”

Under induced demand a physician shifts the patient’s demand curve in the direction of
her own interests. Physicians can effect such a shift, because patients must rely on the
physician to inform them of the treatment options and their expected risks and benefits.
     In an ideal world, the econometrician would compare actual treatment quantity with
the quantity the physician believes the patient would demand if she were perfectly in-




                                              4
formed. Because this is not observable,4 empirical tests for PID have followed one of
two alternative approaches. The first approach exploits variation in physicans’ incentives
to induce. This literature began with researchers measuring the response of treatment
choices to changes in physician availability (i.e., the physician-to-population ratio). All
else equal, an increase in provider availability should decrease physician income and
increase the incentive to induce through its impact on the marginal utility of income
(McGuire & Pauly (1991)). Numerous authors have documented a positive cross-sectional
correlation between physician supply and rates of surgery (Fuchs (1978), Cromwell and
Mitchell (1986), Rossiter and Wilensky (1983)). Following Dranove and Wehner’s (1994)
critique, this empirical approach was superseded by studies exploiting exogenous shocks
to physician incomes.5 Gruber and Owings (1996) provides credible evidence of PID by
exploiting the shock to obstetrician incomes resulting from the secular decline in fertility
rates in the 1970s. They find that a 5% fall in incomes leads physicians to increase the
C-section rate by 1 percentage point.
       A related test for inducement exploits changes in physician fees. In response to a
fee reduction, physicians have been found to make up lost revenue by increasing volume
(Nguyen and Derrick (1997), Yip (1998), Jacobson et al. (2010)).6 There are also studies
which find little evidence of income effects, with physicians altering quantities in the
direction of the fee change. For example, Gruber et al. (1999) finds an increase in the C-
section rate in the Medicare population after C-sections became more highly reimbursed
relative to vaginal deliveries. Specifically, they found a 0.7 ppt increase for a $100 increase
in the fee differential. In both of these approaches identification comes from shocks to
   4
     Due to heterogeneity in physician beliefs and skills and the inherent uncertainty in patient outcomes,
even ex post it is not possible to determine the optimal treatment plan in many cases.
   5
     Dranove and Wehner (1994) show that the aforementioned approach would lead one to conclude that
increases in the supply of obstetricians are responsible for increases in the number of births in an area.
   6
     Such exercises are more complicated than the simple income shock model as the fee change involves
potentially offsetting income and substitution effects (see McGuire and Pauly (1991).



                                                    5
providers; as a result they cannot estimate the overall level of PID.
    The second broad approach to testing for PID uses variation in the information asym-
metry necessary for physicians to induce demand. These papers typically compare the
treatment physicians choose for themselves with the treatment non-physicians receive
(Bunker and Brown (1973), Hay and Leahy (1982), Chou et al (2006)).7 For example,
in a Swiss survey Domenigetti et al. (1993) find that physicians report receiving one of
seven major surgical interventions one-third less often than non-physicians. In a more
recent survey of U.S. physicians, Ubel et al. (2011) finds physicians want less intensive
treatment for themselves than they would recommend to their patients in two fatal dis-
ease scenarios. This empirical approach has also been employed more generally to test for
agency problems when employing experts. Levitt and Syverson (2008) find that houses
are kept on the market slightly longer and sold for a higher price when the real estate
agent is also the seller.
    The above studies highlight the role of physicians’ financial incentives in treatment
decisions. Financial remuneration, however, is unlikely to be the only factor in the physi-
cians’ calculation of the marginal costs and marginal benefits of treatment choices. For
example, Currie and MacLeod (2006) study malpractice in the context of childbirth and
find that liability concerns are a significant determinant of treatment choices.



III      Labor and Delivery in the U.S.

Under PID treatment quantities are determined in equilibrium by physicians equating
the marginal cost of inducing demand with its marginal benefit. PID models predict
over-provision of care under fee-for-service and under-provision of care under capitated
   7
     Currie, Lin and Zhang (2011) take a different approach. They send simulated patients to physicians
in China and compare the rates of antibiotic prescription for patients signaling their understanding of
appropriate antibiotic use with that of similar patients who do not signal this understanding.


                                                  6
payment systems (Ellis & McGuire (1986), McGuire & Pauly (1991), McGuire (2000)).8
In the setting of childbirth, the number of deliveries is fixed from the perspective of the
physician; the physician’s primary treatment margin is the method of delivery. Thus, in
childbirth, overuse (underuse) takes the form of more (less) resource-intensive delivery
methods.9 This section provides an overview of the clinical decision-making process in
labor and delivery, focusing on factors influencing the choice to deliver vaginally or via
C-section.
       There are several clinical situations in which a C-section is clearly indicated, and
the medical guidelines recommend scheduling a C-section before labor begins for many of
these cases.10 In California approximately 10 percent of first-time mothers have scheduled
C-sections, and the remaining 90 percent attempt vaginal delivery.11
       An attempt at vaginal delivery most often begins with the natural onset of labor.
However, in cases where waiting for the onset of labor could harm the mother or fetus,
the patient and provider can schedule a medical induction of labor (15% of first births in
California are medically induced).12 In California nearly 80% of labor attempts result in
a successful vaginal delivery. However, if the physician believes the risks associated with
continuing labor outweigh the benefits of avoiding a Cesarean delivery, she can recommend
   8
     Ellis & McGuire show under-provision results under capitation if physicians put more weight on
profits than patient care.
   9
     See Gruber & Owings (1996) for a model of the delivery method decision under fee-for-service.
  10
     The conditions for which the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) rec-
ommends Cesarean delivery before a trial of labor are breech or transverse lie, placenta previa, triplets
and higher order multiples, uterine rupture (or history of uterine rupture), three or more prior Cesarean
sections, prior classical Cesarean section, and certain types of rare cardiac or neurologic conditions in
the mother. A history of certain types of uterine surgery (such as a deep myomectomy or uterine re-
construction) is also an indicator for C-section (Source: Daniela Carusi, M.D., Brigham and Women’s
Hospital Department of Maternal Fetal Medicine, personal e-mail communication). C-sections may also
be scheduled at maternal request, though survey evidence suggests maternal request C-sections are rare
(Declercq et al. (2006)).
  11
     The authors’ tabulation, using California Hospital Discharge data for 1996-2005.
  12
     Induction is most common in post-term pregnancies (42 or more weeks gestation). Induction is also
indicated in cases of extreme maternal hypertension, in growth-restricted fetuses, and in cases when the
mother’s water breaks before the onset of labor and labor does not begin naturally within a specified
time frame.


                                                   7
progressing to surgery. C-sections after a trial of labor are termed “unscheduled C-
sections.” Some of these are considered emergency C-sections, in the sense that not
immediately progressing to surgery would likely compromise the health of the mother or
fetus, but for most the indications for C-section are less urgent.13
       While C-sections have been shown to unambiguously improve maternal and infant out-
comes in some clinical situations (e,g, uterine rupture), unambiguous guidelines regarding
the decision to leave the delivery room for the operating room are often lacking.14 One
thing that is clear is that the benefit of the C-section must be weighed against the risks
of maternal mortality and morbidity associated with major abdominal surgery. While
maternal mortality rates are very low, they are estimated to be two to four times higher in
C-sections than in vaginal delivery. Mothers are also more likely to be re-hospitalized for
infection, for cardiopulmonary and thromboembolitic conditions, and for surgical wound
complications after a C-section (Lydon-Rochelle et al. (2000)).                   In addition, recovery
times and hospital stays are twice as long for Cesarean deliveries, and C-sections may
increase the risk of complications in future pregnancies as well as the ability to become
pregnant (Alpay et al. (2008), Nielson et al. (1989), Ananth et al. (1997), Norberg
& Pantano (2013)).15 C-sections also carry risks for infants; for example, 1.1 percent
of infants delivered by Cesarean are injured in the procedure (Alexander et al. 2006).
However, these risks must be traded off against the uncertain consequences of allowing
labor to progress, particularly for the infant.16
  13
     For example, the life of the mother and fetus are clearly threatened in cases of uterine rupture and
in some cord prolapse cases. Indications that the fetus is not tolerating labor well, though difficult to
interpret, can be cause for emergency C-section as well.
  14
     While guidelines for managing shoulder dystocia are quite clear, guidelines for cases when the first
stage of labor fails to progress, or when the second stage of labor progresses past 1 or 2 hours are lacking.
The former are often coded as failure to progress; the latter as cephalopelvic disproportion or obstruction.
An emergency C-section is warranted in cases where the fetus is being deprived of oxygen, but fetal heart
rate monitoring typically provide only a noisy indication of fetal distress (Prentice and Lind (1987)).
  15
     The Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project estimates hospital stays range from 2.1 days for a
vaginal delivery without complication to 4.4 for C-section with complication (HCUP (2009)).
  16
     The largely observational medical literature provides little consensus regarding infant and maternal


                                                     8
    In fee-for-service payment schemes, physicians are typically reimbursed more highly for
C-sections than for vaginal delivery.17 This difference in fees is not thought to be justified
by increased costs incurred by the obstetrician in a Cesarean delivery. C-sections require
surgical training and may be a more complex procedure than vaginal deliveries. However,
they take less time on average, and the timing is more predictable.18 Importantly for this
study, in California 15% of births take place in an HMO-owned hospital setting, where
physicians are paid by salary and the HMO directly operates hospitals.19 In this setting
both physicians and hospitals have the incentive to perform vaginal deliveries in lieu
of C-sections.20 Furthermore, since the hospital is owned by the insurance company it
internalizes the cost of care provided.
    C-sections are much more costly than vaginal deliveries in terms of hospital resources
consumed. Hospital charges are $6,000 higher for a C-section on average (Baicker, Buckles
and Chandra, 2006).21 Hospital costs associated with C-sections are estimated to be
approximately $1000 higher for uncomplicated deliveries and $3000 higher for complicated
deliveries (Podulka et al. (2011)). These numbers include only direct medical costs
incurred during the hospital stay, yet they suggest reducing C-sections to their 1996
levels could save between $1 and $3 billion per year in health costs.22 While limitations
outcomes in long or difficult labors.
  17
     Gruber et al. (1999) report a difference of $500 on average. A more recent estimate from the
Healthcare Blue Book is $380. This is close to the differential reported by Medicare: Medicare pays
physicians $2,295 for a C-section vs. $1,926 for a vaginal delivery (on average).
  18
     The Medicare Resource-Based Relative Value scale assigns a higher score to C-sections com-
pared with vaginal deliveries (49.26 vs.       43.78), but there is some debate regarding whether
this reflects the difference in true work or complexity between the two procedures.                 Source:
www.physicianspractice.com/display/article/1462168/1589375.
  19
     Another 37% of births are to patients insured by an HMO, but delivering in a non-HMO-owned
hospital.
  20
     According to the HMO, 95% of their physicians are paid by salary (as of 2006), and medical groups
whose costs consistently come in under-budget may use the surplus for additional compensation.
  21
     In California average charges for the mother differ by $8,472. According to the Healthcare Blue
Book, the average difference in the price paid by insurers is approximately $3,000.
  22
     Hospital charges do not, for example, include the costs of readmissions, the substantially longer re-
covery time associated with C-sections or any increases in the risk of complications in future pregnancies.



                                                    9
of data and clinical evidence make it difficult to determine the optimal C-section rate,
many experts believe these costs outweigh the benefit for many of the C-sections currently
performed in the United States. For example, the United States Department of Health
and Human Services has repeatedly included significant reductions in C-section rates in
its Healthy People goals.23
       Obstetric rotations are part of the core curriculum in U.S. medical schools and resi-
dency programs. This exposure combined with classroom learning means physicians have
greater knowledge of childbirth than other educated parents. While non-obstetricians are
likely not as informed as their doctors going into pregnancy, they can likely use their
training to educate themselves on current treatment standards.24 Moreover, physicians
are likely better able to independently understand the treatment options presented to
them by physicians and come to a decision.



IV         Data and Methodology

IV.I        Data

The empirical approach hinges on the ability to observe a sample of physicians as pa-
tients. We have identified physician-patients by merging the confidential California Vital
Statistics data, which includes mothers’ full names, with licensure data on physicians
practicing in the state.25 Specifically, we merge the California confidential Linked Patient
Discharge Data-Birth Cohort File (PDD-Birth) from the California Office of Statewide
  23
     The 2010 goal was to reduce Cesarean births to 15 percent of first births. Instead, the U.S. C-section
rate rose from 1:5 births in 1996 to nearly 1:3 births in 2010 and is now over 27 percent of first births
and 23 percent of low risk first births. The 2020 goal is a 10 percent reduction (or 2.6 ppts).
  24
     8% of the physicians in the sample are obstetrician / gynecologists; 41% are general practice or
internal medicine doctors; and 13% report a surgical specialty.
  25
     It was not possible to reliably identify physician fathers in the VS data because the confidential
PDD-Birth file does not include the father’s first name.



                                                    10
Health Planning and Development (OSHPD), with the California Medical Board database
of all licensed physicians in the state. In addition to the full name, the mother’s zip code,
approximate age and education were used in the merge process. Because names could
not be released, the probabilistic record linkage between the two datasets was performed
for this project by an OSHPD-approved contractor. A detailed description of the merge
process is in the data appendix.
       The linked data include the VS record for every birth registered in California from
1996-2005. Births taking place in hospitals are linked to the hospital discharge records for
both mothers and infants for the 9 months prior through 1 year after the birth date. The
VS record includes maternal and paternal demographic information, maternal pregnancy
history, pregnancy risk factors, and delivery complications. The data also has information
on the birth outcome, including method of delivery. The linked patient discharge data
then adds discharge status and up to 24 diagnosis and 20 procedure codes for the mother
and the infant for each admission, including the admission associated with the delivery.
The data also include patient insurance type and hospital charges.
       There were 5,372,478 registered births in California in the sample period. We focus
on the 2,072,477 first births (birth to mothers with parity 0) in the sample, because of
the path dependence of treatment in second births. We further restrict the analysis to
singleton births over 20 weeks gestation taking place in California hospitals.26 Next we
restrict the sample to the 1,111,058 mothers between 24 and 50 years of age and exclude
observations with missing maternal age, missing maternal zipcode, missing gestational
age, or missing birthweight.27 Finally, to reduce concerns about comparability between
physicians and non-physicians our preferred sample is the 583,126 births to parents with
  26
     The California restriction excludes 12,732 observations. Restricting to singleton births over 20 weeks
gestation excludes 33,774 observations.
  27
     Given the time necessary to complete medical school, there are virtually no physicians in their early
twenties. Births to mothers over 50 are extremely rare. There were 51,212 observations outside the
selected age range.


                                                    11
at least one college degree between them.28 Of these, 3,296 mothers are identified as
physicians in the probabilistic record linkage.
       We complement the California data with VS data on all births in Texas from 1996-
2003 and 2005-2007 (summarized in Appendix Table A.1).29 The Texas data come solely
from the birth certificate and its associated survey and are therefore less detailed than
the linked PDD-birth data in California. In the Texas data it is not possible to reliably
classify C-sections as scheduled or unscheduled, and we observe fewer clinical risk factors.
However, the Texas data has two important variables that are unavailable in California:
the name of the attending obstetrician (after 2004) and the self-reported occupations of
both parents. We identify 2,628 births to physician-mothers, 5,915 births to physician-
fathers and 1,475 births in families with two physician-parents.30
       Table 1 summarizes the independent variables used in the California analysis. 15.8%
of physician-patients and 14.7% of non-physicians deliver in an HMO-owned hospital.
The differences between physicians and non-physicians are substantively similar in these
two settings. Physicians are older (32.6 vs. 31.1 outside of HMO-owned hospitals and
32.6 vs. 30.7 inside HMO-owned hospitals). Physicians are also less likely to be hispanic,
and they live in zip codes with higher income per capita. By definition, physicians are all
highly educated, but they also have spouses who are more highly educated than spouses
of non-physician mothers.
       Physicians give birth to infants with lower gestational ages and lower birth weights on
average. In terms of clinical risk factors,31 physicians and non-physicians are fairly similar.
  28
     Results are robust to including all education levels in the comparison group and to further restricting
the comparison group to families with at least one highly educated parent or to highly educated mothers.
See Supplementary Tables B.3 and B.4 for full sample results. See Supplementary Tables B.5 and B.6
for the sample of births to highly educated mothers.
  29
     The hospital identifier was not available in 2004.
  30
     We identify physician-mothers and fathers from self-reported occupations. See the data appendix
for a detailed description of the process.
  31
     The risk factors are coded using ICD-9-CM diagnosis codes from the discharge record. We exclude
diagnoses that occur during labor indicating failure of the labor to progress, obstruction, and non-


                                                    12
Outside of HMO-owned hospitals, only 2 of 17 physician / non-physician differences
are significant at the 5 percent level. For both of these, physicians have higher risk.32
Inside HMO-owned hospitals, differences are slightly larger and 4 of 17 differences are
significant.33


IV.II      Econometric Model

We first estimate OLS regressions of a binary indicator for C-section delivery on an
indicator for whether the mother is a physician along with demographic and clinical
controls. For the initial analysis, we focus on births occurring outside of HMO-owned
hospitals. OLS regressions are of the following form:


                               yiht = α + Diht β + xiht γ + δt + iht                             (1)

where yiht is a dummy variable indicating that patient i had a C-section in hospital h
in year t, Diht is a dummy indicating that the delivering mother is a doctor, and xiht
is a vector of all the variables listed in Table 1 including maternal demographics, infant
information, and clinical risk factors. xiht also includes interactions between zip code
income and race and clinical risk factors interacted with age, race and zip code. δt is a
vector of year and month dummies. Hospital fixed effects, νh , are included as indicated
in tables.34 β is the coefficient of interest. It is the estimate of the difference in C-section
rates for doctors and non-doctors outside of HMO-owned hospitals. We expect β < 0,
reassuring fetal heart rate, as these are subjective and are potentially endogenous to the treatment
decision. This problem is exacerbated by the need for physicians to justify a Cesarean section with a
diagnosis code.
  32
     The two conditions are thyroid conditions and pre-existing maternal physical factors.
  33
     These are placental / uterine rupture and hemorrhage, polyhydramnios, growth-restriction and pre-
existing maternal factors.
  34
     Results are not dependent on including interactions in the regression. Results are also robust to
including zip code fixed effects instead of hospital fixed effects.




                                                 13
as agency theory predicts that informed patients will get less intense treatment when
treatment intensity is reimbursed on the margin.
       The regressions above employ a fairly flexible functional form. However, complex in-
teractions between observed risk factors and demographics are possible. For this reason,
we also run nonparametric nearest neighbor matching regressions. This approach ex-
ploits the large size of the control group (non-physicians) relative to the treatment group
(physicians). Specifically, we estimate the average treatment-on-treated (TOT) effect by
matching each doctor with the closest comparable non-doctor on a rich vector of demo-
graphic and clinical variables. This vector includes a full set of 2-year age bins, education
and race indicators, clinical risk factors, term length indicators, indicators for low and
high birthweight, and 5-year time bins. The TOT estimator is calculated as the mean
difference in C-section rates between treatment and control observations in the matched
sample.35 Analytical standard errors are calculated following Equation 14 of Abadie &
Imbens (2006).
       To test whether physicians’ treatment covaries with the treating physician’s financial
environment we next turn to the full sample of patients (delivering inside and outside of
HMO-owned hospitals). We estimate the following OLS regression:


             yiat = α + Diat β1 + Diat ∗ HM Oiat β2 + HM Oiat β3 + xiat γ + δt + iat              (2)

where HM Oiat is a variable indicating that the birth for patient i in hospital service area
(HSA) a in year t took place in an HMO-owned hospital. Where indicated, fixed effects
for the patient’s HSA are also included. HSAs are used in lieu of hospital fixed effects,
  35
    The Mahlanobis measure is used to determine closeness. In cases of multiple exact matches, a
weighted average of exact matches is used as the control observation in the difference calculation. See
Abadie & Imbens (2006) for a discussion of identification assumptions in nearest neighbor matching
estimators.




                                                  14
because the latter are collinear with the HMO-owned hospital indicator.36 As before, we
expect lower C-section rates for physicians relative to non-physicians outside of HMO-
owned hospitals (β1 < 0). We also expect lower C-section rates for non-physicians in
HMO-owned hospitals, where C-sections are not reimbursed on the margin, compared
with non-physicians delivering elsewhere (β3 < 0). Because informed patients should be
unaffected by the incentive environment, agency theory predicts more intense treatment
for informed patients relative to less-informed patients inside of HMO-owned hospitals
(β2 > 0). If informed patients are unaffected by the incentive environment, we expect
(β2 + β3 = 0).
       Finally, we examine how physicians’ morbidity compares with that of non-physicians.
Because the patient morbidity measures we observe are uncommon, we estimate logit
regressions:


             logit (Iiat ) = α + Diat β1 + Diat ∗ HM Oiat β2 + HM Oiat β3 + xiat γ + δt                 (3)

where Iiat is an indicator variable for a maternal or infant morbid condition for patient
i in HSA a in year t, and the remaining variables are defined as in equation (2). Under
PID, informed patients should have fewer adverse outcomes under both fee-for-service
and capitation as long as inappropriate levels of care affect morbidity (β1 < 0 & β2 < 0).
If instead the marginal treatment is in the flat-of-the-curve region (net marginal benefit
of treatment is near zero), then we would not expect differential morbidity for informed
patients.37
  36
      HSA fixed effects, while not a perfect proxy for the hospital, will control for the socio-economic
status of patients in the hospital’s area. The results are robust to using patient zip code in lieu of HSA
fixed effects (see Supplementary Table B.2). The Dartmouth Atlas defines an HSA as “a collection of
zip codes whose residents receive most of their hospitalizations from the hospitals in that area. HSAs
were defined by assigning zip codes to the hospital area where the greatest proportion of their Medicare
residents were hospitalized.” There 3,436 HSAs in the U.S.
   37
      It might also be the case that physicians place different weights than their patients on mothers’
versus infants’ outcomes. If that is the case predictions of effects of doctor status on infant and maternal


                                                    15
V      Results

V.I      Treatment Intensity

Table 2 summarizes raw C-section rates of physician and non-physician parents. The top
and bottom panels present rates for the California and Texas samples, respectively. The
California rates are displayed separately for HMO-owned and non-HMO-owned hospitals.
Consistent with PID in non-HMO-owned hospitals, doctors have C-section rates that are
1.6 ppts lower than non-doctors (27.6% versus 29.2%). Also as predicted, patients in
HMO-owned hospitals have much lower C-section rates (3 ppts) than those in non-HMO-
owned hospitals, and physician-patients inside HMO-owned hospitals have substantially
higher raw C-section rates than non-physicians in the same incentive environment (31.1%
versus 26.1%). C-section rates in Texas are considerably higher than in California (32.7%
versus 29.2%), but, as in California, physician-parents in Texas have lower raw C-section
rates compared with non-physicians.
    These raw comparisons are roughly in line with the predictions of the PID model.
Next we turn to OLS regressions with a full set of controls for observed demographic
and clinical factors that influence C-section rates. In all specifications, the comparison
sample is non-physicians between 24 and 50 years of age, in families with at least one
college-educated parent.38
    OLS estimates of Equation (1) are in Table 3, Panel A. Consistent with PID, physician-
mothers have C-section rates that are 2.13 percentage points (7 percent, Column 1)
lower than educated non-physicians. It is also clear that the reduced C-section rate is
coming entirely from unscheduled C-sections: doctors have risk-adjusted unscheduled
outcomes would differ accordingly.
  38
     Results are unaffected by including all education levels in the comparison group or by further re-
stricting the comparison group to families with at least one highly-educated parent or to highly-educated
mothers. See Supplementary Tables B.3 and B.4 for full sample results. See Supplementary Tables B.5
and B.6 for the sample of births to highly-educated mothers.


                                                   16
C-section rates that are 2.14 percentage points lower than non-doctors (Column 5, an
11 percent effect).39 Thus, it appears the effect is among mothers who have expressed
a revealed preference for vaginal delivery by attempting labor. This decomposition is
not consistent with the difference in C-section rates arising as a result of differences
in maternal preferences for elective C-sections. Instead, it appears the difference arises
from decisions made in the delivery room regarding when to stop laboring and progress to
surgical delivery.40 This is what we would expect from a PID model, as there is little time
to gather additional information once labor has begun, and because clinical guidelines
are less clear for unscheduled relative to scheduled C-sections.
       C-section rates vary substantially across hospitals within California. We next ask
whether this treatment difference arises from physician-mothers using their medical knowl-
edge to differentially sort across medical facilities or whether physicians receive differential
treatment within the same hospital.41 The addition of hospital fixed effects reduces the
disparity in unscheduled C-sections by only 20%. Physician unscheduled C-section rates
remain 9% below rates of non-physicians (Table 3, Column 6). Thus, differential sorting
does not appear to be the primary mechanism behind physicians’ lower C-section rates.42
       The OLS regressions employ a fairly flexible functional form with interactions of zip
code income and race, and clinical risk factors interacted with age, race and zip code.
However, there could still be complex interactions in the relationship between observed
risk factors and C-section incidence. Nearest neighbor matching estimators do not require
  39
     We classify scheduled and unscheduled C-sections using ICD-9-CM codes from the hospital record.
See the data appendix for more detail.
  40
     The difference in C-section rates between physicians and non-physicians does not appear to be
driven by differences in medical judgment regarding how any particular complication should be handled.
Instead, it appears as if a different threshold is being applied to physician and non-physician patients
across the board.
  41
     Physician-mothers choose hospitals that are larger (more births each year), and they are more likely
to deliver in an academic medical center.
  42
     The results are robust to the inclusion of patient zip code fixed effects in lieu of hospital fixed effects.
See Supplementary Table B.1.



                                                       17
functional form assumptions and implicitly allow for complex interactions. Table 3, Panel
B presents TOT nearest neighbor matching estimates. Even matching on a rich set of
covariates, the exact match rate is 89% in the main specification (Table 3, panel B,
Columns (1), (3), and (5)). Regressions that also match on hospital achieve 53% match
rates (Columns (2), (4) and (6)).43 Both sets of results are strikingly similar to the OLS.
       These findings are not unique to California. Table 4 displays coefficients from OLS
regressions for the Texas sample. As mentioned above, the following controls are excluded
from regressions due to lack of availability in Texas: uterine rupture/ hemorrhage; rup-
tured membranes ≥ 24 hours; isoimmunity; oligohydramnios, polyhydramnios; growth
restriction; thyroid condition; herpes, asthma, pre-existing maternal physical factors;
and other maternal pre-existing conditions. The Texas specifications include an indicator
for physician-fathers in addition to the physician-mother indicator. They also include
indicators for whether the parents are married and whether the mother and father each
report an occupation other than homemaking, which are not available in California. As
in California, the comparison sample is non-physicians in families with at least one college
degree.
       Columns (1) and (2) display results for the full-sample and Columns (3) and (4) for
years 2005-2007, the sample for which the name of the attending physician is available.
As in California, physician-mothers in Texas have significantly lower C-section rates. The
difference is 2.75 ppts overall (an 8% effect) and 2.06 ppts after controlling for the hos-
pital of delivery (a 6% effect). After controlling for the attending obstetrician, the point
estimate is only reduced by 18% (Table 4, Columns 3 and 4).44 This suggests the treat-
  43
     Hospitals with less than 100 births are excluded due to low match rates (this excludes 0.12% of the
sample of births and 1 physician-parent). Hospitals with no physician-patients are also excluded.
  44
     Attending fixed effects were created from the cleaned attending name field. Mothers treated by
physicians delivering fewer than 20 babies are excluded from the attending fixed effect analysis. This
specification does not include hospital fixed effects because the majority of attendings deliver at only 1
hospital.



                                                   18
ment gap arises from obstetricians treating their physician-patients differently rather than
physicians selecting different obstetricians. Results are similar when teaching hospitals
are excluded, further suggesting differential attention from attendings and residents in
teaching hospitals is not driving results.
       Interestingly, spouses of physician-fathers have C-sections at similar rates to non-
physician mothers. The medical knowledge of physician-fathers does not appear to be
used to avoid C-sections. This could occur for several reasons. Fathers may view avoiding
a C-section as less important than mothers. Alternatively, physician fathers may not be
as involved in prenatal care and therefore may not update their knowledge of current
obstetric practice. Finally, fathers may not be in the room for the entire birth. Relatedly,
while mother’s occupation is almost always reported, fathers occupation is missing for
15% of observations. This measurement error could be responsible for attenuating the
coefficient on physician fathers.45
       The failure to find an effect for physician fathers raises the concern that physician
mothers may be choosing a higher clinical threshold for C-sections due to their high cost
of time away from work. Even among highly educated women, physicians are relatively
highly compensated and often work either as sole proprietors or in group practices where
maternity leave is costly. If this were driving results, one would expect to see similar
results in higher paid occupations and for those who are self-employed. Neither lawyer
mothers, who have high incomes and bill for their time, or self-employed women have
lower C-section rates compared with other educated women. In fact, female lawyers
have significantly higher C-section rates, though this result could reflect malpractice
concerns.46
  45
      More generally, we fail to find that father’s occupation has any correlation with the C-section rate.
For example, while lawyer mothers have higher C-section rates, wives of lawyer fathers have similar
C-section rates to other highly educated women (see Supplementary Table B.8).
   46
      Results for lawyers and self-employed are in Supplementary Table B.8. A natural group to look at
is nurses, since they have more medical knowledge than the average person, but less than physicians.


                                                    19
    The estimates thus far have shown the effect of physicians’ medical knowledge is siz-
able. However, the above estimates may understate the true effect of patient information
on treatment. Women have nine months to prepare for labor, and highly educated women
are likely not completely uninformed. Thus, these effects capture the impact of full versus
partial information. In addition, the estimates in California likely suffer from attenuation
bias due to measurement error in the physician-patient identifier.
    While time cost does not appear to be a driving factor, there are a number of other
mechanisms, which could play a role in treatment differences. For example, physicians
may alter recommendations in response to private malpractice concerns or convenience
factors. It could also be the case that physicians have different preferences for intensive
treatment. Physician financial incentives are thought to be the primary impetus behind
PID. Thus, we now ask how the gap between physicians and non-physicians varies with
the financial incentive of the treating physician.


V.II      Financial Incentives

Next we test whether the treatment gap covaries with the treating physician’s financial
incentives. As discussed above, we expect lower C-section rates in HMO-owned hospitals
compared with non-HMO-owned hospitals. We also expect physician-patients to be less
affected by the incentive environment, because they are more informed about the relative
benefits and costs of their treatment options.
    Table 5 displays estimates of Equation (2). As one would expect, the coefficient
on the HMO-owned hospital indicator is negative. Non-physician mothers delivering at
HMO-owned hospitals have C-section rates that are approximately 5 ppts lower than
Given the self-reported occupation categories, we are not able to reliably distinguish hospital nurses or
even registered nurses from nurses who have more limited medical knowledge. Nurses appear to have
lower risk-adjusted C-section rates, but the point estimates are not significantly different from zero.



                                                   20
non-physicians delivering elsewhere (Columns (1) and (2)), with roughly half coming
from lower scheduled and half from lower unscheduled C-sections.47
       In contrast, physician-mothers have the same risk-adjusted C-section rates in and
outside of HMO-owned hospitals. The coefficients on the HMO-owned hospital and
physician-patient indicators are close in magnitude and of opposite sign.48 Thus, un-
like other patients, physician-patients appear to be unaffected by the contract environ-
ment of their providers. This is exactly what one would expect if demand inducement is
only possible when information asymmetries are present. Moreover, for malpractice con-
cerns to be driving results, one would have to believe that physicians are less concerned
about physician-patients suing them (relative to non-physicians) outside of HMO-owned
hospitals, but relatively more concerned about physician lawsuits inside of HMO-owned
hospitals. When broken out into scheduled and unscheduled C-sections the same pattern
holds, although the estimates are less precise.


V.III        Maternal and Infant Morbidity

The estimates above demonstrate that physician-mothers receive different treatment in
birth than comparable non-physicians. However, are physicians receiving better care or
just different care? Are they using their medical knowledge to avoid over-treatment or
are they being permitted to choose higher risk treatment plans? If physician-mothers
were pursuing high risk treatment paths one would expect them and their infants to have
higher morbidity rates. Similarly, if they were placing more weight on their own health
  47
     It is important to note, in interpreting the effect of the HMO-owned hospital on treatment, that in
addition to a different financial incentive for the attending, HMO-owned hospitals may have implemented
broader processes or policies to reduce C-section rates. However, there doesn’t appear to be a policy
regarding treatment of any single diagnosis driving results. C-section rates are lower across a broad
swath of diagnoses in HMO-owned hospitals.
  48
     P-values from the test of the null that β2 + β3 = 0 are 0.79 and 0.92 for regressions displayed in
Columns 1 and 2, respectively. For regressions in Columns (5) and (6), they are 0.90 and 0.80.



                                                  21
(relative to their infants’) in their treatment decisions one would expect to see lower
maternal morbidity coming at the expense of infant morbidity. We find neither.
       Infant and maternal death in childbirth are incredibly rare in the United States.
The overall maternal death rate in California is only 8 per 100,000 college educated
women, and no physician-mothers died in our sample. Infant and maternal complications
during and immediately following childbirth are more common. Table 6 summarizes
morbidity morbidity measures that occur in at least 1% of births. Almost 9% of mothers
have 3rd or 4th degree perineal lacerations, which are serious tears sustained during
labor. Post-partum hemorrhage, a more serious complication, is less common (3%) as is
maternal infection (4.5%). For infants, the only conditions prevalent enough to study are
respiratory conditions, infection, and delivery trauma. We split respiratory conditions
into the less serious conditions that require oxygen therapy or mechanical ventilation
(2.7%) and the more severe cases that require intubation (2.5%).49 Because even these
conditions are still relatively infrequent, we estimate logit regressions as in equation (3).
       Table 7 displays average marginal effects (AME) from these regressions. The values
assumed for indicator variables in the AME integration are noted in parentheses un-
der the variable name.50 Overall, physician-mothers have better outcomes. Outside of
  49
      This corresponds to the following ICD-9-CM codes: 3rd and 4th degree lacerations are the more
serious of the tears associated with vaginal delivery (664.2 or 664.3), post-partum hemorrhage (666),
infection (including pyrexia, generalized infection and major infection: 672, 659.2, 659.3, 670.3); respi-
ratory assistance (including oxygen therapy and mechanical ventilation: 93.96 and 93.90), intubation
(96.04), infection (771), trauma (all trauma to the infant excluding minor and relatively common scalp
lacerations: 767 excluding 767.1). Respiratory assistance and intubation are procedures, not diagnoses.
The following measures were observable using ICD-9-CM codes but occurred in less than 1% of the
sample: obstetric wound complications and anesthesia complications (in mothers and infants).
   50
      The estimates presented represent the average marginal effect of the variable listed, with the integra-
tion taken assuming a value for the other indicator variable (with the value given in parenthesis). The
Doctor (HMOHosp=0) estimate is analogous to the coefficient on the doctor identifier in OLS regressions.
The Doctor (HMOHosp=1) estimate is analogous to the sum of the coefficients on the doctor indicator
and the interaction of doctor with HMO-owned hospital. This sum is the effect of being a doctor in
HMO-owned hospitals. The difference between the Doctor (HMOHosp=1) and Doctor (HMOHosp=0)
estimates is analogous to the coefficient on the interaction of doctor with HMO-owned hospital in the
OLS regressions. The HMOHosp (Doctor=0) estimate is analogous to the coefficient on HMO-owned
hospital in OLS regressions.


                                                     22
HMO-owned hospitals, physician-mothers have significantly lower rates of serious per-
ineal lacerations and infection (just over 1 ppt). The laceration result is striking given
physician mothers’ higher rates of vaginal delivery. It suggests that the marginal vaginal
delivery does not require extended or difficult active labors which would result in tear-
ing. While lacerations typically occur only in vaginal deliveries, infection and maternal
hemorrhage can arise in women delivering either vaginally or by C-section. Thus, the
reduced rate of infection could arise from physicians having fewer C-sections and associ-
ated surgical wounds at risk for infection or they could have lower infection rates even
within delivery method categories.51 However, care should be taken in interpreting the
infection estimates. While physician mothers are unlikely to be able to reduce their rates
of laceration and hemorrhage through self-care, they maybe able to reduce their risk of
infection through self-care after delivery.52
       Infants born to physician-mothers also experience lower rates of trauma and are less
likely to experience extreme breathing difficulties that require intubation.53 These suggest
that physician mothers are not achieving their lower C-Section rates by persisting in more
perilous labors, nor are they improving their own morbidity by risking the health of their
infants. Moreover, the results suggest overuse outside of HMO-owned hospitals adversely
impacts patients: limiting demand inducement improves outcomes in addition to lowering
treatment intensity.
       Inside HMO-owned hospitals the health consequences of the lower C-section rate are
less clear cut. Non-physician mothers delivering in this setting experience significantly
higher rates of laceration and post-partum hemorrhage. Impacts on infant morbidity are
  51
      Long active labors are associated with increased risk for maternal infection. Thus, the infection result
is also not consistent with physician mothers reducing C-sections by persisting in long active labors.
   52
      Readmission to the hospital is likely even more subject to the physician self-care concern. Although
results are noisy, physician mothers and their babies are, if anything, less likely to be readmitted in the
30 days after delivery.
   53
      The Texas VS data includes 1 and 5-minute APGAR scores. While estimates are imprecise, we find
no evidence of differential APGAR scores (See Appendix Table B.9).


                                                     23
mixed: infants in HMO-owned hospitals have lower rates of infection and birth trauma,
but higher rates of respiratory assistance. Even putting aside the mixed results for in-
fants, we cannot draw any conclusions about patient welfare from the morbidity estimates
inside HMO-owned hospitals. Mothers in this setting are after all avoiding major abdom-
inal surgery (C-sections), and they may prefer an increased risk of complication to a
guaranteed surgical incision.
      Informed patients, on the other hand, do not face this tradeoff. Outside of HMO-
owned hospitals physicians achieve lower risk-adjusted unscheduled C-section rates, and
they do this without any measurable increase in morbidity for them or their infants.
HMO-owned hospitals reduce the overall C-section rate beyond the rate of physicians
outside of HMO-owned hospitals, and the differential patient morbidity in HMO-owned
hospitals may be a result of this underuse. Physician-mothers in HMO-owned hospitals
have risk-adjusted C-section rates similar to physicians outside of them, and they are able
to avoid increases in the most serious complication, hemorrhage, though they may not
completely avoid increases in laceration and respiratory assistance.54 It is also possible
that the C-section which is reduced in response to financial incentives is different from
the C-section physician-patients avoid.


V.IV         Additional Treatment Margins

The estimates above strongly suggest that physician-patients are able to mitigate demand
inducement on the C-section margin. However, there are several other key treatment
interventions in childbirth. A question is whether the difference in C-section rates could
arise from differences on these other margins that then make a C-section less necessary
for physician-patients. One such margin is induction. If the pregnancy has passed beyond
 54
      The effect of HMO-owned hospital for physicians is -1.86+.03+1.77=-0.06.



                                                  24
an acceptable length of gestation, the patient and obstetrician may choose to medically
induce labor. The medical literature suggests induction is associated with increased risk
of C-section. Another key treatment decision arises in the delivery room. As the second
stage of labor progresses, the attending can attempt to aid in the delivery through the
use of forceps or a vacuum extractor (this is termed surgical vaginal delivery).
       We estimate equations of the form of equation (2) using indicators for each of these
interventions as the dependent variable.55 Physician-mothers are significantly more likely
to be induced, thus doctors are not avoiding C-sections through lower rates of induction
(Table 8, Column (1)).56 They are also not substituting forceps or vacuum extractions
for C-sections. Physician-mothers are significantly less likely to be delivered by vacuum
extraction, and there is no measurable difference in the use of forceps.
       The treatment decisions investigated above constitute the major medical interventions
in childbirth, but are not the only treatments provided. Moreover, while the average
vaginal birth is cheaper than a C-section, safely performing the marginal vaginal birth
could require more resources both during the birth and to treat any complications that
arise. For example, if either physicians or their infants have adverse outcomes on margins
not cataloged in the discharge data one would expect them to require additional medical
care. Hospital charges provide a summary measure of total treatment provided. Though
payers typically receive a large discount on hospital charges, in regressions with hospital
fixed effects multiplicative discount factors should cancel out. Thus, within a hospital,
one would expect patients with higher list charges to have had more or more intensive
  55
     Though induction, forceps and vacuum are available on the birth certificate, we use the ICD-9-CM
procedure codes from the discharge record (to avoid concerns of under-reporting of procedures in the VS
data): induction (73.1, 73.4), vacuum (72.7), forceps (72.0-4).
  56
     The Texas birth certificate contains information on the use of epidural anesthesia after 2004. We find
physician-parents are more likley to get epidurals, suggesting differential use of epidurals is not behind
physicians’ lower C-section rate and that physicians are not opposed to medical interventions into birth
more generally (see Appendix Table B.7).




                                                    25
care.57
    Columns (4)-(6) of Table 8 display estimates from regressions of the form of Equation
(1) with log hospital charges as the dependent variable. Hospital charges are only available
for births outside HMO-owned hospitals so the analysis is limited to those births. Charges
of physician mothers and their infants are nearly 2.6% lower than those of non-physician
mothers delivering in the same hospitals (Column 2). If this reduction could be achieved
in the broader U.S. population hospital charges would be reduced by two billion dollars
per year.58 Half of these savings are attributable to the difference in delivery method in
the two groups. However, even after accounting for differences in the use of C-Sections,
physician mothers and their infants have hospital charges that are 1.5% lower than other
comparable patients, a difference of $497.
    In addition, from a purely financial perspective, treatment decisions within HMO-
owned hospitals appear to pass cost-benefit analysis. Estimates of the expected financial
costs of treating patient complications, using the non-HMO data, suggest that the costs
associated with differential morbidity are only $100 to $200.59 These are well below the
cost of a C-section.
  57
     It is also important to note that hospital charges do not include physician charges or un-billed care,
such as the amount of time a physician spends with the patient.
  58
     This may overestimate the amount of hospital costs avoided, as costs are a fraction of charges.
Percentages may be more informative, as insurers typically pay a fixed fraction of charges. On the
other hand, this measure does not include any cost savings associated with reduced readmissions due to
complications from C-sections.
  59
     We regress hospital charges on indicators for observed morbidities using the specification of Column
(2) in Table 6 in order to estimate the effect of each condition on hospital charges (coefficients are in
Appendix Table B.7). Estimates of the increase in morbidity for each measure from Table 7 are then
multiplied by the increased charges associated with treating each. Summing across all measures, the
expected costs arising from differential morbidity is about $50 for the average patient. Even if one only
considers the costs of increased morbidity (and ignores measures of improved morbidity), the expected
cost is under $150.




                                                    26
VI      Discussion and Conclusion

This paper tests whether treatment and outcomes covary with the patient’s medical
knowledge. After controlling for patient demographics and clinical risk factors, we find
that physician-mothers are approximately ten percent less likely to have a C-section.
Outside of HMO-owned hospitals the difference in C-section rates is entirely coming from
unscheduled C-sections; it arises from treatment decisions made in the delivery room
among mothers who chose to attempt labor. Sorting across hospitals and attendings
explains only 20% of this difference. Thus, physician-patients are using information to
make different treatment decisions, not simply to select different providers.
   This difference is consistent with physicians being able to avoid over-treatment. More-
over, it appears informed patients are able to avoid the impact of their treating physician’s
financial incentives. While patients in HMO-owned hospitals have significantly lower C-
section rates (5 percentage points), physician-patients have similar C-section rates inside
and outside of HMO-owned hospitals. This also helps alleviate concerns that the differ-
ence in C-section rates is driven by unobservables.
   Physician-mothers are not avoiding C-sections by substituting other forms of resource-
intensive care. Thus, it appears physicians are able to achieve at least as good or better
health outcomes while using less intensive treatment. This is consistent with the induced
demand hypothesis - physicians are able to prevent being moved away from their optimum
and avoid a utility loss.
   Outside of HMO-owned hospitals, PID clearly lowers social welfare. C-section rates,
morbidity and hospital costs are higher for the marginal patient, and the higher C-section
rate means longer recovery times for mothers. It is importantly to note that, the socially
optimal C-section rate may be even lower than the rate of physician-patients. Physician-
patients are likely targeting a private optimum, and, like all patients with insurance, they


                                             27
do not face the full marginal cost of their medical decisions.
       One often proposed response to PID in childbirth is equalizing payments for C-sections
and vaginal deliveries. This is essentially the incentive scheme within HMO-owned hos-
pitals. In that setting the impact of PID on social welfare is less clear. In HMO-owned
hospitals the provider’s financial incentive is to provide fewer C-sections, and obstetri-
cians do provide fewer C-sections to non-physicians in HMO hospitals. However, the
lower C-section rate appears to come at a cost: higher patient morbidity. The socially
optimal level of risk is not zero (it is the point at which the expected marginal benefit of
reducing the risk is equal to the expected marginal cost of its reduction), therefore lower
C-section rates with higher morbidity could be welfare-improving. Considering only fi-
nancial costs borne by the hospital, this tradeoff appears to pass cost-benefit analysis:
the increase in hospital costs associated with treating the additional morbid conditions
are substantially lower than estimates of cost savings due to eliminated C-sections. This
exercise, of course, does not take into account any non-hospital costs or benefits, includ-
ing impacts on patient utility. Thus, while equalizing payments would likely be effective
at reducing the C-section rate, further research is needed to determine whether such a
policy would be welfare improving.
       This study also provides suggestive evidence that efforts to improve patient knowledge
and information could improve outcomes while reducing health costs. If all patients
were treated the way physicians are treated, hospital and physician charges could be
                                     60
reduced by 3% or nearly $2B.              However, it is important to consider whether these
results might be replicated in the broader population. Information interventions and
empowerment programs are unlikely to provide patients with the same level of information
  60
     Back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest inducement on the C-section margin represents only ap-
proximately $30M in physician fees (1% of physician incomes). Physician fees for vaginal deliveries on
average are $1926 (Medicare). For C-sections fees are $2295 (Medicare). By inducing demand physicians
increase their income from the average patient by .02 ($2295-$1926). This is compared with average fees
of .292*2295+(1-.292)*1926.


                                                  28
that physicians have, and the effect of information is likely nonlinear. Finally, it is
also possible that an information intervention in the broader population could achieve
larger reductions in C-section rates. Hospital policies and standards of care may limit
how far even a physician-patient can deviate from standard practice, but a broad policy
intervention could affect standards.
    An alternative to PID which we cannot rule out is one in which obstetricians choose
to treat physician-patients differently for reasons other than the patient’s information.
For example, obstetricians may choose to treat their physician-patients differently out
of professional courtesy. If professional courtesy is motivated by identification with the
physician-patient rather than informational concerns it would not be PID.61 However, the
gap between physicians and non-physicians would still be informative as to the extent
of over-treatment and its impact on patients. This paper demonstrates that 10 percent
of C-sections represent overuse of healthcare, and that this overuse is not only costly
but may have an adverse impact on patients. Moreover, if all patients were treated like
physicians, we would nearly achieve the U.S. Government’s Healthy People 2020 goal of
reducing primary C-sections by 2.6 percentage points.




  61
     If professional courtesy arises from the fact that a physician-patient will know if anything less than
optimal care is provided, or related reputational concerns, then professional courtesy is a manifestation
of PID. If, on the other hand, it arises from obstetricians choosing to provide physician-patients with
different care on their own, it would not be PID.


                                                    29
A         Data Appendix

A.I        The California Physician Match

Physician-patients were identified by conducting a probabilistic merge of the California
Vital Statistics (VS) data with a dataset of physicians practicing in California. The
merge was performed by an OSHPD contractor for this project. The contractor was
given access to a confidential version of the California VS data (that OSHPD does not
release to researchers) that included the full name (first, last and maiden) of the mother.62
We provided the contractor with a file of physicians practicing in California and worked
with the contractor to develop the merge process.
       The primary physician file is the California Medical Board physician licensure database.
It includes the full name, zip code, and year of graduation from medical school for all
physicians with active California state medical licenses during the sample period. We
augmented this file with data purchased from BrightPath Marketing, a private company.
The BrightPath Marketing data includes month and year of birth, physician specialty
and gender and was available for 16% of the physician licenses. Only records with female
gender or unknown gender were used in the merge.
       The merge was undertaken in 4 blocks. First name matches were considered first; then
maiden name matches; then last name matches; and then matches on year and month
of birth.63 Agreement weights were calculated for 5 variables in the merge process: first
name, last name, year of birth, month of birth and commuting zone. First and last
name were available in both databases. Because mothers could have multiple last names
matches were considered using any of the mother’s last names and her maiden name
  62
     Only the last name of the father was available in the VS data.
  63
     It was not computationally feasible to compare all potential pairs. Blocking on commuting zone and
birth year range was also intractable. Also for tractability, very common names were excluded in the
first three blocks. These were names with frequencies greater than 1,000 in the vital statistics data or
greater than 300 in the physician data. A list of excluded names is available on request.


                                                  30
from the VS data. The full match weight was applied in cases of exact match, and the
Jaro and bigram comparators were used to account for “close” matches.64 The exact
year of birth was only available in 16% of physician records. For the remaining 84% of
records, an 8-year range of birth years was imputed from the year of graduation from
medical school.65 For month of birth only exact matches among the 18% of licenses with
month available were assigned the full agreement weight. The final matching variable,
the commuting zone, was calculated from the zip code in each dataset to account for
moves and/or disagreements between work versus home addresses.66 The full agreement
weight was applied if the commuting zone in the physician file matched at least one of
the commuting zones in the VS data.67
       The confidential VS data included 412,376 unique mothers at least 25 years old and
with either postgraduate education or unknown education at some point during the study
period.68 The physician data included 182,344 physicians of female or unknown gender
with a unique combination of matching variables. The probabilistic record linkage iden-
tified 8,922 physician moms as matches using a probabilistic match weight cutoff of 0.4.
36% of identified doctors were exact matches on month and year of birth. The mean
match probability for doctors is 0.63.
       The match identifiers were then merged onto the full VS dataset. Births taking place
in hospitals were then linked to the hospital discharge records for both mothers and babies
for the 9 months prior through 1 year after the birth date. The final file provided to us
  64
     A comparison was deemed a match if the maximum of the Jaro and bigram comparator was over
0.7, and in this case the comparator value was used to prorate the agreement weight.
  65
     For the physicians with year of birth and year of medical school graduation in the physician file, 88%
of birth years fell within the imputed 8-year range of birth years.
  66
     This was done using the Census zip code to commuting zone crosswalk derived from 1990 commuting
patterns.
  67
     The U- and M-probabilities are available on request. The highest U-probability was 0.106 for year
of birth and the lowest M-probability was 0.991 for year of birth.
  68
     Mothers can appear in the data more than once if they give birth more than once during the sample
period.



                                                    31
included the usual VS-PDD data elements as well as the doctor identifier and several
indicators providing information on the merge matching process for doctors as well as
the non-confidential data elements from the physician file, for example medical specialty
and year of medical school graduation.


A.II      Classification of Delivery Method in California

The final dataset provides two different methods for determining the delivery method of
births. The birth certificate in California contains information on the delivery method,
and C-sections are coded on the hospital discharge record associated with each delivery.
Specifically, in the VS data C-sections, vaginal deliveries and surgical vaginal deliveries
are coded. Then for 2005, when California switched to a new birth certificate form, an
indicator for whether a trial of labor was attempted prior to C-section is also included
on the birth certificate. While this would allow classification of C-sections into scheduled
and unscheduled solely using the VS data (and not the PDD) in 2005, we instead chose to
classify deliveries as C-sections using ICD-9-CM procedure codes in all years (any delivery
with a procedure code of 74 was classified as C-section). We then classify scheduled and
unscheduled C-sections following the methods of Henry et al. (1995) and Gregory et al.
(2002). This method uses diagnosis codes indicating trial of labor to classify C-sections.
This method was superior to classification using the trial of labor field in 2005.69


A.III       Texas Vital Statistics Data

The Texas data come from the confidential VS file of the Texas State Department of
Health Statistics. The data contain the birth certificate record for every birth registered
  69
    Trial of labor appears to be substantially under-reported in the VS data, as many observations
containing diagnosis codes indicating that labor was tried in the discharge data did not report attempting
labor in the VS data.



                                                   32
in Texas from 1995-2003 and 2005-2007. The 2004 data was not used because a hospital
identifier was not available in this year. The file includes maternal and paternal demo-
graphic information, including self-reported industry and occupation for both. Addition-
ally, the data includes maternal pregnancy history, pregnancy risk factors and delivery
complications, and the birth outcome, including method of delivery. The confidential files
additionally include a hospital identifier for all hospital births.70 A new birth certificate
form was introduced in Texas in 2005, making additional variables available from 2005-
2007. These include the name of the attending (confidential, but made available to us),
and a variable indicating whether labor was tried for C-section deliveries.71
       A limitation of this data compared with the California data is that the Texas VS
record is not linked to the hospital discharge record. This means we cannot reliably
split C-sections into scheduled and unscheduled categories. It also means we observe
fewer patient risk factors in Texas compared with California - we can control only for
risk factors included on the birth certificate form, not those appearing in the discharge
record diagnosis codes. However, the Texas data is a valuable addition to the study.
It provides another state for comparison with the California case, and it allows for a
different method for identifying physicians giving birth. In Texas we identify physicians
using the occupation field from the birth certificate form. We used a 3-step process to
categorize occupations as physician or non-physician occupations. We first categorized
all occupation entries appearing 100 or more times over the sample period. Next, for less
common occupation entries, we categorized any entry including the text strings ”med” or
”phys.” Finally, we categorized all entries for individuals with a doctorate after 2005.72
Because this field is available for both mothers and fathers, we can use the Texas sample
  70
     Due to the introduction of a new birth certificate form in Texas in 2005, the hospital identifier is
not consistent across years. Hospitals were linked across years using the name, which is available both
before and after 2005.
  71
     We found the quality of the trial of labor field to be suspect and so this is not used in the analysis.
  72
     Education is not categorized into masters/doctorate before 2005.


                                                    33
to study treatment of physician fathers as well as physician mothers. We also identified
lawyers and nurses using the first step of the method.
   There were 4,419,892 registered births in Texas in this period. We restrict the anal-
ysis to births taking place in a hospital in Texas (dropping 72,792 observations) and to
singleton births over 20 weeks gestation (dropping 121,655 observations). Given the time
necessary to complete medical school, there are virtually no physicians in their early
twenties. The sample is therefore further restricted to the 2,623,090 mothers at least 24
years of age and 50 years of age or younger. We further exclude observations with missing
maternal age, missing maternal zip code, missing gestational age, or missing birthweight
(90,663 observations). Finally, we restrict our analysis to the 720,487 first births and
then to reduce concerns about comparability between doctors and non-doctors to the
372,691 parents with at least one college degree. Of these roughly 2,628 are families with
physician mothers, 5,915 are families with physician fathers, and 1,475 are families with
physician fathers and mothers.
   Table A.1 summarizes the independent variables used in the Texas analysis. The
top panel displays means and standard deviations of parental demographics for physician
parents, broken out according to the identity of the doctor (physician-mothers, physician-
fathers and families with two physician parents), and non-doctors. As in California,
physician-parents are slightly older, are less likely to be hispanic, and they live in zip
codes with higher income per capita.
   The second panel of Table A.1 summarizes information on the infant. As in Cal-
ifornia, physician-moms are slightly more likely to deliver before their pregnancies are
considered full-term and slightly less likely to deliver post-dates (42 or more weeks ges-
tation). Physician-mothers are also more likely to give birth to babies that are low or
very-low birth weight.



                                           34
   The last panel in Table A.1 summarizes clinical risk factors that potentially affect the
C-section treatment decision. While the risk factors for the California sample are derived
from ICD-9-CM codes, the Texas risk factors come from the birth certificate survey. The
risk factors available for comparison are limited, but physician-parents do appear to have
lower rates of diabetes and smoking than non-doctors, and physician mothers may have
infants with higher rates of congenital anomalies.


References
   Alexander, Jame M., Kenneth J. Leveno, John Hauth, Mark B. Landon, Elizabeth
Thom, Catherine Y. Spong, Michael W. Varner, Atef H. Moawad, Steve N. Caritis,
Margaret Harper, Ronald J. Wapner, Yoram Sorokin, Menachem Miodovnik, Mary J.
O’Sullivan, Baha M. Sibai, Oded Langer, and Steven G. Gabbe, “Fetal Injury Associated
with Cesarean Delivery,”Obstetrics and Gynecology, 108 (2006), 885-890.
   Alpay, Z., Saed, G.M., and Diamond, M.P. (2008) “Postoperative Adhesions: From
Formation to Prevention”Seminars in Reproductive Medicine, 26 (2008), 313-321
   Ananth, C.V., Smulian, J.C. and Vintzileos, A.M. (1997) “The association of placenta
previa with history of cesarean delivery and abortion: a metaanalysis.”Am J Obstet
Gynecol. 177(5):1071-8.
    Baicker, Katherine, Kasey S. Buckles, and Amitabh Chandra, “Geographic Variation
in the Appropriate use of Cesarean Delivery,”Health Affairs, 25 (2006), w355-w367.
  Bunker, John.P. and Byron W. Brown Jr., “The Physician-Patient as an Informed
Consumer of Surgical Services,”New England Journal of Medicine, 290 (1974),1051-1055.
   Chandra, Amitabh, David Cutler, and Zirui Song, “Who Ordered That? The Eco-
nomics of Treatment Choices in Medical Care,”Handbook of Health Economics 2 (Elsevier,
2012).
   Chou, Yiing-Jeng, Nicole Huang, I-Feng Lin, Chung-Yeh Deng, Yi-Wen Tsai, Long-
Shen Chen, and Cheng-Hua Lee “Do Physicians and Their Relatives Have a Decreased
Rate of Cesarean Section? A 4-Year Population-Based Study in Taiwan,”Birth, 33 (2006),
195-202.


                                            35
   Cromwell, Jerry and Janet B. Mitchell, “Physician-induced Demand for Surgery,”Journal
of Health Economics, 5 (1986), 293-313.
   Currie, Janet, Wanchuan Lin, and Wei Zhang, “Patient Knowledge and Antibiotic
Abuse: Evidence from an Audit Study in China,”Journal of Health Economics, 30 (2011),
933-949.
  Currie, Janet and Duncan MacLeod, “First Do No Harm:? Tort Reform and Birth
Outcomes,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123 (2008), 795-830.
   Declercq, Eugene R., Carol Sakala, Maureen P. Corry, and Sandra Applebaum, Lis-
tening to Mothers II: Report of the Second National U.S. Survey of Women’s Childbearing
Experiences (New York: Childbirth Connection, 2006).
   Domenighetti, Gianfranco, Antoine Casabianca, Felix Gutzwiller, and Sebastiano
Martinoli, “Revisiting the Most Informed Consumer of Surgical Services,”International
Journal of Technology Assesment in Health Care, 9 (1993), 505-513.
   Dranove, David and Paul Wehner, “Physician-Induced Demand for Childbirths,”Journal
of Health Economics, 13 (1994), 61-73.
   Ellis, Randall and Thomas McGuire, “Provider Behavior Under Prospective Reim-
bursement,”Journal of Health Economics, 5 (1986), 129-151.
   Epstein, Andrew and Sean Nicholson, “The Formation and Evolution of Physician
Treatment Styles: An Application to Cesarean Sections,”Journal of Health Economics,
28 (2009), 1126-1140.
    Evans, Robert, “Supplier-Induced Demand: Some Empirical Evidence and Implica-
tions,”in The Economics of Health and Medical Care, M. Perlman, ed. (London: Macmil-
lan, 1974).
   Fuchs, Victor, “The Suppy of Surgeons and the Demand for Operations,”The Journal
of Human Resources, 13 (1978), 35-56.
   Fuchs, Victor, “Reflections on the Socio-Economic Correlates of Health,”The Journal
of Health Economics, 23 (2004), 653-661.
    Gregory, Kimberly D., Lisa M. Korst, Jeffrey A. Gornbein, and Lawrence D. Platt.,
“Using Administrative Data to Identify Indications for Elective Primary Cesarean Deliv-
ery,”Health Services Research, 37 (2002), 1387-1401.


                                          36
   Gruber, Jonathan and Maria Owings, “Physician Financial Incentives and Cesarean
Section Delivery,”RAND Journal of Economics, 27 (1996), 99-123.
    Gruber, Jonathan, John Kim, and Dina Mayzlin, “Physician Fees and Procedure
Intensity: the Case of Cesarean Delivery,”Journal of Health Economics, 18 (1999), 473-
490.
    Hay, Joel and Michael J. Leahy, “Physician-Induced Demand: An Empirical Analysis
of the Consumer Information Gap,”Journal of Health Economics, 2 (1982), 231-244.
    Henry, Olivia A., Kiimberly D. Gregory, Calvin J. Hobel, and Lawrence D. Platt.
(1995), “Using ICD-9 Codes to Identify Indications for Primary and Repeat Cesarean Sec-
tions: Agreement With Clinical Records,”American Journal of Public Health, 85 (1995),
1143-1145.
  Jacobson, Mireille, Craig C. Earle, Mary Price, and Joseph P. Newhouse (2010) “How
Medicare’s Payment Cuts for Cancer Chemotherapy Drugs Changed Patterns of Treat-
ment,”Health Affairs, 29 (2010), 1391-1399.
   Kessler, Daniel and Mark McClellan, “Do Doctors Practice Defensive Medicine?,”Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 111 (1996), 353-390.
    Kessler Daniel and Mark McClellan, “How Liability Law Affects Medical Productiv-
ity,”Journal of Health Economics, 21 (2002), 931-955.
    Kozhimannil, Katy B., Michael R. Law, and Beth A. Virnig, “Cesarean Delivery Rates
Vary Tenfold Among US Hospitals; Reducing Variation May Address Quality and Cost
Issues,”Health Affairs, 32 (2013), 527-535.
   Levitt, Steven and Chad Syverson, “Market Distortions When Agents are Better In-
formed: The Value of Information in Real Estate Transactions,”The Review of Economics
and Statistics, 90 (2008), 599-611.
    Lydon-Rochelle, Mona, Victoria L. Holt, Diane P. Martin, and Thomas R. Easterling,
“Association Between Method of Delivery and Maternal Rehospitalization”The Journal
of the American Medical Association, 283 (2000), 2411-2416.
   McGuire, Thomas (2000), “Physician agency,”in The Handbook of Health Economics
1, Anthony J. Culyer and Joseph P. Newhouse, eds., (Elsevier Science, 2000).
    McGuire, Thomas and Mark Pauly, “Physician Response to Fee Changes with Multi-
ple Payers,”Journal of Health Economics, 10 (1991), 385-410.

                                          37
   Nielsen, T.F., Hagberg, H. and Ljungblad, U. (1989) “Placenta previa and antepartum
hemorrhage after previous cesarean section,”Gynecol. Obstet. Invest., 27, 88-90.
   Norberg, Karen and Pantano, Juan (2013) “”Mimeo, Washington University in St.
Louis.
  Nguyen, Nguyen and Frederick W. Derrick, “Physician Behavioral Response to a
Medicare Price Reduction,”Health Services Research, 32 (1997), 283-298.
   Podulka, Jennifer, Elizabeth Stranges, and Claudia Steiner, “Hospitalizations Related
to Childbirth, 2008,”HCUP Statistical Brief 110 (Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality, 2011).
   Prentice, A. and Thomas Lind, “Fetal Heart Rate Monitoring During Labour - Too
Frequent Intervention, Too Little Benefit?,”The Lancet, 330 (1987), 1375-1377.
   Rice, Thomas H., “The Impact of Changing Medicare Reimbursement Rates on
Physician-Induced Demand,”Medical Care, 21 (1983), 803-815.
  Rossiter, Louis F. and Gail R. Wilensky, “Identification of Physician-Induced De-
mand,”Journal of Human Resources, 19 (1984), 231-244.
   Spetz, Joanne, Mark W. Smith, and Sean F. Ennis, “Physician Incentives and the
Timing of Cesarean Sections: Evidence from California,”Medical Care, 39 (2001), 536-
550.
    Stearns, Sally C., Barbara L. Wolfe, and David A. Kindig (1992), “Physician responses
to fee-for-service and capitation payment,”Inquiry, 29 (1992), 416-425.
   Tai-Seale, Ming, Thomas McGuire, and Weimin Zhang “Time allocation in primary
care office visits,”Health Services Research, 42 (2007), 1871-1894.
    Ubel, Peter, Andrea M. Angott, and Brian J. Zikmund-Fisher, “Physicians Recom-
mend Different Treatments for Patients than They Would Choose for Themselves,”Archives
of Internal Medicine, 171 (2011), 630-634.
  Yip, Winnie, “Physician Responses to Medical Fee Reductions: Changes in the Vol-
ume and Intensity of Supply of Coronary Artery Bypass Graft (CABG) Surgeries in the
Medicare and Private Sectors,”Journal of Health Economics, 17 (1998), 675-699.




                                           38
                                       Table I: Summary Statistics: California

                                                             Non-HMO Hospitals                                       HMO Hospitals
                                                         Doctors               Non-doctors                    Doctors               Non-doctors
                                                  Mean       Std. Dev.      Mean       Std. Dev.      Mean       Std. Dev.      Mean        Std. Dev.
Demographics:
Age                                              32.59*        [4.00]       31.13*       [4.28]       32.63*         [4.12]     30.69*        [4.28]
Mother’s education (%):
 Some college                                       0             [0]       11.81*       [32.27]        0             [0]       12.51*       [33.08]
 College graduate                                   0             [0]       44.68*       [49.72]        0             [0]       42.21*       [49.39]
 High education                                    100            [0]        38.4*       [48.63]       100            [0]       40.1*        [49.01]
Father’s education (%):
 Some college                                    5.081*       [21.97]       12.99*       [33.62]      4.798*       [21.39]      16.98*       [37.54]
 College graduate                                16.54*       [37.16]       39.66*       [48.92]      19.39*       [39.57]      37.20*       [48.33]
 High education                                   71.6*       [45.10]       37.63*       [48.45]      71.21*       [45.32]      34.17*       [47.43]
Mother’s race (%):
 Black                                              3.46       [18.28]       2.99        [17.02]       5.76        [23.32]       6.16         [24.05]
 Hispanic                                          6.09*       [23.92]      13.78*       [34.47]      7.294*       [26.03]      17.79*        [38.24]
 Other                                            38.67*       [48.71]      26.03*       [43.88]     47.22*        [49.97]      28.92*        [45.34]
Zip code income ($)                              34,601*      [15,560]     29,524*      [13,765]     33,877*      [13,901]     26,648*       [10,975]
Insurance (%):
 HMO                                              42.95       [49.51]       43.98        [49.64]      98.46        [12.31]       98.37       [12.65]
 Government                                      3.604*       [18.64]       8.52*        [27.92]                                 0.31         [5.55]
 Indigent                                                                   0.024         [1.54]                                0.0035        [0.59]

Infant information (%):
Female                                            48.40       [49.98]       48.57        [49.98]      50.10        [50.05]       48.74       [49.98]
Very early term (20-36 weeks)                      8.18       [27.41]         7.71       [26.68]       9.597       [29.48]        8.59       [28.03]
Early term (37-39 weeks)                         25.37*       [43.52]       21.79*       [41.28]      23.03        [42.14]       19.76       [39.82]
Post-dates (≥ 42 weeks)                           5.87*       [23.52]        6.87*       [25.29]      5.76*        [23.32]       8.26*       [27.53]
Very low birth weight                             0.901        [9.45]         1.01        [9.99]        0.96        [9.76]        1.25       [11.09]
Low birth weight                                   5.15       [22.11]         4.42       [20.55]       8.64*       [28.12]       5.01*       [21.81]
High birth weight                                 5.84*       [23.45]        8.97*       [28.57]       6.33*       [24.38]       9.77*       [29.69]
Prenatal care                                     99.71        [5.36]        99.78        [4.73]      100.00          [0]        99.73        [5.22]

Risk factors (%):
Malpositioned fetus                                4.36       [20.42]       4.57         [20.88]       3.84        [19.23]       4.12        [19.84]
Diabetes                                           4.40       [20.51]       4.70         [21.16]       5.76        [23.32]       7.08        [25.65]
Eclampsia                                         0.036        [1.90]       0.081         [2.84]       0.38         [6.19]        0.20        [4.41]
Smoking / substance abuse                          0.14        [3.80]        0.19         [4.31]       1.54        [12.31]        1.43       [11.88]
Hypertension / pre-eclampsia                       5.51       [22.83]        5.80        [23.35]       7.29        [26.03]        7.54       [26.40]
Congenital anomaly                                 0.14        [3.80]        0.08         [2.86]                                  0.12        [3.39]
Placental/uterine rupture/hemorrhage               1.44       [11.92]       1.19         [10.82]      2.11*        [14.39]       1.16*       [10.69]
Ruptured membranes ≥ 24 hours                      2.27       [14.90]        2.27        [14.88]        3.84       [19.23]        4.22       [20.10]
Isoimmunity                                        1.84       [13.43]        1.89        [13.62]        0.38        [6.19]        1.07       [10.27]
Oligohydramnios                                    0.43        [6.56]        0.32         [5.65]        0.38        [6.19]       0.26         [5.12]
Polyhydramnios                                    15.24       [35.95]       13.62        [34.30]      24.18*       [42.86]      20.12*       [40.09]
Growth restriction                                 2.81       [16.53]       1.52         [12.22]       2.67*       [16.19]       1.21*       [10.93]
Thyroid condition                                 2.45*       [15.46]       1.50*        [12.14]        2.11       [14.39]       1.85        [13.48]
Herpes                                             0.47        [6.83]        0.51         [7.15]       0.96         [9.80]       1.43        [11.87]
Asthma                                             1.26       [11.16]        0.94         [9.64]        2.88       [16.74]        2.87       [16.70]
Pre-existing maternal physical factors            1.98*       [13.94]       1.47*        [12.04]       2.88*       [16.74]      1.19*        [10.83]
Other maternal pre-existing conditions             1.44       [11.92]        1.11        [10.49]        1.73       [13.04]       0.97         [9.82]

Observations                                              2,775                   494,589                      521                       85,241
Table contains means and standard deviations of independent variables used in the empirical analysis. “Pre-existing maternal physical factors”
include previous uterine scar and physical anomalies. “Other maternal pre-existing conditions” includes heart disease, renal disease and liver
disease. * denotes differences in doctor and non-doctor means that are significantly different from zero at the 5 percent level. The comparison
of means is performed separately inside and outside of HMO-owned hospitals)




                                                                         39
                          Table II: Raw C-section Rates

                                Non-HMO Hospitals                 HMO Hospitals
Panel A: California            Doctors     Non-Doctors        Doctors      Non-Doctors
Any C-section                    27.6              29.2          31.1           26.1
                                [44.7]            [45.5]        [46.3]         [43.9]
Scheduled C-section              11.0              10.1          12.7            8.2
                                [31.2]            [30.1]        [33.3]         [27.4]
Unscheduled C-section            16.6              19.1          18.4           18.0
                                [37.2]            [39.3]        [38.8]         [38.4]

Observations                    2,775            494,589         521           85,241



                                         Doctors
Panel B: Texas                  Moms      Dads       Both           Non-Doctors
Any C-section                    31.8      30.0       28.9                 32.7
                                [46.6]    [45.8]     [45.3]               [46.9]

Observations                    2,628     5,915      1,475               362,673
Mean C-section rates for births to families in which at least one parent is a college grad-
uate calculated from California and Texas VS data. Standard deviations are displayed
in brackets. Details on sample and physician identification are provided in Section 4.1
and in the Data Appendix.




                                            40
               Table III: C-sections and Physician Mothers: California
                            Any C-section        Scheduled C       Unscheduled C
Panel A: OLS                    (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)
Doctor                       -2.13**      -1.68*        0.013     0.021      -2.14**       -1.70*
                              [0.78]      [0.69]        [0.60]    [0.54]      [0.65]       [0.66]

Hospital FE?                               Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Observations                 497,364     497,364       497,364   497,364     497,364      497,364
Adjusted R-squared            0.17         0.18          0.22     0.23        0.061        0.068


Panel B: Matching               (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)
Doctor                       -2.11**     -1.75+          0.27     0.052       -1.88*       -1.81*
                              [0.87]      [0.99]        [0.56]    [0.68]      [0.78]       [0.90]

Hospital FE?                               Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Observations                  94,377      16,920       94,377     16,920      94,377      16,920
Exact match rate               89%         53%          89%        53%         89%         53%
The sample is deliveries in non-HMO hospitals. Effects are displayed in percentage points.
Standard errors are in brackets. Doctor is a dummy indicating the mother is a physician. Panel
A displays results from OLS regressions, containing the controls summarized in Table 1 as well as
their interactions as described in the paper, and month and year dummies. OLS standard errors
are clustered by hospital. Panel B displays results from nearest neighbor matching regressions,
with matching performed on variables as described in Section 4.2. Abadie & Imbens (2006)
analytical standard errors are displayed (+ denotes significance at the .10 level, * at the .05, and
** at the .01).




                                                  41
    Table IV: C-sections and Physician Parents: Texas
                                Any C-section
                             (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)
Doctor Mother             -2.75**       -2.06**    -3.12*     -2.57+
                           [0.83]        [0.61]    [1.58]      [1.52]
Doctor Father              -0.37          0.41      -0.24       0.71
                           [0.72]        [0.53]    [1.21]      [1.20]

Hospital FE?                             Yes
Attending FE?                                                   Yes
Observations       372,691              372,691   101,839     101,839
Adjusted R-squared  0.12                  0.14      0.09       0.16
Table displays results from OLS regressions. Columns (1) - (2) are
for the full sample; Columns (3) and (4) are for the subsample with
attending name (years 2005-2007). All regressions include maternal
demographic controls, infant information, and clinical risk factors and
year and month effects (see Appendix Table A.1). Effects are dis-
played in percentage points. Standard errors, clustered by hospital in
Columns (1) and (2) and by attending in Columns (3) and (4), are in
brackets (+ denotes significance at the .10 level, * at the .05, and **
at the .01).




                                   42
    Table V: C-sections and Physician Mothers - HMO and non-HMO Hospitals
                        Any C-section      Scheduled C       Unscheduled C
                             (1)        (2)           (3)       (4)       (5)            (6)
Doctor                     -2.05*     -1.91*          0.11     0.11     -2.16**        -2.02*
                           [0.81]     [0.77]         [0.51]   [0.48]     [0.77]        [0.78]
HMOHosp*Doctor             5.57*       4.80*         2.94*    2.50+       2.63          2.30
                           [2.29]      [2.24]        [1.47]   [1.43]     [1.87]        [1.87]
HMOHosp                   -4.93**     -4.57**    -2.05**      -1.74**   -2.88**       -2.83**
                           [0.44]      [0.50]     [0.25]       [0.26]    [0.35]        [0.41]

HSA FE?                                 Yes                    Yes                      Yes
Observations       581,310           581,310     581,310      581,310 581,310         581,310
Adjusted R-Squared  0.16              0.17         0.21        0.22    0.064           0.066
Table displays results from OLS regressions, including controls as in Panel A of Table 3, with the
exception of HMO patient which is excluded. Doctor is an indicator the mother is a physician
and HMOHosp is an indicator that the birth took place in an HMO-owned hospital. Effects are
displayed in percentage points. Standard errors, clustered by maternal HSA, in parentheses (+
denotes significance at the .10 level, * at the .05, and ** at the .01).




                                                43
                           Table VI: Summary Statistics: Morbidity and Treatment Intensity

                                               Non-HMO Hospitals                                  HMO Hospitals
                                          Doctors              Non-doctors                 Doctors          Non-doctors
                                     Mean     Std. Dev.     Mean       Std. Dev.   Mean      Std. Dev.   Mean      Std. Dev.
     Maternal morbidity (%):
      Laceration               7.60             [26.51]      8.44       [27.80]    10.94       [31.24]   11.68      [32.12]
      Post-partum hemorrhage 2.85               [16.63]      2.81       [16.53]    3.07        [17.27]   4.93       [21.64]
      Infection               3.35              [18.00]      4.37       [20.44]    5.95        [23.68]   5.35       [22.50]
     Infant morbidity (%):
      Respiratory assistance   2.23             [14.78]      2.49       [15.56]     3.45       [18.28]    4.26      [20.19]




44
      Intubation               2.38             [15.24]      2.48       [15.56]     1.73       [13.64]    2.80      [16.49]
      Infection               1.87              [13.56]      2.14       [14.46]     0.77        [8.74]    1.22      [10.97]
      Trauma                  0.94               [9.64]      1.28       [11.22]     0.77        [8.74]    1.09      [10.38]
     Treatment quantity (%):
      Induction               17.00             [37.58]      15.68      [36.36]    21.30       [40.98]   16.31      [36.94]
      Vacuum extraction       15.57             [32.26]     16.79       [37.38]    12.67       [33.29]   11.66      [32.09]
      Forceps                  2.74             [16.32]      2.18       [14.59]     1.53       [12.31]    1.18      [10.79]
      Hospital charges       18,010            [37,373]     19,130     [53,252]       -           -         -          -

     Observations                           2,775                   494,589                 521                  85,241
     Table contains means and standard deviations of dependent variables used in Section 5.3. Maternal and infant morbidity
     measures are coded from ICD-9-CM codes. HMO-owned hospitals are not required to report hospital charges.
                            Table VII: Morbidity in HMO-Owned and Non-HMO-Owned Hospitals

                                          Maternal Morbidity                                               Infant Morbidity
                              Laceration        Hemorrhage          Infection       Respiratory         Intubation        Infection         Trauma
                                                                                     assistance
                                   (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)                (5)              (6)               (7)
     Doctor                     -1.17**              -0.03            -1.15**           -0.064             -0.43*           -0.25            -0.31+
     (HMOHosp=0)                 [0.43]              [0.35]            [0.41]           [0.30]             [0.21]           [0.23]            [0.17]
     Doctor                      –0.97              -1.86*              0.70             -0.82             -1.30*           -0.57+            -0.26
     (HMOHosp=1)                 [1.40]             [0.80]             [1.01]            [0.53]            [0.76]            [0.33]           [0.39]




45
     HMOHosp                     3.36**             1.77**              0.31             1.6**             -0.026          -1.03**           -0.26**
     (Doctor=0)                  [0.54]             [0.43]             [0.45]            [0.53]            [0.29]           [0.35]            [0.09]

     HSA FE?                       Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes              Yes
     Observations               581,281            581,204           580,801           580,147            580,783          580,669          579,168
     R-squared                   0.038              0.037             0.038             0.14               0.16             0.11             0.05
     Mean of depvar                8.9                3.1               4.5               2.7                2.5              2.0               1.2
     Table displays average marginal effects from logit regressions including controls as detailed in Table 5. Effects are displayed in percentage points.
     The values assumed for indicator variables in the AME integration are noted in parentheses under the variable name. The construction of the
     morbidity measures is described in Section 5.2. Sample sizes deviate from 581,310 when one or more HSAs is dropped during logit estimation.
     Standard errors, clustered by HSA, are in brackets (+ denotes significance at the .10 level, * at the .05, and ** at the .01).
           Table VIII: Ancillary Procedures and Hospital Charges and Physician Mothers
                                  Ancillary Procedures           (Log) Hospital Charges
                                  Labor         Vacuum Forceps
                                Induction      extraction
                                    (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)            (6)
     Doctor Mom                     1.6*         -1.5+          0.20        -3.9*       -2.6**         -1.5+
                                   [0.76]        [0.81]        [0.23]       [1.7]       [0.94]         [0.83]
     HMOHosp * Doctor               3.4*           2.5          -0.10
                                    [1.4]         [1.7]        [0.46]
     HMOHosp                       -0.82         -4.9**        -1.0**
                                    [1.1]         [1.0]        [0.38]
     Scheduled C                                                                                       0.53**




46
                                                                                                        [0.01]
     Unscheduled C                                                                                     0.62**
                                                                                                       [0.008]

     FE?                           HSA            HSA           HSA                   Hospital       Hospital
     Observations                581,554        581,554       581,554     482,831      482,831        482,831
     Adjusted R-squared           0.057          0.026         0.010        0.40        0.57           0.68
     Mean of depvar                 15.8           16.0          2.0                      19,124
     Table displays results from OLS regressions including the full set of controls described in Table 3, Panel A.
     In Columns (1) - (3) the sample includes all hospitals, and these regressions exclude the HMO insurance
     variable due to collinearity; in Columns (4) - (6) the sample is all non-HMO-owned hospitals. Standard
     errors, clustered by HSA in Columns (1) - (3) and by hospital in Columns (4) - (6), are in parentheses
     (+ denotes significance at the .10 level, * at the .05, and ** at the .01).
                                     Table A.1: Summary Statistics: Texas


                                                                  Doctors
                                             Moms                    Dads                    Both                    Non-doctors
                                     Mean      Std. Dev.    Mean       Std. Dev.    Mean       Std. Dev.          Mean             Std. Dev.
Demographics:
Age                                  32.37       [3.94]      31.12       [3.86]     32.10        [3.37]           30.29              [4.02]
Mother’s education (%)
 Some college                                                10.94      [31.21]                                   11.19             [31.53]
 College graduate                                            41.22      [49.23]                                   51.34             [49.98]
 High education                                              43.01      [49.51]                                   32.41             [46.80]
Father’s education (%)
 Some college                         9.32      [29.08]                                                           14.99             [35.70]
 College graduate                    31.24      [46.36]                                                           41.73             [49.31]
 High education                      52.47      [49.95]                                                           32.24             [46.74]
Mother’s race
 Black                                9.48       [29.29]     3.74        [18.97]     3.66        [18.79]            7.44            [26.24]
 Hispanic                            11.38       [31.76]     13.37       [34.04]    11.93        [32.43]           16.35            [36.98]
 Other race                          22.15       [41.53]     19.15       [39.36]    28.54        [45.18]            9.86            [29.82]
Zipcode income                      29,818      [12,789]    28,904      [13,044]    31,223      [14,261]          25,312           [10,483]
Married                              95.89       [19.85]     97.75       [14.83]     99.05       [9.699]           93.23            [25.13]
Mother working                                               72.71       [44.55]                                   81.44            [38.88]
Father working                       96.19      [19.14]                                                           96.79             [17.62]

Infant information:
Female                               48.10      [49.97]      48.66      [49.99]     50.24       [50.02]           48.67             [49.98]
Very early term (20-36 weeks)         9.17      [28.87]       7.59      [26.49]      7.19       [25.84]            8.19             [27.42]
Early term (37-39 weeks)             31.96      [46.64]      27.52      [44.67]     31.12       [46.31]           26.19             [43.97]
Post-dates (≤42 weeks)                6.16      [24.06]       7.66      [26.60]     6.441       [24.56]            9.14             [28.82]
Very low birth weight                 1.18      [10.80]       0.66       [8.09]      0.88        [9.35]            0.98              [9.86]
Low birth weight                      6.20      [24.12]       5.17      [22.15]      5.83       [23.44]            4.90             [21.59]
High birth weight                     5.67      [23.13]       5.46      [22.72]      4.68       [21.12]            8.26             [27.53]
Prenatal care                        98.71      [11.30]      98.28      [13.02]     98.44       [12.39]           98.60             [11.77]

Risk factors:
Malpositioned fetus                   7.04      [25.59]      5.95       [23.66]     6.71        [25.03]            6.61             [24.84]
Diabetes                              2.51      [15.65]      2.74       [16.32]     2.44        [15.44]           3.217             [17.65]
Eclampsia                             0.30       [5.51]       0.15       [3.90]     0.14         [3.68]            0.26              [5.07]
Smoking                               0.27       [5.16]       0.56       [7.45]     0.20         [4.51]           1.461             [12.00]
Hypertension / pre-eclampsia          6.55      [24.74]      4.48       [20.69]     4.81        [21.41]            6.30             [24.30]
Congenital anomaly                    0.15       [3.90]      0.017       [1.30]     0.068        [2.60]           0.088              [2.96]
Observations                                 2,628                   5,915                   1,475                      362,673
Table contains means and standard deviations of independent variables used in the empirical analysis. The sample is described in
the Data Appendix.




                                                                  47
