                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   EXTERNAL ADJUSTMENT, GLOBAL IMBALANCES AND VALUATION EFFECTS

                                      Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
                                             Hélène Rey

                                        Working Paper 19240
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19240


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2013




This chapter was prepared for the Handbook of International Economics, vol IV, edited by Gita Gopinath,
Elhanan Helpman and Kenneth Rogoff. Comments on an earlier draft are gratefully acknowledged.
Thanks to Evgenia Passari, Nicolas Govillot for their help with the US data. Thanks to Gian Maria
Milesi-Ferretti and Philip Lane for providing us with the 2010 update of their dataset. Thanks to the
editors and discussants Vincenzo Quadrini and Paolo Pesenti as well as to Maury Obstfeld for detailed
comments. Rey gratefully acknowledges support from ERC grant 210584. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas and Hélène Rey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
External Adjustment, Global Imbalances and Valuation Effects
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas and Hélène Rey
NBER Working Paper No. 19240
July 2013
JEL No. F21,F3,F33,F36,F4,F41,G01,G15

                                           ABSTRACT

We provide an overview of the recent developments of the literature on the determinants of long term
capital flows, global imbalances and valuation effects. We present the main stylized facts of the new
international financial landscape in which external balance sheets of countries have grown in size and
discuss implications for the international monetary and financial system.


Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and CEPR
and also NBER
pog@econ.berkeley.edu

Hélène Rey
London Business School
Regents Park
London NW1 4SA
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
hrey@london.edu
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                                                         1

2 Stylized facts                                                                                                                       4
  2.1 Global imbalances, world interest rates and allocation puzzle . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                          4
  2.2 The growth of cross-border gross positions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                       5
  2.3 The importance of valuations for the external balance sheet . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                          7

3 Long Term Capital Flows in the Neoclassical Growth Model                                                                             8
  3.1 The set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    9
  3.2 Financial autarky . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   10
      3.2.1 Relation to the Lucas Puzzle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   10
      3.2.2 Steady state autarky rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   11
  3.3 Open economy and the direction of capital ﬂows . . . . . . . . .                    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   12
      3.3.1 Small open economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   12
      3.3.2 Large open economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   14
  3.4 Current account movements and productivity diﬀerentials . . . .                     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   15

4 Models of Global Imbalances                                                                                                         15
  4.1 Asset Shortages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   17
      4.1.1 The individual problem and aggregate dynamics             .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   17
      4.1.2 Financial Autarky . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   19
      4.1.3 Open Economy and the direction of capital ﬂows            .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   21
      4.1.4 Productivity and ﬁnancial frictions . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   23
  4.2 Demographics and global imbalances . . . . . . . . . . .        .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   24
  4.3 Bewley models and precautionary savings. . . . . . . . .        .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   26
      4.3.1 The set-up. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   27
      4.3.2 Individual consumption and portfolio decisions .          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   28
      4.3.3 Financial Autarky . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   29
      4.3.4 Open economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   30
      4.3.5 Aggregate uncertainty. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   32
  4.4 Financial frictions and international trade . . . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   32
  4.5 Global Imbalances and Financial Fragility . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   33
  4.6 Private Flows, Public Flows and Reserve accumulation .          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   34

5 External Balance Sheets Valuation Eﬀects and Adjustment                                                                             35
  5.1 International Adjustment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   35
      5.1.1 External solvency constraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   35
      5.1.2 Valuation eﬀects: empirical methodology . . . . . . . . .                     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   37
      5.1.3 The case of the United States . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   38
      5.1.4 Intertemporal approach to the current account . . . . . .                     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   42
      5.1.5 Trade and valuation channels of international adjustment                      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   44
  5.2 Theoretical models and valuation eﬀects . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   47

6 The International Monetary and Financial System                                                                                     50

7 Conclusions                                                                                                                         52
1     Introduction

The question of external adjustment is a central issue in international macroeconomics. Early ap-
proaches such as Hume (1752)’s price specie ﬂow mechanism emphasized the self-regulating nature
of international exchanges through settlements in hard currency. Following the disruptions of the
interwar period, the early Keynesian analyses of Machlup (1943), Meade (1951) or Metzler (1960)
focused instead on the role of monetary and ﬁscal policy in achieving a desired level of internal
and external balance. These static models focused on nominal price and wage rigidity and did
not feature any self-correcting force that would ensure long-term stability. When Mundell (1968)
asked “To what extent should surplus countries expand; to what extent should deﬁcit countries con-
tract?” the debate was about the relative merits of expenditure-switching and expenditure-reducing
policies, that is, policies that would alter the composition of demand between domestic and for-
eign goods, versus policies that would directly aﬀect patterns of aggregate demand. Subsequent
research, started by Hamada (1969) and Bruno (1970) and summarized in Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ
(1995) borrowed from the optimal growth theory of Ramsey (1928), Cass (1965) and Koopmans
(1965). Since the current account measures the diﬀerence between national saving and domestic
investment, both forward looking decisions, proper modeling of the external adjustment requires
an explicit theory of economic agents’ consumption/saving and investment decisions. The resulting
synthesis, in the form of the ‘intertemporal approach to the current account’ characterized the
dynamics of the current account as the result of forward-looking decisions by households and in-
vestment decisions by ﬁrms, set in market structures of varying degrees of complexity. This was the
focus of Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1995) in the previous volume of the handbook, and constitutes a nat-
ural starting point for this chapter. Conceptually, the intertemporal approach ascribes movements
in a country’s current account to the diﬀerence between the current situation of a country, and its
long run circumstances. Formally, it states that countries should borrow whenever their current
income is below their permanent income, or whenever the return to domestic capital is higher then
the cost of borrowing. The precise amount of borrowing is then pinned down by the requirement
that debts be repaid, and returns to capital be equated across locations.1
    From a conceptual point of view, this approach constitutes a giant leap forward. From an em-
pirical perspective, however, the theory has yielded mixed results and its key empirical predictions
have often been rejected by the data, a point already noted by Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1995).2 We
    1
      This chapter does not deal with situations where countries may decide not to repay their debts. For a discussion
of the speciﬁc issue of sovereign debt, see the chapter by Mark Aguiar and Manuel Amador in this Handbook.
    2
      For instance, Nason and Rogers (2006) found that the present-value-model of the current account was soundly
rejected for Canada over the post-war period. In general, the current account balances ascribed by the theory tend


                                                          1
emphasize here two particularly relevant empirical shortcomings, which we document in section
2: ﬁrst, the model performs particularly poorly in explaining the empirical pattern of net long
term capital movements, both between developing and mature economies and across developing
countries. Second, the model does not take into account that the current account represents an
increasingly imperfect measure of the change in a country’s net foreign asset position since the
latter also reﬂects changes in the market value of cross-border claims and liabilities. The relative
importance of these ‘valuation eﬀects’ is particularly high for advanced economies, but increasingly
so too for emerging ones. The growing empirical importance of these valuation eﬀects require that
we look more closely at the determinants of international portfolios.

    We explore these two dimensions in turn. Understanding the source of ‘global imbalances’
–deﬁcits in advanced countries, surpluses in rapidly growing emerging ones– constitutes the prin-
cipal objective of sections 3 and 4. Section 3 lays out a simple model of long term capital ﬂows.
The starting point is the neo-classical growth model in continuous time under perfect foresight, a
standard framework which allows us to derive many key results without having to spend too much
time on the necessary machinery. The model’s predictions regarding capital ﬂows rests on two key
elements. First, capital will tend to ﬂow from countries with low autarky returns to countries with
high autarky returns. Second, the model identiﬁes two key determinants of a country’s autarky re-
turns: capital scarcity and long run growth prospects both taken as exogenous and country-speciﬁc.
Putting both things together, the theory unambiguously points to advanced economies as countries
with low autarky interest rates, and emerging ones as countries with high autarky interest rates.
Hence capital should ﬂow ‘downstream’ from rich to poor countries.
    Existing attempts to explain the observed pattern of global imbalances introduce additional
determinants of autarky interest rates. The various models put forward in the literature, surveyed
in section 4, all share the feature that advanced economies –chieﬂy the U.S.- can exhibit higher
autarky real returns than the rest of the world, especially emerging economies. Equivalently, these
countries have high desired saving (or low desired investment) relative to the U.S. Hence, these
theories predict that capital should ﬂow from South to North, as observed in the data. Most of
these theories rely on asymmetries between ﬁnancial and economic development in advanced and
to be much smaller and less variable than their empirical counterpart. Put another way, output ﬂuctuations appear
much more persistent to the econometrician’s eyes than actual current account movements suggest. There are some
important exceptions. For instance, Aguiar and Gopinath (2007) ﬁnd that the current account ﬂuctuations of small
emerging economies are consistent with the theory precisely once one takes into account that productivity shocks
appear much more persistent in emerging economies. Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2000) show that introducing transportation
costs in an otherwise standard model helps understanding the Feldstein and Horioka (1980) puzzle of small current
account imbalances and also allows to make progress on other important international macroeconomics puzzles.



                                                       2
emerging countries. Caballero et al. (2008a), for instance, assume that developing countries face a
shortage of stores of value. This shortage depresses the autarky rates of returns of these countries,
and rapid growth in this part of the world can exacerbate global imbalances. Other theories, such
as Mendoza et al. (2009) or Angeletos and Panousi (2011), emphasize cross-country diﬀerences in
the ability to insure away idiosyncratic risk. In a Bewley-type model, these diﬀerences translate
into diﬀerent strength of the precautionary saving motive. Less ﬁnancially developed countries,
faced with higher residual levels of idiosyncratic risk will save more, depressing autarky rates of
return. Yet other theories, such as Antràs and Caballero 2009, emphasize the interactions between
ﬁnancial frictions and international trade.

   Most of these models do not feature aggregate uncertainty and do not have an international
diversiﬁcation motive. They make predictions about net capital ﬂows, that is, about the intertem-
poral transfer of resources across countries. Section 5 follows a diﬀerent track. It starts by observing
that the current account does not, in general, coincide with the change in a country’s net foreign
asset position. The latter also reﬂects changes in the market value of claims and liabilities un-
derlying a country’s net position, including exchange rate movements. As documented in section
2 and by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001) these valuation changes, ignored in much of the earlier
literature, have grown tremendously in importance since the 1980s, to the point where over a given
period, their ﬂuctuations can easily dominate the current account balance. Obtaining precise esti-
mates of these valuation changes is not an easy task, and we discuss the empirical methodological
advances that have allowed researchers to make progress on that front. Valuation changes would
not matter much for the underlying process of external adjustment if they were purely unexpected
and random. We present a simple framework to analyze the structure of total external returns
and their predictability. We discuss how such returns can be constructed from underlying balance
sheet position, with a particular attention to the relevant empirical caveats that are involved in
any exercise of this nature. Section 5 also focuses more speciﬁcally on the U.S. external balance
sheet and presents updated estimates of the excess return the U.S. enjoys on its external balance
sheet. We discuss the origin of what has sometimes been called an ‘exorbitant privilege.’ We show
how the predictable component of this excess return contributes to relaxing the external constraint
of the United States. A legitimate question to ask then is to what extent existing theories and in
particular to what extent the new stream of literature featuring dynamic stochastic general equi-
librium models can accommodate the valuation channel of adjustment in their dynamics of the net
foreign asset positions.


                                                   3
        Finally, our discussion on the structure of external balance sheets of countries has a bearing on
the functioning of the International Monetary and Financial System which we take up in section
6. Traditionally the country at the centre of the system, -the UK in the 19th century and before
the ﬁrst world war or the US after the second world war-, has been described as a global liquidity
provider. The centre country issues the currency used in most international exchanges whether
on goods market or on ﬁnancial markets. By emphasizing the heterogeneity in risk proﬁles of
the diﬀerent countries, the role of the center country can be reinterpreted as one not only of a
liquidity provider but also one of a global insurer. After all, the dollar is not merely a very liquid
international mean of exchange but is it also the currency denomination of U.S. Treasuries, which
are held as reserve assets all over the globe. We discuss how the endogenous structures of portfolios
of countries aﬀects net returns on the external asset position and leads to potentially very large
wealth transfers in crisis times.
        We conclude with a review of intriguing research questions left open by the literature.


2        Stylized facts

We begin by highlighting some important stylized facts characterizing recent developments in in-
ternational capital markets.


2.1       Global imbalances, world interest rates and allocation puzzle

Over the last twenty years capital has ﬂown from South to North, and especially towards the
United States, arguably among the most advanced economies in the world. The large current
account deﬁcits of the United States have started to expand after the Asian Crisis to reach 5.3% of
US GDP in 2004, 5.8% in 2005 and about 6% in 2006. Figure 1 illustrates this pattern by reporting
the current account balances of various groups of countries, as a fraction of world output between
1980 and 2012. Table 1 reports average ratios of current accounts to world output for three periods:
between 1980 and 1996 (before the Asian ﬁnancial crisis); from 1997 to 2006 (between the Asian
and global ﬁnancial crises); and since 2007.3 U.S. current account deﬁcits have been ﬁnanced by a
broad array of creditors, mostly Japan in the 1980s and early 1990s, oil producing economies and
emerging Asia since 1996, and especially China over the recent period.4 These massive net capital
ﬂows into the world’s dominant capital market have been referred to as “global imbalances.”
    3
     Current account balances in table 1 do not sum to zero because of the discrepancy between global saving and
investment. The missing surplus (or deﬁcit in recent years) averages about 0.5% of world output.
   4
     See Blanchard and Milesi-Ferretti (2009) for a detailed account of the evolution of global external deﬁcits.



                                                       4
    Figure 2 reports the world real interest rate over the same period.5 We observe a dramatic
decline in the world real interest rate, from 5-6% at the beginning of the 1980s, to -2% by the end
of 2011. As Bernanke (2005) observed in his early and inﬂuential piece on the ‘savings glut,’ any
account for the pattern of global imbalances needs also to be consistent with the evidence on real
interest rates.

Stylized Fact 1 (Global Imbalances) The largest and arguably most advanced world economy,
the United States, has been a net capital importer since 1982 and has been increasingly ﬁnanced by
fast growing emerging economies. The absolute value of world current account balances scaled by
world GDP, the “global imbalances,” have been increasing starting in 1996 -with a short dip at the
time of the 2001-02 recession and a more sustained one since 2008-. The emergence of these global
imbalances coincides with a general decline in world real interest rates.

    Moreover, the pattern of total net capital inﬂows to developing countries stands also in con-
tradiction with the basic theory. Figure 3, reproduced from Gourinchas and Jeanne (forth.), plots
average productivity growth between 1980 and 2000 (horizontal axis) against the average net cap-
ital inﬂows relative to GDP. According to the theory, the relationship should be strongly positive.
Instead, the ﬁgure exhibits a strong negative correlation, which the authors label the ‘allocation
puzzle.’ Gourinchas and Jeanne (forth.), Aguiar and Amador (2011) and Alfaro et al. (2011) ﬁnd
that this negative correlation between growth and capital ﬂows is mostly driven by public ﬂows,
while private capital inﬂows appear positively correlated with productivity fundamentals.

Stylized Fact 2 (Allocation Puzzle) Aggregate net capital inﬂows tend to be negatively corre-
lated with productivity growth across developing countries. This pattern is largely driven by public
sector capital ﬂows.


2.2    The growth of cross-border gross positions

Another key stylized fact in international economics since the 1990s has been the massive increase
in gross capital ﬂows. As capital controls were taken down, as ﬁnancial regulation and transaction
costs decreased, the gross external asset positions of countries underwent a remarkable surge. At
the beginning of the 21st century, some small open economies invested abroad and/or owed to
foreigners several times their level of annual output. The example, of Iceland, which in 2007 owned
about 524% of its annual GDP in external assets while owing foreigners 636% of its annual GDP
   5
     The world real interest rate is deﬁned as the GDP-weighted average of 3-months nominal interest rates minus
realized inﬂation, for the countries of the G-7. The ﬁgure also reports two measures of ex-ante long-term US rates.


                                                        5
is particularly striking but not isolated: for instance, in 2010, the gross external assets of the UK
were 488% and 507% of annual output respectively.6
       In pioneering work, Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001) and Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007a) con-
structed an annual panel of cross border assets and liabilities for a large number of countries. A
simple and widely used measure of de facto ﬁnancial integration is the sum of cross-border ﬁnancial
claims (A) and liabilities (L), scaled by annual GDP: (A + L)/Y .7 As reported in Lane (2012),
this measure of ﬁnancial integration has risen from 68.4% in 1980 to 438.2% in 2007 for advanced
economies.8 Meanwhile, the same measure for emerging market economies increased from 34.9%
in 1980 to 73.3% in 2007. Financial integration has therefore been a general phenomenon. But
unlike trade globalization, which was mostly driven by emerging markets, ﬁnancial integration has
been more pronounced so far for advanced economies. Using the latest update of the Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti (2007a) dataset with data up to 2010, ﬁgure 4 reports the sum of gross external
assets and liabilities, scaled by world GDP for the G7 economies as well as for four large and fast
growing emerging economies -the so-called BRICs (Brazil, Russia, India, China)-. The magnitude
of ﬁnancial globalization for G-7 economies increased sharply from 75% of world output in 1990s
to 210% at its peak in 2007. For the BRIC economies, it increased tenfold, from 2% in 1990 to
20% in 2010.

Stylized Fact 3 (Increase in cross-border gross ﬂows and positions) Cross-border gross as-
set and liability positions have massively increased since the 1980s and especially in the 1990s and
2000s. This increase has been particularly pronounced for advanced economies.

       Furthermore, the type of cross border positions taken by diﬀerent economies, i.e. the compo-
sition of the balance sheets, is very heterogeneous across countries. While it is relatively common
to ﬁnd that “risky” assets (portfolio equity or FDI investments) account on average for a large
share of the asset side of the balance sheet of advanced economies (49% for the United States,
50% for Canada, 26% for the UK, 31% for France ), emerging markets’ external portfolios have
a lower weight on risky assets (India 5%, Indonesia 5%, Russia 18%, China 9% , Brazil 21%), as
   6
     Source: Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007a) updated until 2010. We report gross external assets and liabilities
excluding ﬁnancial derivatives. Data on ﬁnancial derivatives are available towards the end of the sample for most
countries. For the United States, they are available since 2005. At that date they amounted to $1.2 trillion on the
asset side and to $1.1 trillion on the liability side. In 2010 derivatives had grown to represent $3.6 trillion on the
asset side (i.e. 18% of gross assets) and $3.5 trillion on the liability side (i.e. 16% of gross liabilities).
   7
     There are also de jure measures of ﬁnancial integration based on the institutional framework as described in the
IMF Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions and reﬁned in Quinn (1997), Quinn and
Toyoda (2008) or Chinn and Ito (2008). Other de facto measures are based on convergence in asset prices, rather than
quantities traded. All these measures indicate increased ﬁnancial integration since 1970, especially so for advanced
economies.
   8
     These numbers exclude countries with annual GDP smaller than 10 billion dollars.


                                                          6
these economies tend to invest in safer securities such as government bonds.9 Interestingly, and
in particular since the 1990s, the BRICs (Brazil, Russia, India, China) have taken increasingly
net short positions in risky assets while the G7 economies, which often double up as important
ﬁnancial centers (the US, the UK, large euro area countries) are increasingly long in risky assets.10
Figure 5 reports the net risky position of these two groups of countries as fraction of the groups’
annual GDP. Starting in the 1990s, the expansion of the external balance sheet of countries has
been accompanied by a marked heterogeneity in their structure across countries, with advanced
economies increasingly involved in international maturity and liquidity transformation.

Stylized Fact 4 (Heterogeneity in Gross Flows and Positions) The asset composition of the
external balance sheet of countries is heterogeneous with advanced economies tending to be long in
risky assets and emerging markets short in risky assets.


2.3    The importance of valuations for the external balance sheet

Large and heterogenous leveraged portfolios open the door to potentially important wealth trans-
fers across countries when asset prices and exchange rate ﬂuctuate. In turn, these capital gains and
losses are bound to aﬀect the external asset positions of countries. To illustrate, ﬁgures 6-7 compare
the Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007a)’s measure of a country’s net external position with a measure
obtained simply by cumulating current account balances for a group of advanced economies (ﬁgure
6) and a group of emerging ones (ﬁgure 7). Since the current account does not -by deﬁnition-
incorporate ﬂuctuations in the value of existing assets and liabilities, the two measures diﬀer from
one another in theory by the cumulated value of capital gains and losses on the country’s external
position.11 As ﬁgure 6(a) shows for the United States, simply cumulating the balance on the US
current account since 1970 would lead to a severe underestimate of the US external position, by
about 36% of US GDP in 2010. A contrario, this suggests that the US has enjoyed important
   9
      The share of risky assets is calculated as the sum of FDI assets and equity assets as a ratio of total assets. The
average is taken between 1970 and 2010 except for Russia (1993-2010) and China (1981-2010).
   10
      The net risky position is deﬁned as the diﬀerence between portfolio equity and direct investment assets and
liabilities. Other components of the external balance sheet also include risky assets: portfolio debt includes long-term
corporate and sovereign bonds. Cross border banking positions also involves long-term syndicated loans. However,
these asset categories also include shorter term or safer ﬁxed-income assets, such as oﬃcial reserves, government
securities or short-term loans. It is possible that some of the asymmetries we now observe across asset categories
were present in the past within asset categories. For instance, Despres et al. (1966) argue that the United States was
providing liquidity to the rest of the world by lending long term and borrowing short term, transactions that would
both be recorded in the ‘other’ categories of the international investment position. The observed asymmetry coupled
with the increase in the size of the external balance sheet leaves little doubt that these activities have, if anything,
increased over time.
   11
      In practice, data discrepancies between the Balance of Payments and the International Position surveys can also
account for the gap between the two series. We revisit this issue at length in section 5.



                                                           7
net capital gains on its net external asset positions over this period. These valuation eﬀects are
economically quite sizable: they represent the equivalent of an additional surplus of the US cur-
rent account of about 2% of output, for every year between 1970 and 2010. Figures 6(b)-6(d)
show smaller cumulated valuation gains for the other advanced economies we consider.12 Figure 7
shows that the BRIC economies tended to experience signiﬁcant cumulated valuation losses since
2000, between 10% of output for China and 40% for Russia. Figures 6-7 illustrate the asymmetry
between the US (large positive valuation gains) and emerging economies (large valuation losses).
By contrast, ﬁgures 6(b)-6(d) show that cumulated current accounts provide a roughly accurate
guide to the low frequency movements in the net external position of other advanced economies,
although the valuation component can be large in any given year. Table 2 documents the average
magnitude of absolute valuation eﬀects (as a percentage of GDP), as well as the average of the
absolute value of current accounts of a number of countries over four periods.13 For most coun-
tries, including emerging economies, the importance of valuation eﬀects has been increasing over
time. For economies very open to cross border investments, such as Ireland, the average valuation
change per annum reaches more than 13% of GDP in the most recent period (it reaches 11.8% for
Switzerland). The absolute value of current accounts has also increased over these four periods for
all the countries considered. Except for Germany, Japan and to a lesser extent China, the average
magnitude of the current accounts, though rising over time, tend to be dominated by the average
magnitude of valuation eﬀects.

Stylized Fact 5 (The growing importance of valuation eﬀects) Valuation eﬀects, which are
capital gains and losses on gross external assets and liabilities, account for an important and in-
creasing part of the dynamics of the net foreign asset positions of countries. For the U.S., valuation
eﬀects have tended to be positive and economically large.


3        Long Term Capital Flows in the Neoclassical Growth Model

This section presents the prototype neoclassical model of long term capital ﬂows. We begin with
a riskless inﬁnite-horizon model in continuous time, that corresponds to the open economy version
of the Ramsey (1928), Cass (1965) and Koopmans (1965) model. We assume that the reader has
    12
     The UK external position is underestimated by about 20% of GDP in 2010 while the German and Japanese
positions are overestimated by 11% and 1.5% of GDP respectively.
  13                                       N A −N At−1 −CAt                         
                                                                       ¯ = 1/T   CAt  over the four periods
     Speciﬁcally, we calculate V¯A = 1/T t  t GDP      t
                                                                 and CA          t GDPt
1971-1980; 1981-1990; 1991-2000; 2001-2010 where N At denotes the net foreign asset position and CAt the current
account.



                                                       8
enough familiarity with the details of this model and skip many intermediate derivations in the
interest of conserving space.14


3.1      The set-up

Time is continuous and there is no uncertainty, aggregate or otherwise. Consider a country with one
homogenous good and a population Nt that grows at a constant rate n = Ṅt /Nt . The population
can be viewed as a large family that maximizes the integral utility

                                                     ∞
                                       Ut =               e−ρ(s−t) Ns u (cs ) ds,                            (1)
                                                  t


where ρ > 0 is the rate of time preference, ct denotes consumption per capita, and u (c) =
c1−γ / (1 − γ) is an isoelastic instantaneous utility function with an intertemporal elasticity of sub-
stitution 1/γ. Since there is no disutility of labor, labor is supplied inelastically and the labor force
equals the population, Nt . Output is produced with physical capital and labor, according to a
Cobb-Douglas production function:


                                             Yt = Ktα (ξ t Nt )1−α ,                                         (2)


where 0 ≤ α ≤ 1 represents the share of capital income and ξ t is an exogenous labor-augmenting
productivity term that grows at a constant rate g = ξ̇ t /ξ t .
       Output can be consumed, or invested:


                                                      Yt = C t + It ,                                        (3)


where Ct = ct Nt denotes aggregate consumption and It aggregate gross investment. For simplicity,
we assume away capital adjustment costs, so that capital accumulates according to:15


                                               K̇t = It − δ k Kt ,                                           (4)


where δ k is the constant rate of depreciation of physical capital. Given some initial conditions
K0 , ξ 0 , N0 > 0, the set-up is complete.
  14
   A full detailed treatment can be found in Blanchard and Fischer (1989, chap.2).
  15
   Adjustment costs to capital are relatively unimportant for the model’s predictions regarding long term capital
ﬂows.




                                                              9
3.2      Financial autarky

Consider, to begin with, the case where the country is in ﬁnancial autarky. With a single good, and
no possibility of intertemporal trade, this corresponds to the textbook closed economy neoclassical
growth model. Following standard steps, it is immediate to show that optimal consumption/saving
and investment decisions by the representative household yield a consumption path that satisﬁes
the usual Euler equation:
                                        d ln ct   1  α−1         
                                                =    αk̃t − δk − ρ ,                                            (5)
                                          dt      γ

where ‘tilde’ denotes variables expressed in eﬃcient units per capita: x̃ = X/ (ξN ) . Equation (5)
states that consumption per capita grows if the autarky real interest rate rta = αk̃tα−1 − δ k exceeds
the rate of time preference ρ. In that case, along the optimal plan, the representative household
prefers to reduce consumption in order to beneﬁt from the high return delivered by the additional
unit of saving. The strength of that eﬀect on consumption growth is controlled by the willingness
of the household to shift consumption across periods, that is, by the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution 1/γ.16
       Diﬀerent countries with the same technology parameters α and δ k will face diﬀerent autarky
interest rates only to the extent that they have diﬀerent levels of capital per eﬃcient unit. That
is, if we consider two countries i and j : rta,i > rta,j if and only if k̃ti < k̃tj : autarky rates are high if
countries are capital-scarce.


3.2.1      Relation to the Lucas Puzzle

This argument forms the basis for the well-known Lucas (1990) puzzle. Lucas observed that if
countries had access to the same technology α and ξ, then the ratio of their marginal product
of capital M Pk = αk̃ α−1 can be expressed simply as a function of relative output per worker:
                       1−1/α
M Pki /M Pkj = y i /y j        .
       Applying this calculation to India and the US, where Lucas estimated a 15-fold diﬀerence
in output-per-worker and assuming α = 0.4, the ratio of marginal products equals a whopping
(1/15)1−1/0.4 = 58! Of course, the assumption that technology ξ is the same in India and the U.S.
is a strong one, and a ‘trivial’ way to solve the Lucas puzzle is to allow for diﬀerences in produc-
tivity levels.17 There is no puzzle if diﬀerences in productivity entirely oﬀset diﬀerences in output
  16
     The rate of growth of population n does not aﬀect consumption growth under our choice of preferences. With
faster population growth, a unit of output saved today yields fewer units of consumption per capita tomorrow. But
because ﬂow utility is scaled by population, future consumption per capita is also valued more and the two eﬀects
cancel exactly.
  17
     One of Lucas’ proposed explanation for the puzzle was to take into account how external eﬀects of human capital


                                                        10
per worker: ξ i /ξ j = y i /y j . Indeed, the literature on development accounting has found signiﬁcant
diﬀerences in productivity or social infrastructure across countries. For instance, Gourinchas and
Jeanne (2006) using data for 1995, estimate an average 6-fold diﬀerence in labor-augmenting pro-
ductivity for 65 non-OECD economies relative to the U.S.18 Clearly, cross-country diﬀerences in
productivity levels are important.
    Other factors can also account for the Lucas puzzle. Most prominently, Caselli and Feyrer (2007)
ﬁnd that, despite large diﬀerences in capital-output, marginal products of capital M Pk = αY /K
are remarkably close across countries, after properly adjusting the eﬀective share of capital α for
diﬀerences in the share of reproducible capital and the relative price of investment to output across
countries.19 An alternative approach is to note that countries may face domestic capital market
distortions. Suppose that the private return to capital is r = (1 − τ ) (M Pk − δ k ) where τ denotes
a wedge between social and private returns. This wedge is a shorthand for all the distortions that
potentially aﬀect the return to capital: credit market imperfections, taxation, expropriation, bribery
and corruption.... With open capital markets, we would expect private returns to be equated, and
diﬀerences in capital-output ratio to reﬂect diﬀerences in capital wedges. This approach is followed
empirically in Gourinchas and Jeanne (forth.). Calibrating the capital wedge in each country to
match the long run investment rate, the measured private rates of returns r are remarkably similar
across countries.
    To sum up, the evidence indicates that private returns to capital are fairly well equated across
countries, either because of diﬀerences in productivity, in the share or price of reproducible capital,
or because of country-speciﬁc wedges between the private and the social return to capital. This
is an important observation since it indicates that international ﬁnancial frictions are likely to be
small, and that direct observation of realized rates of return provides little if any information about
the autarky rates that determine the direction of capital ﬂows.


3.2.2    Steady state autarky rates

We now focus on the long run interest rate that obtains once the economy has settled into its steady
state. It is easy to verify that the steady state is characterized by constant levels of capital and
accumulation translate into diﬀerences in productivity.
  18
     Gourinchas and Jeanne (2006, Table 9 p.736) reports a development accounting gap of 0.11 and a contribution of
0.58 and 0.2 respectively for exogenous labor augmenting productivity and human capital (in log-share). We obtain
the number reported in the text as exp(−(0.58 + 0.2) ln (0.11)). Hall and Jones (1999) and Caselli (2005) document
similar results. Alfaro et al. (2008) also conﬁrm that controlling for institutional quality diﬀerences removes the
puzzle for direct and portfolio equity investments.
  19
     Since the price of investment relative to output is high in poor countries, this tends to depress the marginal
return to capital in these countries.



                                                        11
consumption per eﬃcient units, k̃ss and c̃ss . This implies that consumption per capita grows at the
same rate as technology d ln ct /dt = g. Substituting into the Euler equation, we obtain:

                                                      1/(1−α)
                                             α                         a
                           k̃ss =                                 ;   rss = ρ + γg                  (6)
                                        ρ + γg + δ k

   This expression tells us that, once initial capital scarcities are eliminated (the gap between k̃
and k̃ss ), diﬀerences in autarky interest rates across countries with similar preferences are driven
                                       a,i    a,j
by diﬀerences in productivity growth: rss  > rss  if and only if g i > g j .


3.3     Open economy and the direction of capital ﬂows

3.3.1    Small open economy

Consider now the case of a small open economy that opens its ﬁnancial account at time t = 0 and
faces a constant world real interest rate r at which it can borrow or lend. Optimal investment
requires that the marginal return to capital equals the world interest rate:


                                                αk̃tα−1 − δ k = r.                                  (7)


   This pins down the stock of capital per eﬃcient units at k̃ (r) = (α/ (r + δ k ))1/(1−α) , a decreas-
ing function of the world interest rate. Denote the ﬁnancial wealth of the country by W = K + B
where B represents net foreign claims. Along the optimal plan, consumption and wealth evolve
according to:


                  d ln ct  1                    dw̃t
                          = (r − ρ)         ;        = (r − n − g) w̃t + (1 − α) ỹ (r) − c̃t       (8)
                    dt     γ                     dt

   where ỹ (r) = k̃ (r)α represents the constant level of output and (1 − α)ỹ(r) represents the part
of output that is not paid out as capital income. According to (8), the growth rate of consumption
per capita is constant and equal to:


                                        1                   1
                              gc =        (r − ρ − γg) + g = (r − rss
                                                                   a
                                                                      )+g                           (9)
                                        γ                   γ

   Consumption per capita grows faster (resp. slower) than the rate of domestic productivity
growth if the world interest rate is higher (resp. lower) than the autarky interest rate.
   To ﬁx ideas further, we can think of the rest of the world as a closed economy that has reached
its steady state. In that case, the world interest rate r satisﬁes r = ρ + γḡ, where ḡ is the growth


                                                         12
rate of world productivity. Substituting into equation (9), we obtain: gc = ḡ: the rate of growth
of consumption per capita equals the world’s growth rate of productivity, regardless of domestic
output growth per capita g.
    Under the assumption that r > n + max g, ḡ and after a few tedious but elementary steps of
algebra, we can substitute back into the dynamic budget constraint (8) and integrate to obtain:

                                                               (1 − α) ỹ (r)
                                    c̃t = (r − n − ḡ) w̃t +                  .                                  (10)
                                                                r−n−g

    The consumption rule is linear in total wealth with a propensity to consume equal to the interest
rate minus the growth rate of aggregate consumption n+ ḡ. Total wealth consists of ﬁnancial wealth
w̃t and the present value of labor income (1 − α) ỹ (r) / (r − n − g) . After a few extra steps, one
can also solve for the path of external wealth and the current account (noting that CAt = Ḃt ):20
                                        
                           (1 − α) ỹ (r) (r−rss a )t/γ   (1 − α) ỹ (r)
           b̃t   =   w̃0 +                 e            −                − k̃ (r) .                            (11a)
                            r−n−g                           r−n−g
                                                                                                   
                                   (1 − α) ỹ (r) (r−rss  a )t/γ              (1 − α) ỹ (r)
          cãt   = (n + ḡ) w̃0 +                    e           − (n + g)                   + k̃ (r)          (11b)
                                     r−n−g                                     r−n−g

    Inspection of these expressions reveals that the long term external position depends on the gap
between the world and autarky interest rates r − rss
                                                  a , proportional to the gap between world and


country productivity growth, ḡ − g. We can distinguish three cases:

    • case 1: rss
               a < r. From the preceding discussion, this occurs when g < ḡ. The ﬁrst term in


      the expression for cãt and b̃t asymptotically dominates the dynamics. Eventually the country
      runs a current account surplus and holds a positive net foreign position. Because optimal
      consumption grows at a higher rate than output, the country needs to accumulate growing
      claims against the rest of the world.21

    • case 2: rss
               a = r. In that case g = ḡ and the current account and net foreign asset positions
                                                                                          
      are driven by initial capital scarcity and external claims: cãt = (g + n) w̃0 − k̃ss and b̃t =
      w̃0 − k̃ss . The country runs a permanent current account deﬁcit if it is initially capital scarce
      or has initial external liabilities. If initial capital scarcities and external claims are small, so
      that w̃0 ≈ k̃ss , then cã = b̃ = 0.
   20
      In this expression, w̃0 = k̃0− + b̃0− = b̃0 + k̃(r), where k̃0− and b̃0− denote the stock of capital and the net
external position immediately before the ﬁnancial account opening at time t = 0. At the time of the opening, initial
external debt positions are rolled over and the country ﬁnances any capital shortfall through external borrowing:
b̃0 = b̃0− + k̃0− − k̃ (r) .
   21
      Expressed in world eﬃcient units, B stabilizes at B/ξ̄N = w̃0 + (1 − α) ỹ (r) / (r − n − g) ≥ 0.



                                                         13
       • case 3: r < rss
                      a . From the preceding discussion, this corresponds to ḡ < g. The ﬁrst term in


         (11a) and (11b) disappear asymptotically and the economy becomes a net borrower and runs
         a current account deﬁcit. Since the country’s output grows faster than the rest of the world,
         foreigners want to invest domestically.22

       The preceding analysis reveals that countries export (resp. import) capital when the autarky
interest rate is below (resp. above) the world interest rate. The determinants of intertemporal
trade are thus similar to those of intratemporal trade and dictated by the principles of comparative
advantage: just as countries export goods that are relatively abundant (i.e. with low autarky
prices), countries export capital when capital is relatively abundant, i.e. when autarky real interest
rates are relatively low.23


3.3.2      Large open economy

Consider now the case of two economies (home and foreign), not necessarily small, with open
ﬁnancial accounts. One can characterize the pattern of capital ﬂows and net foreign positions by
following the same steps as above, now with the condition that Bt + Bt∗ = 0 at any instant where
∗ denotes foreign variables. Assuming that the technology parameters δ k and α are the same in
both countries, free capital mobility ensures that k̃t = k̃t∗ , so that the world interest rate satisﬁes
rt = αk̃tα−1 − δ k . Faced with a common real return to capital, optimal consumption plans in both
countries satisfy:
                                             d ln ct          d ln c∗t
                                         γ           + ρ = γ∗          + ρ∗ = rt ,                                     (12)
                                               dt                dt

so that with common preferences (γ and ρ) the rate of growth of consumption per capita gc is the
same in both countries and r = ρ + γgc .
       Without lack of generality, assume that home has a higher growth rate of productivity than
foreign: g > g ∗ . Equation (6) then implies that home has a higher autarky interest rate: rss
                                                                                            a >

 a∗ . Assume further that there are no initial capital scarcities, so that we focus on diﬀerences in
rss
productivity growth. It is easy (but tedious) to show that the world interest rate r is located
                                                    a∗ ≤ r ≤ r a . Since r = ρ + γg , one can
somewhere between home and foreign interest rates: rss        ss                   c

equivalently show that the growth rate of consumption per capita is located between the domestic
and foreign productivity growth rates g ∗ ≤ gc ≤ g. Countries with an autarky interest rates above
  22
     In that case, the country will not permanently remain small relative to the rest of the world. Eventually, the
                                                                           a
world interest rate will have to converge to the domestic autarky rate rss    . The country will still run a current account
deﬁcit cãss = (n + g) b̃ss since it will have accumulated large net foreign liabilities b̃ss < 0 along the way to the steady
state.
  23
     Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1996, chap. 2) present a similar analysis in a two-period model.


                                                             14
the equilibrium world interest rate will experience capital inﬂows; those with autarky interest rates
below the world interest rate will experience capital outﬂows.24


3.4    Current account movements and productivity diﬀerentials

For the preceding theory to account for the empirical evidence on capital ﬂows from emerging
economies to advanced ones, two conditions need to be met. First, initial capital scarcities must
not be too large for the developing world: k̃0 ≈ k̃ss . This will be the case if productivity levels
are lower or if capital market distortions (τ ) are higher in poorer countries. Second, productivity
growth must be higher in advanced economies than in developing ones.
    This interpretation of the theory would be relatively bad news for developing countries: the
direction of capital ﬂows would simply reﬂect a broader pattern of economic divergence that would
see advanced economies pulling further and further away from developing ones.25 Fortunately, it
does not survive careful empirical scrutiny. Instead, the empirical evidence indicates that it is
precisely the (developing) countries with the strongest productivity growth that also experienced
the strongest capital outﬂows (stylized fact 2).
    Large net capital inﬂows in the eurozone’s periphery (Blanchard and Giavazzi (2002)) or in
Eastern European economies (Alfaro et al. (2011)) in the early 2000s were held as strong examples
of the validity of the neo-classical theory. However, given the ongoing eurozone crisis, the deep
structural adjustment in many Eastern European economies, and the fact that many of these
capital inﬂows appear to have fueled ultimately unsustainable residential housing and ﬁnancial
booms, the argument that net capital ﬂows in both regions were triggered by strong productivity
growth as predicted by the neoclassical growth model is not so clear cut anymore.
    If diﬀerences in productivity growth are not the main driver of capital ﬂows over long periods
of time, what is? The next section of this chapter reviews recent theoretical advances that help us
understand the pattern of ‘global imbalances’ (stylized facts 1 and 2).


4     Models of Global Imbalances

The previous section established two results. First, capital ﬂows to countries with high autarky
returns to capital, until returns are equalized. Second, productivity growth is one of the main
  24
     A source of global imbalances in that model arises from diﬀerences in impatience ρ. More patient countries will
have lower autarky rates, and run current account surpluses. See Ghironi et al. (2008) for a model along these lines.
  25
     Although, under ﬁnancial integration and common preferences, the rate of growth of consumption per capita
would remain equal in advanced and developing economies. See equation (12).




                                                         15
determinants of autarky returns in the neoclassical growth model. Existing attempts to explain the
pattern of observed external imbalances maintain the ﬁrst element but relax the second. They all
share the feature that some other ingredient depresses autarky interest rates in emerging economies
relative to advanced ones. Equivalently, these countries feature a high desired saving (or low
desired investment) relative to the U.S. As ﬁrst analyzed by Bernanke (2005), this can account
simultaneously for the external deﬁcits of the U.S. and the observed low world real interest rates
(stylized fact 1). Bernanke identiﬁed a number of potential culprits for the increase in global desired
savings: the increased savings and reserve accumulation in emerging economies following the East
Asian ﬁnancial crisis of 1997-1998; the rapidly aging population in many advanced economies
(and some emerging ones), requiring additional saving to provide for an increasingly large retired
population; and the sharp increases in oil prices and the corresponding swing toward current account
surpluses of oil exporting economies (see ﬁgure 1). Contemporaneously, Dooley et al. (2004a) and
Dooley et al. (2004b) emphasized the role of export-led growth development strategies in developing
Asia, with an undervalued currency and the accumulation of oﬃcial claims on the center country.
   We begin with a review of theories relying on asymmetries in ﬁnancial development between
countries at diﬀerent stages of development. The form that these ﬁnancial frictions takes does
matter. For instance, consider the capital wedge τ introduced in section 3.2.1. In the steady state
of the neoclassical model, this capital wedge does not aﬀect the private rate of return to capital, still
equal to ρ + γg: the eﬀect of the ﬁnancial friction τ falls entirely on the marginal product of capital:
M Pk = (ρ + γg)/(1 − τ ) + δ k . Instead, we emphasize below ﬁnancial frictions that also inﬂuence the
autarky interest rate. In the model we consider, these ﬁnancial frictions simultaneously drive up the
equilibrium marginal product of capital and drive down the autarky risk free rate. The ﬁrst such
model argues that developing countries suﬀer from a shortage of ‘stores of value.’ This shortage
tends to drive up the price of ﬁnancial assets, that is, to drive down the equilibrium interest rate.
We use that framework to also explore the role of demographic factors, in particular population
aging, and the interaction between demographic forces and ﬁnancial frictions. The second model
borrows from Bewley (1987) and Aiyagari (1994) and emphasizes the general equilibrium eﬀects
of precautionary saving. In that model, agents try to self insure against idiosyncratic risk. In
equilibrium this depresses autarky interest rates below the riskless rates of the neoclassical model.
The stronger the precautionary saving motive, the lower the autarky interest rate. Diﬀerences in
idiosyncratic risk then translate into diﬀerences in autarky interest rates. The third class of models
focuses on the interaction between ﬁnancial frictions and international trade. Lastly, we discuss
the role of public vs. private capital ﬂows and reserve accumulation.


                                                   16
4.1      Asset Shortages

We begin with a model of asset shortage. The model captures the notion that ﬁnancial markets
in many emerging economies are not suﬃciently developed and that these countries suﬀer from a
shortage in stores of value. It generalizes Caballero et al. (2008a) to a production economy with
overlapping generations. In the model, the demand for stores of value arises from the asynchronicity
between income and consumption decisions.26 That idea is implemented in a perpetual youth
model à la Blanchard (1985) and Weil (1987). The model exhibits an essential non-Ricardian
feature: households currently alive are unable to trade in claims on the resources of yet unborn
generations. The lower the share of total income that accrues to the ﬁnancial assets, the more acute
is the resulting shortage of stores of value. Under ﬁnancial autarky, this depresses equilibrium real
interest rates. The model provides a link between levels of ﬁnancial development, measured by the
capacity of a country’s ﬁnancial system to capitalize streams of future income into real assets, and
global imbalances.


4.1.1      The individual problem and aggregate dynamics

At every instant, households face an i.i.d instantaneous probability of dying θ. Since θ is common
to all households, it represents the fraction of the population that dies every instant. A fraction θ
of the population is also born every instant, so that total population remains constant, normalized
to 1.27 Since mortality risk is idiosyncratic, it is perfectly insurable: a competitive market for life-
insurance will oﬀer a rate of return θ per unit of wealth, in exchange for a claim on the household’s
estate when it dies.28 Denote by c (s, t) , w (s, t) , z (s, t) the consumption, ﬁnancial assets and
nonﬁnancial income at time t of an individual born at time s ≤ t. As of time t, the household
maximizes

                                    ∞                                            ∞
                                             −ρ(u−t)
                 U t = Et                e             u (c (s, u)) du =               e−(ρ+θ)(u−t) u (c (s, u)) du,   (13)
                                 t                                             t


       where the expectation is taken over the -random- time of death. The second equality uses
the fact that life expectancy is exponentially distributed. Mortality risk makes households more
  26
     The focus on consumption-saving decisions is done mostly for modeling simplicity. One could equivalently focus
on the asynchronicity between sales and investment decisions in a production economy, or on a precautionary motive
due to liquidity shocks.
  27
     It is straightforward to introduce population growth. One could simply assume that the fraction of the population
that is born every instant is n + θ. Alternatively, one could follow Weil (1987) and assume that each cohort is an
inﬁnitely lived dynasty, but new cohorts are born every period.
  28
     The life insurance company breaks even under this scheme. If assets under management are Wt , it pays out θWt
per unit of time, and receives θWt from households that just died.



                                                                  17
impatient: they discount future ﬂow utility at rate ρ + θ instead of ρ.
       The budget constraint is

                              dw (s, t)
                                        = (rt + θ) w (s, t) − c (s, t) + z (s, t) ,                        (14)
                                dt

where rt is the risk-free interest rate, and we used the fact that the life-insurance company pays
a premium θw (s, t) . Following standard steps, the optimal consumption plan of a household with
iso-elastic utility u (c) = c1−γ / (1 − γ) satisﬁes the following Euler condition:

                                                d ln c (s, t)
                                            γ                 = rt − ρ.                                    (15)
                                                     dt

       This is the same Euler equation as in the inﬁnite horizon model (see equation (5)). The intuition
is simple: mortality risk makes the household more impatient. But she also receives a premium θw
that exactly oﬀsets this eﬀect. From now on, we limit the analysis to the case γ = 1 (logarithmic
preferences).29 Following standard (and tedious) steps, the consumption function takes a simple
form:
                                    c (s, t) = (ρ + θ) [w (s, t) + h (s, t)] .                             (16)

   It is linear in the household’s total wealth, deﬁned as the sum of ﬁnancial holdings w (s, t) and
                                  ∞                u           
nonﬁnancial wealth h (s, t) = t z (s, u) exp − t (rv + θ) dv du equal to the expected present
discounted value of future nonﬁnancial income over the household’s expected lifespan.
       We can now derive aggregate variables by summing across existing cohorts. With obvious no-
tation, the aggregate value Xt of a variable x(s, t) is deﬁned as:

                                                   t
                                       Xt =              x (s, t) θe−θ(t−s) ds                             (17)
                                                    −∞


since the size of a cohort born at time s as of time t ≥ s is θe−θ(t−s) . With linear budget constraints
(14) and consumption rules (16), aggregate consumption and wealth follow:


                             Ct = (ρ + θ) [Wt + Ht ] ,          Ẇt = rt Wt + Zt − Ct .                    (18)


       In this expression Ht represents the present discounted value of nonﬁnancial income of all
currently alive cohorts, but does not include the present discounted value of nonﬁnancial income
  29
    With logarithmic preferences, income and substitution cancel out and the marginal propensity to consume does
not depend upon the interest rate. The model can be solved in the general iso-elastic case, but the increased
complexity does not deliver deep additional insights.


                                                           18
accruing to yet unborn cohorts. This non-Ricardian feature is essential for the results.30

       To ﬁx ideas, assume, as in Blanchard (1985) that cross-section income proﬁles decrease with
age:
                                                  φ+θ
                                     z (s, t) =       Zt e−φ(t−s) ,   φ≥0                                     (19)
                                                   θ

       Equation (19) states that, at any given time t, older workers (lower s) receive lower income with
a slope controlled by φ. In the limit of φ → ∞, all nonﬁnancial income is received by the newborn
generation: z (t, t) = Zt , z (s, t) = 0 for s < t, and Ht = 0. This case maximizes the asynchronicity
between income and consumption decisions since all income is received at birth, but consumption
decisions need to be sequenced over a -random- lifetime. Conversely, when φ = 0, all households
receive the same income, regardless of age, which mitigates the need for saving. Under assumption
(19) , Ht satisﬁes:
                                          Ḣt = (rt + θ + φ) Ht − Zt                                          (20)


4.1.2      Financial Autarky

We close the model by specifying the market structure and technology available to the household.
As in the previous section, suppose that output is produced with the aggregate production function
Yt = Ktα (ξ t Nt )1−α , where ξ̇ t /ξ t = g. Under ﬁnancial autarky, physical capital K is the only asset
available, so Wt = Kt . We make two simplifying assumptions. First, we assume that there is no
depreciation of capital: δ k = 0.31 Second, we assume that the share of aggregate non-ﬁnancial
income in total income is constant: Zt = (1 − δ) Yt . δ is a key parameter. It controls the supply
of stores of value. To see this, observe that the payments to capital rK equal δY since there is no
depreciation. It follows trivially that the value of the capital output ratio is:


                                                   K/Y = δ/r.                                                 (21)


       For a given interest rate r, the market value of the capital stock (the supply of stores of value
under ﬁnancial autarky) varies one-to-one with δ.32 Under these two assumptions, it is simple but
tedious to combine (18) and the equilibrium condition Wt = Kt to show that the steady state
  30
                       ∞         u        
     If we deﬁne H̄t = t Zu exp − t rv dv du as the nonﬁnancial wealth of current and future generations, where
Zt denotes aggregate nonﬁnancial income. It is easy to check that Ht ≤ H̄t with equality when θ = 0.
  31
     This assumption is innocuous but simpliﬁes the algebra.
  32
     One can also verify that δ maps directly into the capital wedge τ introduced in the previous: δ = α (1 − τ ) .




                                                        19
autarky interest rate satisﬁes:

                          a
                        [rss − δ (g + ρ + θ)] (rss
                                                a
                                                   + θ + φ − g) = (1 − δ) rss
                                                                           a
                                                                              (ρ + θ) .                          (22)


    A few cases are worth exploring:

    • when φ = θ = 0, the model collapses to the neoclassical benchmark of the previous section
           a = g + ρ (recall that γ = 1 with logarithmic preferences).33
      and rss

    • in the polar case where φ → ∞, we obtain instead:

                                                   a
                                                  rss = δ (g + ρ + θ) .                                          (23)


      Compared to the neoclassical model, two parameters inﬂuence the autarky rate. First, the
      interest rate increases because the mortality risk θ makes agents more impatient, which re-
      duces saving. Second, the interest rate decreases because only a share δ ≤ 1 of income is
      paid out as ﬁnancial income. This second eﬀect is due to the scarcity of stores of value in the
      non-Ricardian economy. When δ < (g + ρ) / (g + ρ + θ) , the second eﬀect dominates and the
      interest rate falls below the autarky rate of the benchmark model. Economies with distorted
      domestic capital markets (low δ or high τ ) are more likely to have lower autarky interest rate.

    • In the general case where φ, θ > 0, one can check that the autarky interest rate lies in the
      interval [ρ+g−φ, ρ+g+θ]. The shortage of assets dominates if δ(θ+ρ+g+θ(ρ+θ)/φ) ≤ ρ+g.
                                                                                          a < ρ+g.
      In that case the autarky interest rate decreases below the neoclassical benchmark: rss

    The main implication of the model is that low levels of ﬁnancial development, associated with
suﬃciently low δ, can depress autarky interest rates. It is then possible for a country to have a low
autarky rate, despite a high growth rate of productivity g. When φ → ∞, the marginal product
of capital remains constant and equal to: M Pk = αY /K = α (g + ρ + θ), regardless of δ. In that
case, we obtain the opposite result from the neoclassical benchmark model: variations in τ (or δ)
                       a , and not in the marginal product of capital or the capital-output ratio. For
are fully reﬂected in rss
the general case where φ, θ > 0, one can show that the marginal product of capital increases with
τ = 1 − δ/α, while the autarky interest rate decreases. Hence the model provides simultaneously a
rationale for high marginal product of capital and low autarky rates in countries with low levels of
ﬁnancial development.
  33                                 a
     There is another solution with rss = δg. However, that solution is not valid since it implies a negative value of
human wealth.


                                                         20
4.1.3      Open Economy and the direction of capital ﬂows

Small open economy. Following the steps described in the previous section, consider now the
case of a small open economy facing a constant real interest rate r. For simplicity, we limit ourselves
to the case where φ → ∞. With a constant interest rate r, it is easy to check that the following
equations hold:34
                                        Wt     1−δ                 Kt  δ
                                           =         ;                = .                         (24)
                                        Yt   g+ρ+θ−r               Yt  r

The ﬁrst equation expresses domestic wealth, i.e. the domestic demand for stores of value per
unit of output, W/Y , as a function of the world interest rate. A higher interest rate increases
the demand for stores of value since wealth accumulates at a higher rate. The second equation
expresses the domestic supply of stores of value (here capital) as a function of the interest rate.
A higher interest rate depresses the present discounted value of the payments to capital δY, which
lowers the equilibrium capital-output ratio. The diﬀerence between W and K represents the net
foreign asset position of the country, B. With some simple manipulations, it is easy to express the
net foreign asset position and the current account as a function of the autarky and world interest
rates, as in the preceding section:35

                            Bt   W t − Kt    δ (r − rss
                                                     a )          CAt     δ (r − rss
                                                                                  a )
                               =          =      a − δr)
                                                         ;            =g      a − δr)
                                                                                                  (25)
                            Yt       Yt     r (rss                 Yt    r (rss

This expression makes clear that the net foreign asset position is positive (resp. negative) depending
on whether the world interest rate is higher (resp. lower) than the autarky interest rate. From the
previous discussion, we infer that it is now possible for capital to ﬂow out of emerging countries,
provided that they have a suﬃciently low autarky interest rate, i.e. a suﬃciently low supply of
stores of value.


Asymptotic Metzler diagram. The previous results can be summarized in a version of the
celebrated Metzler (1960) diagram. The vertical axis in ﬁgure 8 reports the real interest rate
while the horizontal axis reports either the long run domestic ﬁnancial wealth W or the value of
domestic assets K, scaled by output Y . By construction, the diﬀerence between domestic ﬁnancial
wealth and the value of domestic assets equals the country’s long run net foreign asset position:
B = W − K. From the previous discussion, the value of domestic assets decreases with the real
interest rate, while the value of domestic wealth increases with the real interest rate. Financial
 34
      We assume in what follows that r < g + ρ + θ so that domestic wealth is well-deﬁned.
 35
      The current account satisﬁes N Ȧt = CAt .



                                                         21
autarky corresponds to the situation where W = K. This pins down the autarky real interest rate
 a . When r > r a , the small open economy runs an asymptotic current account surplus and is
rss            ss
                                              a the country runs an asymptotic current account
a net foreign creditor. Conversely, when r < rss
deﬁcit and is a net foreign borrower.


World economy.           Consider now a world economy composed of two countries, a and b. The
two countries are identical, except in terms of their level of ﬁnancial development, captured by
δ. Assume that δ a > δ b . It follows that country a will have a higher autarky interest rate than
country b. Each country satisﬁes equations (18) and (21). Combining these equations, and denoting
ω a = Y a /(Y a + Y b ) the share of country a in global output, the steady state world interest rate
 a is a weighted average of the autarky interest rate in both countries:
rss

                                a
                               rss = ω a rss
                                          a,a
                                              + (1 − ω a ) rss
                                                            a,b
                                                                = δ̄ (g + ρ + θ) .                 (26)


    a depends on the output-weighted level of ﬁnancial development δ̄ := ω a δ a +(1 − ω a ) δ b . Since
   rss
 a,b    a < r a,a , following a ﬁnancial liberalization, capital will ﬂow from b to a, and a will run an
rss  < rss   ss

asymptotic negative net foreign asset position given by:

                   Ba    (1 − ω a )                      CAa   g (1 − ω a ) b
                      →            δ b − δ a < 0;          →            δ − δ a < 0.           (27)
                   Ya    a 1 − δ̄
                        rss                              Ya     a 1 − δ̄
                                                               rss

   According to the model, a simultaneous decline in world interest rates and the emergence of
global imbalances (stylized fact 1) can be the result of the integration of countries with low ﬁnancial
development –low δ– into the world economy (e.g. China after 1980), or the decline in the market
perception of ﬁnancial development in some countries (e.g. emerging Asia after the Asian ﬁnancial
crisis of 1997).


Assessing the model. We can think of a variety of reasons why countries may be unable to
pledge a high share of future output. Government, managers or insiders can dilute and divert
a substantial share of proﬁts. δ can thus capture a number of capital market frictions, from
explicit taxation, lack of enforcement of property rights, corruption or rent-seeking etc... Many
of these features tend to be associated with developing economies, as measured by indicators of
social infrastructure. A small set of papers in the empirical literature have explored the reduced-
form link between indicators of ﬁnancial development and global imbalances, following the popular
panel-regression approach of Chinn and Prasad (2003), with somewhat mixed results (Chinn and


                                                       22
Ito (2007), Gruber and Kamin (2009)). For instance, Gruber and Kamin (2009) ﬁnds that quantity
measures of ﬁnancial development, such as the ratio of credit to GDP, do not systematically predict
larger current account deﬁcits. One issue is whether quantity measures such as credit to GDP
accurately capture the level of a country’s ﬁnancial development when some countries’ ﬁnancial
systems are bank-based, while others’ are market based. Gruber and Kamin (2009) also ﬁnds
that real long-term interest rates are similar in the US and other industrial countries. But the
model predicts that under integration the risk-free rates should be equalized, so diﬀerences in
observed long term interest rates should simply reﬂect risk characteristics, and not diﬀerences in
autarky interest rates. A deeper question is why excess savings from emerging markets should ﬂow
disproportionately towards the United States, and not other industrial countries. One answer is
that external balances worsened in other industrial economies too, such as the United Kingdom
and Australia, or many peripheral eurozone economies such as Spain, Ireland, or Portugal. But this
was oﬀset by growing current account surpluses in Germany and Japan. Another possible answer
is that even if the U.S. oﬀers similar levels of ﬁnancial development (high δ) as other industrialized
economies as a whole, it experiences more robust growth (high g) and therefore should have higher
autarky interest rates.36 Another part of the answer, to which we return later in this chapter, is
that the US dollar remains the leading international reserve currency.


4.1.4    Productivity and ﬁnancial frictions

In the model of the previous section, external imbalances arising from diﬀerences in levels of ﬁnancial
development, as measured by δ, are ampliﬁed by diﬀerences in productivity growth. To see why,
consider the two-country model from the previous section, but now suppose country b grows faster:
g b > g a . The world interest rate is still the output weighted average of the two autarky rates:
              a,a               a,b
 a
rss,t = ω at rss  + (1 − ω at )rss  . The diﬀerence is that ω at tends to zero so the world interest rate
              a,b                                            a,b    a,a
converges to rss  . As long as g b is not too high, so that rss  < rss  , this leads to larger capital ﬂows
from b to a, unlike the neoclassical growth model where g b > g a leads to capital ﬂows from a to b. A
similar mechanism is at work in Buera and Shin (2009). That paper models an emerging economy
that experiences a growth acceleration. In the model individuals choose between supplying labor
(worker) or becoming entrepreneurs. In an eﬃcient allocation, low productivity individuals choose
to become workers and high productivity ones become entrepreneurs. The economy, however,
suﬀers from two frictions: idiosyncratic wedges that distort the allocation of factors away from
  36
    Engel and Rogers (2006) argue along those lines that the US current account deﬁcit can be explained by the
country’s higher growth relative to other industrial countries.



                                                     23
eﬃciency, and ﬁnancial frictions. Both frictions lower total factor productivity (TFP). The paper
then considers the eﬀect of a program of structural reforms that increases TFP, while keeping the
ﬁnancial friction unchanged. This is similar to an increase in g while keeping δ low in our model.
Initially, this reform lowers investment and increases savings. Investment decreases due to the exit
of low-productivity ﬁrms, while high productivity ones are constrained by the ﬁnancial friction.
The response of aggregate saving is more complex. Workers face an upward wage proﬁle due to
the rise in TFP. This tends to decrease savings. On the other hand, incumbent entrepreneurs
experience temporarily high proﬁts, since wages are initially low. In addition, individuals with high
productivity but little wealth will choose a high saving rate to overcome the ﬁnancial frictions.
The net eﬀect is an increase in saving, and net capital outﬂows. Song et al. (2011) present a
similar model tailored speciﬁcally to the experience of China after the economic reforms of 1978.
At the beginning of the reform process, the economy features high productivity private ﬁrms with
limited access to credit markets, and ineﬃcient state owned ﬁrms with better access to credit.
The paper shows that the ﬁnancial frictions slow down the reallocation of factors towards eﬃcient
private ﬁrms, while sustaining high returns to capital during the transition. It can also lead high
productivity ﬁrms to specialize initially in labor intensive activities, where the ﬁnancial frictions
are less relevant. In these papers, it is the interaction between ﬁnancial friction and productivity
growth that triggers external surpluses in emerging economies.


4.2      Demographics and global imbalances

As noted by Bernanke (2005), demographic characteristics can also explain global imbalances. In
general, demographics can have complex eﬀects on net savings. A faster rate of population growth
increases investment as a larger workforce increases the marginal return to capital, increasing
autarky rates. Faster population growth also increases the fraction of young (savers) relative to old
(dissavers), increasing aggregate saving and reducing the autarky rate.37 In general, the impact
of demographic factors on the autarky rate and capital ﬂows depends on the age-structure of the
working age population and the age-proﬁle of income. Aging countries should save more to provide
suﬃcient resources in retirement for the increasing number of retirees per worker. Lane and Milesi-
Ferretti (2001) ﬁnd strong empirical support for this claim when studying the determinants of net
foreign asset position, with a negative impact of the share younger age cohorts and a positive eﬀect
of the share of workers near retirement. Domeij and Flodén (2006), in a calibrated overlapping
generation model, ﬁnd that demographic variables account for a small but signiﬁcant fraction of
 37
      See Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1996).


                                                 24
capital ﬂows for OECD countries between 1960 and 2002. Ferrero (2010) explores the eﬀect of
population aging in a two-country extension of Gertler (1999)’s model of ‘perpetual youth and
perpetual retirement,’ calibrated to the US and the G-6. The model allows for diﬀerences in ﬁscal
policy, as well as productivity growth and ﬁnds that the more pronounced aging of the population
in the G-6 (relative to the U.S.) accounts for a signiﬁcant share of the deterioration in the US
trade balance and the decline in global real interest rates. We illustrate the basic mechanism with
a simple extension of our model. Households evolve through two distinct stages of life: work and
retirement. While working, households earn labor income. With some instantaneous probability λ,
i.i.d. across workers, they retire. Once in retirement, they do not earn income any longer and die
with instantaneous probability θ, as before. We maintain total population constant, so that the
dependency ratio –the ratio of retirees to workers – is equal to λ/θ. A decline in mortality rate (a
decline in θ) will increase the dependency ratio for a given length of the working life (equal to 1/λ).
To simplify further the analysis, suppose that households only consume when they are about to die.
Aggregate consumption must then equal θWtr where Wtr denotes the aggregate ﬁnancial wealth of
retirees. Since aggregate output is given by Yt , this pins down the aggregate wealth of retirees:
Wtr = Yt /θ. Consider now the wealth accumulation dynamics of retirees and workers respectively:


                                     Ẇtr = rt Wtr − θWtr + λWtw ,                                           (28a)

                                    Ẇtw = rt Wtw + (1 − δ) Yt − λWtw .                                      (28b)


       Equation (28a) states that the retirees’ wealth increases with the interest rate rt , decreases
with consumption, and increases with the arrival of newly retired workers. Equation (28b) states
that the aggregate wealth of workers Wtw increases with savings (equal to nonﬁnancial income) and
decreases when workers retire. In steady state, the aggregate wealth of both groups must increase
at rate g. Substituting the expression for W r and W w , it follows that the autarky interest rate
satisﬁes:
                                   (1 − δ) λθ = (g + θ − rss
                                                          a
                                                             ) (g + λ − rss
                                                                         a
                                                                            )                                  (29)

                           a < g + δλ < g + λ and that ∂r a /∂θ > 0: population aging lowers
It is easy to verify that rss                            ss

the autarky interest rate. This result allows us to understand why economies with rapidly aging
populations, such as Germany, Japan or China, run sizable external surpluses.38
  38
    According to United Nations projections, the dependency ratio, deﬁned as the ratio of population aged 65 or over
to population aged 20-64 is 21.8% in the U.S. in 2010. For Germany, Japan and China, the corresponding numbers
are 33.4%, 38.3% and 12.7%. By 2050, the dependency ratio will have increased to 39.5% for the U.S., and 62%,
76.4% and 45.4% for Germany, Japan and China respectively.



                                                        25
       In a recent paper, Coeurdacier et al. (2012) explore further the interaction of demographic
characteristic and ﬁnancial frictions for an emerging economy such as China. In their three-period
overlapping generation models, young workers in emerging economies (the South) face tighter credit
constraints, preventing them from borrowing against their middle-age income. As a result, autarky
interest rates are lower and following ﬁnancial integration, capital ﬂows to industrial countries (the
North). The model also features higher growth in the South, so that the world interest rate declines
over time – a consequence of the rising share of the South in global output, as discussed above. The
model can explain why a decline in global interest rates leads to a decrease in saving rates in the
North and an increase in the South. The reason is twofold. First, the substitution eﬀect dominates
for younger workers in the South: they would like to borrow more but are prevented to do so by the
ﬁnancial friction. Second, the income eﬀect dominates for middle-aged workers in the South: they
want to save more, since they have fewer debts to repay. The paper documents through a careful
analysis of cohort-level saving in the U.S. and China that the savings of the young decreased more in
the US than in China, while the savings of middle-aged workers increased more in China than in the
US. One simple way to re-interpret their model is to observe that a tighter borrowing constraints on
young workers is equivalent to a more steeply declining age-income proﬁle, a higher φ in equation
(19). A larger φ causes more asynchronicity between income and consumption decisions, increasing
saving and depressing the autarky interest rate.39


4.3      Bewley models and precautionary savings.

The previous section showed how lack of ﬁnancial development can simultaneously depress real
autarky interest rates and generate global imbalances (stylized fact 1) in a model without risk. We
now consider a complementary explanation, based on idiosyncratic risk and precautionary saving
in a Bewley (1987)-type economy. In this class of models, agents face uninsurable idiosyncratic
risk. Yet, because risk is purely idiosyncratic, there is no aggregate uncertainty.40 Idiosyncratic
risk triggers a precautionary saving motive. The strength of this precautionary term depends on
the households’ level of prudence and the volatility of the uninsurable idiosyncratic shocks. Under
ﬁnancial autarky, the additional demand for saving depresses the equilibrium interest rate. This
is the central result of Aiyagari (1994). Willen (2004) and Mendoza et al. (2009) were the ﬁrst
to consider the implications in an open economy. In Mendoza et al. (2009), diﬀerences in levels
of ﬁnancial development imply that some countries can better insure against idiosyncratic shocks.
  39                                          a
   From equation (22), one can check that ∂rss  /∂φ < 0.
  40
   This greatly simpliﬁes the analysis since the distribution of wealth becomes time-invariant in the steady-state.
Models that allow for idiosyncratic and aggregate risk need to keep track of the dynamics of the wealth distribution.


                                                         26
Hence countries face diﬀerent autarky interest rates and capital will tend to ﬂow from countries with
higher levels of residual uninsurable idiosyncratic risk (i.e. less ﬁnancially developed) to countries
with lower levels of risk (i.e. more advanced ﬁnancial systems).
       Unlike Caballero et al. (2008a), it is not diﬀerences in the ability to supply riskless stores of
value, i.e. the pledgeability of future income, that matters but the ability to supply contingent
assets, i.e. diﬀerences in the degree of risk sharing. These diﬀerences in risk sharing translate into
diﬀerences in the demand for stores of value, thus aﬀecting equilibrium interest rates. A similar
mechanism is at work in Sandri (2010).41 Our presentation follows Angeletos and Panousi (2011)
which allows for investment risk in a continuous time setting similar to that of the previous section.42


4.3.1      The set-up.

Consider a country populated with a continuum of inﬁnitely-lived households uniformly distributed
over [0, 1] . Each household supplies one unit of labor inelastically to a competitive labor mar-
ket, so that the aggregate labor supply is constant and equal to 1. In addition, each house-
hold runs a ‘privately-held’ ﬁrm. This ﬁrm operates with capital kit and labor nit and produces
       α (ξ n )1−α , where productivity ξ is common to all ﬁrms and grows at a constant rate g.
yit = kit  t it                          t

In addition to capital invested in their own ﬁrm, households can trade a riskless bond in zero net
supply. Denote wit = kit + bit the domestic ﬁnancial wealth of household i, composed of holdings
of physical capital kit , and bond holdings bit . The budget constraint for household i is:


                                        dwit = dπ it + [rt bit + zt − cit ] dt                                   (30)


where zt denotes labor income, equal to the wage since each household supplies one unit of labor, rt
is the equilibrium riskfree rate and dπ it denotes the household’s capital income. Labor income and
the interest rate are deterministic due to the absence of aggregate risk. Household capital income
dπ it is subject to idiosyncratic and uninsurable risk:


                                   dπ it = [yit − zt nit − δ k kit ] dt + σkit dω it                             (31)
  41
     In addition, in that model entrepreneurs need to accumulate wealth to relax their borrowing constraint, as in
Buera and Shin (2009) and Song et al. (2011).
  42
     See also Corneli (2009). Mendoza et al. (2009) allow for both investment and income risk. The case with
investment risk only is more tractable and delivers as an additional result that the capital-output ratio is low (and
hence the marginal product of capital is high) when the level of ﬁnancial development is low. Instead, in the Aiyagari
(1994) set up with labor income risk, there is no risk premium and precautionary saving increases the capital stock
above its complete market level. This would imply the counterfactual result that capital-output is high (and marginal
product of capital low) in less ﬁnancially developed countries.




                                                          27
       The ﬁrst term in brackets represents the deterministic part of the capital income, equal to out-
put minus labor costs and depreciation. The second part represents the stochastic component. dω it
is a standard Wiener process, i.i.d. across agents and time, akin to an obsolescence shock. Impor-
tantly, while the shock is idiosyncratic –and therefore perfectly insurable with complete markets–
we assume that markets remain incomplete. More speciﬁcally, σ measures the residual idiosyncratic
risk faced by households, after all available formal and informal domestic risk sharing opportuni-
ties have been exhausted. The case of complete markets then corresponds to σ = 0. A country
with a higher level of ﬁnancial development –and therefore more opportunities to diversify risk
domestically– will have a lower σ.43


4.3.2      Individual consumption and portfolio decisions

Assume that labor demand decisions are taken after the realization of the idiosyncratic shock.
Since production exhibits constant returns to scale, this implies that employment and capital
income will be proportional to capital with nit = n̄t kit /ξ t , where n̄t = ((1 − α) ξ t /zt )1/α , and
dπ it = r̄t kit dt + σkit dω it , where r̄t = αn̄1−α
                                                 t   − δ k represents the expected return to capital, common
to all ﬁrms, and therefore also the average expected return to capital in the economy.
       The linearity of the budget constraint in capital implies that the problem is a simple variant of
the standard Samuelson (1969)-Merton (1971) optimal consumption and portfolio problem. Deﬁne
ht the present discounted value of current and future nonﬁnancial income, which is common across
                                                                                     s
                                                                               ∞ −        rv dv
households since labor supply and the wage are identical: ht =                t e
                                                                                      t           zs ds. Deﬁne also total
wealth xit = wit + ht as the sum of ﬁnancial and human wealth.
       One can then show that optimal consumption and investment plans are linear and independent
of the household, with:44

                                                     ṁt         (1 − γ) ρ̂t − ρ
                                cit   =    mt xit ;       = mt +                 ,                                 (32a)
                                                     mt                γ
                                           kit   r̄t − rt
                                 φt :=         =          ,                                                        (32b)
                                           xit     γσ 2
                                    
where ρ̂t = rt + (r̄t − rt )2 / 2γσ 2 is the risk-adjusted return on the portfolio. The ﬁrst equation
states that consumption is linear in total wealth and characterizes the evolution of the marginal
propensity to consume mt , common to all households. In the case of logarithmic preferences
  43
     Of course, this interpretation may not be warranted. For instance, one could imagine situations where higher
levels of ﬁnancial sophistication allow for better sharing of idiosyncratic risk, at the expense of a higher exposure to
aggregate risk. Since the model does not feature aggregate risk, this is not a feature we explore here.
  44
     See the online appendix for detailed derivations.



                                                          28
(γ = 1), mt is constant and equal to ρ. The second equation shows that the share of investment
in the domestic physical capital stock φt satisﬁes the familiar formula: it increases with expected
excess return r̄t − rt and decreases with idiosyncratic risk σ and risk aversion γ.
       With linear consumption and investment rules, the model aggregates very easily. Observe that
equilibrium on the labor market requires                nit di = 1 from which we can recover the aggregate wage
as a function of the aggregate stock of capital: zt = ξ t (1 − α) (Kt /ξ t )α with the obvious notation
for aggregate capital: Kt =          kit di. Substituting into the expression for r̄t , one obtains the familiar
expression for the expected return to capital: r̄t = α (Kt /ξ t )α−1 − δ k .


4.3.3       Financial Autarky

Consider the case of ﬁnancial autarky: Bt = 0, or Wt = Kt . In steady state, all aggregate variables
grow at the same rate: d ln Ct /dt = d ln Kt /dt = d ln Yt /dt = d ln Ht /dt = g. Solving the aggregate
Euler equation for the risk-adjusted return ρ̂, one obtains:

                                          γ 2 2                γ2
                               r = ρ̂ −     φ σ ≤ ρ̂ = ρ + γg − φ2 σ 2 ≤ ρ + γg.                           (33)
                                          2                    2

This condition states that in equilibrium the precautionary motive depresses both the riskless rate
r and the risk-adjusted return ρ̂ below the benchmark return in the risk-less economy, ρ + γg.
Investing in capital is risky, so the precautionary motive increases the demand for riskless bonds.
In equilibrium these bonds are in zero net supply so the risk free rate has to decrease up to the
point where households decide not to hold them. This is the same logic as in Aiyagari (1994). The
precautionary motive also tends to depress the demand for capital, since it is the source of risk.
Therefore, capital has to oﬀer a premium in equilibrium. Substituting the deﬁnition of ρ̂ and φ,
and after simple manipulations, we obtain:45

                                                                       1/2
                                                       2 (ρ + γg − r)
                                    φ (r) =                                                               (34a)
                                                        γσ 2 (1 + γ)
                                        r̄ = αk̃ α−1 − δ k = r + γσ 2 φ (r) ≥ r                           (34b)


The ﬁrst equation expresses the share of wealth invested in the risky asset as a function of the
riskless rate r. The second equation expresses the expected return to capital as a function of the
riskless rate. It is immediate that in the riskless case σ 2 = 0, r̄ = r. It can be solved implicitly for
the level of capital as a function of the riskless rate: k̃(r). As Angeletos and Panousi (2011) show,
  45
       Where we use our notation x̃ = X/ (ξN ) .



                                                              29
k̃(r) is not monotonously decreasing with the interest rate. Instead, it is U-shaped, decreasing only
if r ≤ r ≡ ρ + γg − (γ/(1 + γ))σ 2 /2. The intuition is that a higher interest rate allows households to
accumulate more wealth, making them more willing to take risks, and reducing the risk premium
required by households to hold capital. It follows that for r > r, an increase in the riskless rate is
associated with a decrease in the marginal product of capital as the decline in the risk premium
more than oﬀsets the increase in the riskless rate.
   One solves for the autarky interest rate by substituting k̃(r) into the asset market equilibrium
condition: φ(k̃(r) + h̃(r)) = k̃(r) where h̃(r) = (1 − α)k̃(r)α /(r − g). This yields the implicit
expression:                                                          
                                                             a )α−1
                                                (1 − α) k̃ (rss
                                        a
                                1 = φ (rss ) 1+       a −g
                                                                                                   (35)
                                                     rss
                                  a = ρ + γg when σ = 0, and that ∂r a /∂σ < 0: more uninsurable
   It is immediate to check that rss                                ss

idiosyncratic risk depresses autarky rates.


4.3.4   Open economy

Small open economy.        Consider now the case of a small open economy facing a constant riskless
interest rate r. From the previous derivations, the domestic capital stock (per eﬃcient unit) will be
given by k̃ (r) that solves (34b) while the portfolio share will be φ(r) that solves (34a). The demand
for stores of value is w̃(r) = k̃(r)/φ(r) − h̃(r). The supply is k̃(r), and the diﬀerence between the
two determines the net foreign asset position b̃(r) = w̃(r) − k̃(r). One can check that b̃(r)/k̃(r) is
always increasing with the interest rate: as the interest rate increases, the propensity to save in
                                                                              a (resp. r < r a ), the
the riskless bond increases, relative to saving in the risky capital. If r > rss            ss

small open economy is a net creditor (resp. borrower).
   Following Kraay and Ventura (2000), we can use the model to ask how the current account
should respond to transitory income shocks. To do so, rewrite equations (34) as:

                                         k̃   αk̃ α−1 − δ k − r
                                            =                                                      (36)
                                         x̃          γσ 2

and solve for the response of domestic capital k̃ to a change in domestic wealth x̃:

                                 ∂ k̃          γσ 2            k̃
                                      =                           ≥ 0.                             (37)
                                 ∂ x̃     2
                                        γσ + α(1 − α)k̃ α−2 x̃ x̃

When σ 2 is close to 0 (full risk sharing), the marginal increase in domestic wealth is invested in
international riskless bonds (∂ k̃/∂ x̃ ≈ 0). In this case, countries run current account surpluses in

                                                  30
response to transitory positive shocks. Conversely, when α ≈ 1, so that ∂ k̃/∂ x̃ ≈ k̃/(k̃ + b̃), the
marginal increase in wealth is invested like the average unit.46 The implication is that net creditor
countries (for which b̃ > 0) run current account surpluses in response to a transitory positive income
shock, while net debtor countries (for which b̃ < 0) run current account deﬁcits. In a panel of 13
industrial countries between 1973 and 1995, Kraay and Ventura (2000) ﬁnd that the interaction
term between the share of gross national saving in GDP and the ratio of foreign assets to total
assets is highly signiﬁcant, with a R2 of 0.37.


Large open economy.             Following the now familiar steps, suppose a world economy is composed of
two otherwise identical countries facing diﬀerent levels of residual uninsurable risks with 0 < σ < σ ∗
where ∗ denotes the foreign, less ﬁnancially developed, economy. Assuming that the conditions are
              a,i
satisﬁed for rss  ≥ ri in each country i, the equilibrium satisﬁes:

                                                 a
                                                rss ≤ r ≤ rss
                                                           a∗
                                                              < ρ + γg                               (38a)
                                              a∗
                                          k̃(rss ) < k̃ ∗ < k̃ < k̃(rss
                                                                     a
                                                                        )                            (38b)

                                                 b̃ < 0 < b̃∗                                        (38c)


      The integrated risk-free rate settles somewhere between the two autarky rates, as usual. More-
over, the capital stock in the riskier economy is lower than in the safer one. This is because the risk
premium eﬀect dominates. This has two interesting implications. First, the capital stock increases
                                                             a ) < k̃(r): the increase in interest
in the less developed economy upon ﬁnancial integration: k̃(rss
rates in the less ﬁnancially developed economy makes them richer and willing to take more risk.
Second, the marginal product of capital is higher –and the capital-output ratio is lower– in less
ﬁnancially developed economies, something that accords well with the empirical evidence.


Cross border ﬂows as safe asset ﬂows.                Finally, this model predicts that the advanced economy
is a net borrower while the less ﬁnancially developed economy is a net creditor: b̃ < 0 < b̃∗ . In the
model, all cross border ﬂows take the form of riskless loans: there is no cross-border investment
in risky projects. This provides a way to re-interpret the results: faced with larger uninsurable
risks, households in the foreign country wants to invest in safe assets. The domestic country faces
lower uninsurable risks, so it has less need for insurance and is willing to supply these safe assets
to foreigners. Stated diﬀerently, the domestic economy has a comparative advantage in supplying
 46
      We use the fact that h̃ ≈ 0 when α ≈ 1.




                                                        31
safe assets. In turn, it earns a premium that allows it to consume more than it produces along the
transition to the new steady state (i.e. it runs a trade deﬁcit). This result parallels Gourinchas et
al. (2010) whom we will discuss later in this chapter.47


4.3.5    Aggregate uncertainty.

The models considered so far only feature idiosyncratic uncertainty. Some recent models consider
instead the impact of aggregate uncertainty.48 In a business cycle framework, Fogli and Perri (2006)
consider the eﬀect of the Great Moderation (the decline in the volatility of the U.S. business cycle
between the mid 1980s and the onset of the 2007 ﬁnancial crisis). Faced with a decline in aggregate
volatility, the U.S. representative household would reduce its precautionary holdings. This would
result in a deterioration of the U.S. external balance. In a calibration of their model, they ﬁnd that
the Great Moderation can account for around 20% of the US external imbalance. Note however,
that the decline in precautionary saving would be associated with an increase in global interest
rates, in contradiction with stylized fact 1. In a recent paper, Coeurdacier et al. (2013) study jointly
the gains from capital accumulation and risk sharing in a model with aggregate uncertainty. Using
global numerical methods they study the dynamics of the model along the transition path from
autarky to ﬁnancial integration. They ﬁnd that aggregate uncertainty interacts with the classical
determinants of capital ﬂows explored in section 3 and that the precautionary motive can overturn
the direction of net capital ﬂows as in the models explored in this section.


4.4     Financial frictions and international trade

Two recent papers focus on the interaction between trade ﬂows and capital ﬂows. Jin (2012)
presents a stochastic two-country overlapping generations model with production and capital ac-
cumulation in which factor intensities are (exogenously) diﬀerent across countries. The paper
combines insights from the factor proportions trade literature with those of the standard neo-
classical open economy growth model. In her model, there is both an inter-temporal motive for
capital ﬂows and an intra-temporal motive since capital will tend to ﬂow to countries that are more
specialized in capital intensive industries. Hence two competing eﬀects determine the direction of
net capital ﬂows: the composition eﬀect (linked to asymmetries in specialization across countries)
  47
     Mendoza et al. (2009) also allow for investment risk. In their model, agents can invest in risky assets in foreign
countries. As a result, in equilibrium, the ﬁnancially developed country still runs a negative net foreign position, but
holds a long position in foreign risky assets and earns excess returns on its external portfolio.
  48
     These models abstract from idiosyncratic uncertainty. As mentioned earlier, in models with both idiosyncratic
and aggregate uncertainty the wealth distribution varies over time and become a state variable.




                                                          32
and the standard eﬃciency eﬀect (stemming from capital scarcity). A country hit by a positive
productivity shock, or experiencing a relative increase in its labour force –as was the case for many
emerging economies since 1990-, can nevertheless become a capital exporters if it specializes in
labour intensive industries. Hence specialization is the key mechanism through which Jin (2012)
may account for global imbalances.
   Antràs and Caballero (2009) presents a model where ﬁnancial frictions determine patterns
of capital ﬂows and trade ﬂows. Countries are heterogeneous in terms of ﬁnancial development
and sectors diﬀer in their degree of ﬁnancial dependence. They feature a two-country (North
and South, where South is ﬁnancially underdeveloped), two-factor (capital and labour) two-sector
general equilibrium model where a homogeneous good is internationally traded. Under trade and
ﬁnancial autarky, South invests disproportionately in the sector without ﬁnancial frictions. This
depresses wages and rental rates of capital. If capital is now allowed to move freely, but international
trade in goods remains restricted, capital will ﬂow out of the ﬁnancially underdeveloped economy
towards the ﬁnancially developed one, as in the models presented in this section. By contrast, if
international trade in goods is also liberalized, countries will specialize along the lines of comparative
advantage: the ﬁnancially underdeveloped South specializes (incompletely) in the sector unaﬀected
by the ﬁnancial friction. This raises the rental rate of capital in the South because of good price
equalization, while domestic wages remain depressed, and this can reverse the direction of capital
ﬂows. Hence it is the diﬀerence in production structures due to the pattern of specialization induced
by comparative advantage that interacts with ﬁnancial liberalization to shape the direction of net
capital ﬂows. The pattern of specialization is thus endogeneously determined by cross country
diﬀerences in ﬁnancial development, echoing the main theme of this section.


4.5   Global Imbalances and Financial Fragility

An important theme developed in Bernanke (2005) is that other asset prices may adjust beside the
global interest rates to a shortage of stores of value. In Caballero et al. (2008b), the decline in world
interest rates can be so strong as to make the economy dynamically ineﬃcient, opening the door to
rational bubbles. While the ﬁnancial bubble increases asset supply endogenously, it is also prone to
crashes. More generally, low world interest rates can fuel search for yield, or ineﬃcient investments
(e.g. Rajan (2005)). A number of observers noted the close connection between current account
deﬁcits and housing booms (Bernanke (2010), Ferrero (2012)). Lower global interest rates, and in
particular mortgage rates, can account for part of the increase in housing prices. As Ferrero (2012)
observes, a gradual relaxation of borrowing constraints for household, or a favorable change in

                                                   33
property taxes would lead to a simultaneous current account deﬁcit and housing boom, as observed
in the data, but would also lead to an increase in interest rates. In the same vein, Adam et al. (2011)
use a small open economy model with endogenous housing and learning. In their model, bullish
agents about the housing market respond strongly to a decline in world interest rates, triggering a
housing boom and a current account deﬁcit.


4.6    Private Flows, Public Flows and Reserve accumulation

A number of papers have pointed out that private and public ﬂows behave quite diﬀerently, and that
most of the net accumulation of foreign assets by emerging economies is in the form of public ﬂows,
especially through oﬃcial reserve accumulation by central banks (see Aguiar and Amador (2011),
Gourinchas and Jeanne (forth.) and Alfaro et al. (2011)). Indeed, a large share of emerging markets
gross external asset holdings takes the form of central bank reserves or other oﬃcial holdings. The
distinction between private and public capital ﬂows becomes relevant once we depart from the -
admittedly extreme- case of full Ricardian equivalence. In that class of models, any change in public
ﬂows is oﬀset one-for-one by a corresponding change in private sector capital ﬂows so the model pins
down total net capital ﬂows but not their composition. It is quite reasonable to depart from full
Ricardian equivalence and the stringent assumptions it requires (non-distortionary taxation, perfect
capital markets, inﬁnitely lived dynasties). But the precise channels by which models depart from
Ricardian equivalence matters greatly for the predictions of the model about the joint ﬂuctuations
in private and public ﬂows. It is not in general a good idea to simply assume private ﬂows behave
as if there were no public ﬂows. Spelling out the right model of public and private ﬂows is an
active area of ongoing research. At one extreme, some models assume that there are no private
capital ﬂows and governments provide the only form of intermediation of domestic resources into
foreign stores of value (semi-open economy). For instance, one may see governments as ﬁnancial
intermediaries for the domestic private sector, intermediating domestic savings into global uses,
as pointed out by Song et al. (2011). Similarly, in Aguiar and Amador (2011) a government
that has access to international capital markets faces a commitment problem. It accumulates
international reserves as a way to post collateral, and limit the temptation to expropriate investors
in the future. In Jeanne and Rancière (2011), the domestic government faces instead the possibility
of a sudden loss of access to external credit and accumulates reserves for precautionary reasons.49
  49
    Bacchetta and Benhima (2012) present a model where the demand for precautionary liquid reserves arises from
the corporate sector. In the model, credit constrained ﬁrms face liquidity shocks and their demand for liquid assets
(foreign bonds) increases with investment. Therefore, a more rapidly growing economy will invest more and demand
more foreign bonds.



                                                        34
Bacchetta et al. (2012) present a model where households face borrowing constraints and where
the planner may choose to impose capital controls and accumulate reserves. In steady state, when
ﬁnancial constraints don’t bind, it is optimal to replicate the open economy, and the central bank
is simply a shell for international ﬁnancial intermediation. Along the transition, binding ﬁnancial
constraints may lead the planner to choose an interest rate diﬀerent from the world interest rate,
through reserve accumulation and capital control policy, as in Jeanne (2012). Many of these models
emphasize the strong demand from emerging market economies for liquid and safe global assets.
Indeed, as Bernanke (2011) show, surplus emerging market economies concentrated their reserve
accumulation on the safest US securities: U.S. Treasuries and agency debt. To understand this
pattern, one needs to go beyond models with no aggregate risk and no diversiﬁcation motive.


5     External Balance Sheets Valuation Eﬀects and Adjustment

Many of the models of the previous section, with no aggregate uncertainty or no diversiﬁcation mo-
tive, make predictions about net capital ﬂows, that is, about the intertemporal transfer of resources
across countries. However, as emphasized in Section 2, one key stylized facts in international eco-
nomics since the 1990s has been the massive increase in gross capital ﬂows. The properties of the
international balance sheet of countries determine how diﬀerent shocks propagate across countries
and how countries adjust to their long run solvency constraint.


5.1     International Adjustment

This section highlights the quantitative importance of valuation eﬀects and the ﬁnancial channel
of external adjustment. To do so, we explore the implications of the external solvency constraint.
Unlike sections 3 and 4, we present derivations in discrete time for two reasons. First, it allows
for an easier mapping between the theoretical objects of analysis and their empirical counterpart.
Second, many of the issues discussed in this section have a business cycle dimension, for which a
discrete time set-up is better adapted.


5.1.1    External solvency constraint

We begin by writing down the external budget constraint of a country and deriving some implica-
tions for the process of international adjustment. Deﬁne N At = At − Lt as the net foreign asset
position (at market value) of a country at the end of period t, where At and Lt denote respectively




                                                 35
gross external assets and liabilities.50 The change in net foreign asset position from one period to
the next is given by the following accumulation equation:


                                             N At = Rt N At−1 + N Xt                                               (39)


where N Xt = Xt − Mt renotes the balance on goods, services and net transfers during period t,
and Rt represents the gross portfolio return on the net foreign portfolio between the end of period
t − 1 and the end of period t. Adding and subtracting the net investment income balance N It , we
can write:
                      N At − N At−1 = [(Rt − 1) N At−1 − N It ] + CAt = V At + CAt                                 (40)

using the deﬁnition of the current account as the sum of the trade balance N Xt and the net factor
payment: CAt = N Xt + N It . The change in the net foreign position equals the current account,
CAt , plus the valuation adjustment V At . This valuation adjustment equals the capital gain on
the net foreign asset portfolio i.e. the net return (Rt − 1) minus income, dividends and earnings
distributed.51 Traditionally, this valuation term has been omitted and the net external position of a
country has been calculated as the cumulated sum of past current acounts. This is in keeping with
the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) and the Balance of Payments methodology
that focuses on produced transactions and ignores capital gains and losses. But cumulated current
acounts will give a very approximate and potentially misleading reﬂection of a country’s net foreign
asset position –the object of interest in most of our economic models– unless the cumulated valuation
gain is correspondingly small. While this assumption may have been reasonably accurate in eras of
limited levels of ﬁnancial integration, it is not one we can maintain in the face of large cross border
gross positions, as seen in sylized fact 5. We now turn to the empirical methodology allowing us to
value assets and liabilities at market prices.
   50
      Note that this deﬁnition of the net foreign asset position coincides with the one presented in the previous section
since domestic wealth W consists of domestic holdings of domestic assets V d and gross external claims A, while
                                                                        d
domestic assets V can be held by either by domestic     residents (V
                                                                      ) or dby
                                                                               foreigners in the form of gross external
liabilities (V = L). It follows that N A = A − L = W − V − V − V = W − V.
              f                                                 d
   51
      To be complete, the accumulation equation should also include the capital account KAt , unilateral transfers
U Tt and the statistical discrepancy SDt . We abstract from these components in this discussion and will bring them
back when necessary. For many countries, especially industrialized ones, capital account transactions and unilateral
transfers are typically small. Errors and omissions are also excluded from the ﬁnancial account in the US Bureau of
Economic Analysis estimates of the US international investment position.




                                                           36
5.1.2      Valuation eﬀects: empirical methodology

Obtaining precise estimates of these valuation changes is not an easy task. We start with a discus-
sion of the empirical methodological advances that have allowed researchers to focus on valuation
changes with a particular attention to the relevant empirical caveats that are involved in any exer-
cise of this nature.


Stocks and Flows.           The relatively recent availability of periodic surveys of cross border assets
and liabilities has it made possible to investigate empirically the channels of adjustments of a
country’s external balance sheet.52 Constructing external balance sheets of countries at market
value involves reconciling data on stocks and balance of payment data on ﬂows.53
       For each asset class, we can write a general law of motion as follows:

                                    i
                                 P Xt+1 = P Xti + F Xt+1
                                                     i        i
                                                         + V Xt+1     i
                                                                  + OXt+1                                         (41)


where P Xti represents the position at the end of period t for asset class i reported in the disaggre-
gated net international investment position for gross claims (X = A) or gross liabilities (X = L),
F Xti denotes the corresponding ﬂow during period t as recorded in the balance of payments, V Xti
is the valuation gain that can be attributed to currency and asset price movements, while OXti
(‘other changes’) represents an error term due to changes in coverage or mismeasurements of vari-
ous kinds. Summing across all the series and using a simpliﬁed version of the balance of payment
identity F At = CAt +SDt , where SDt denotes the statistical discrepancy of the balance of payment,
we obtain the international investment position at the end of period t + 1 :54


                           N At+1 = N At + CAt+1 + V ALt+1 + OCt+1 + SDt+1                                        (42)

                    j   
                j V At −
where V ALt =                    i
                            i V Lt , is the sum of the valuation eﬀects across asset classes, and
              
OCt = j OAjt − i OLit . is the corresponding sum of the ‘other changes’.
       These simple accounting relations allow in principle researchers to construct time series of
  52
     For example, the Coordinated Portfolio Investment Surveys of the IMF, covering external holdings of securities
of 73 countries (in 2010) started in 1997 and became annual from 2001. The CPIS surveys are complemented by the
surveys on Securities Held as Foreign Exchange Reserves (SEFER), and Securities Held by International Organizations
(SSIO). The Coordinated Direct Investment Survey (CDIS) of the IMF covering 97 countries started in 2009. The
US Treasury has performed very occasional surveys of external assets or liabilities since at least the second world war
but has done so on a more regular (annual) basis only since 2002 for the liability side and 2003 for the claim side.
  53
     In the case of the US, data on stocks comes from surveys performed infrequently by the Treasury and reported
by the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
  54
     As before, we ignore the capital account and unilateral transfers in this derivation.



                                                          37
estimates of cross border positions at market values which are consistent with ﬂow data and with
the periodic surveys. In practice, of course, the exercize is rarely straighforward and a number of
assumptions are needed to ensure everything “adds up.”
      Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001) and Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007a) in pioneering work con-
structed and updated annual estimates of external assets and liabilities for over 178 countries and
the euro area over the period 1970-2007 (data release august 2009). Gourinchas and Rey (2007a)
and Gourinchas et al. (2010) focused on the United States and provided quarterly estimates for the
period 1952-2010. Bertaut and Tryon (2007), building on Thomas et al. (2004) perform a number
of reﬁnements to the data and provide monthly estimates of US cross border securities positions
from 1994. Stoﬀels and Tille (2009) constructed data on the Swiss external investment position.
In more conjectural work given the data limitations, Kubelec and Sá (2010) provides estimates of
bilateral holdings among 18 advanced economies and emerging markets, Milesi-Ferretti et al. (2010)
estimated a snapshot of bilateral holdings in a sample of 70 countries at end year 2007 while Gour-
inchas et al. (2012) extended this sample to 2009. Lane and Shambaugh (2010) presents currency
compositions of external claims and liabilities for a large panel of countries over 1990-2004. Finally,
exploiting a unique Swiss database, Zucman (2013) shows that non recorded assets held in oﬀshore
accounts can explain the discrepancy between assets and liabilities at the world level.


5.1.3     The case of the United States

A world’s banker balance sheet.          The case of the United States is a particularly interesting.
We have already noted the very sizeable gap between the reported U.S. net international position
and cumulated current account deﬁcits (stylized fact 5). This suggests possible important roles
played by valuation eﬀects in the dynamics of the net foreign asset position of the US. Along the
same line, Tille (2008) observed the potential important stabilizing eﬀects of a dollar depreciation
on the external balance sheet of the United States due to a large asymmetry in currency compo-
sition between liabilities (all in dollars) and assets (mostly in foreign currency): when the dollar
depreciates, the value of liabilities in dollar is unchanged while the value of external claims goes
up.
      As a number of papers noted, the structure of the US external balance sheet is also asymmetric
in other ways. Writing in the 1960s while the US was the center country of the Bretton Wood
system of ﬁxed exchange rates, Kindleberger (1965) and Despres et al. (1966), observed that the
US was the ‘Banker of the World’, ‘lending mostly at long and intermediate terms, and borrowing
short’ thereby supplying loans and investment funds to foreign enterprises and liquidity to foreign

                                                  38
asset holders. Figure 10 presents the decomposition of the US external accounts by asset classes
(FDI, bank -which includes trade credits-, debt, equity). In the wake of the second world war, the
United States was a creditor country, with a positive Net International Investment Position (NIIP)
of about 12 percent of U.S. output. More importantly, U.S. gross external claims and liabilities
were small, reﬂecting the large direct and indirect costs of cross-border ﬁnancial transactions. Most
of the external claims of the US were direct investment or bank loans, while a sizeable share of its
external liabilities were foreign holdings of US government securities. Fast forward to the beginning
of the 21st century, after an unprecedented period of deregulation of cross border ﬁnancial ﬂows.
By then, the U.S. has become a sizable debtor country, with a negative NIIP of about 22 percent
of output in 2010. More dramatically, gross external claims and liabilities soared,to more than
100% of output in recent years. Figure 9 presents the evolution of net portfolio equity and FDI
position of the US (its risky asset position) and its net debt and bank asset position (as a proxy for
its safe asset position). The risky position skyrocketed upwards in the run up to the crisis while
the US was increasingly short in safe and liquid assets: as noted by Gourinchas and Rey (2007a),
the US became an increasingly leveraged global ﬁnancial intermediary. The pattern of liquidity
and maturity transformation already noted by observers in the 1960s is still a characteristic of the
US balance sheet. This is all the more surprising if one puts this stylized fact in parallel with the
evolution of the banking sector in recent years. In a series of thought provoking papers, Shin argues
that European global banks have become intermediaries for US savings, ﬁnancing themselves in the
United States, in particular via the wholesale market (money market funds) and channelling the
liquidity worldwide including back into the US markets (see for example Shin (2012)). Shin points
out that US-dollar denominated assets of banks outside the United States amounted to about $10
trillion prior to the 2007 crisis. This pattern of banking investment ﬂows whereby global banks
are liquidity providers to the United States goes against the previously described role of the US
as a World Banker. In the aggregate balance sheet of the country though, it is still dominated by
the overall pattern of liquidity and maturity transformation performed by the United States as a
whole.


Computing returns on the U.S. external asset position. The particular structure of the
external balance sheet of the United States has been shown to generate an “Exorbitant Privilege”:
the United States is able to earn higher returns on its external assets than on its external liabilities
(see Gourinchas and Rey (2007a)).55 This French claim has been under intense scrutiny in the
  55
     Giscard d’Estaing (February 16, 1965), then ﬁnance Minister of President Charles De Gaulle coined the term
“exorbitant privilege.”


                                                      39
literature, igniting a lively debate, which we now brieﬂy summarize.
       From equation (42), the formula linking the change in net foreign asset position and the return
is:
                              N At+1 = Rt+1 N At + N Xt+1 + SDt+1 + OCt+1                                        (43)

       When computing the returns on the net foreign asset position of a country, the researcher is
immediately faced with a problem: Where should OCt+1 , the residual term whose raison d’être is to
reconcile stock and ﬂow data coming from diﬀerent sources be allocated?56 Diﬀerent authors have
taken diﬀerent (time varying) views on this question and obtained estimates of external returns
on samples of diﬀerent lengths, resulting in a debate which may look confusing for the lay person.
But the underlying issue is quite simple and easy to summarize: as a residual item, OCt+1 can
only represent mismeasured valuations, mismeasured ﬂows, mismeasured initial positions, or some
combination of the three. Let’s consider each possibility in turn.

       • OCt+1 represents mismeasured capital gains. This is a plausible assumption for some asset
         categories, such as direct investment, where capital gains are notoriously hard to measure.
         This was the assumption adopted in the ﬁrst wave of papers of the literature. In that case, the
         total return is given by (Rt+1 − 1) N At = N It+1 + V ALt+1 + OCt+1 . This set of papers tend
         to ﬁnd that the US enjoys a strong excess returns on its overall external position. Gourinchas
         and Rey (2007a) report a real excess return of 2.1% per year on the 1952:2004 period; Lane
         and Milesi-Ferretti (2007b) reports 3.9% per year for the shorter 1980-2004 period; similarly
         Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2005) ﬁnds a 3.1% per year excess return for 1983-2003 and Meissner
         and Taylor (2008) 3.7% per year on 1981-2003.

       • OCt+1 represents mismeasured ﬁnancial ﬂows as pointed out in a second wave of papers
         (Curcuru et al. (2008b) and Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2009)).57 In that case, the dynamics
         of net assets is given by N At+1 = N At + F Ât+1 + V ALt+1 with the ”corrected” ﬂow term
         deﬁned as F Ât = F At + OCt . Such an adjustment must have a counterpart in the Balance of
         Payments identity F Ât = CAt + KAt + SDt − OCt = 0. By deﬁnition, if F Â measures the
         correct ﬁnancial ﬂows, then the residual term SD − OC must correspond to mis-measured
  56
     OCt+1 can also reﬂect some reclassiﬁcation. For example when a portfolio investor has a position in a ﬁrm and
then acquires more equity such that total holdings exceed 10%, his entire holdings are classiﬁed as direct investment,
including those that were held prior to meeting the 10% threshold. This results in OC for both portfolio and FDI.
A similar reclassiﬁcation occurs when a US ﬁrm reincorporates oﬀshore or onshore.
  57
     Their argument relies on the diﬀerence in revision policies between the stock and the ﬂow data for equity and
bond portfolio investment.




                                                         40
         current account transactions: C Ât = CAt + (SDt − OCt ) .58 Hence, if ﬂow adjustments are
         large, this implies that trade ﬂows are also de facto grossly misrecorded for the United States,
         especially in the recent period (for a discussion on the implications for the balance of payments
         see Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2009) and Curcuru et al. (2008a)). Adding residuals to ﬂows,
         Curcuru et al. (2008b) ﬁnds no excess returns on the portfolio component nor on the overall
         net foreign asset position of the US for the 1990-2005 period.59 Forbes (2010) implements the
         Curcuru et al. (2008b) methodology and, in contrast, estimates very large excess returns of
         about 6.9% per year during 2002-2006.60 Curcuru et al. (2013) ﬁnds excess returns of 1.9%
         on the total net foreign asset position of the US for the 1990-2011 period and show that direct
         investment yield diﬀerentials play an important role in their sample.

       • OCt+1 represents mismeasured positions as advocated by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2009) for
         non-portfolio positions of banks and non banks. For these categories covering bank loans,
         deposits, short term paper and trade credits, capital gains are unlikely to be large. However
         the scope of the surveys has progressively expanded over time and the methodology has
         improved making it plausible that initial positions were mismeasured.

       Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2009) oﬀer a detailed and careful discussion of these diﬀerent options,
indicating where mismeasurements are likely to be more severe. They end up recommending that
for portfolio assets and liabilities, the residual be partly reallocated to ﬁnancial ﬂows; for FDI that
it be reallocated to capital gains; and for non-portfolio positions of banks and non-banks that it
be reallocated to mismeasured initial positions.


How large is the “Exorbitant Privilege”? We follow an agnostic approach and allocate the
residual term in diﬀerent ways to assess quantitatively whether the result change substantially. As
pointed out already by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2009) allocating the residual term to valuations
increases the excess returns on the net foreign asset position, while allocating it to ﬂows decreases it.
Table 3 presents in (a) the most conservative results regarding the excess returns (following Curcuru
et al. (2008b) -whose own estimates are presented in row (e) for the shorter period analysed in their
paper- we allocate all the residuals to ﬂows); in (b) we allocate all the residuals to ﬂows except for
  58
     Capital account transactions are well measured if they correspond mostly to oﬃcial aid and grants. However,
we note that the capital account also includes transactions in non-produced, non-ﬁnancial assets, such as patents
and trademarks which should be included in direct investment returns and are unlikely to be measured with great
precision.
  59
     For the return on the overall position, they use BEA original data releases instead of revised data to compute
their estimates, arguing this corrects the problem of disparate revision policies between stocks and ﬂows.
  60
     As we show below, the diﬀerence in estimates comes from the short sample period and volatility of underlying
returns.


                                                        41
FDI where they are allocated to valuations as argued by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2009); in (c) we
present an upper bound for the excess returns as all the other changes are allocated to valuations.
In rows (d) to (h) we present earlier estimates of the literature pertaining to various sample lengths
and estimation methods. Estimates (d), (g) and (h) allocate all residuals to valuations; estimates
(e) and (f) allocate residuals to ﬂows. In all cases we ﬁnd evidence of an ”exorbitant privilege”
ranging on the whole 1952:1-2011:4 period from 1.6% to 2.7% depending on the assumptions. This
is far from being negligible.
      The key lessons of this robustness exercize are (i) that the sample length is important (see
the very diﬀerent results obtained by Curcuru et al. (2008b) and Forbes (2010) who use the same
methodology or the results for the two periods in (a) (b) or (c)). This is to be expected given the
large volatility of the excess returns. (ii) that the reﬁnements on construction of positions data
(Bertaut and Tryon (2007)) while undoubtedly improving the quality of the data, do not make much
of a quantitative diﬀerence; (iii) that the allocation of the residuals does not alter the substance of
the results if the sample is long enough.
      The most natural interpretation of the results is that this positive excess return may come from
a composition eﬀect The composition eﬀect is positive if, just like a bank or a venture capitalist,
U.S. claims on foreigners are weighted toward riskier asset classes with higher average returns and
liabilities are safer and more liquid. In addition, there may be excess returns within asset classes,
for example because US government bonds earn a liquidity discount compared to foreign bonds or
because of tax asymmetries in the realm of direct investment. More research is doubtlessly needed
to understand the underlying determinants of these excess returns.


5.1.4      Intertemporal approach to the current account

We now go back to the external solvency constraint (39), and iterate it forward, imposing a no-Ponzi
condition and taking conditional expectations:61
                                                       ⎡                     −1          ⎤
                                                           +∞
                                                               
                                                                i
                                  N At = −Et ⎣                         Rt+j         N Xt+i ⎦ .     (44)
                                                           i=1   j=1



      This expression states that the net foreign asset position of a country should equal the (opposite
of) the expected present discounted value of future trade balances, discounted at the cumulated
return on the net foreign asset position. Hence the current value of a country’s net foreign asset
                                          
                                              
                                              k
 61
      The no-Ponzi condition is: limk→∞             Rt+j    N At+k = 0.
                                              j=1




                                                                 42
position reﬂects both the expected future path of net exports and of returns on the net foreign asset
position. Equation (44) is very generic: it has to hold, regardless of the details of the economic
model, provided Ponzi schemes are ruled out. To illustrate the economic intuition behind this
intertemporal constraint, imagine that some news lead agents to update upwards their estimates of
future next exports. That same news would either decrease the value of current net foreign assets
(either by movements in the exchange rate or by increasing consumption and current indebtedness
for example) or would aﬀect expectations of future returns on the net foreign asset position (or
both).
    In a world where internationally traded assets consist only in riskless government bonds whose
gross rates of returns are Rtf , the rate of return on the net foreign asset positions Rt simpliﬁes
to Rf . In such a world, which may not be so diﬀerent from the pre-1980s international capital
                                                           +∞
                                                           
markets, equation (44) takes the familiar form N At = −Et     (1 + r)−i N Xt+i where we also
                                                                         i=1
assumed that Rtf = (1 + r) is constant. Hence in this “relatively non-ﬁnancially globalized world”,
any movements in the net foreign asset position has to be made up in the future by net exports. The
international adjustment process of countries relies exclusively on quantity adjustments through the
classical trade channel.62 Furthermore, since there are no capital gains or losses on net riskless bond
positions, it is immediate from (40) that there is no valuation eﬀect either and the change in the
net foreign asset position N At+1 − N At coincides with the current account CAt . From there, the
simplest version of the intertemporal approach to the current account assumes an inﬁnite-horizon
certainty-equivalent representative consumer, with a rate of time preference equal to interest rate,
to obtain:63
                                                 ∞
                                                 
                          CAt = Qt − Q̂t =              (1 + r)−(s−t) Et (Qs − Qs−1 )                        (45)
                                                s=t+1

    where Qt denotes net output, i.e. output minus government expenditures and domestic invest-
ment and a ‘hat’ denotes the permanent value of a variable.64
    This expression makes particularly transparent some of the main lessons of the intertemporal
approach to the current account: movements in the current account in a world where riskless bonds
with constant rate of returns r are the only assets traded internationally, are driven by temporary
   62
      Whether this adjustment requires movements in the real exchange rate and/or the terms of trade, is a debated
issue. Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2005) present estimates of the adjustment in relative prices needed to close the U.S.
current account. Corsetti et al. (forth.) argue that some of the adjustment can come from adjustments at the
extensive margin, i.e. through the export/import of new varieties, without much adjustment in terms of trade.
Faruqee et al. (2007) presents a richer simulation based on four regional blocs.
   63
      See Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1995) in the previous Handbook chapter.
   64                     ∞            −(s−t+1)
      Formally, Q̂t = rEt   t+1 (1 + r)          Qs .




                                                         43
deviations of macroeconomics quantities from their permanent levels. A US deﬁcit reﬂects a com-
bination of a temporary shortfall in US output or an investment level or government spending
temporary above trends. It leads to an accumulation of US riskless debt by foreign countries on
which the US pays a constant interest rate r.65 As discussed above, the new international ﬁnancial
landscape characterized by large cross border holdings of a myriad of diﬀerent assets denominated
in diﬀerent currencies cannot be forced into that mold. The empirical failure of intertemporal
approach to the current account underlines this discrepancy between the simple market structure
of the models and the real world.We therefore go back to equation (39) to derive a more general
characterisation of the dynamics of the net foreign asset position that is the core of the empirical
analysis of Gourinchas and Rey (2007b)


5.1.5      Trade and valuation channels of international adjustment

Gourinchas and Rey (2007b) start with the external constraint identity (39), with a slightly altered
timing (for notational convenience):66


                                       N At+1 ≡ Rt+1 (N At + N Xt ) .                                         (46)


       As above, N Xt represents net exports during period t, deﬁned as the diﬀerence between exports
Xt and imports Mt of goods and services. N At represents net foreign assets, deﬁned as the dif-
ference between gross external assets At and gross external liabilities Lt measured in the domestic
currency, while Rt+1 denotes the (gross) return on the net foreign asset portfolio. A ﬁrst step
consist in log-linearizing equation (46). But while in most theories the ratios of exports, imports,
external assets and liabilities to wealth are all statistically stationary along a balanced-growth path,
even a cursory look at the data shows in contrast, that the stock of gross assets and gross liabilities,
exports and imports are on a transition path. Looking at international ﬁnancial integration from
a historical perspective (see for example Obstfeld and Taylor (2004)), capital mobility increased
between 1880 and 1914; decreased between the First World War and the end of the Second World
War; and has been increasing until the advent of the global ﬁnancial crisis. Many of these long
run structural shifts are driven by exogenous forces, chief among them technological innovations in
  65
     For a richer model with non traded and traded goods where stochastic movements in real interest rate plays a
role, see Bergin and Sheﬀrin (2000).
  66
     In equation (46), net foreign assets are measured at the beginning of the period. This timing assumption is
innocuous. One could instead deﬁne N At as the stock of net foreign assets at the end of period t, i.e. N At+1 =
Rt+1 N At . The accumulation equation becomes: N At+1 = Rt+1 N At + N Xt+1 .which brings us back to the notation
of the previous section.




                                                        44
the shipping and communication industries. Hence a natural approach consists in modelling the
world economy as a stochastic economy around a slow-moving deterministic trend. The variables
of interest are the ﬂuctuations of the net asset and net export variables in deviation from these
trends.67 The derivation of the loglinearized solvency constraint requires several steps and some
ancillary assumptions, which are relegated to the online Appendix. Denote by nxat a linear com-
bination of the stationary components of exports, imports, assets and liabilities (the weights are
constant given by the loglinearization). The loglinearized approximation of (46) takes the following
form:
                                                   1
                                       nxat+1 ≈      nxat + rt+1 + Δnxt+1                                         (47)
                                                   ρ

where rt are the loglinearized returns on the net foreign asset position, the variable nxat is a measure
of cyclical external imbalances and Δnxt+1 measures the cyclical net export growth. Unlike the
current account, this expression incorporates information both from the trade balance (the ﬂow)
and the foreign asset position (the stock). It increases with assets and exports and decreases
with imports and liabilities. Finally, the constant ρ equals the ratio of the long term growth
rate of the economy to the long term gross return on the net foreign asset position, assuming the
economy eventually settles in a balanced growth path. Assuming a no-Ponzi condition and taking
expectations, one obtains:
                                                     +∞
                                                     
                                      nxat ≈ −Et           ρj [rt+j + Δnxt+j ]                                    (48)
                                                     j=1

where we assume ρ < 1 i.e. that the long-term growth rate of the economy is lower than the
steady-state rate of return, a plausible restriction.68
       Equation (48), which is the loglinearized equivalent of (44), is central to the analysis of external
adjustment dynamics in a world of integrated ﬁnancial markets. It shows that movements in net
exports and the net foreign asset position must forecast either future portfolio returns, or future net
export growth, or both. Consider the case of a country with a negative value for nxa, either because
of a deﬁcit in the cyclical component of the trade balance, or a cyclical net debt position, or both.
If returns on net foreign assets are expected to be constant: Et rt+j = r. In that case, equation (48)
implies that any adjustment must come through future increases in net exports: Et Δnxt+j > 0.
  67
     In that sense the exercise is similar to the one performed in the business cycle literature, which separates trend
growth from medium frequency ﬂuctuations and focuses exclusively on the latter. It diﬀers from it though, in that
the trends considered here have considerably lower frequency. Evans (2012) proposes a variation that keeps the trend
component. It requires that the ratio of gross assets to gross liabilities be stationary.
  68
     This also implies that the steady state mean ratio of net exports to net foreign assets N X/N A satisﬁes N X/N A =
ρ − 1 < 0. In other words, countries with long run creditor positions (N A > 0) should run trade deﬁcits (N X < 0)
while countries with steady state debtor positions (N A < 0) should run trade surpluses (N X > 0).



                                                           45
As above, this is the standard implication of the intertemporal approach to the current account,
where adjustment is done by quantities. This is the trade channel of adjustment.
       But instead, the adjustment may also come from high expected net foreign portfolio returns:
Et rt+j > 0. This is the valuation channel of adjustment. Such movements in predictable returns can
occur via a depreciation of the domestic currency which induces a predictable wealth transfer from
foreigners to domestic residents. The role of the exchange rate can be illustrated by considering the
case -relevant for the US, the UK and generally advanced economies- where foreign liabilities are
mostly denominated in domestic currency while foreign assets are mostly denominated in foreign
currency. Holding local currency returns constant, a currency depreciation helps stabilize the net
external asset position as it increases the domestic return on foreign assets, an eﬀect that can
be magniﬁed by the degree of leverage of the net foreign asset portfolio. If we consider emerging
markets, external liabilities are likely to be at least partly denominated in foreign currency (dollar
or euro). A domestic currency depreciation might then lead to sizable losses on the net foreign asset
position for these countries and be destabilizing, as in the Asian ﬁnancial crisis of 1997-1998.69


Quantifying the trade and the valuation channels of adjustment. It is possible that some
of today’s ﬂuctuations in the cyclical net foreign asset position come from unexpected changes in
asset prices or net exports. These unexpected changes would be reﬂected simultaneously in the left
and right hand side of equation (48). If valuation changes were mostly unexpected and had a white
noise structure, they would not matter much for the underlying process of external adjustment.
If, on the contrary, they had a predictable component they would be potentially an important
component of the process of international adjustment, just like the trade channel.
       We can decompose the cyclical imbalance nxat into a valuation and a net export component
nxat = nxart + nxaΔnx
                  t   where nxart is the component of nxat that forecasts future returns, while
nxaΔnx
   t   is the component that forecasts future net exports growth. We construct empirical es-
timates of nxart and nxaΔnx
                        t   using a VAR formulation. Speciﬁcally consider the VAR(p) repre-
sentation for the vector (rt+1 , Δnxt+1 , nxat ) . Appropriately stacked, this VAR has a ﬁrst order
companion representation: zt+1 = A zt + t+1 . We construct nxart and nxaΔnx
                                                                         t   as:


                     nxart = βer A (I − ρA)−1 zt ; nxaΔnx
                                                       t   = −eΔnx A (I − ρA)−1 zt


where er (eΔnx ) deﬁnes a vector such that er zt = rt (resp. eΔnx zt = Δnxt ).
  69
    Corsetti and Konstantinou (2012) uses a similar approach to show that transitory shocks are important drivers
of gross asset and liability positions while variations in aggregate consumption are dominated by permanent shocks.



                                                        46
   We can also compute the unconditional decomposition of the variance of nxat :
                                                                                       
                               +∞ j                                   +∞ j
                    cov        j=1 ρ rt+j , nxat           cov        j=1 ρ Δnxt+j , nxat
             1=−                                       −                                        ≡ β r + β nx
                           var (nxat )                                 var (nxat )

   The empirical study of the measure of cyclical imbalances of the United States nxat uncovers
the following stylized facts:

  1. The valuation channel has historically accounted for roughly 30% of the process of adjustment
      of the United States towards its long run solvency constraint. The results are similar for the
      conditional decomposition and the unconditional variance decomposition (β r ).

  2. The capital gains on the net foreign asset position are positively correlated with net exports
      for the United States.

  3. Current imbalances help predict net exports (especially in the medium to long run), returns
      in the net foreign asset position (in the short to medium run) and the exchange rate from
      one quarter onwards, both in and out of sample.

   Writing models compatible with these facts has proved to be a challenging task,as discussed in
the next section.


5.2   Theoretical models and valuation eﬀects

Expected and unexpected valuation eﬀects
   Valuation eﬀects come in two ﬂavors: unpredictable and predictable. The ﬁrst variety does not
create any particular diﬃculty for standard models of international ﬁnance: while we may argue
over what model best characterizes international portfolio holdings, most models from our toolbox
would incorporate in one form or another something akin to a parity condition. Conceptually,
perhaps the simplest way to understand unpredictable valuation terms is by reference to a standard
complete market model. In such a set-up, one can interpret unexpected valuation eﬀects as the
record-keeping of future payments on the contingent claims held by domestic and foreign investors,
payments that implement full risk sharing. Interpreted in this light, the volatility generated by
valuation adjustments could be interpreted as ‘good volatility’ insofar as it reduces the volatility
of marginal utility of consumption and improves welfare.
   Consider for example a symmetric two country two good endowment economy in complete
markets. Imagine the domestic economy is hit by a positive output shock. As is well known (see

                                                            47
for example Chapter 5 of Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1995)), when current realisation of domestic output
is high compared to foreign’s, the domestic economy is running a trade surplus, while the real
exchange rate is depreciating due to the relative abundance of the domestic good. In complete
markets, the home country becomes a net debtor as foreigners hold claims on current and future
domestic output and domestic asset is worth more relative to foreign’s. Hence foreigners realize
an (unexpected) capital gain on their net asset position. So when its trade balance is in surplus,
the domestic economy experiences a valuation loss on its net external asset position. This is the
desired outcome from an eﬃcient risk sharing point of view and these valuation gain and losses
tend to stabilize the external debt dynamics. External liabilities will tend to disappear over time
so that the relative wealth distribution remains stationary. Hence, in that standard set up, there
are potentially strong valuation eﬀects but these are unexpected capital gains and losses on the
net foreign asset position. As such, they do not contribute to the adjustment process described
in equation (48) which is driven by expected gains and losses. This is not to say that it would
be impossible to get expected valuation eﬀects in models with complete markets, but for this to
happen, one would need, for example, models with time variation in the risk premia, such as
external habits models (see Campbell and Cochrane (1999)).
   Conversely, models with incomplete markets do not necessarily generate expected valuation
eﬀects. Pavlova and Rigobon (2012) present a continuous time two-country pure exchange model
with incomplete markets in which stocks and a bond are traded and in which valuation eﬀects
are non existent. There are supply shocks in both countries as well as preference shocks for the
home country good. By assuming log utility, Pavlova and Rigobon (2012) are able to elegantly
obtain closed form solutions and to gain a number of important insights. Interestingly, in their
model, preference shifts can introduce enough heterogeneity to generate non-zero bond holdings
in equilibrium. They show that in the absence of intertemporal hedging –which comes from the
log preference speciﬁcation, the net foreign asset position is exactly equal to the present value of
future trade deﬁcit. This result reﬂects the absence of time varying risk premia in their incomplete
asset market model. In log linearized models with more general utility speciﬁcations and incom-
plete markets such as for example Tille and van Wincoop (2010) or Evans and Hnatkovska (2012)
similar results have been obtained as a ﬁrst order approximation around the deterministic steady
state. More generally, as long as the Euler condition of the model implies expected returns are
equalized at the ﬁrst order around the non stochastic steady state, expected valuation eﬀects can
only be of second or higher order, a point noted by Devereux and Sutherland (2010). Expected
valuation eﬀects will therefore generally not be quantitatively large.in this class of models, as they


                                                 48
can only reﬂect changes in second or higher order moments. As a result, and despite signiﬁcant
methodological advances made by Devereux and Sutherland (2011) and Tille and van Wincoop
(2010), the recent microfounded literature on optimal portfolios in DSGE models of the open econ-
omy surveyed in Coeurdacier and Rey (2013) has not, so far, led to frameworks in which expected
gains and losses on net foreign asset positions can be substantial.

   Modelling expected valuation eﬀects
   By contrast, the predictable valuation eﬀects that are relevant for the US adjustment along
its long run solvency constraint require large deviations from standard arbitrage conditions. Some
limited progress has been made toward modeling predictable valuation eﬀects with a revival of
the older portfolio-balance literature associated with the work of Dale Henderson, Pentti Kouri, or
the late Bill Branson. Blanchard et al. (2005) provides a very elegant presentation of the Kouri
portfolio balance model and explores its implications for the joint dynamics of the US current
account and the dollar. In this literature, a key assumption is imperfect asset substitutability. A
negative shock to the trade balance of the United States, leads to a depreciation of the US dollar.
But this immediate unexpected depreciation does not fully oﬀset the shock. If it did, there would
be excess demand for US assets since the supply of assets is assumed inelastic and in dollar terms
the value of the rest of the world’s wealth rises. Instead, there is a less than oﬀsetting drop in
the dollar and foreigner’s demand for US assets is kept in check by a further expected depreciation
of the dollar towards its long run steady state value. The US keeps on accumulating more debt
along the depreciation path so that the long run level of the dollar will be below that which
would have been needed to oﬀset the negative shock at once. If in contrast assets were perfect
substitutes then the exchange rate would have immediately jumped to oﬀset the negative shock
fully. The imperfect substitutatibility of assets implies a slow adjsutment of the portfolios together
with expected exchange rate changes. Very interestingly the model does therefore predict that
foreigners will be purchasing US dollar assets while expecting a dollar depreciation. The model
however has the drawback of assuming exogenous interest rates and ad hoc demand functions for
ﬁnancial assets. Microfoundations and general equilibrium eﬀects tend to mute portfolio balance
eﬀects. For example, Backus and Kehoe (1989) have shown in the context of sterilized interventions
on foreign exchange markets that if a general equilibrium setting is adopted, portfolio balance eﬀects
are not present any longer. Changes in the relative supplies of bonds do not matter if one takes
into account the ensuing changes in monetary and ﬁscal variables. As Woodford (2012) recently
remarked in his Jackson Hole address assessing the eﬀectiveness of open market purchases, in most


                                                 49
of our microfounded general equilibrium models, a Modigliani -Miller irrelevance results holds (see
Wallace (1981)). When assets are valued “only for their pecuniary returns” (they may not be perfect
substitutes from the standpoint of investors, owing to diﬀerent risk characteristics, but not for any
other reason) and when there are no limits to arbitrage, one of the core predictions of portfolio
balance models, which is that changing the relative supply of assets has an eﬀect on prices, goes
away. This is because the market price of any asset is taken to be the present value of returns. Since
changing the relative supplies of assets should not change the real quantity of resources available for
consumption in each state of the world, the representative household’s marginal utility of income
in diﬀerent states of the world should not change. Hence the pricing kernel should not change, and
the market price of a given asset should not change, either (see Woodford (2012) p61).
    The open economy literature has so far not managed to come up with a new generation of
portfolio balance models microfounded and embedded in a general equilibrium set up. In the
context of closed economies some recent papers have introduced strong frictions on asset markets
in order to rationalize the eﬀect of net supply changes on prices. Greenwood and Vayanos (2008)
for example build on the idea of “preferred habitat” for bond market investors, a very strong form
of non-substitutatility of assets, to study the eﬀect of open market interventions. A similar research
agenda could be pursued in the open economy.


6    The International Monetary and Financial System

The world banker balance sheet of the US generates excess returns in normal times. But, as
explained in Gourinchas et al. (2010), this “exorbitant privilege” has a counterparty in times of
ﬁnancial turmoil. The US as the center country of the international monetary system provides
insurance to the rest of the world. During a global crisis, there is a massive wealth transfer from
the US to the rest of the world. This insurance transfer occurs at a time where the marginal
utility of consumption is high. This is the “exorbitant duty”. It is implemented very naturally
by a portfolio long in risky assets -whose value goes down dramatically in crisis times- and short
on government debt -whose value remains relatively stable in crisis times-. This is precisely the
external portfolio of the US, issuer of the safe asset, the reserve currency, which is held in large
quantities abroad. Hence Gourinchas et al. (2010) argues that the US plays the role of a global
insurer. This interpretation of the role of the centre country in the international monetary system
is new. Traditional views have focused on the network externality in the use of the centre country’s
currency as a medium of exchange: the dollar is used in international transactions because the sheer


                                                  50
size of the US economy in the world makes it more likely that other agents use it and therefore
dollar transaction costs are low (see for example Krugman (1980)).
      The economic intuition of the global insurance role of the US can be simply captured within a
CCAPM framework70 . If we denote the net foreign asset position of of the US as N At = At − Lt ,
the external solvency constraint (in a world with no government consumption nor investment) is
                           
                         a
given by N At+1 = 1 + rt+1    At − (1 + rt+1
                                         l )L + Y − C . where r a
                                              t    t   t
                                                                          l
                                                                 t+1 and rt+1 are the returns on

gross external assets and liabilities.
      Let us call rt the risk free rate of interest, we can then use the no arbitrage condition of a
representative consumer model to get
                                                                                                                      
                            βu (Ct+1 )                  βu (Ct+1 )                             βu (Ct+1 )          
         (1 + rt ) Et                         = Et                   (1 + rta )       = Et                     1 + r l
                                                                                                                               =1
                             u (Ct )                     u (Ct )                                u (Ct )           t



      Multiplying the external constraint through by the pricing kernel and taking expectation:


                                              βu (Ct+1 )                    Yt − C t .
                                    Et                   N At+1 = At − Lt +
                                               u (Ct )                        1 + rt

which is equivalent to

                                                                                             βu (Ct+1 )
                Et (N At+1 ) = (1 + rt ) N At + Yt − Ct − (1 + rt ) covt                                 , N At+1
                                                                                              u (Ct )

      Hence, by having a net external position which comoves negatively with the stochastic discount
factor (i.e .which decreases when the marginal utility of consumption is high), the US is able to
increase the expected return on its net foreign asset position (this is the ”exorbitant privilege”).
As a mirror image, the rest of the world sees its return on its net foreign asset position decreased
due to the hedge provided by the centre country. Indeed during the 2007-2009 global ﬁnancial
crisis, the US wealth transfer to the rest of the world amounted to about $2 trillion. Gourinchas
et al. (2012) present some empirical evidence on the geographical distribution of gains and losses.
Interestingly during that period, some regional insurers such as Switzerland and the euro area also
provided wealth transfers to the rest of the world alongside the US, albeit on a much smaller scale.
      Gourinchas et al. (2010) provides a theoretical model of the role of the US as the global insurer.
The model features both business cycle and global risk. The US portfolio, endogenously determined,
is long equity and short in safe assets. This portfolio reﬂects an assumed asymmetry in risk aversion
between the US and the Rest of the World (more risk averse).71 One way of microfounding this
 70
      We are very grateful to Maury Obstfeld for this insight.
 71
      Stepanchuk and Tsyrennikov (2011) also model the US as a less risk averse economy and use global solution


                                                                   51
asymmetry in risk aversion is provided by Maggiori (2011) who models a world in which ﬁnancial
development is unequal. The country whose ﬁnancial intermediaries are less constrained will behave
in the aggregate as if it were less risk averse. Another possible microfoundation can be found in
Mendoza et al. (2009), where it is a better ability to share idiosyncratic risk within the US, which
enables the US to be long in risky assets internationally. Focusing on international bond markets,
Hassan (forth) emphasizes diﬀerences in country sizes to explain diﬀerences in real rates of returns.
In his model, bonds of larger economies (in particular the US) are better hedges because they insure
against shocks that aﬀect a larger fraction of the world economy.
    This interpretation of the workings of the International Monetary System, where the US is a
global insurer, puts center stage the ability of the US to issue safe assets (government bonds).
Those are backed by the ﬁscal capacity of the United States. During times of global crisis, US
government bonds are the only assets able to provide insurance on a massive scale (the Swiss bond
market can also be considered a safe haven but its sheer size precludes it from being the world
insurer). This in turn suggests the emergence of a modern version of the Triﬃn dilemma. In the
1960s, Robert Triﬃn identiﬁed a fundamental weakness in the Bretton Woods institutions. Under
that system, the currencies of member countries could be exchanged at a ﬁxed rate against the
dollar while the value of the dollar was ﬁxed against gold at $ 35/oz. Triﬃn observed that global
liquidity demand grows with the global economy. As the rest of the world grew, so did the stock
of dollars held abroad. In the meantime, however, the United States’ gold stocks (backing the
dollars held abroad) remained more or less constant. Maintaining the gold value of the dollar had
to become increasingly diﬃcult, and the dollar crisis of the dollar unavoidable. Ten years before
the end of the Bretton Woods system, Triﬃn had thus predicted its collapse.The gold value of the
dollar is no longer ﬁxed, but we still live in a Triﬃn style world. There is a growing asymmetry
between the ﬁscal capacity of the United States (the ”backing” of U.S. Treasury bills) and the stock
of reserve assets held abroad, in other words, the U.S.’s external debt, thus threatening the ability
of the US to act as a world insurer (see Farhi et al. (2011) and Obstfeld (2011)).


7    Conclusions

The consequences of these dramatic changes in the landscape of international ﬁnance have only
started to be investigated recently. A large part of the economics profession, as well as international
organizations (see for example Fischer (1997)) often see ﬁnancial integration as an ideal towards
methods to solve for optimal portfolios under incomplete markets.



                                                       52
which economies should aspire. The belief was that by moving towards a more integrated world,
the international economy would reap many of the beneﬁts from better risk sharing. The recent
crisis however, having shaken advanced economies ﬁnancial systems more deeply than emerging
markets’ has altered this view and put at the forefront the dangers of contagion inherent to large
cross-border holdings. It has become more obvious that current accounts deﬁcits or surpluses,
linked to net capital ﬂows, miss important dimensions of the process of international adjustment
of countries and of their ﬁnancial fragility in crisis times.72 After all, the euro area was running a
balanced current account vis-a-vis the US and yet it was deeply aﬀected by the US ﬁnancial crisis
of 2007-8. The properties of the international balance sheet of countries determine how diﬀerent
shocks propagate across countries and how countries adjust. There is a clear need for a deeper
analysis of the international ﬁnancial landscape.




 72
      See Obstfeld (2012) for a recent careful and nuanced discussion of the role of current accounts.


                                                           53
                               Figure 1: Global Imbalances: Current Accounts.
                     % of World GDP

                      2.50
                                                     Asian Crisis          Financial Crisis
                      2.00

                      1.50

                      1.00

                      0.50

                      0.00

                     -0.50

                     -1.00

                     -1.50

                     -2.00
                             1980     1984    1988     1992         1996      2000      2004     2008   2012
                                      U.S.                                  Europe
                                      Japan                                 Oil Producers
                                      Emerging Asia ex-China                China

Notes: Oil Producers: Bahrein, Canada, Kuweit, Iran, Lybia, Nigeria, Norway, Mexico, Oman, Russia, Venezuela,
Saudi Arabia; Emerging Asia ex-China: Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand.
Europe: European Union. Source: IMF World Economic Outlook


                             Figure 2: Global Imbalances: World Interest Rates.
                     percent
                      7
                      6
                      5
                      4
                      3
                      2
                      1
                      0
                     -1
                     -2
                     -3
                       1980 1984 1988 1992 1996 2000 2004 2008
                                world-short real               US-long real                   10-year TIPS


Notes: world-short real: ex-post 3-month real interest rate for the G-7 countries (GDP weighted). US-long real: 10
year yield on U.S. Treasuries minus 10-year expected inﬂation. 10-year TIPS: yield on inﬂation indexed 10-year
Treasuries. Source: Global Financial Database, IMF International Statistics, OECD Economic Outlook, Survey of
Professional Forecasters


                                                               54
        Figure 3: Average productivity growth and capital inﬂows between 1980 and 2000.



                                  15
                                                               MOZ
                                                                                                         COG



                                                                        TZA
                                               10
                 Capital Inflows (percent of GDP)

                                                                                 MLI
                                                                                 SEN             MWI
                                                                             NER
                                                          TGO         MDG
                                                                       CIV
                                                                        HND     BOL
                                                                              CRI BEN        LKA
                                                                         PER JAM       NPL                          CYP
                                      5




                                                                                           GHA    TUN CHL
                                                         RWA                  ECU GTM
                                                                             CMR
                                                                                    PRY       DOM
                                                                         JOR           KEN
                                                                                 PNG MAR UGA         HTI  PAKTHA
                                                                            MEXPHLPAN      FJI ISR
                                                                                         ARG                  MUS
                                                                                       COL
                                                                                     BRA
                                                                           SLVETH     TUR      IDN    MYSIND
                                                                                                BGD URY
                                                                            TTO                         EGY
                                                                              AGO
                            0




                                                                     NGA        ZAF        GAB SYR              KOR
                                                                                  IRN                             CHN

                                                                       VEN
                                                                                                            BWA
                                                                                                             SGP
                                                                                                           HKG
                 −5




                                                                                                                     TWN
                                  −10




                                                    −4           −2               0              2              4          6
                                                                               Productivity Growth (%)


Source: Gourinchas and Jeanne (forth.). Sample of 68 developing economies




             Figure 4: G-7 Cross Border Assets and Liabilities (percent of world GDP)
            "


            "


            "


            "


             "


               "
                                        
                                                                                   

Source: Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007a) updated to 2010. Gross external assets and liabilities, scaled by world
GDP.




                                                                                       55
                                          Figure 5: Net Risky Position. percent of GDP
                             !

                             !

                               !

                            !

                            !

                            !

                            !
                                                                                           
                                                                                     


Source: Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007a) updated to 2010. Net risky position deﬁned as equity and direct
investment assets, minus equity and direct investment liabilities. percent of GDP


Figure 6: Cumulated Current Account and Net Foreign Asset Position, US, UK, Germany and
Japan, 1970-2010. Percent of GDP

     &                                                                             %
     &                                                                             %
      &
                                                                                      %
     &
                                                                                       %
     &
                                                                                  %
     &
                                                                                  %
     &
     &                                                                        %

      &                                                                        %
             #! #! #!" #" #"  ## ## ##"                   "  "  " ! "! "! "" "" ""!   
                                                                                       

                               (a) United States                                                            (b) United Kingdom

     %                                                                             !&
     %                                                                              &
     %
                                                                                      &
     %
     %                                                                             &
     %                                                                             &
     %                                                                             &
     %
                                                                                      &
     %
      %                                                                              &
      %                                                                         &
            "  "  " ! "! "! "" "" ""!                   #! #! #!" #" #"  ## ## ##"    
                                                                                       

                                  (c) Germany                                                                         (d) Japan
Source: Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007a) updated to 2010.




                                                                                 56
Figure 7: Cumulated Current Account and Net Foreign Asset Position, Brazil, Russia, India and
China, 1970-2010. Percent of GDP
      &                                                                              &

     &                                                                            &
                                                                                      &
     &
                                                                                      &
     &
                                                                                      &
     &
                                                                                      &
     &
                                                                                       &
      &                                                                        &
     !&                                                                        &
             #! #! #!" #" #"  ## ## ##"                   #! #! #!" #" #"  ## ## ##"    
                                                                                       

                                      (a) Brazil                                                                   (b) Russia

      &                                                                             %
      &
                                                                                      %
     &
                                                                                      %
     &
     &                                                                            %
     &
                                                                                       %
     &
                                                                                  %
     &
     &                                                                        %
             #! #! #!" #" #"  ## ## ##"                   "  "  " ! "! "! "" "" ""!   
                                                                                       

                                      (c) India                                                                       (d) China
Source: Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007a) updated to 2010.



                                                        Figure 8: The Metzler diagram

                                      r
                                                                                                                        W            1−δ
                                                                                                                        Y
                                                                                                                              =    g+ρ+θ−r
                                                                  B > 0; CA > 0




                                 rss
                                  a




                                                                  B < 0; CA < 0
                                                                                                                        K          δ
                                                                                                                        Y
                                                                                                                            =      r



                                                                                                             W/Y , K/Y


                                                                                 57
Figure 9: Net portfolio equity and direct investment (percent of GDP) and net portfolio debt and
other assets (percent GDP).



               

               

               

               

                 

               

               

               

               

               
                    ! ! ! ! !  ! ! !  !  !     !! !!     
                                                             


Source: Gourinchas et al. (2010).




                                                                   58
                Figure 10: U.S. Gross Asset and Liabilities, by asset class, 1952-2012.
                 


                 


                 


                  "


                   


                  


                  


                   
                    # #  #  #  # " #! #!  #" #" #"" ## ##    " 
                                                                



                                            (a) Gross Assets (percent of GDP)
                  


                 


                 


                 


                  "


                   


                  


                  


                   
                    # #  #  #  # " #! #!  #" #" #"" ## ##    " 
                                                           



                                         (b) Gross Liabilities (percent of GDP)
Source: Gourinchas et al. (2010)




                                                                59
                                                                         Period
                Region                                  1980-1996      1997-2006      2007-2012
                United States                                 -0.44          -1.17          -0.86
                Japan                                          0.32           0.36           0.26
                European Union                                -0.10           0.04          -0.07
                Oil producers                                 -0.06           0.28           0.57
                China                                          0.01           0.15           0.49
                Emerging Asia ex-China                        -0.01           0.19           0.26
                Latin American and Caribbean                  -0.13          -0.10          -0.07
                Rest of the World                             -0.08          -0.02          -0.14

Source: IMF World Economic Outlook, April 2012. Oil producers consists of Canada, Norway, Mexico, Russia,
Venezuela, Saudi Arabia, Iran, Kuweit, Libya, Oman and Bahrein. Emerging Asia ex-China consists of Taiwan,
Korea, Malaysia, Indonesia, Philippines, Singapore and Thailand.

                      Table 1: Current Account Balances, fraction of world GDP.

 Period         US        UK        Ireland    Germany Japan Brazil               Russia    China      India     Switzerland
                                                    —valuations—
 1971-1980      0.84%     1.29%     3.12%      0.67%      1.3%    0.97%           N/A       0.00%     0.44%      10.74%
 1981-1990      0.93%     3.59%     3.73%      0.75%      0.83% 2.02%             N/A       1.47%     0.98%      9.76%
 1991-2000      1.79%     4.71%     18.67%     1.42%      2.03% 2.11%             4.26%     2.95%     1.16%      9.39%
 2001-2010      4.75%     7.57%     13.29%     3.91%      2.67% 8.38%             13.71%    2.22%     6.08%      11.84%
                                                  —current accounts—
 1971-1980      0.40%     1.16%     5.75%      1.00%      1.15% 5.74%             N/A       0.00%     0.82%      2.16%
 1981-1990      1.95%     2.16%     4.23%      2.71%      2.32% 2.32%             N/A       1.52%     1.68%      3.72%
 1991-2000      2.12%     2.21%     0.48%      1.48%      2.26% 2.05%             9.02%     1.94%     1.13%      8.55%
 2001-2010      4.56%     2.24%     2.37%      4.50%      3.39% 1.67%             7.94%     5.43%     1.41%      10.96%
The table reports the average valuation and current account components, as a share of GDP,   for each sub period,
                                                                                        N A −N At−1 −CAt 
where the average valuation and current account components are deﬁned as V A = 1/T t  t GDP                  and
             CAt 
                                                                                                     t

CA = 1/T t  GDPt .

                  Table 2: Valuations and Current Accounts, (average p.a., % GDP)

                                                                   Period
                                                                   1952:1-2011:4 1952:1-1972:4           1973:1-2011:4
 Excess returns                                                    ra − rl        ra − rl                ra − rl
 (a) OCt+1 allocated to ﬂows                                       1.6%           0.8%                   2.0%
 (b) OCt+1 allocated to ﬂows (except for FDI)                      2.1%           0.8%                   2.8%
 (c) OCt+1 allocated to valuations                                 2.7%           0.8%                   3.8%
                                                                   Previous estimates
 (d) Initial Gourinchas and Rey (2007a) on 1952-2004               2.1%
 (e) Curcuru et al. (2008b) on 1994-2005                           0.72%
 (f) Forbes (2010) on 2002-2008                                    6.9%
 (g) Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2009) on 1980-2004                  3.9%
 (h) Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2005) on 1983-2003                        3.1%

     Table 3: Various Estimates of the Excess Returns on the U.S. Net Foreign Asset Position


                                                        60
References
Adam, Klaus, Pei Kuang, and Albert Marcet, “House Price Booms and the Current Ac-
 count,” in “NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2011, Volume 26,” National Bureau of Economic
 Research, 2011, pp. 77–122.

Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath, “Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle Is the
 Trend,” Journal of Political Economy, February 2007, 115 (1), 69–102.

   and Manuel Amador, “Growth in the Shadow of Expropriation,” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2011, 126 (2), 651–697.

Aiyagari, Rao, “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Savings,” Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 1994, 109, 659–684.

Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych, “Why Doesn’t Capital
 Flow from Rich to Poor Countries? An Empirical Investigation,” The Review of Economics and
 Statistics, May 2008, 90 (2), 347–368.

  , , and , “Sovereigns, Upstream Capital Flows and Global Imbalances,” NBER Working
  Papers 17396 Aug 2011.

Angeletos, George-Marios and Vasia Panousi, “Financial integration, entrepreneurial risk
 and global dynamics,” Journal of Economic Theory, May 2011, 146 (3), 863–896.

Antràs, Pol and Ricardo J. Caballero, “Trade and Capital Flows: A Financial Frictions
 Perspective,” Journal of Political Economy, 08 2009, 117 (4), 701–744.

Bacchetta, Philippe and Kenza Benhima, “The Demand for Liquid Assets, Corporate Saving,
 and Global Imbalances,” Working Paper University of Lausanne December 2012.

  ,  , and Yannick Kalantzis, “Capital Controls with International Reserve Accumulation:
  Can this Be Optimal?,” CEPR Discussion Papers 8753 2012.

Backus, David K and Patrick J Kehoe, “On the denomination of government debt: a critique
 of the portfolio balance approach,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 1989, 23 (3), 359–376.

Bergin, Paul and Steven Sheﬀrin, “Interest Rates, Exchange Rates and Present Value Models
 of the Current Account,” Economic Journal, 2000, 110, 535–58.

Bernanke, Ben, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deﬁcit,” Sandridge
 Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, Virginia, Federal Reserve Board March
 2005.

  , “Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble,” Annual Meeting of the American Economic Asso-
  ciation Meeting, Atlanta, GA, Federal Reserve Board January 2010.

  , “International capital ﬂows and the returns to safe assets in the United States 2003-2007,”
  Financial Stability Review, February 2011, (15), 13–26.

Bertaut, Carol C. and Ralph W. Tryon, “Monthly estimates of U.S. cross-border securities
 positions,” International Finance Discussion Papers 910, Board of Governors of the Federal
 Reserve System (U.S.) 2007.



                                              61
Bewley, Truman, “Stationary Monetary Equilibrium with a Continuum of Independently Fluc-
 tuating Consumers,” in W. Hildenbrand and A. Mas-Colell, eds., Contributions to Mathematical
 Economics in Honor of Gerard Debreu, North Holland, 1987, pp. 79–102.

Blanchard, Olivier J., “Debt, Deﬁcits, and Finite Horizons,” Journal of Political Economy, 1985,
  93, 223–47.

   and Francesco Giavazzi, “Current Account Deﬁcits in the Euro Area: The End of the
  Feldstein Horioka Puzzle?,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2002, 33 (2), 147–210.

   and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, “Global Imbalances: In Midstream?,” Staﬀ Position Note
  2009/29, International Monetary Fund 2009.

  and Stanley Fischer, Lectures on Macroeconomics number 0262022834. In ‘MIT Press Books.’,
  The MIT Press, 1989.

  , Francesco Giavazzi, and Filipa Sá, “International Investors, the U.S. Current Account,
  and the Dollar,” in “Brookings Papers on Economic Activity” Spring 2005, pp. 1–65.

Bruno, Michael, “Trade, Growth and Capital,” Working papers 65, Massachusetts Institute of
 Technology (MIT), Department of Economics November 1970.

Buera, Francisco Javier and Yongseok Shin, “Productivity Growth and Capital Flows: The
 Dynamics of Reforms,” NBER Working Papers 15268, National Bureau of Economic Research,
 Inc 2009.

Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, “An Equilibrium
 Model of “Global Imbalances” and Low Interest Rates,” American Economic Review, March 2008,
 98 (1), 358–93.

  , , and , “Financial Crash, Commodity Prices and Global Imbalances,” Brookings Papers
  on Economic Activity, 2008, 2, 1–55.

Campbell, John and John Cochrane, “By Force of Habit: A consumption-Based Explanation
 of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, April 1999, 107 (2), 205–51.

Caselli, Francesco, “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Diﬀerences,” in Philippe Aghion and
 Steven Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, 1 ed., Vol. 1, Part A, Elsevier, 2005,
 chapter 09, pp. 679–741.

   and James Feyrer, “The Marginal Product of Capital,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May
  2007, 122 (2), 535–568.

Cass, David, “Optimum Growth in an Aggregative Model of Capital Accumulation,” The Review
 of Economic Studies, 1965, 32 (3), pp. 233–240.

Chinn, Menzie D. and Eswar S. Prasad, “Medium-term determinants of current accounts
 in industrial and developing countries: an empirical exploration,” Journal of International Eco-
 nomics, January 2003, 59 (1), 47–76.

  and Hiro Ito, “Current account balances, ﬁnancial development and institutions: Assaying the
  world ‘saving glut’,” Journal of International Money and Finance, June 2007, 26 (4), 546–569.

   and   , “A New Measure of Financial Openness,” Journal of Comparative Policy Analysis,
  September 2008, 10 (3), 309–22.

                                               62
Coeurdacier, Nicolas and Hélène Rey, “Home Bias in Open economy Financial Macroeco-
 nomics,” The Journal of Economic Literature, 2013, 51 (1), 63–115.

  , Hélène Rey, and Pablo Winant, “Financial Integration in a Risky World,” Technical Report
  December 2013. mimeo SciencesPo.

  , Stéphane Guibaud, and Keyu Jin, “Credit Constraints and Growth in a Global Economy,”
  mimeo, SciencesPo July 2012.

Corneli, Flavia, “The Saving Glut Explanation of Global Imbalances: the Role of Underinvest-
 ment,” Economics Working Papers ECO2009/41, European University Institute 2009.

Corsetti, Giancarlo and Panagiotis T. Konstantinou, “What Drives US Foreign Borrowing?
 Evidence on the External Adjustment to Transitory and Permanent Shocks,” American Economic
 Review, April 2012, 102 (2), 1062–92.

  , Philippe Martin, and Paolo Pesenti, “Varieties and the Transfer Problem: The Extensive
  Margin of Current Account Adjustment,” Journal of International Economics, forth.

Curcuru, Stephanie E., Charles P. Thomas, and Francis E. Warnock, “Current Account
 Sustainability and Relative Reliability,” NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics, 2008,
 5 (1), 67–109.

  , , and , “On returns diﬀerentials,” Journal of International Money and Finance, September
  2013, 36, 1 – 25.

  , Tomas Dvorak, and Francis E. Warnock, “Cross-border returns diﬀerentials,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, November 2008, 123 (4), 1495–1530.

Despres, Emile, Charles Kindleberger, and Walter Salant, “The Dollar and World Liquid-
 ity: A Minority View,” The Economist, February 5 1966, 218 (5).

Devereux, Michael B. and Alan Sutherland, “Valuation eﬀects and the dynamics of net
 external assets,” Journal of International Economics, January 2010, 80 (1), 129–143.

   and , “Country Portfolios In Open Economy Macro Models,” Journal of the European Eco-
  nomic Association, 04 2011, 9 (2), 337–369.

Domeij, David and Martin Flodén, “Population Aging And International Capital Flows,”
 International Economic Review, 08 2006, 47 (3), 1013–1032.

Dooley, Michael, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter M. Garber, “The revived Bretton
 Woods system,” International Journal of Finance & Economics, 2004, 9 (4), 307–313.

  , , and , “The Revived Bretton Woods System: The Eﬀects of Periphery Intervention and
  Reserve Management on Interest Rates & Exchange Rates in Center Countries,” NBER Working
  Papers 10332, National Bureau of Economic Research March 2004.

Engel, Charles and John Rogers, “The U.S. Current Account Deﬁcit and the Expected Share
 of World Output,” Journal of Monetary Economics, July 2006, 53, 1063–1093.

Evans, Martin D. D., “International Capital Flows and Debt Dynamics,” IMF Working Papers
 12/175, International Monetary Fund July 2012.



                                             63
Evans, Martin D.D. and Viktoria Hnatkovska, “A Method for Solving General Equilibrium
 Models with Incomplete Markets and Many Financial Assets,” Journal of Economic Dynamics
 and Control, 2012, 36 (12), 1909–1930.

Farhi, Emmanuel, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Hélène Rey, Reforming the Interna-
  tional Monetary System, CEPR, 2011.

Faruqee, Hamid, Douglas Laxton, Dirk Muir, and Paolo Pesenti, “Smooth Landing or
  Crash? Model-Based Scenarios of Global Current Account Rebalancing,” in Richard Clarida,
  ed., G-7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, Chicago: University of
  Chicago Press, 2007, pp. 377–456.

Feldstein, Martin and Charles Horioka, “Domestic Saving and International Capital Flows,”
  Economic Journal, June 1980, 90 (358), 314–29.

Ferrero, Andrea, “A structural decomposition of the U.S. trade balance: Productivity, demo-
  graphics and ﬁscal policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2010, 57 (4), 478–490.

  , “House price booms, current account deﬁcits, and low interest rates,” Staﬀ Reports 541, Federal
  Reserve Bank of New York 2012.

Fischer, Stanley, “Capital Account Liberalization and the Role of the IMF,” presented at the
  seminar “Asia and the IMF”, Hong-Kong, China, September 19, IMF 1997.

Fogli, Alessandra and Fabrizio Perri, “The Great Moderation and the U.S. External Imbal-
  ance,” Monetary and Economic Studies, December 2006, 24 (S1), 209–225.

Forbes, Kristin J., “Why do foreigners invest in the United States?,” Journal of International
  Economics, January 2010, 80 (1), 3–21.

Gertler, Mark, “Government debt and social security in a life-cycle economy,” Carnegie-Rochester
 Conference Series on Public Policy, June 1999, 50 (1), 61–110.

Ghironi, Fabio, Talan B. Iscan, and Alessandro Rebucci, “Net foreign asset positions
 and consumption dynamics in the international economy,” Journal of International Money and
 Finance, December 2008, 27 (8), 1337–1359.

Giscard d’Estaing, Valery, “Le Figaro [cited by Raymond Aron],” Les Articles du Figaro, Febru-
 ary 16, 1965, p. 1475.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Hélène Rey, “From World Banker to World Venture Capital-
 ist: US External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege,” in Richard Clarida, ed., G-7 Current
 Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, University of Chicago Press Chicago 2007,
 pp. 11–55.

   and    , “International Financial Adjustment,” Journal of Political Economy, August 2007,
  pp. 665–703.

   and Olivier Jeanne, “The Elusive Gains From International Financial Integration,” Review
  of Economic Studies, 2006, 73 (3), 715–741.

   and , “Capital Flows to Developing Countries: The Allocation Puzzle,” Review of Economic
  Studies, forth.



                                                64
  , Hélène Rey, and Kai Truempler, “The ﬁnancial crisis and the geography of wealth trans-
  fers,” Journal of International Economics, 2012, 88 (2), 266 – 283.

  , , and Nicolas Govillot, “Exorbitant Privilege and Exorbitant Duty,” mimeo, UC Berkeley
  2010.

Greenwood, Robin and Dimitri Vayanos, “Bond Supply and Excess Bond Returns,” NBER
 Working Papers 13806, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc February 2008.

Gruber, Joseph W. and Steven B. Kamin, “Do Diﬀerences in Financial Development Explain
 the Global Pattern of Current Account Imbalances?,” Review of International Economics, 09
 2009, 17 (4), 667–688.

Hall, Robert and Charles Jones, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
 Per Worker than Others?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114 (1), 83–116.

Hamada, Koichi, “Optimal Capital Accumulation by an Economy Facing an International Capital
 Market,” Journal of Political Economy, 1969, 77 (4), pp. 684–697.

Hassan, Tarek A., “Country Size, Currency Unions, and International Asset Returns,” Journal
 of Finance, forth.

Hume, David, Political Discourses, Edinburgh: Printed by R. Fleming, for A. Kincaid and A.
 Donaldson, 1752.

Jeanne, Olivier, “Capital Account Policies and the Real Exchange Rate,” in “NBER International
  Seminar on Macroeconomics 2012,” National Bureau of Economic Research, March 2012.

   and Romain Rancière, “The Optimal Level of International Reserves For Emerging Market
  Countries: A New Formula and Some Applications,” Economic Journal, 09 2011, 121 (555),
  905–930.

Jin, Keyu, “Industrial Structure and Capital Flows,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (5),
  2111–46.

Kindleberger, Charles, “Balance of Payments Deﬁcits and the International Market for Liquid-
 ity,” Essays in International Finance, May 1965, 46.

Koopmans, Tjalling, “On the Concept of Optimal Economic Growth,” in “(Study Week on the)
 Econometric Approach to Development Planning” North-Holland Publishing Co. Amsterdam
 1965, pp. pp. 225–87.

Kraay, Aart and Jaume Ventura, “Current Accounts in Debtor and Creditor Countries,”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2000, 115 (4), 1137–66.

Krugman, Paul, ““Vehicle Currencies and the Structure of International Exchange”,” Journal of
 Money, Credit and Banking, August 1980, 12 (3), 513–526.

Kubelec, Chris and Filipa Sá, “The geographical composition of national external balance
 sheets: 1980-2005,” working papers 384, Bank of England 2010.

Lane, Philip R., “Financial Globalisation and the Crisis,” BIS Working Papers 397, Bank for
  International Settlements December 2012.



                                             65
   and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, “The External Wealth of Nations: Measures of Foreign
  Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Countries,” Journal of International Eco-
  nomics, December 2001, 55, 263–94.

   and , “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign
  Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004,” Journal of International Economics, November 2007, 73 (2),
  223–250.

   and , “A Global Perspective on External Positions,” in Richard Clarida, ed., G-7 Current
  Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 2007.

   and , “Where did all the borrowing go? A forensic analysis of the U.S. external position,”
  Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, June 2009, 23 (2), 177–199.

  and Jay C. Shambaugh, “Financial Exchange Rates and International Currency Exposures,”
  American Economic Review, March 2010, 100 (1), 518–40.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr., “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?,” American
 Economic Review, 1990, 80, 92–96.

Machlup, F., International trade and the national income multiplier, Blakiston, 1943.

Maggiori, Matteo, “Financial Intermediation, International Risk Sharing and Reserve Curren-
 cies,” mimeo, Haas School of Business, November 2011.

Meade, J.E., The Theory of International Economic Policy - the balance of payments, Oxford
 University Press, 1951.

Meissner, Christopher M. and Alan M. Taylor, “Losing our marbles in the new century?:
 the great rebalancing in historical perspective,” in “Global Imbalances and the Evolving World
 Economy” J.S. Little Boston, Mass: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 2008.

Mendoza, Enrique G., Vincenzo Quadrini, and José-Vı́ctor Rı́os-Rull, “Financial Inte-
 gration, Financial Development, and Global Imbalances,” Journal of Political Economy, 06 2009,
 117 (3), 371–416.

Merton, Robert, “Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a Continuous Time Model,”
 Journal of Economic Theory, 1971, 3, 373–413. and erratum, Journal of Economic Theory, 6, pp
 213-214, (1973).

Metzler, Lloyd A., “The process of International Adjustment under Conditions of Full Employ-
 ment. A Keynesian View,” in Richard Caves and Harry G. Johnson, eds., Readings in Interna-
 tional Economics, Richard D. Irwin, Homewood, IL 1960, pp. 465–486.

Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria, Francesco Strobbe, and Natalia Tamirisa, “Bilateral Finan-
 cial Linkages and Global Imbalances: A View on The Eve of the Financial Crisis,” Discussion
 Paper 8173, CEPR 2010.

Mundell, Robert A., International Economics, New York: Macmillan Company, 1968.

Nason, James M. and John H. Rogers, “The present-value model of the current account has
 been rejected: round up the usual suspects,” Journal of International Economics, January 2006,
 68, 159–187.



                                              66
Obstfeld, Maurice, “International Liquidity: The Fiscal Dimension,” Bank of Japan Lecture,
 Monetary and Economic Studies, November 2011.

  , “Does the Current Account Still Matter?,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceed-
  ings, 2012, 102 (3), 1–23. Richard T. Ely Lecture.

   and Alan Taylor, Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis, and Growth, UK: Cambridge
  University Press, 2004.

   and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, “The Intertemporal Approach to the Current Account,” in Gene M.
  Grossman and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, eds., Handbook of International Economics, North-Holland Am-
  sterdam 1995, pp. 1731–99.

   and    , Foundations of International Macroeconomics, Cambridge: MIT Press, 1996.

   and , “The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?,”
  in Ben Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, eds., N.B.E.R. Macroeconomics Annual, MIT Press Cam-
  bridge MA 2000, pp. 73–103.

   and , “Global Current Account Imbalances and Exchange Rate Adjustments,” in “Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity” Spring 2005.

Pavlova, Anna and Roberto Rigobon, “Equilibrium Portfolios and External Adjustment under
 Incomplete Markets,” mimeo, London Business School, March 2012.

Quinn, Dennis P., “The Correlates of Change in International Financial Regulation,” American
 Political Science Review, 1997, 91, 531–51.

   and A. Maria Toyoda, “Does Capital Account Liberalization Lead to Growth?,” Review of
  Financial Studies, May 2008, 21 (3), 1403–1449.

Rajan, Raghuram G., “Has Financial Development Made The World Riskier?,” Proceedings,
 2005, (Aug), 313–369.

Ramsey, Frank, “A Mathematical Theory of Saving,” The Economic Journal, 1928, 38 (152), pp.
 543–559.

Samuelson, Paul A, “Lifetime Portfolio Selection by Dynamic Stochastic Programming,” The
  Review of Economics and Statistics, August 1969, 51 (3), 239–46.

Sandri, Damiano, “Growth and Capital Flows with Risky Entrepreneurship,” IMF Working
  Papers 10/37, International Monetary Fund 2010.

Shin, Hyun Song, “Global Banking Glut and Loan Risk Premium,” IMF Economic Review,
  November 2012, 60 (4), 155–192. Mundell Fleming Lecture.

Song, Zheng, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, “Growing Like China,” American
  Economic Review, February 2011, 101 (1), 196–233.

Stepanchuk, Sergiy and Viktor Tsyrennikov, “International Portfolios: an Incomplete Mar-
  kets General Equilibrium Approach,” mimeo, Cornell University, August 2011.

Stoﬀels, Nicolas and Cédric Tille, “Where Have the Savings Gone To? Assessing the Re-
  turn on Switzerland’s External Assets,” working paper, Graduate Institute for International and
  Development Studies June 2009.

                                               67
Thomas, Charles P., Francis E. Warnock, and Jon Wongswan, “The performance of in-
 ternational portfolios,” International Finance Discussion Papers 817, Board of Governors of the
 Federal Reserve System (U.S.) 2004.

Tille, Cédric, “Financial integration and the wealth eﬀect of exchange rate ﬂuctuations,” Journal
  of International Economics, July 2008, 75 (2), 283–294.

   and Eric van Wincoop, “International capital ﬂows,” Journal of International Economics,
  2010, 80 (2), 157–175.

Wallace, Neil, “A Modigliani-Miller Theorem for Open-Market Operations,” American Economic
 Review, June 1981, 71 (3), 267–74.

Weil, Philippe, “Overlapping Families of Inﬁnitely-lived Agents,” Journal of Public Economics,
 March 1987, 38 (2), 183–198.

Willen, Paul, “Incomplete markets and trade,” Working Papers 04-8, Federal Reserve Bank of
 Boston 2004.

Woodford, Michael, “Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound,”
 presented at the 2012 Jackson Hole Symposium August 2012.

Zucman, Gabriel, “The Missing Wealth of Nations: Are Europe and the U.S. net Debtors or net
 Creditors?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013.




                                               68
