                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       OVERCONFIDENCE IN POLITICAL BEHAVIOR

                                           Pietro Ortoleva
                                           Erik Snowberg

                                        Working Paper 19250
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19250


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2013




We thank Stephen Ansolabehere, Marc Meredith, Chris Tausanovitch, and Christopher Warshaw for
sharing their data. The authors are indebted to John Aldrich, Scott Ashworth, Larry Bartels, Roland
Benabou, Jon Bendor, Adam Berinsky, Ethan Bueno de Mesquita, John Bullock, Steve Callander,
Pedro Dal Bó, Ben Gillen, Faruk Gul, Gabe Lenz, Alessandro Lizzeri, John Matsusaka, Andrea Mattozzi,
Antonio Merlo, Massimo Morelli, Steve Morris, Gerard Padró i Miquel, Wolfgang Pesendorfer, Matthew
Rabin, Ken Shotts, Holger Sieg, Theda Skocpol, Mike Ting, Francesco Trebbi, Leeat Yariv, and Eric
Zitzewitz for useful discussions. We also thank seminar participants at the AEA, the University of
British Columbia, the University of Chicago, Columbia, Duke, Harvard, the IV Workshop on Institutions
at CRENoS, the University of Maryland, MPSA, the NBER, the Nanyang Technological University,
NYU, the University of Pennsylvania, Princeton, The Prioriat Workshop, USC, SPSA, and Washington
University, St. Louis for thoughtful feedback. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Pietro Ortoleva and Erik Snowberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Overconfidence in Political Behavior
Pietro Ortoleva and Erik Snowberg
NBER Working Paper No. 19250
July 2013
JEL No. C83,D03,D72,D83

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper studies, theoretically and empirically, the role of overconfidence in political behavior. Our
model of overconfidence in beliefs predicts that overconfidence leads to ideological extremeness, increased
voter turnout, and increased strength of partisan identification. Moreover, the model makes many nuanced
predictions about the patterns of ideology in society, and over a person's lifetime. These predictions
are tested using unique data that measure the overconfidence, and standard political characteristics,
of a nationwide sample of over 3,000 adults. Our predictions, eight in total, find strong support in this
data. In particular, we document that overconfidence is a substantively and statistically important predictor
of ideological extremeness and voter turnout.


Pietro Ortoleva
Division of Humanities and Social Sciences
MC 228-77
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
ortoleva@caltech.edu

Erik Snowberg
Division of Humanities and Social Sciences
MC 228-77
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
and NBER
snowberg@caltech.edu
1         Introduction

Without heterogeneity in ideology—preferences and opinions—there would be no need for the
institutions studied by political economists. However, the sources of ideology have received
scant attention: since Marx, political economists have largely viewed ideology as driven by
wealth or income (Meltzer and Richard, 1981; Acemoglu and Robinson, 2000, 2001, 2006).1
        This paper proposes a complementary theory in which differences in ideology are also due
to imperfect information processing. This theory predicts that overconfidence in one’s own
beliefs leads to ideological extremeness, increased voter turnout, and stronger identification
with political parties. Our predictions find strong support in a unique dataset that measures
the overconfidence, and standard political characteristics, of a nationwide sample of over
3,000 adults. In particular, we find that overconfidence is the most reliable predictor of
ideological extremeness, and an important predictor of voter turnout in our data.
        Adopting a behavioral basis for ideology may help answer puzzling questions, such as
why politicians and voters are becoming more polarized despite the increased availability
of information (McCarty et al., 2006), or why political rumors and misinformation such as,
“Global warming is a hoax”, are so persistent (Berinsky, 2012).2 Moreover, as behavioral
findings deepen our understanding of market institutions (Bertrand, 2009; Baker and Wur-
gler, 2013), a behavioral basis for ideology promises greater understanding of the design and
consequences of political institutions (Callander, 2007; Bisin et al., 2011).
        In our model, overconfidence and ideology arise due to imperfect information processing.
Citizens passively learn about a state variable through their experiences. However, to varying
degrees, citizens underestimate how correlated these experiences are, and thus, have different
levels of overconfidence about their information. This underestimation—which we term
correlational neglect—may have many sources. For example, citizens may choose to get
    1
     Political scientists also study identity politics; the closest analog in economics is the study of ethnicity
as the basis for coalition formation in distributive politics (Alesina et al., 1999; Padró-i-Miquel, 2007).
   2
     In early 2013, 37% of U.S. voters agreed with this statement (Public Policy Polling, 2013). Only 41%
believe global warming is caused by human activity, compared with 97% of climate scientists (Yale Project
on Climate Change Communication, 2013). Similar levels of agreement with other political rumors or
“conspiracy theories” are regularly found among voters (Berinsky, 2012; Public Policy Polling, 2013).



                                                                                                               1
information from a biased media outlet, but fail to fully account for the bias. Indeed,
unbeknownst to most users, Google presents different news sources for the same search
depending on a user’s location.3 Alternatively, exchanging information on a social network
could lead to correlational neglect if citizens fail to understand that much of the information
comes from people similar to themselves, if they fail to recognize the influence of their own
previous reports on others’ current reports (DeGroot, 1974; DeMarzo et al., 2003), or if they
fail to account for the presence of rational herds (Eyster and Rabin, 2010). Recent laboratory
experiments find strong evidence of correlational neglect (Enke and Zimmerman, 2013).
      Our primary theoretical result is that overconfidence and ideological extremeness are
connected. This follows an uncomplicated logic. For example, consider a citizen who notes
the number of people in her neighborhood who are unemployed, and uses this information to
deduce the state of the national economy. Suppose further that she lives in a neighborhood
with high unemployment. If the citizen believes that the employment status of each person
is relatively uncorrelated, she will think she has a lot of information about the state of the
national economy—she will be overconfident—and favor generous aid to the unemployed
and loose monetary policy. If, instead, she realizes that local unemployment has a common
cause—say, a factory shutting down—then she will understand that she has comparatively
little information about the national economic situation, and believe that although the sit-
uation is bad, it is not likely to be dire, and will support more moderate policies.
      Our data—from the 2010 Cooperative Congressional Election Survey (CCES)—strongly
supports this prediction. We document that a one-standard-deviation change in overconfi-
dence is related to 15–22% of a standard-deviation change in ideological extremeness, de-
pending on the specification. This relationship is as large as, and much more stable than,
the relationship between extremeness and demographics. Indeed, the range of correlations
for most demographics include points that are statistically indistinguishable from zero, sug-
gesting that overconfidence is an important and distinct predictor of ideological extremeness.
      The size and complexity of this data allows for the testing of more subtle predictions. For
  3
      See: http://vimeo.com/51181384.



                                                                                               2
example, the model predicts that older citizens will be more overconfident, and will generally
be more ideologically extreme. Moreover, if more overconfident citizens are, on average, more
conservative, ideology should be more correlated with overconfidence for conservatives than
for liberals. These results find robust support in the data.
   To extend this model to voter turnout, we posit an expressive voting model in which
the expressive value of voting is increasing with a citizen’s belief that one party’s policy is
better for her (Fiorina, 1976; Brennan and Hamlin, 1998). Similarly, strength of partisan
identification is modeled as the probability a citizen places on her favored party’s policy
being better for her.
   As more overconfident citizens are more likely to believe that one or the other party is
likely to have the right policy for them, they are more likely to turn out to vote. This is
true even conditional on ideology. The opposite conditional statement also holds: more ide-
ologically extreme citizens are more likely to vote, conditional on overconfidence. Thus, our
model matches the well-known empirical regularity that more ideologically extreme citizens
are more likely to vote. Similar predictions hold for strength of partisan identification.
   This second set of predictions are, once again, robustly supported by the data. Using
verified voter turnout data we document that a one-standard-deviation change in overconfi-
dence is associated with 7–19% increase in voter turnout. This is a more important predictor
of turnout in our data than income, education, race, gender, or church attendance.
   Finally, we theoretically analyze whether our results would be altered by citizens com-
municating their ideology to each other. Even assuming that citizens are Bayesian—albeit
overconfident in the precision of their own signals—allowing for communication strength-
ens our results. Intuitively, this occurs because more-overconfident citizens will attribute
differences in ideology to anything other than their information being incorrect, and hence
update less than less-overconfident citizens, accentuating the correlation between ideological
extremeness and overconfidence.
   The remainder of this section provides more details on the behavioral phenomena of
overconfidence, and connects our work to the literature.


                                                                                             3
1.1       What is Overconfidence?

Overconfidence describes related phenomena in which a person thinks some aspect of his or
hers, usually performance or information, is better than it actually is. These phenomena
are the subject of a large literature in psychology, economics, and finance, having been first
documented by Alpert and Raiffa (1969/1982). This literature has documented overcon-
fidence in a wide range of contexts, and among people from a wide range of backgrounds
and countries. Two features of this literature are of particular importance to our empirical
exercises: men are more overconfident than women (for example, Lundeberg et al., 1994),
and overconfidence is treated as a personality trait—that is, some people are simply more
overconfident than others.
       Moore and Healy (2007, 2008) divide overconfidence into three, often conflated, cate-
gories: over-estimation, over-placement, and over-precision. Over-estimation is when people
believe that their performance on a task is better than it actually is. Over-placement is when
people believe that they perform better than others—as in the classic statement that, “93%
of drivers believe that they are better than average.”4
       In this paper we focus on over-precision: the belief that one’s information is more precise
than it actually is. There are two reasons for this focus. First, while over-estimation and over-
placement often suffer from reversals,5 this does not seem to be the case for over-precision. In
other words, it appears that (almost) everyone exhibits over-precision (almost) all the time
(Moore and Healy, 2007, 2008). Second, over-precision has a very natural interpretation in
political contexts: it is the result of people believing that their own experiences are more
informative about policy than they actually are. Despite our narrower focus, we continue to
use the term overconfidence.
       Overconfidence is usually a modeling fundamental. By contrast, we derive it as a con-
sequence of correlational neglect. We model a citizen who has many experiences that she
believes to be relatively uncorrelated signals of the state. However, she neglects that these
   4
    Interestingly, this may be perfectly rational; see Benoı̂t and Dubra (2011).
   5
    That is, people tend to perceive their performance as better than it actually is when a task is easy, and
worse when the task is difficult (Erev et al., 1994).


                                                                                                           4
experiences are all happening to her, and thus, highly correlated. The greater the neglect
of correlation, the greater the information the citizen (incorrectly) believes she has received,
leading to overconfidence.


1.2       Literature

This work contributes to the emerging literature on behavioral political economy, which
applies findings from behavioral economics to understand the causes and consequences of
political behavior.6 This approach promises to allow political economists to integrate the
insights of a half-century of psychology-based political behavior studies.
       A particular appeal of applying behavioral insights to political economy is that many
of the feedback mechanisms that have led scholars to doubt the importance of behavioral
phenomena in markets do not seem to exist in politics. In particular, as an individual’s
political choice is unlikely to be pivotal, citizens who make poor political choices do not
suffer worse consequences than those who make good political choices. Moreover, this lack
of direct feedback drastically reduces a citizen’s ability to learn of her bias. This is in stark
contrast to markets, where poor choices directly impact the decision-maker, which some
scholars argue will eliminate behavioral biases. Furthermore, behavioral traits that may be
detrimental in markets may, in some cases, be useful in facilitating collective action (Benabou
and Tirole, 2002, 2006; Benabou, 2008).
       Our model of correlational neglect is closest in spirit to social-learning models where peo-
ple exchange information, but fail to recognize the influence of their own previous reports
on others’ current reports. Hence people “double count” information (DeGroot, 1974; De-
Marzo et al., 2003; Golub and Jackson, 2010, studies the learning paths of such networks).
Recent field experiments show that this model fits data better than a fully Bayesian model
(Chandrasekhar et al., 2012).
       This paper is related to a number of additional literatures. First and foremost, the
   6
    This literature is small, and includes Matsusaka (1995); Bendor et al. (2003, 2011); Callander and Wilson
(2006, 2008); Bisin et al. (2011); Degan and Merlo (2011); and Lizzeri and Yariv (2012).



                                                                                                           5
study of ideology, voting, and partisan identification are the subject of massive literatures
in political science. Second, overconfidence is the focus of a large literature in behavioral
economics and finance (see, for example, Odean, 1998; Daniel et al., 1998; Camerer and
Lovallo, 1999; Santos-Pinto and Sobel, 2005). Third, our modeling technique comes from
the small literature that utilizes the normal learning model.7 Fourth, this paper is related
to the literature that strives to understand how political behaviors are tied to personality
traits. Recent work in this literature has focused on the “Big Five” personality traits (see,
for example, Gerber et al., 2010, 2012). Overconfidence is often seen as akin to a personality
trait, although it is orthogonal to the “Big Five” (Moore and Healy, 2007). Finally, our model
of voter turnout is consistent with voters being either choice- or regret-avoidant (Matsusaka,
1995; Degan and Merlo, 2011).8



2       Framework and Data

This section presents our model, and formally defines correlational neglect and overconfi-
dence. This is followed by a discussion of our data, and how we use it to construct measures
of overconfidence, ideology, voter turnout, and partisan identification.


2.1     Theoretical Framework

There is a unit measure of citizens i ∈ [0, 1]. Each citizen i has a utility for actions which
depends on the state. A citizen’s beliefs about the state are determined by her experiences.
We emphasize that the state is just part of the citizens’ belief formation process, nothing
    7
      Although the literature is not large, it cannot be completely reviewed here. Early papers include Zechman
(1979), Achen (1992). For a recent review, see the introduction of Bullock (2009). In this literature, our
model is closest to Blomberg and Harrington (2000), which studies a model in which citizens have priors with
heterogeneous means and precisions. Citizens all observe public signals of the state. Those that start with
extreme and precise beliefs end up retaining those beliefs, while those with extreme and imprecise beliefs
converge to the center. While similar in some respects to our model, there are substantive differences. For
example, Blomberg and Harrington (2000) predicts that citizens who receive more signals, such as older
citizens, should be less ideologically extreme—as Bayesian citizens will converge to the truth. By contrast,
in our model (and data), citizens who receive more signals can also become more ideologically extreme as
they become more overconfident.
    8
      For a discussion of how our results relate to other models of voter turnout, see Appendix D.


                                                                                                             6
more. In particular, it is not the “truth”.


Utilities: Each citizen i has a standard quadratic-loss utility over actions ai ∈ R, which
depends on the state x ∈ R, and a preference bias bi

                                       U (ai , bi |x) = −(ai − bi − x)2 .

       Throughout this paper ai is the policy that a citizen would like to see implemented by
government. A citizen’s preference bias is an i.i.d. draw from a normal distribution with
mean 0 and precision τb . We write this as bi ∼ N [0, τb ].
       With uncertainty about the state, it is straightforward to show that the policy preferred
by citizen i will be ai = bi + Ei [x], where Ei is the expectation taken over citizen i’s beliefs.
We define this quantity as the citizen’s ideology,
                                               Ii = bi + Ei [x],                                      (1)
and ideological extremeness as Ei = |Ii |.


Experiences, Beliefs, and Correlational Neglect: The core of the model is the process
by which citizens form beliefs over the state. In our model, each citizen is well-calibrated
about the informativeness of individual experiences, but underestimates how correlated her
experiences are. This will lead to varying degrees of overconfidence in the population.
       Each citizen starts with a normal prior N [π, τ ] over the state, which has a common
mean π, and a common precision τ . For simplicity, we normalize π = 0 throughout. Citizens
have multiple experiences over time, which are signals about the state, eit = x + εit , t ∈
{1, 2, . . . , ni }. Each εit ∼ N [0, 1], and the signals are correlated, with Corr[εit , εit0 ] = ρ.9
   9
       Formally, εi is distributed
                                according to a mean-zero multinomial normal with covariance matrix
                                                                                             
                       1 ρ ···   ρ                                               1 ρi · · · ρi
                     ρ 1 · · ·  ρ                                            ρi 1 · · · ρi 
            Σεi =  . . .        ..  . However, citizen i believes that Σεi =  ..          ..  .
                                                                                             
                                                                                    .. . .
                      .. ..   .. .                                             .  .     . .
                      ρ   ρ ··· 1                                               ρi ρi · · · 1

Each εit has unit variance, so Corr[εit , εit0 ] = Cov[εit , εit0 ] = ρ.
  Alternatively, we could model the state in a multi-dimensional space with multi-dimensional errors over
time, and citizens either underestimate the amount of correlation between dimensions, or across time, or
both. This does not add to the testable predictions of the model, see Appendix D.



                                                                                                       7
However, citizen i underestimates this correlation: she believes Corr[εit , εit0 ] = ρi ∈ [0, ρ).

Definition. A citizen suffers from correlational neglect when ρi < ρ.

       The magnitude of correlational neglect varies by citizen, and is an i.i.d. draw from Fρi ,
which is independent of the distribution of experiences and preference biases ρi ⊥(eit , bi ).10
Except where noted, we assume that all citizens receive the same number of signals, that is,
we set ni = n, ∀i.


Overconfidence: As our data measures overconfidence, our theoretical results are in terms
of this variable. Denote the precision of citizen i’s posterior belief as κi + τ , which we refer
to as the citizen’s confidence. Additionally, denote by κ + τ the posterior belief the citizen
would have if she had accurate beliefs about the correlation between signals.

Definition. Overconfidence is the difference between a citizen’s confidence, and how con-
fident she would be if she were properly calibrated, κi − κ. Given two citizens i and j, we say
that i is more overconfident than j if κi ≥ κj > 0.11

As κ and τ are the same for all citizens, we denote a citizen’s level of overconfidence as κi .


2.2       Data

Our data comes from the Harvard and Caltech modules of the 2010 Cooperative Congres-
sional Election Study (CCES) (Alvarez, 2010; Ansolabehere, 2010a,b). This data is unique
(as far as we know) in that it allows a survey-based measure of overconfidence in beliefs as
well as political characteristics.
       The CCES is an annual cooperative survey. Participating institutions purchase a module
of at least 1,000 respondents, who are asked 10–15 minutes of custom questions. In addition,
every respondent across all modules is asked the same battery of basic demographic and
  10
      Note that we also assume bi ⊥eit . All of our results hold in the more general case in which πi |ρi ∼ N [0, τπ ],
τ |ρi ∼ Fτ (·) over [τ , τ ] ∈ (0, ∞), and ρ varies by citizen—subject to the constraint that ρi ⊥ρ, and for each
citizen, ρi < ρ. These complications do not add to the testable predictions of the model, so we omit them.
   11
      All results hold defining overconfidence as κi /κ.


                                                                                                                     8
political questions. The complete survey is administered online by Knowledge Networks.
Each module uses a matched-random sampling technique to achieve a representative sample,
with over-sampling of certain groups (Ansolabehere, 2012; Ansolabehere and Rivers, 2013).


2.2.1      Overconfidence

The most important feature of this data, for our purposes, is that it allows for a measure of
overconfidence. This measure is constructed from four subjective questions about respon-
dent confidence in their guesses about four factual quantities, adjusting for a respondent’s
accuracy on the factual question. This is similar to the standard psychology measure in that
it elicits confidence and controls for knowledge. However, it differs in that we cannot say
for certain whether a given respondent is overconfident, just that their confidence, condi-
tional on knowledge, is higher or lower than another respondent. Therefore, we use previous
research, which shows that (almost) everyone exhibits over-precision (almost) all the time
(Moore and Healy, 2007, 2008), to argue that this is a measure of overconfidence.12
       The factual and confidence questions were asked as part of another set of studies (An-
solabehere et al., 2011, 2013). Respondents were asked their assessment of the current
unemployment and inflation rate, and what the unemployment and inflation rate would be a
year from the date of the survey. Respondents were then asked their confidence about their
answer to each factual question on a qualitative, six-point scale.
       Confidence reflects both knowledge and overconfidence, so subtracting knowledge from
confidence leaves overconfidence.13 To subtract knowledge, we deduct points from a re-
spondent’s reported confidence based on his or her accuracy, and thus knowledge, on the
corresponding factual question. This is implemented conservatively: we regress confidence
on an arbitrary, fourth-order polynomial of accuracy, and use the residual as a measure of
  12
      Psychological studies typically elicit a large (up to 150) number of 90% confidence intervals and count the
percent of times that the actual answer falls within a subject’s confidence interval. This number, subtracted
from 90, is used as a measure of overconfidence. Our measure has advantages over the typical psychology
approach—see Appendix B, which also contains all survey questions.
   13
      Theoretically, we need to control for the precision a citizen would have if they were properly calibrated.
As we do not observe this, we control for accuracy, which is, in our theory, correlated.




                                                                                                               9
 Table 1: Overconfidence is correlated with gender and age, but not education or income.

 Dependent
                                  Overconfidence                                    Confidence
 Variable:

 Gender (Male)          0.45∗∗∗       0.44∗∗∗         0.43∗∗∗           0.48∗∗∗       0.47∗∗∗        0.46∗∗∗
                        (.078)        (.080)          (.079)            (.077)        (.078)         (.0022)
 Age (in years)        0.012∗∗∗       0.013∗∗∗       0.012∗∗∗           0.013∗∗∗      0.014∗∗∗       0.013∗∗∗
                       (.0023)        (.0024)        (.0023)            (.0022)       (.0023)        (.0022)
 Education                           F = 1.12                                        F = 2.03
                                     p = 0.36                                        p = 0.08
 Income                                             F = 1.33                                        F = 1.82
                                                    p = 0.21                                        p = 0.05

 N                                                              2,927
 Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level with standard errors, clustered
 by age (73 clusters), in parentheses. All specifications estimated using WLS with CCES sampling weights.

overconfidence.14 This allows the regression to pick the points to deduct for each level of
accuracy, such that knowledge absorbs as much variation as possible.
     Each of the resultant overconfidence measures are measured with error, as some respon-
dents with little knowledge will randomly provide accurate answers. Thus, we use the first
principal component of the four measures.15 Finally, to standardize regression coefficients,
we subtract the minimum level of overconfidence, and divide by the standard deviation.
     In keeping with previous research, overconfidence is strongly correlated with a respon-
dent’s gender, as shown in Table 1. Section 3.4 predicts that overconfidence is correlated with
age. This is also clear in Table 1. This predicted relationship leads us to cluster standard
errors by age.16 Additionally, as the CCES over-samples certain groups, such as voters, we
   14
      That is, we use a semi-nonparametric sieve method to control for knowledge (Chen, 2007). Ideally
one would impose a monotonic control function, however, doing so is methodologically opaque, see Athey
and Haile (2007); Henderson et al. (2009). In keeping with the treatment of these factual questions in
Ansolabehere et al. (2011, 2013), we topcode responses to the unemployment and inflation questions at 25,
limiting a respondent’s inaccuracy.
   15
      Consistent with each measure consisting of an underlying dimension plus i.i.d. measurement error, the
first principal component weights each of the four questions approximately equally. Also consistent with
this structure, our results are substantively similar using any one of the four questions in isolation. So, for
example, they hold if we use only variables pertaining to present conditions, or only to future predictions.
   16
      Age also has a greater intraclass correlation than state of residence, education, or income, making age
the most conservative choice. Because the intraclass correlation is small for all of these variables, thus,
clustering on any one of them produces similar results that are also similar to heteroskedastistic-consistent
standard errors. Classical standard errors are approximately 25% smaller.


                                                                                                             10
estimate specifications using WLS and the supplied sample weights (Ansolabehere, 2012).
   However, overconfidence is uncorrelated with education or income. Note that these lat-
ter controls are ordered categorical variables, so we provide F -tests on the five and fifteen
dummy variables that, respectively, represent these categories. For comparison, we construct
a confidence measure from the first principal component of confidence scores. Education and
income are related to this measure, providing some confirmation that actual knowledge has
been purged from the overconfidence measure.
   While the data we use to elicit overconfidence is quite similar to that used in psy-
chology, there are some differences. First, we use questions about economic measures—
unemployment, inflation—as opposed to general knowledge questions—for example, “When
was Shakespeare born?” Second, these questions elicit confidence directly, while studies in
psychology typically elicit confidence intervals. To understand whether our slightly different
approach provides similar results, we added four general knowledge questions—eliciting con-
fidence with an interval—to the 2011 CCES. The 2011 CCES also included the confidence
questions from the 2010 version. The main finding is reassuring: the results we can test in
the (more limited) 2011 CCES hold using general knowledge-based measures of overconfi-
dence. These results can be found in Section 3.2, and more about using surveys to measure
overconfidence can be found in Appendix B.


2.2.2   Dependent Variables

The predictions in this paper concern three types of dependent variables: ideology, voter
turnout, and strength of partisan identification.


Ideology: This study uses one main and two alternative measures of ideology. The main
measure is scaled ideology from Tausanovitch and Warshaw (2011), which they generously
provided to us. This measure is generated using item response theory (IRT) to scale responses
to eighteen issue questions asked on the CCES—for example, questions about abortion and
gun control. A similar process generates the Nominate Scores used to evaluate the ideology


                                                                                           11
of members of Congress (Poole and Rosenthal, 1985).17
       Our alternative measures of ideology are direct self-reports. The CCES twice asks re-
spondents to report their ideology: from extremely liberal to extremely conservative. The
first elicitation is when the respondent agrees to participate in surveys (on a five point scale),
and the second when taking the survey (on a seven point scale). We normalize each of these
measures to the interval [−1, 1], and average them. Those that report they “don’t know” are
either dropped from the sample, or treated as moderates (0). Results are presented for both
cases. These self-reported measures are imperfectly correlated with scaled ideology (0.42).
       To generate measures of ideological extremeness, we take the absolute value of these
measures. All three measures of ideology and ideological extremeness are divided by their
standard error to standardize regression coefficients.


Voter Turnout: Turnout is ascertained from the voting rolls of the state that a respondent
lives in. Voter rolls vary in quality between states, but rather than trying to control for this
directly, we include state fixed effects in most of our specifications.18


Partisan Identification: At the time of the survey, respondents were asked whether they
identify with the Republican or Democratic Party, or consider themselves to be an indepen-
dent. If they report one of the political parties—for example the Democrats—they are then
asked if they are a “Strong Democrat” or “Not so Strong Democrat”. Those who report
they are independents are asked if they lean to one party or the other, and are allowed to say
that they do not lean toward either party. Those who report they are strong Democrats or
Republicans are coded as strong partisan identifiers. Independents—those who do not lean
toward either party—are coded as either strong party identifiers, weak party identifiers, or
are left out of the analysis. Results are presented for all three resultant measures.
  17
      There are many ways to aggregate these individual issues into ideology. For example, one could aggregate
groups of related issues into different ideological dimensions. We prefer to use a measure generated by other
scholars to eliminate concerns about specification searching, see Appendix D.
   18
      The state of Virginia did not make their rolls available, so the 60 respondents from Virginia are dropped
from turnout regressions (see Ansolabehere and Hersh, 2010). Classifying as non-voters the 42 respondents
who were found to have voted in the primary but not the general election does not change the results.



                                                                                                            12
                        Table 2: Controls used in statistical tests.

            Type                                          Number of Categories

            Income                                                 16 categories
            Education                                                  6 categories
            Gender                                                     2 categories
            Race                                                       8 categories
            Hispanic                                                   3 categories
            Religion                                               12 categories
            Church attendance                                          8 categories
            Union / union member in household                          8 categories
            State—including DC, and missing                        52 categories
            Total                                                 115 categories

2.2.3    Controls

Our theory makes no predictions about which variables should be included as controls. Thus,
we follow a “kitchen sink” approach. Although the controls are not theoretically motivated,
they are useful in understanding the substantive significance of the relationship between
overconfidence and the various dependent variables.
    The CCES provides demographic controls as categories: for example, rather than provid-
ing years of education, it groups education into categories such as “Finished High School”.
Thus, we introduce a dummy variable for each category of each demographic control. We
also include a category for missing data for each variable. The controls, and number of
categories they contain, can be found in Table 2.



3       Ideological Extremeness and Overconfidence

The first set of theoretical and empirical results concern the relation between ideological
extremeness and overconfidence.




                                                                                        13
3.1    Ideological Extremeness

Our first theoretical result is:

Proposition 1. Overconfidence and ideological extremeness are positively correlated.

Proof. All proofs are in Appendix A.                                                            

   To build the intuition underlying this result it is useful to rewrite our model as one in
which citizens receive only a single signal, but overestimate its precision. Specifically, we can
model each citizen as if they have a single experience ei = x + εi , where εi ∼ N [0, κ] , ∀i.
However, citizens overestimate the precision of this signal: that is, they believe that εi ∼
N [0, κi ] , where κi ≥ κ. If we properly define ei , κ and κi , then this “model” will give some
of the same results.
                              n
                          1X                        n                        n
Lemma 2. Define ei ≡            eit . Then κ =              , and κi =               .
                          n t=1                1 + (n − 1)ρ            1 + (n − 1)ρi

   Consider two citizens with the same preference bias b = 0 and the same experience e ≥ 0,
but two different levels of overconfidence κ1 and κ2 , with κ1 > κ2 . Using the definition of
                                                     κi e
ideology in (1) and Bayes rule Ii = bi + Ei [x] =   τ +κi
                                                          .   As citizens’ mean beliefs, and hence
ideology, are increasing in κi , then the more-overconfident citizen will have a more extreme
ideology. Intuitively, the more-overconfident citizen believes her experience is a better signal
of the state, and hence updates more, becoming more extreme.
   To see that this results in a positive correlation, we examine the entire distribution of
ideologies. The logic above implies that the distribution of ideologies for those who are
more overconfident will be more spread out than the distribution for those who are less
overconfident. Figure 1 shows the distribution of ideologies for two levels of overconfidence
with x = 0. In that figure, as one moves further from the ideological center, citizens are more
likely to be more overconfident, generating a positive correlation between overconfidence and
ideological extremeness. The simplicity of the figure is driven by the assumption that x = 0:
if x 6= 0, the distributions will not be neatly stacked on top of each other, and the relationship



                                                                                               14
              Figure 1: Overconfidence and Ideological Extremeness are Correlated




will be more complex—but Proposition 1 shows that there is a positive correlation between
overconfidence and ideological extremeness for any value of x.19


3.1.1      Empirical Analysis

We now test this prediction in survey data. Table 3 presents the results of regressing ideologi-
cal extremeness—from the scaled ideology measure of Tausanovitch and Warshaw (2011)—on
overconfidence.
       The relationship between ideological extremeness and overconfidence is statistically very
robust, no matter what additional (non-theoretically motivated) controls are added to the
regressions—with t-statistics on this novel result between ∼5.5 and ∼7.5.20 For comparison,
previous research has shown that gender is the most robust predictor of overconfidence.
In Table 1 the t-statistic on gender, as a regressor of overconfidence, is ∼5.5. It is also
worth noting that the control that leads to the greatest attenuation of the coefficient on
overconfidence is gender. This is reassuring: the control that really matters is the one found
to be correlated with overconfidence in prior research.
  19
     The proof of Proposition 1—after applying Lemma 2—does not rely on the normal distribution of beliefs
and experiences. For more discussion, see Appendix D.
  20
     The closest empirical result we are aware of appears in Footnote 14 of Kuklinski et al. (2000), which notes
a strong correlation (0.34) between strength of partisan identification and confidence in incorrect opinions.



                                                                                                             15
            Table 3: Ideological extremeness is robustly related to overconfidence.
                      Dependent Variable: Scaled Ideological Extremeness

        Overconfidence             0.22∗∗∗        0.18∗∗∗       0.19∗∗∗       0.20∗∗∗          0.15∗∗∗
                                   (.029)         (.028)        (.027)        (.031)           (.027)
        Income, Education
                                                    Y
        Race, Hispanic
        Union, Religion
                                                                  Y
        Church, State
        Gender (Male)                                                         0.16∗∗∗
                                                                              (.058)
        All Controls                                                                             Y
        N                                                       2,868
        Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level with standard
        errors, clustered by age (73 clusters), in parentheses. All specifications estimated using
        WLS with CCES sampling weights.

   Table 4: Self-reported ideological extremeness is robustly related to overconfidence.

                 Treatment of
                                             Centrist (0)                 Missing (.)
                 “Don’t Know”
                 Overconfidence         0.20∗∗∗       0.17∗∗∗       0.17∗∗∗       0.16∗∗∗
                                        (.032)        (.031)        (.035)        (.030)
                 All Controls              N             Y              N            Y
                 N                              2,910                       2,754
                 Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10%
                 level with standard errors, clustered by age (73 clusters), in parentheses.
                 All specifications estimated using WLS with CCES sampling weights.

   In Table 4, we study similar relationships for self-reported ideology, and once again find
robust support for the theory. As discussed in Section 2.2.2, there are two measures of self-
reported ideology. These measures treat respondents who answered they “don’t know” their
ideological disposition differently: in one they are treated as centrist (0), in the other they
are removed from the data (.). Table 4 considers both measures, and shows that the robust
relationship found in Table 3 between ideological extremeness and overconfidence also exists
for self-reported ideology. One other pattern in Table 4 is worth noting: classifying as centrist
those who report they “don’t know” their ideological disposition increases the correlation



                                                                                                         16
Table 5: Overconfidence is a substantively important predictor of ideological extremeness.

         A one standard deviation change              with a         standard deviation
             in        is associated                  change in ideological extremeness.
                                                        Minimum              Maximum

        Income                                              2%                     28%
        Education                                           2%                     25%
        Race (Black)                                        5%                     13%
        Church attendance                                   1%                     15%
        Gender (Male)                                       1%                     13%
        Overconfidence                                     15%                     22%
        Notes: The minimum and maximum effect size come from regressions with no other
        variables, and all other variables respectively across the three different measures of
        ideology. Effect sizes for categorical variables are based on entering them linearly in
        regressions.

between overconfidence and ideological extremeness. This appears intuitive: those who
express a low level of confidence about their answer to factual questions are also likely to be
relatively less confident about their ideological leanings.
   While we have shown that the relationship between ideological extremeness and overconfi-
dence is statistically robust, is it substantively important? Table 5 suggests the answer is yes.
In particular, it shows the change in ideological extremeness associated with a one-standard-
deviation change in some demographics. As the table shows, overconfidence is almost as
predictive of ideological extremeness as education and income, and more predictive than
race, gender, or church attendance. Moreover, as this relationship is more consistent across
specifications, it suggests that overconfidence is a separate phenomena that is not captured
by standard controls.


3.2    Discussion of Identification

Before discussing more results, we briefly address the twin issues of identification and causal-
ity. For our results to be identified, correlational neglect, and thus overconfidence, must be
something akin to a personality trait: set early in life, with changes unrelated to political
conditions. While this is plausible, and we assume it is true, it is not testable with our data.


                                                                                                  17
       We can gain additional insights by considering what it would mean for our results to not
be identified. There are two classes of issues that seem especially worrying: reverse causality
and third-factor causation.
       Reverse causality implies that ideological extremeness causes overconfidence. If this were
the case, it must be that something else, say, attending political rallies as a child, causes
ideological extremeness, and this in turn causes overconfidence. However, overconfidence
has been shown to cause many other behaviors, such as inefficiently high levels of equity
trading (Grinblatt and Keloharju, 2009). This would then imply that political rallies cause
overtrading on the stock market. While this is possible, it does not seem plausible.
       However, one might object to the factual questions used to measure overconfidence on the
grounds that they are inherently ideological. While Ansolabehere et al. (2011) find this is not
the case, we can also examine other ways of eliciting overconfidence. In particular, we were
allowed to place several questions on the 2011 CCES that would measure overconfidence on
general knowledge-related items, such as the year of Shakespeare’s birth and the population
of Spain. Moreover, confidence was elicited using a confidence interval. While the 2011
survey is limited in other ways—it was much shorter and smaller, only allowed for self-
reported ideology, and did not contain voter turnout data—it allows us to check our previous
results.21
       The first panel of Table 6 shows that the results are substantively unchanged in the 2011
data, and by the use of a general knowledge-based overconfidence measure. The results
here are analogous to the first two columns of Table 4. As can be seen, the results are not
statistically different between years or measures. We believe this should eliminate concerns
that the correlation between ideological extremeness and overconfidence is driven by the
questions we use to measure overconfidence.
       However, different parts of the variation in the two measures may drive the results. In or-
der to assuage such concerns, we instrument our economy-based overconfidence measure with
the general knowledge-based measure. The first stage shows that there may be some reason
  21
       For more on measuring overconfidence on surveys, and the text of all questions, see Appendix B.



                                                                                                         18
Table 6: A general knowledge-based measure of overconfidence produces the same results.

                                               Panel A: WLS

 Dependent                                      Self-Reported Ideological Extremeness
 Variable:                                       (“Don’t Know” treated as centrist)

 Overconfidence                      0.16∗∗∗              0.14∗∗∗
  (Economy)                          (.047)               (.035)
 Overconfidence                                                               0.17∗∗∗               0.10∗∗
  (General Knowledge)                                                         (.043)                (.042)
 All Controls                            N                   Y                   N                    Y

 N                                                                    989

                                               Panel B: 2SLS

 Dependent                      Overconfidence                           Overconfidence
                                               Extremeness                                     Extremeness
 Variable:                       (Economy)                                (Economy)

 Overconfidence                                           0.49∗∗∗                                   0.33∗∗
  (Economy)                                                (.15)                                    (.14)
 Overconfidence                      0.35∗∗∗                                  0.30∗∗∗
  (General Knowledge)                (.049)                                   (.044)
                                     F =51                                    F =48
 All Controls                            N                   N                   Y                    Y

 N                                                                    989
 Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level with standard errors, clustered
 by age (69 clusters), in parentheses. The first stage specifications also present an F test on excluding
 the instrument, Overconfidence (General Knowledge). Each stage of 2SLS is implemented via WLS.

for concern, as the unconditional correlation between the two measures is 0.35. However, in
the second stage, the coefficient on the economy-based measure increases by approximately a
factor of three. This indicates that there is significant measurement error in both measures,
and that we may be understating the magnitude of results compared to what one would find
with a less-noisy measure of overconfidence.
   Third-factor causation may also be the result of measurement problems. In particular,
some survey respondents may simply enjoy picking extreme answers. These respondents
would reply that they are certain of their answers to factual questions, and also report that



                                                                                                               19
they are ideologically extreme. This is not a concern for us: our main ideology measure—
from Tausanovitch and Warshaw (2011)—is constructed by splitting the possible answers to
each issue question into two groups, one group coded as for, the other against.22 That is,
all respondents who indicate a similar position are coded the same way, regardless of the
extremity of their position. This eliminates concerns that our results concerning ideological
extremeness are driven by respondents who simply like to choose extreme answers on surveys.
       Finally, there may be “something else” that causes both ideology and overconfidence: for
example, particular patterns of brain development. To our knowledge, current research does
not suggest any obvious third factors that would explain all eight of our empirical findings. If
such a third factor could be found, it would clearly be very important. Even if that occurs,
we believe our theory and results will still provide useful insights into the unconditional
relationship between overconfidence and political characteristics.


3.3       When Average Ideology Changes with Overconfidence

While Proposition 1 holds for all values of the state x, a more nuanced prediction is possible
when x > 0. As the value of x is not observable, we instead make the prediction in terms
of an implication of x > 0. Also, as the midpoint of the ideology scale is arbitrary, we
use a data-driven midpoint for this proposition: in particular, we define IM as the median
ideology in the population, and define EM = |I − IM |.23 We also define the minimum level
of overconfidence κ = inf{κ|Fκi (κ) > 0}.
                                   p              p
Proposition 3. Assume x <             2/κ, κ/τ ≥ ( π/2−1)−1 , and τb is large.24 Then, if E[Ii |κi ]
is increasing in κi ,
                             Cov[E 0 , κi |Ii ≥ IM ] > Cov[E 0 , κi |Ii ≤ IM ].                          (2)

  22
     If an issues question had an odd number of responses, the middle response is randomly coded as either
for or against for all respondents.
  23
     For all three ideology measures, median ideology is very close to zero. As such, using this measure of
extremeness would not change any of our other empirical results.
  24
     While our proof only holds given the constraints above, numerical simulations suggest the proposition
holds for all parameter values when x > 0. The use of covariances here is for tractability, and our empirical
results also hold for correlations.


                                                                                                          20
    Figure 2: The theoretical structure of Proposition 3, and the data used to test it.
                                                               0.3




                                                                                                  (Median Ideology)
                                                     Density
                                                               0.2




                                                                                             Least Overconfident Tercile
                                                               0.1
                                                                                             Middle Tercile
                                                                                             Most Overconfident Tercile

                                                                      Very     Liberal           Moderate                 Conservative      Very
                                                                     Liberal                                                             Conservative
                                                                                         Self−Reported Ideology



 (a) Theory: When average ideology is increasing   (b) Data: Distribution of self-reported ideology
 in overconfidence.                                by tercile of overconfidence. (Smoothed using an
                                                   Epanechnikov kernel, bandwidth 0.8.)


   The proposition states that if average ideology is increasing in overconfidence, than the
covariance between overconfidence and extremeness is larger for those to the right-of-center
than for those to the left-of-center. This is a subtle, mathematical, prediction of the theory.
The mathematical intuition is illustrated in Figure 2(a), which uses three different levels of
κi . Moving right from median ideology, average overconfidence is quickly increasing, along
with ideological extremeness measured from the median point. This leads to a large covari-
ance between overconfidence and ideological extremeness. Moving to the left from median
ideology, ideological extremeness measured from the median point is also increasing, but
average overconfidence initially decreases. Eventually, average overconfidence will increase,
but this occurs in a region that contains a relatively small measure of citizens. Thus, the
covariance to the left will be either small and negative or small and positive, depending on
the relative measure of citizens in the regions with positive and negative covariances. Either
way, the covariance between overconfidence and ideological extremeness, measured from the
median, will be smaller for left-of-center citizens than right-of-center citizens.


3.3.1   Empirical Analysis

Initial support for Proposition 3 comes from a comparison of Figure 2(a), generated by
theory, and Figure 2(b), generated from the data.

                                                                                                                                                 21
Table 7: There is a greater covariance between extremeness and overconfidence for right-of-
center citizens than left of center citizens.
                                                                         Self-Reported
 Ideology Measure:                 Scaled                         Treatment of “Don’t Know”
                                                                Centrist               Missing
                           Left of       Right of       Left of       Right of       Left of        Right of
                           Median        Median         Median        Median         Median         Median

 Covariance with            0.014        0.099∗∗∗        0.0083        0.13∗∗∗        -0.012         0.11∗∗∗
  Overconfidence            (.013)        (.014)         (.017)        (.015)         (.014)         (.012)
 Difference                        0.085∗∗∗                     0.12∗∗∗                        0.13∗∗∗
                                    (.019)                      (.022)                         (.018)
 All Controls                  Y              Y             Y             Y             Y                Y
 N                           1,367         1,502         1,448          1,990         1,322          1,859
 Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level with standard errors, clustered
 by age (73 clusters), in parentheses. We use the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell Theorem to compute conditional
 covariances. The N of the two regressions may not sum to the N in previous tables due to the fact that
 those respondents with the median ideology are included in both regressions and the median is determined
 using sample weights. Extremeness is measured from median ideology, as required by Proposition 3.
 Similar results hold using partial correlations.

       A more rigorous analysis requires that we first establish the hypothesis of the proposition:
average ideology is increasing in overconfidence. Indeed, for all three measures of ideology,
those in the middle and highest tercile of overconfidence are significantly further to the right
than those in the lowest tercile. The difference between the first and second tercile (with
clustered standard error) for the scaled ideology measure is 0.30 (.061), and the difference
between the first and third is 0.58 (.054).25
       As the hypothesis of the proposition is met, Table 7 tests to see whether the conclusion
is confirmed by the data. Ideological extremeness has a substantially higher covariance with
overconfidence for those to the right of center than for those to the left of center.26
  25
      For the self-reported measure with “don’t know” treated as ideologically centrist, the corresponding
differences are 0.28 (.054) and 0.47 (.054). When treating “don’t know” as missing, the differences are 0.30
(.063) and 0.51 (.058). For all three measures, differences between the terciles are statistically significant.
   26
      Another obvious prediction from Figure 2(a) is that the variance of ideology is increasing in overconfi-
dence. We cannot test this prediction because ideology is an ordinal, not cardinal, measure. There exists a
monotonic transformation of each ideology measure—in particular, one that reduces ideological differences in
the center and increases them toward the extremes—that makes the data appear to support this prediction,
but other transformations create the opposite impression. Along the same lines, Tausanovitch and Warshaw
(2011) use techniques to maximize discrimination in the tails, so their estimates of ideology are bimodal,
producing a slightly different picture than Figure 2(b).



                                                                                                               22
   One might be concerned that there is a relationship between overconfidence and con-
servatism, rather than overconfidence and extremeness. That is, formally, Ii = g(κi ) with
g 0 > 0. It is straight-forward to show this is consistent with the data for those who are
right-of-center, however, for those left-of-center, it predicts a negative covariance between
ideological extremeness and overconfidence. Table 7 clearly shows this is not the case. An
in-depth discussion of this point can be found in Appendix C.


3.4     Age, Overconfidence, and Ideology

We now extend the analysis to the more general case in which citizens have different numbers
of experiences (signals), ni ≥ 2. Under the assumption that citizens have more experiences
as they age, we can make predictions about how age, overconfidence and ideology are related.

Proposition 4. Overconfidence is increasing with the number of experiences. Further, if
        1+ρi τ
ρ ≥   1+2τ −ρi τ
                   then ideological extremeness is, on average, increasing with the number of
experiences, that is, E[Ei |n] is increasing in n.

   This proposition provides a potential answer to the first puzzle posed in the introduction:
why politicians and voters are becoming more polarized, despite the increased availability of
information through the internet (McCarty et al., 2006). The second part of the proposition
suggests that an increase in the number of signals can actually increase ideological extreme-
ness, and thus, polarization. Note that this occurs even if media consumption is not more
polarized, as seems to be the case (Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2011).
   To build intuition for Proposition 4, consider the extreme case in which ρi = 0 and
ρ = 1; that is, when experiences are perfectly correlated, but citizen i believes that they
are independent. In this case, each experience is identical, so it will make the citizen more
confident without increasing her information—leading to the first part of the proposition.
Moreover, each experience makes a citizen more extreme, as her posterior shifts closer and
closer to the signal—leading to the second part of the proposition.
   While the condition in the second part of Proposition 4 holds for a wide range of pa-


                                                                                           23
rameters, the fact that ideological extremeness can increase with the number of signals sets
our model apart from fully Bayesian models. Specifically, in a fully Bayesian model, as the
number of signals increases, all citizens’ beliefs must converge to x, and thus ideological ex-
tremeness will decrease with the number of signals. This will also be the case in the “model”
of Lemma 2, extended to allow for citizen’s to receive multiple, independent signals. There-
fore, a test of this result can be seen not just as a test of a single prediction of our model,
but a test of the modeling methodology itself.27


3.4.1      Empirical Analysis

As we do not observe the number of signals a respondent receives, we assume that older
respondents receive more signals than younger respondents, and test whether overconfidence
and ideological extremeness are increasing with age in Figure 3.28
       Each panel of Figure 3 shows a smoothed, non-parametric fit with 95% confidence in-
tervals, and three-year averages of the data. The first panel shows that, in accordance with
Proposition 4, overconfidence increases with age, except, possibly, among those older than
80—who account for less than 1% of the data.29 The second panel shows that ideological
extremeness increases with age, consistent with our theory.30 The third and fourth panels
show that the increase in ideological extremeness is due to both a slight rightward shift in
ideology, and an increase in ideological dispersion with age. The increase in dispersion is
implied by Proposition 4, while the rightward shift is consistent with the theory if x > 0,
which is also consistent with Figure 2(b). It is worth noting that this increase in dispersion
holds both right- and left-of-center, casting further doubt on the idea that “something” is
causing both overconfidence and conservatism: for more, see Section 3.3 and Appendix C.
  27
      Of course, this is an imperfect test. Our model allows ideological extremeness to increase or decrease
with age, so there is no way to reject our model here, only fully Bayesian models.
   28
      Another plausible interpretation is that the number of signals is increasing with media consumption. The
results in Figure 3 are statistically and substantively more significant when age is replaced by self-reported
media usage. However, we focus on age, as the literature suggests that media consumption may be caused
by ideological extremeness (Mullainathan and Shleifer, 2005; Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2006).
   29
      This is consistent with previous research that finds older people are more overconfident, see Hansson et
al. (2008). For regression results on the data in Figure 3, see Appendix D.
   30
      When this is the case, all of our results hold mechanically with a distribution of ages.


                                                                                                           24
                                          Figure 3: Age, Overconfidence, and Ideology

                                                                                                   2




                                                                 Scaled Ideological Extremeness
                           3
       Overconfidence




                         2.5                                                                      1.5




                           2                                                                       1
                                20   40           60       80                                               20    40         60   80
                                            Age                                                                        Age


                          0.5                                                                           1




                                                                 Deviation of Scaled Ideology
       Scaled Ideology




                           0                                                                      0.75




                         −0.5                                                                      0.5
                                20   40           60       80                                                20   40         60   80
                                            Age                                                                        Age


Notes: Each point is the average for three years of age. Trendiness, in black, and 95% confidence intervals,
in gray, use an Epanechnikov kernel with a bandwidth of 8.

4                        Turnout and Partisan Identification

To analyze turnout and partisan identification, we must specify how citizens make these
political choices. We posit an expressive voter model in which the expressive value of voting
is increasing with a citizen’s belief that one party’s policy is better for her (Fiorina, 1976;
Brennan and Hamlin, 1998).31
  31
       For a discussion of other models of voter turnout, see Appendix D.




                                                                                                                                       25
4.1     Formalization

Turnout and partisan identification will depend on the policy positions adopted by parties.
We assume there are two parties committed to platforms L and R, with L = −R.32 Denote
by Uj (bi |x) the utility that a citizen with preference bias bi receives from the platform of
party j when the state is x. Party R’s position will be better for citizen i in state x when
UR (bi |x) > UL (bi |x). As in the above description, we assume citizen i turns out to vote if
and only if
                                                                 1
                             Probi [UR (bi |x) > UL (bi |x)] −     − ci > 0.                          (3)
                                                                 2

We assume the c.d.f. Fc is strictly increasing on 0, 21 , and ci ⊥(bi , ρi , eit ). Appendix D shows
                                                       

that (3) produces the same comparative statics as the canonical voting model of Riker and
Ordeshook (1968) with a large electorate, and regret- or choice-avoidant voters (Matsusaka,
1995; Degan and Merlo, 2011).
   Finally, we model strength of partisan identification using the left-hand side of (3), but
with a (possibly different) distribution of costs Fc0 .33


4.2     Predictions

This model of turnout gives several predictions:

Proposition 5.

   1. More ideologically extreme citizens are more likely to turn out to vote.

   2. Conditional on overconfidence, more ideologically extreme citizens are more likely to
      turn out.

   3. Conditional on ideology, more overconfident citizens are more likely to turn out.
   32
      Symmetric divergence can be generated from a Calvert (1985) model with policy and office motivated
parties that are uncertain about the median voter’s ideology due to the random realization of x.
   33
      We adopt this formulation to simplify and shorten the exposition. Identical predictions are obtained
from a more complex model of partisan identification that we discuss in Appendix D.




                                                                                                       26
                    Figure 4: Intuition for Proposition 5 and Corollary 6.




  (a) More ideologically extreme citizens are more (b) More overconfident citizens are more likely to
  likely to turn out.                              turn out, conditional on ideology


   The first part of Proposition 5 is a well-documented empirical regularity: more ideologi-
cally extreme citizens are more likely to turn out. The second part of Proposition 5 makes
a stronger prediction: more ideologically extreme citizens are more likely to turn out, even
controlling for overconfidence. Figure 4(a) helps build intuition. It depicts the posterior of
two citizens with the same level of overconfidence, but different ideologies. While both prefer
R to L, the more extreme citizen assigns a higher probability to R having the correct policy,
and hence is more likely to turn out.
   The third part of Proposition 5 describes the role of overconfidence in turnout: more
overconfident citizens are more likely to turn out, even controlling for ideology. The intuition
is apparent from Figure 4(b), which shows the posterior of two citizens, both with b = 0 and
the same posterior mean Ei [x], but different levels of overconfidence. While both citizens
prefer R to L, the more overconfident citizen assigns a higher probability to R having the
correct policy—and hence, will be more likely to turn out.
   The final predictions examined in survey data concern the strength of partisan identifi-
cation. These results follow directly from Proposition 5, as (3) characterizes both turnout
and partisan identification.
Corollary 6. Strength of partisan identification is increasing in overconfidence, both condi-
tional on, and independent of, ideological extremeness. Moreover, conditional on overconfi-
dence, strength of partisan identification is increasing in ideological extremeness.

                                                                                                        27
Table 8: Turnout is increasing with ideological extremeness and overconfidence, as predicted
by Proposition 5.

 Dependent Variable:                                        Turnout Decision

 Overconfidence               0.096∗∗∗      0.056∗∗∗       0.048∗∗∗      0.046∗∗∗      0.054∗∗∗       0.038∗∗
                               (.017)        (.017)         (.017)        (.017)       (.0090)        (.017)
 Ideological                                 0.18∗∗∗       0.17∗∗∗        0.17∗∗∗       0.18∗∗∗       0.16∗∗∗
   Extremeness                               (.014)        (.014)         (.014)        (.0089)       (.014)
 Income, Education
                                                              Y
 Race, Hispanic
 Union, Religion
                                                                             Y
 Church, State
 Gender (Male)                                                                           0.014
                                                                                         (.030)
 All Controls                                                                                             Y
 N                                                                 2,808
 Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level with standard errors, clustered
 by age (73 clusters), in parentheses. All specifications estimated using WLS with CCES sampling weights.

4.3       Empirical Analysis

We test Proposition 5 using verified voter turnout from the 2010 CCES.34 The results, shown
in Table 8, are robustly supportive of the proposition: more ideologically extreme citizens
are more likely to vote, even conditional on overconfidence; and more overconfident citizens
are more likely to vote, even conditional on ideological extremeness.
       To get a full accounting of the effect of overconfidence on turnout, we need to first
account for the fact that overconfidence also leads to ideological extremeness. Doing so, a
one-standard deviation increase in overconfidence is associated with a 15–19% (depending on
the specification) increase in turnout—a 7.5–9.5 percentage point increase versus a baseline
turnout rate of 51% in the data. This effect is substantively important as it is larger than the
effect of income, education, race, gender, or church attendance, and 47–54% of the effect size
associated with ideological extremeness—all known to be important correlates of turnout.
       We now examine partisan identification. As noted in Section 2.2.2 we construct three
  34
     One of the advantages of the CCES dataset is that it provides verified voter turnout in addition to
self-reported turnout, which is known to be unreliable. Our results also hold, and indeed are stronger, if we
use self-reported turnout.


                                                                                                                28
Table 9: Overconfidence is correlated with strength of partisan identification, even controlling
for ideological extremeness.
   Treatment of
                              Strong (1)                    Weak (0)                 Missing (.)
   Independents:

   Overconfidence       0.050∗∗∗      0.050∗∗∗      0.052∗∗∗      0.044∗∗∗      0.060∗∗∗      0.054∗∗∗
                         (.016)        (.015)        (.013)        (.012)        (.015)        (.013)
   Ideological                        0.071∗∗∗                     0.13∗∗∗                    0.12∗∗∗
     Extremeness                       (.014)                      (.011)                     (.012)
   All Controls             N             Y             N              Y           N             Y
   N                                           2,868                                    2,545
   Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level with standard errors,
   clustered by age (73 clusters), in parentheses. All specifications estimated using WLS with CCES
   sampling weights.

measures of partisan identification, all of which code someone who identifies as a “Strong
Democrat” or “Strong Republican” as a strong partisan identifier (1), and most others as
weak partisan identifiers (0). The three measures differ in how they treat those who identify
as “Independent”. Although the theory does not ascribe any particular status to indepen-
dents, it is possible that they are strongly invested in their political identity. Therefore, the
three different measures code independents as strong partisan identifiers (1), weak partisan
identifiers (0), or drops these respondents altogether (.). Table 9 then regresses these three
measures on overconfidence and ideological extremeness.
   The results in Table 9 are consistent with theory, no matter which measure is used. Doing
the same accounting exercise as above, a one standard-deviation change in overconfidence
is associated with a 9–12% increase in the probability a respondent classifies themselves a a
strongly partisan—a 4.5–6 percentage point increase from a mean rate of 54%, 44% and 49%,
respectively, for the three different measures. This is 48–95% of the effect size associated
with ideological extremeness.
   One other pattern in Table 9 is worth noting: ideological extremeness is a better pre-
dictor of strength of partisan identification when independents are treated as weak partisan
identifiers or left out altogether. Intuitively, there are few respondents who hold extremely
conservative or liberal views, but identify as independent.


                                                                                                           29
       Note that Proposition 5 and Corollary 6 predict that correlations between overconfidence
and turnout or partisan identification should exist even if ideology is entered as fixed effects.
We present fixed-effect specifications using the discrete, alternative measures of ideology in
Appendix D.



5        Communication between Citizens

We have assumed that citizens only receive information from within their social network,
or from their own experiences. But what if they could also learn the point of view of citi-
zens outside their network, or receive information from public sources? In this section we
show theoretically that this would, interestingly, strengthen the correlation between overcon-
fidence and ideological extremeness. This occurs because when more-overconfident citizens
meet someone with a different ideology, they attribute this difference to factors other than
the information of the other citizen—as, by construction, they believe that “they know bet-
ter”. Therefore, more-overconfident citizens will tend to update less than less-overconfident
citizens, making more-overconfident citizens relatively more extreme.
       We illustrate this pattern in two ways. First we consider citizens with arbitrary preference
biases, bi , who are unaware that other citizens may be overconfident. Second, citizens are
aware that others may be overconfident, but there are no preference biases (bi = 0, ∀i). In
the first case, citizens will attribute disagreement to the bias of others; in the second, they
will attribute it to others’ overconfidence. More-overconfident citizens will attribute more of
the difference to these other factors.
       Throughout this section we assume that after n private signals, each citizen i meets
another, randomly chosen, citizen j and is told her ideology. It is straightforward to extend
the analysis to citizens meeting any finite number of other citizens, or observing any finite
number of public signals with known precision.35
  35
    Matching with like-minded individuals is encompassed by correlational neglect. If there is uncertainty
about the distribution of overconfidence in the population, or the mean preference bias in the population,
our results extend to public signals about the summary statistics of the distribution of ideology.



                                                                                                       30
5.1    Unawareness of Overconfidence

As noted above, we begin by assuming citizens are unaware of overconfidence.

Proposition 7. When citizen i is told the ideology of citizen j, and she believes κj = κ:

  1. The ideology of citizen i after communication is αi Ii + βi Ij for some αi , βi ∈ R++ ,
      where αi is increasing in κi and βi is decreasing in κi .

                          κ
  2. If Ij 6= (Ii − bi ) κ+τ , then |Ei [bj ]| is increasing in κi .

   When i meets j, she knows that the difference in their ideologies may have two sources:
different preference biases and different information. The more overconfident citizen i is,
the more confident she is that she and j received similar signals. Thus, she believes their
difference in ideologies is due to differences in preference biases, b. In turn, this leads i to
only slightly update her beliefs.
   This intuition also characterizes how overconfident citizens would update in the face of
media reports contradicting their point of view. As long as there is some chance that the
media is biased, more-overconfident citizens will attribute the contradiction to media bias,
and, hence, update less.


5.2    No Preference Biases

Next, we consider the case in which citizens are (correctly) aware of the fact that others are
overconfident. For simplicity, we assume that all citizens have no preference bias (bi = 0, ∀i),
and that this is common knowledge. Define Fκi as the distribution of posterior precisions in
the population, and κ = inf{κ|Fκi (κ) > 0}, then:




                                                                                             31
Proposition 8. Suppose bi = 0, ∀i. When citizen i is told the ideology of citizen j:

  1. The ideology of citizen i after communication is γi Ii + δi Ij for some γi , δi ∈ R++ ,
      where γi is increasing in κi and δi is decreasing in κi .

  2. Ei [κj ] is increasing in κi if i and j are on opposite sides of the aisle, (Ii ∗ Ij < 0) or
      if j is more ideological extreme than i (Ej > Ei ).

  3. Ei [κj ] is decreasing in κi if i and j are on the same side of the aisle (Ii ∗ Ij > 0), and
             τ +κ
      Ei >     κ
                  Ej .

   Proposition 8 has a similar form, and intuition, to Proposition 7. When a citizen meets
someone with a different ideology, she can attribute the difference to either differences in
information, or in how the other citizen processes information. Following the logic above,
more-overconfident citizens attribute more of the difference to other citizens’ overconfidence.
   However, the other parts of Proposition 8 are more nuanced. In particular, if the other
citizen is more extreme, or is on the other side of the aisle, the first citizen attributes this
to overconfidence. But when the other citizen is on the same side of the aisle but is less
extreme, the first citizen believes that the other under-interprets her information, that is,
she “lacks the courage of her convictions”.
   Proposition 7 and 8 both imply that communication causes more overconfident citizens
to have relatively more dispersed ideologies. This leads to a greater correlation between
overconfidence and ideological extremeness.
   Finally, these results return us to briefly consider a puzzle presented in the introduction:
why political rumors and misinformation are so persistent (the first, that citizens are more
polarized despite the increased availability of information, was briefly discussed in Section
3.4). Our model suggests a possible answer: it is very difficult to persuade overconfident
citizens that their prior is incorrect as they will tend to attribute contradictory information
to others’ biases.




                                                                                              32
6     Conclusion

This paper introduces a novel model of overconfidence and draws implications for political
behavior. These implications are tested using unique survey data. Overconfidence is theo-
retically and empirically related to the central political characteristics of ideology, ideological
extremeness, voter turnout, and strength of partisan identification.
    We conclude by returning to the introduction, where we noted that a behavioral basis for
ideology promises to deepen our understanding of political institutions. While we leave this
to future work, we illustrate the usefulness of our findings by sketching a model of primaries
with overconfident voters.
    Two parties have a primary to nominate candidates for executive office. Between the
primaries and the general election, nature will send each voter a signal of the state. It is
well known that primary voters are more ideologically extreme than the general electorate.
Based on the evidence presented above, these voters are also more overconfident. Thus,
although primary voters know the ideology of the median voter at the time of the primary,
they expect nature’s signals to agree with their beliefs, drawing the median voter toward
their ideology. Thus, primary voters will select divergent candidates. Moreover, the losing
candidates’ partisans will think the median voter ignored “the truth”. We believe this sketch
provides some insight into the nomination of, and partisan reactions to the defeat of, John
Kerry in 2004, and Mitt Romney in 2012 (Ortoleva and Snowberg, 2013).




                                                                                                33
References
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson, “Why Did The West Extend The Franchise?
 Democracy, Inequality, And Growth In Historical Perspective,” The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 2000, 115 (4), 1167–1199.

   and , “A Theory of Political Transitions,” The American Economic Review, 2001, 91
  (4), 938–963.

   and , Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy, New York: Cambridge Uni-
  versity Press, 2006.

Achen, Christopher H., “Social Psychology, Demographic Variables, and Linear Regres-
 sion: Breaking the Iron Triangle in Voting Research,” Political Behavior, 1992, 14 (3),
 195–211.

Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, and William Easterly, “Public Goods and Ethnic
 Divisions,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114 (4), 1243–1284.

Alpert, M. and H. Raiffa, “A Progress Report on the Training of Probability Assessors,”
 in Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky, eds., Judgement Under Uncertainty:
 Heuristics and Biases, Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1969/1982,
 pp. 294–305.

Alvarez, R. Michael, “Cooperative Congressional Election Study, 2010: Caltech Content,”
 2010. [Computer File] Release 1: February 26, 2012. Pasadena, CA: California Institute
 of Technology [producer] http://cces.gov.harvard.edu.

Ansolabehere, Stephen, “Cooperative Congressional Election Study, 2010: Harvard/MIT
 Content,” 2010. [Computer File] Release 1: February 26, 2012. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
 University [producer] http://cces.gov.harvard.edu.

  , “Cooperative Congressional Eletion Study, 2010: Common Content,” 2010. [Com-
  puter File] Release 1: February 26, 2012. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University [producer]
  http://cces.gov.harvard.edu.

  , “Guide to the 2010 Cooperative Congressional Election Survey,” 2012. Available at
  http://hdl.handle.net/1902.1/17705.

   and Douglas Rivers, “Cooperative Survey Research,” Annual Review of Political Sci-
  ence, 2013, 16, 307–329.

   and Eitan Hersh, “The Quality of Voter Registration Records: A State-by-State Anayl-
  sis,” 2010. Harvard University, mimeo.

  , Marc Meredith, and Erik Snowberg, “Mecro-Economic Voting: Local Information
  and Micro-Perceptions of the Macro-Economy,” 2011. California Institute of Technology,
  mimeo.


                                                                         Bibliography–1
  , , and     , “Asking About Numbers: Why and How,” Political Analysis, 2013, 21 (1),
  48–69.

Athey, Susan and Philip A. Haile, “Nonparametric Approaches to Auctions,” in James J.
 Heckman and Edward Leamer, eds., Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 6A, Elsevier,
 2007, pp. 3847–3965.

Baker, Malcolm and Jeffrey Wurgler, “Behavioral Corporate Finance: An Updated
 Survey,” in George M. Constantinides, Milton Harris, and Rene M. Stulz, eds., Handbook of
 the Economics of Finance, Volume 2A: Corporate Finance, North-Holland, 2013, pp. 357–
 424.

Barber, Brad M. and Terrance Odean, “Boys will be Boys: Gender, Overconfidence,
 and Common Stock Investment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (1), 261–292.

Bell, David E., “Regret in Decision Making Under Uncertainty,” Operations Research,
 1982, 30 (5), 961–981.

Benabou, Roland, “Ideology,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2008, 6
 (2–3), 321–352.

   and Jean Tirole, “Self-Confidence and Personal Motivation,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2002, 117 (3), 871–915.

   and , “Belief in a Just World and Redistributive Politics,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 2006, 121 (2), 699–746.

Bendor, Jonathan, Daniel Diermeier, and Michael M. Ting, “A Behavioral Model
 of Turnout,” American Political Science Review, 2003, 97 (2), 261–280.

  , , David Siegel, and Michael M. Ting, A Behavioral Theory of Elections, Princeton,
  NJ: Princeton University Press, 2011.

Benoı̂t, Jean-Pierre and Juan Dubra, “Apparent Overconfidence,” Econometrica, 2011,
 79 (5), 1591–1625.

Berinsky, Adam, “Rumors, Truths, and Reality: A Study of Political Misinformation,”
 2012. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, mimeo.

Bertrand, Marianne, “CEOs,” Annual Review of Econics, 2009, 1 (1), 121–150.

  , Dean S. Karlan, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and Jonathan Zinman,
  “What’s Advertising Content Worth? Evidence from a Consumer Credit Marketing Field
  Experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (1), 263–306.

Bisin, Alberto, Alessandro Lizzeri, and Leeat Yariv, “Government Policy with Time
  Inconsistent Voters,” 2011. California Institute of Technology, mimeo.




                                                                           Bibliography–2
Blomberg, S. Brock and Joseph E. Harrington, “A Theory of Rigid Extremists and
  Flexible Moderates with an Application to the US Congress,” The American Economic
  Review, 2000, 90 (3), 605–620.

Boatwright, Peter and Joseph C. Nunes, “Reducing Assortment: An Attribute-Based
 Approach,” The Journal of Marketing, 2001, 65 (1), 50–63.

Brennan, Geoffrey and Alan Hamlin, “Expressive Voting and Electoral Equilibrium,”
 Public Choice, 1998, 95 (1-2), 149–175.

Bullock, John G., “Partisan Bias and the Bayesian Ideal in the Study of Public Opinion,”
 Journal of Politics, 2009, 71 (3), 1109–1124.

Callander, Steven, “Bandwagons and Momentum in Sequential Voting,” The Review of
 Economic Studies, 2007, 74 (3), 653–684.

   and Catherine H. Wilson, “Context-dependent Voting,” Quarterly Journal of Political
  Science, 2006, 1 (3), 227–254.

   and , “Context-dependent Voting and Political Ambiguity,” Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics, 2008, 92 (3), 565–581.

Calvert, Randall L., “Robustness of the Multidimensional Voting Model: Candidate Moti-
 vations, Uncertainty, and Convergence,” American Journal of Political Science, February
 1985, 29 (1), 69–95.

Camerer, Colin F. and Dan Lovallo, “Overconfidence and Excess Entry: An Experi-
 mental Approach,” The American Economic Review, 1999, 89 (1), 306–318.

Chandrasekhar, Arun G., Horacio Larreguy, and Juan Pablo Xandri, “Testing
 Models of Social Learning on Networks: Evidence from a Framed Field Experiment,”
 2012. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, mimeo.

Chen, Xiaohong, “Large Sample Sieve Estimation of Semi-Nonparametric Models,” in
 James J. Heckman and Edward Leamer, eds., Handbook of Econometrics, Vol 6B, Elsevier,
 2007, pp. 5549–5632.

Choi, James, David Laibson, and Brigitte Madrian, “Reducing the Complexity Costs
 of 401 (k) Participation Through Quick Enrollment,” in David A. Wise, ed., Developments
 in the Economics of Aging, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2009, pp. 57–82.

Coate, Stephen and Michael Conlin, “A Group Rule-Utilitarian Approach to Voter
 Turnout: Theory and Evidence,” The American Economic Review, 2004, 94 (5), 1476–
 1504.

Connolly, Terry and Marcel Zeelenberg, “Regret in Decision Making,” Current Direc-
 tions in Psychological Science, 2002, 11 (6), 212–216.



                                                                         Bibliography–3
Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, “Investor Psy-
 chology and Security Market Under– and Overreactions,” The Journal of Finance, 1998,
 53 (6), 1839–1885.
Degan, Arianna and Antonio Merlo, “A Structural Model of Turnout and Voting in
 Multiple Elections,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2011, 9 (2), 209–245.
DeGroot, Morris H., “Reaching a Consensus,” Journal of the American Statistical Asso-
 ciation, 1974, 69 (345), 118–121.
DellaVigna, Stefano, “Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field,” Journal of
 Economic Literature, 2009, 47 (2), 315–372.
DeMarzo, Peter M., Dimitri Vayanos, and Jeffrey Zwiebel, “Persuasion Bias, Social
 Influence, and Unidimensional Opinions,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118
 (3), 909–968.
Enke, Benjamin and Florian Zimmerman, “Correlation Neglect in Belief Formation,”
 2013. IZA Discussion Paper Number 7372.
Erev, Ido, Thomas S. Wallsten, and David V. Budescu, “Simultaneous Over– and
  Underconfidence: The Role of Error in Judgment Processes,” Psychological Review, 1994,
  101 (3), 519–527.
Eyster, Erik and Matthew Rabin, “Naive Herding in Rich-Information Settings,” Amer-
 ican Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2010, 2 (4), 221–243.
Feddersen, Timothy and Alvaro Sandroni, “A Theory of Participation in Elections,”
  The American Economic Review, 2006, 96 (4), 1271–1282.
Fiorina, Morris P., “The Voting Decision: Instrumental and Expressive Aspects,” Journal
  of Politics, 1976, 38 (2), 390–413.
Gentzkow, Matthew and Jesse M. Shapiro, “Media Bias and Reputation,” Journal of
 Political Economy, 2006, 114 (2), 280–316.
   and Jesse M Shapiro, “Ideological Segregation Online and Offline,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (4), 1799–1839.
Gerber, Alan S., Gregory A. Huber, David Doherty, and Conor M. Dowling,
 “Personality and the Strength and Direction of Partisan Identification,” Political Behavior,
 2012, 34 (4), 653–688.
  ,   ,    ,   , and Shang E. Ha, “Personality and Political Attitudes: Relationships
  Across Issue Domains and Political Contexts,” American Political Science Review, 2010,
  104 (1), 111–133.
Golub, Benjamin and Matthew O. Jackson, “Naive Learning in Social Networks and
 the Wisdom of Crowds,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2010, 2 (1), 112–
 149.

                                                                             Bibliography–4
Grinblatt, Mark and Matti Keloharju, “Sensation Seeking, Overconfidence, and Trad-
 ing Activity,” The Journal of Finance, 2009, 64 (2), 549–578.

Hansson, Patrick, Michael Rönnlund, Peter Juslin, and Lars-Gören Nilsson,
 “Adult Age Differences in the Realism of Confidence Judgments: Overconfidence, Format
 Dependence, and Cognitive Predictors,” Psychology and Aging, 2008, 23 (3), 531–544.

Henderson, Daniel J, John A List, Daniel L Millimet, Christopher F Parme-
 ter, and Michael K Price, “Imposing Monotonicity Nonparametrically in First-Price
 Auctions,” 2009. IDEAS, mimeo.

Iyengar, Sheena S. and Mark L. Lepper, “When Choice Is Demotivating: Can One
  Desire Too Much of a Good Thing?,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2000,
  79 (6), 995–1006.

  , Grub Huberman, and Wei Jiang, “How Much Choice is Too Much? Contributions
  to 401 (k) Retirement Plans,” in Olivia S. Mitchell and Stephen P. Utkus, eds., Pension
  Design and Structure: New Lessons from Behavioral Finance, Oxford University Press,
  2004, chapter 5, pp. 83–95.

Juslin, Peter, Pia Wennerholm, and Henrik Olsson, “Format Dependence in Sub-
  jective Probability Calibration,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
  and Cognition, 1999, 25 (4), 1038–1052.

Knight, Brian, “Evaluating Competing Explanations for the Midterm Gap: A Unified
 Econometric Approach with Microfoundations,” 2013. Brown University, mimeo.

Kuklinski, James H., Paul J. Quirk, Jennifer Jerit, David Schwieder, and
 Robert F. Rich, “Misinformation and the Currency of Democratic Citizenship,” Journal
 of Politics, 2000, 62 (3), 790–816.

Lizzeri, Alessandro and Leeat Yariv, “Collective Self-Control,” 2012. California Insti-
  tute of Technology, mimeo.

Loomes, Graham and Robert Sugden, “Regret Theory: An Alternative Theory of
  Rational Choice Under Uncertainty,” The Economic Journal, 1982, 92 (368), 805–824.

   and   , “Some Implications of a More General Form of Regret Theory,” Journal of
  Economic Theory, 1987, 41 (2), 270–287.

Lundeberg, Mary A., Paul W. Fox, and Judith Punćcohaŕ, “Highly Confident but
 Wrong: Gender Differences and Similarities in Confidence Judgments,” Journal of Edu-
 cational Psychology, 1994, 86 (1), 114–121.

Matsusaka, John G., “Explaining Voter Turnout Patterns: An Information Theory,”
 Public Choice, 1995, 84 (1), 91–117.

McCarty, Nolan M., Keith T. Poole, and Howard Rosenthal, Polarized America:
 The Dance of Ideology and Unequal Riches, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006.

                                                                          Bibliography–5
McMurray, Joseph C., “Ideology as Opinion: A Spatial Model of Common-value Elec-
 tions,” 2012. Bringam Young University.

Meltzer, Allan H. and Scott F. Richard, “A Rational Theory of the Size of Govern-
 ment,” The Journal of Political Economy, 1981, 89 (5), 914–927.

Meredith, Marc, “Persistence in Political Participation,” Quarterly Journal of Political
 Science, 2009, 4 (3), 186–208.

Moore, Don A. and Paul J. Healy, “The Trouble with Overconfidence,” 2007. Carnegie
 Mellon University, mimeo.

   and    , “The Trouble with Overconfidence,” Psychological Review, 2008, 115 (2), 502–
  517.

Mullainathan, Sendhil and Andrei Shleifer, “The Market for News,” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 2005, 95 (4), 1031–1053.

   and Ebonya Washington, “Sticking with Your Vote: Cognitive Dissonance and Polit-
  ical Attitudes,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2009, 1 (1), 86–111.

Odean, Terrance, “Volume, Volatility, Price, and Profit When All Traders are Above
 Average,” The Journal of Finance, 1998, 53 (6), 1887–1934.

Ortoleva, Pietro and Erik Snowberg, “They’ll See! Primaries with Overconfident Vot-
 ers,” 2013. California Institute of Technology, mimeo.

Padró-i-Miquel, Gerard, “The Control of Politicians in Divided Societies: The Politics
 of Fear,” Review of Economic Studies, 2007, 74 (4), 1259–1274.

Poole, Keith T. and Howard Rosenthal, “A Spatial Model for Legislative Roll Call
 Analysis,” American Journal of Political Science, 1985, 29 (2), 357–384.

Public    Policy       Polling,       “Democrats    and    Republicans   Differ   on
 Conspiracy    Theory       Beliefs,”    April   2,     2013.          available   at
 http://www.publicpolicypolling.com/pdf/2011/PPP Release National ConspiracyTheories 040213.pdf.

Reutskaja, Elena and Robin M. Hogarth, “Satisfaction in Choice as a Function of the
 Number of Alternatives: When “Goods Satiate”,” Psychology and Marketing, 2009, 26
 (3), 197–203.

Riker, William H. and Peter C. Ordeshook, “A Theory of the Calculus of Voting,”
 The American Political Science Review, 1968, 62 (1), 25–42.

Rothschild, David, “Expectations: PointEstimates, Probability Distributions, Confidence,
 and Forecasts,” 2011. Yahoo! Research, mimeo.

Santos-Pinto, Luis and Joel Sobel, “A Model of Positive Self-Image in Subjective As-
  sessments,” American Economic Review, December 2005, 95 (5), 1386–1402.


                                                                         Bibliography–6
Sarver, Todd, “Anticipating Regret: Why Fewer Options May Be Better,” Econometrica,
  2008, 76 (6), 263–305.

Schmidt, Klaus D., “On the Covariance of Monotone Functions of a Random Variable,”
  2003. Lehrstuhl für Versicherungsmathematik Technische Universität Dresden, mimeo.

Schwartz, Barry, The Paradox of Choice: Why More is Less, New York, NY: Harper
  Collins, 2004.

Shah, Avni M. and George Wolford, “Buying Behavior as a Function of Parametric
  Variation of Number of Choices,” Psychological Science, 2007, 18 (5), 369–370.

Snowberg, Erik, Justin Wolfers, and Eric Zitzewitz, “Partisan Impacts on the Econ-
  omy: Evidence from Prediction Markets and Close Elections,” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2007, 122 (2), 807–829.

  ,   , and      , “Party Influence in Congress and the Economy,” Quarterly Journal of
  Political Science, 2007, 2 (3), 277–286.

Soll, Jack B. and Joshua Klayman, “Overconfidence in Interval Estimates,” Journal of
  Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 2004, 30 (2), 299–314.

Sugden, Robert, “An Axiomatic Foundation for Regret Theory,” Journal of Economic
  Theory, 1993, 60 (1), 159–180.

Tausanovitch, Chris and Christopher Warshaw, “Testing Theories of Representation
  in Congress, State Legislatures and Cities Using a ‘Super Survey’,” Journal of Politics,
  2011, 75 (2), 330–342.

Yale Project on Climate Change Communication, “Scientific and Public Perspectives
 on Climate Change,” June 3, 2013. available at http://environment.yale.edu/climate-
 communication/files/ClimateNote Consensus Gap May2013 FINAL6.pdf.

Zechman, Martin J., “Dynamic Models of the Voter’s Decision Calculus: Incorporating
  Retrospective Considerations into Rational-Choice Models of Individual Voting Behavior,”
  Public Choice, 1979, 34 (3), 297–315.

Zeelenberg, Marcel, “Anticipated Regret, Expected Feedback and Behavioral Decision
  Making,” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 1999, 12 (2), 93–106.

  , J. Jeffrey Inman, and Rik G.M. Pieters, “What we do when Decisions go Awry:
  Behavioral Consequences of Experienced Regret,” in Elke U. Weber, Jonathan Baron, and
  Graham Loomes, eds., Conflict and Tradeoffs in Decision Making, Cambridge University
  Press, 2001, pp. 136–155.




                                                                           Bibliography–7
Appendix A                Proofs

Proof of Lemma 2: The posterior likelihood in the model is proportional to

    L(x|ei ) ∝ L(ei |x)L0 (x)
                                   T                               
                               −                 i ···            −
                                                                          
                   
                   
                   
                          x    ei1
                                        1    ρ       ρ i
                                                             x    e i1
                                                                         
                                                                           
                                                                           
                                                                           
                                                                           
                   
                                                                    
                                                                           
                    1  x − ei2  ρi 1 · · · ρi   x − ei2 
                                                                              
                                                                                    1 2
                                                                                        
             ∝ exp −  .   . .                                          exp − x τ
                                                                    
                        2  ..   .. .. . . . ...   ...                        2
                                                           
                   
                   
                   
                                                                   
                                                                           
                   
                                                                   
                            x − eini      ρi ρi · · · 1        x − eini 
                   
                                                                          
                                                                          

                       1 nx2 − 2x nt=1
                                    P i                          
                                           eit                  1 2
             = exp −                           +C      exp − x τ
                       2      1 + (ni − 1)ρi                    2
                   (                                          Pni             2 )
                       1 ni + τ (1 + (ni − 1)ρi )                     e
                                                                  t=1 it
             ∝ exp −                                x−
                       2      1 + (ni − 1)ρi           n + τ (1 + (ni − 1)ρi )
                                                               ni
                                                           1 X
where C is constant with respect to x. Thus, defining ei =        eit , the posterior belief of
                                                           ni t=1
a citizen is distributed according to
                                                                             
                                    ni ei            ni + τ (1 + (ni − 1)ρi )
                     N                             ,                            .
                          ni + τ (1 + (ni − 1)ρi )       1 + (ni − 1)ρi
                    ni − κi                                    h
                                                                 κi ei
                                                                             i
Substituting ρi =              the posterior is given by N κi +τ , κi + τ , which is the same as
                   (ni − 1)κi
the posterior that a citizen would have if they received a single signal ei = x + εi , where the
citizen believes εi ∼ N [0, κi ]. Finally, note that E[ei ] = x, and
                     2 Xn                 2
                     1                      1   n(n − 1)                   1 n−1
         Var[ei ] =          Var[εit ] + 2               Cov[εit , εit0 ] = +    ρ.
                     n   t=1
                                            n      2                       n  n
              h          i
                     n
Thus, ei ∼ N x, 1+(n−1)ρ   ≡ N [x, κ].                                                        


Proof of Proposition 1: Corr[E, κi ] > 0 ⇐⇒ Cov[E, κi ] > 0. If bi = 0, ∀i, then using (1)
                               κi
and Lemma 2, Ei = |Ii | =          |e |,
                              κi +τ i
                                           and

                       κ2i
                                                                                  
                                          κi                                  κi
       Cov[E, κ] = E        |ei | − E          |ei | E[κi ] = E[|ei |]Cov          , κi > 0
                     κi + τ             κi + τ                              κi + τ



                                                                                     Appendix–1
             h                i
                  κi                             κi
where Cov        κi +τ
                       , κi       > 0 because   κi +τ
                                                        is an increasing function of κi (Schmidt, 2003). As
                                                    κi
bi ⊥(ρi , ei ), this holds when Ii = bi +          κi +τ
                                                         .                                                  


                                                                                 κi +τ
Proof of Proposition 3: E[Ii |κi ] ⇐⇒ x > 0. Define e(κi ) ≡                      κi
                                                                                       IM ,   and Φκ and φκ as
the c.d.f. and p.d.f., of a normal distribution with mean 0 and precision κ. Then
Cov[E 0 , κi |Ii ≥ IM ]

  = E[(Ii − IM )κi |Ii ≥ IM ] − E[Ii − IM |Ii ≥ IM ]E[κi |Ii ≥ IM ]

  = E[Ii κi |Ii ≥ IM ] − E[Ii |Ii ≥ IM ]E[κi |Ii ≥ IM ]

  = E[(Ii − bi )κi |Ii ≥ IM ] − E[Ii − bi |Ii ≥ IM ]E[κi |Ii ≥ IM ]

         + E[bi κi |Ii ≥ IM ] − E[bi |Ii ≥ IM ]E[κi |Ii ≥ IM ]

  = E[(Ii − bi )κi |Ii ≥ IM ] − E[Ii − bi |Ii ≥ IM ]E[κi |Ii ≥ IM ] + Cov[bi , κi |Ii ≥ IM ]
                      Z ∞Z ∞  2                                    
           1                       κi ei       κi ei
  =                                       −          E[κi |Ii ≥ IM ] dΦκ [ei ]dFκi + Cov[bi , κi |Ii ≥ IM ]
    Prob[Ii ≥ IM ] κ e(κi ) κi + τ           κi + τ
      Z ∞ 2                                   
              κi          κi
  = 2                −         E[κi |Ii ≥ IM ] E[ei |ei ≥ e(κi )]Φκ [x − e(κi )]dFκi + Cov[bi , κi |Ii ≥ IM ]
       κ   κi + τ       κi + τ
       2                                                  
           κi                    κi
  = 2 E          ζ(κi ) − E            ζ(κi ) E[κi |Ii ≥ IM ] + Cov[bi , κi |Ii ≥ IM ]
         κi + τ                κi + τ
where ζ(κi ) := E[ei |ei ≥ e(κi )]Φκ [x − e(κi )]. Similarly,
Cov[E 0 , κi |Ii ≤ IM ]

  = E[(IM − Ii )κi |Ii ≤ IM ] − E[IM − Ii |Ii ≤ IM ]E[κi |Ii ≤ IM ]

  = E[−(Ii − bi )κi |Ii ≤ IM ] − E[−(Ii − bi )|Ii ≤ IM ]E[κi |Ii ≤ IM ]

          −E[bi κi |Ii ≤ IM ] + E[bi |Ii ≤ IM ]E[κi |Ii ≤ IM ]

  = E[−(Ii − bi )κi |Ii ≤ IM ] − E[−(Ii − bi )|Ii ≤ IM ]E[κi |Ii ≤ IM ] − Cov[bi , κi |Ii ≤ IM ]
                     Z ∞Z e(κi )
                                      κ2i ei
                                                                     
          1                                     κi ei
  =                               −          +        E[κi |Ii ≤ IM ] dΦκ [ei ]dFκi − Cov[bi , κi |Ii ≤ IM ]
    Prob[Ii ≤ IM ] κ −∞              κi + τ    κi + τ
      Z ∞ 2                                  
             κi          κi
  = 2              −          E[κi |Ii ≤ IM ] E[−ei |ei ≤ e(κi )]Φκ [−(x − e(κi ))]dFκi
       κ   κi + τ      κi + τ
      −Cov[bi , κi |Ii ≤ IM ]
       2                                             
          κi                   κi
  = 2 E        ξ(κi ) − E           ξ(κi ) E[κi |Ii ≤ IM ] − Cov[bi , κi |Ii ≤ IM ].
        κi + τ               κi + τ


                                                                                                   Appendix–2
Combining the above, we have that (2) holds if and only if:

                                                                                       
            κi                                                                        
       E          κi ζ(κi ) − ξ(κi ) − ζ(κi )E[κi |Ii ≥ IM ] − ξ(κi )E[κi |Ii ≤ IM ]
          κi + τ
                                                                                     
                                    + Cov[bi , κi |Ii ≥ IM ] + Cov[bi , κi |Ii ≤ IM ] > 0.



Claim 1.
                                                                                                    
Cov[bi , κi |Ii ≥ IM ] + Cov[bi , κi |Ii ≤ IM ] = −E[bi |Ii ≥ IM ] E[κi |Ii ≥ IM ] − E[κi |Ii ≤ IM ] .

Proof.
Cov[bi , κi |Ii ≥ IM ] + Cov[bi , κi |Ii ≤ IM ]

  = E[bi κi |Ii ≥ IM ] − E[bi |Ii ≥ IM ]E[κi |Ii ≥ IM ] + E[bi κi |Ii ≤ IM ] − E[bi |Ii ≤ IM ]E[κi |Ii ≤ IM ]
                                                 
        1                      1
  = 2     E[bi κi |Ii ≥ IM ] + E[bi κi |Ii ≤ IM ] − E[bi |Ii ≥ IM ]E[κi |Ii ≥ IM ]
        2                      2
           − E[bi |Ii ≤ IM ]E[κi |Ii ≤ IM ].

Note that as {Ii : Ii ≤ IM } ∪ {Ii : Ii ≥ IM } = R, and Prob[Ii ≤ IM ] = Prob[Ii ≥ IM ] = 12 ,
we have                   1                     1
                            E[bi κi |Ii ≥ IM ] + E[bi κi |Ii ≤ IM ] = E[bi κi ].
                          2                     2

Since bi and κi are independent, then Cov(bi , κi ) = 0, thus E[bi , κi ] − E[bi ]E[κi ] = 0. Since
E[bi ] = 0, then E[bi , κi ] = 0. Thus

Cov[bi , κi |Ii ≥ IM ]+Cov[bi , κi |Ii ≤ IM ] = −E[bi |Ii ≥ IM ]E[κi |Ii ≥ IM ]−E[bi |Ii ≤ IM ]E[κi |Ii ≤ IM ].

Note that 12 E[bi |Ii ≥ IM ] + 12 E[bi |Ii ≤ IM ] = E[bi ] = 0, so E[bi |Ii ≤ IM ] = −E[bi |Ii ≥ IM ],
and thus
                                                                                                    
Cov[bi , κi |Ii ≥ IM ] + Cov[bi , κi |Ii ≤ IM ] = −E[bi |Ii ≥ IM ] E[κi |Ii ≥ IM ] − E[κi |Ii ≤ IM ]

                                                                                                    
Using Claim 1, to prove (2) it is sufficient to show
                                                                                   
          κi                                                                      
     E          κi ζ(κi ) − ξ(κi ) − ζ(κi )E[κi |Ii ≥ IM ] − ξ(κi )E[κi |Ii ≤ IM ]
        κi + τ
                                                                                
                              −E[bi |Ii ≥ IM ] E[κi |Ii ≥ IM ] − E[κi |Ii ≤ IM ] > 0.             (4)


                                                                                        Appendix–3
Simplifying ζ(κi ) and ξ(κi ), we have that

                               −x)2                                      t2
            Z   ∞   exp(− (ei2/κ     )       Z ∞                exp(− 2/κ   )
ζ(κi ) =         ei p                  dei =            (t + x) p             dt =
          e(κi )            2π/κ               e(κi )−x              2π/κ
         Z ∞                   t2           Z ∞                t2         Z ∞                t2
                      exp(− 2/κ   )                   exp(− 2/κ   )                   exp(− 2/κ )
       =            t p             dt + x               p          dt =             t p          dt + xΦκ [x − e(κi )]
          e(κi )−x          2π/κ             e(κi )−x       2π/κ            e(κi )−x     2π/κ
         1 ∞                                                       φκ [x − e(κi )]
           Z
                           exp(−h)
       =                    p         dh + xΦκ [x − e(κi )] =                        + xΦκ [x − e(κi )],
         κ   (x−e(κ
                  2/κ
                     i ))2
                              2π/κ                                        κ
                                       2
                                      −x)                                      2
            Z   e(κi )      exp(− (ei2/κ   )       Z e(κi )−x                 t
                                                                       exp(− 2/κ )
ξ(κi ) =            −ei p                    dei =            −(t + x) p           dt
             −∞                  2π/κ               −∞                     2π/κ
            Z e(κi )−x exp(− t2 )                 Z e(κi )−x exp(− t2 )
                                    2/κ                            2/κ
        =               −t p              dt − x              p         dt
             −∞                  2π/κ              −∞           2π/κ
            Z e(κi )−x exp(− t2 )
                                    2/κ
        =               −t p              dt − xΦκ [−(x − e(κi ))] =
             −∞                  2π/κ
            1 ∞                                                                           φκ [x − e(κi )]
              Z
                             exp(−h)
        =                     p         dh − xΦκ [−(x − e(κi ))] = −xΦκ [−(x − e(κi ))] +                 .
            κ   (x−e(κ
                    2/κ
                       i ))2
                                2π/κ                                                            κ


Define α(κi ) ≡ 2Φκ [x − e(κi )] − 1, and note that
                                                  Z ∞
                                            1
                  E[κi |Ii ≥ IM ] =                   κi Φκ [x − e(κi )]dFκi
                                    Prob[Ii ≥ IM ] κ
                                             Z ∞
                                  = E[κi ] + κi (2Φκ [x − e(κi )] − 1)dFκi
                                                    κ

                                   = E[κi ] + E[κi α(κi )]
                                                      Z ∞
                                             1
                     E[κi |Ii ≤ I] =                       κi (1 − Φκ [x − e(κi )])dFκi
                                     Prob[Ii ≤ IM ] κ
                                              Z ∞
                                   = E[κi ] − κi (2Φκ [x − e(κi )] − 1)dFκi
                                                    κ

                                    = E[κi ] − E[κi α(κi )].

Thus, (2) holds if and only if
                                                                                 
      κi                                      κi                  
E          ζ(κi ) − ξ(κi ) κi − E[κi ] > E           ζ(κi ) + ξ(κi ) +2E[bi |Ii ≥ IM ] E[κi α(κi )]
    κi + τ                                    κi + τ




                                                                                                Appendix–4
Note that

                                           φκ [x − e(κi )]                           φκ [x − e(κi )] 
ζ(κi ) − ξ(κi ) = xΦκ [x − e(κi )] +                       − − xΦκ [−(x − e(κi ))] +
                                                 κ                                         κ
                    = x
                                         φκ [x − e(κi )]                         φκ [x − e(κi )]
ζ(κi ) + ξ(κi ) = xΦκ [x − e(κi )] +                     − xΦκ [−(x − e(κi ))] +
                                               κ                                       κ
                                                             2
                    = x Φκ [x − e(κi )] − Φκ [−(x − e(κi ))] + φκ [x − e(κi )]
                                                                 κ
                                  2
                    = α(κi ) · x + φκ [x − e(κi )].
                                  κ

Thus, (4) holds if and only if

                                                                       
        κi               κi                 2
x·Cov        , κi > E           α(κi ) · x + φκ [x − e(κi )] +2E[bi |Ii ≥ IM ] E[κi α(κi )].
      κi + τ           κi + τ               κ

Since E[α(κi )] = E[2Φκ [x − e(κi )] − 1] = 2Prob[Ii ≥ IM ] − 1 = 0, then we have E[κi α(κi )] =
Cov[α(κi ), κi ]. Therefore (2) holds if and only if:

                                                                                   
        κi                            κi              2
x·Cov        , κi > x·Cov α(κi ) E          α(κi ) +    φκ [x − e(κi )] + 2E[bi |Ii ≥ IM ] , κi .
      κi + τ                        κi + τ           xκ

                                      h                                                       
                      κi
                                                                            i
Define T (κi ) ≡     κi +τ
                             − α(κi ) E κiκ+τ
                                           i
                                              α(κi ) +    2
                                                            φ [x
                                                         xκ κ
                                                                   − e(κi )] + 2E[bi |Ii ≥ IM ] . Since
x > 0, then the expression above is equivalent to Cov[T (κi ), κi ] > 0. To prove the proposition
it is sufficient to show that if the condition in the proposition holds we have T 0 (κi ) > 0. Note
                             τ                         τ
          T 0 (κi ) =            2
                                   − 2φκ [x − e(κi )] 2 · IM ·
                        (κi + τ )                     κi
                                                                                         
                                      κi                 2
                                E             α(κi ) +     φκ [x − e(κi )] + 2E[bi |Ii ≥ IM ] > 0
                                   κi + τ               xκ
           κ2i
                                                                                                          
                                           IM           κi                 2
⇐⇒                    > 2φκ [x − e(κi )] ·    · E              α(κi ) · x + φκ [x − e(κi )] + 2E[bi |Ii ≥ IM ]
       (κi + τ )2                           x        κi + τ                κ

To show this holds, we bound both the LHS and RHS. We start by noting that as φκ is the




                                                                                           Appendix–5
                                                                                                  √ √
normal p.d.f. with mean 0 and precision κ, then φκ [x − e(κi )] < φκ [0] =                         κ/ 2π. Thus:

                                                                                 
                 κi                 2                      2               κi
            E          α(κi ) · x + φκ [x − e(κi )]    < √     +x·E             α(κi )
               κi + τ               κ                     2πκ            κi + τ
                                                        Z
                                          κi                             κi
                                   x·E         α(κi ) ≤ x       α(κi )        dFκi
                                        κi + τ             x−e(κi )≥0 κi + τ

                                             h                                      i
                                                                          κi +τ
Further, as x > 0 we have Prob[Ii ≥ x] = Prob ei ≥                         < Prob[ei ≥ x] = 12 =
                                                                           κi
                                                                                x
                                                                             h             i
Prob[Ii ≥ IM ], which implies x > IM .                  Thus, as α(κi ) = 2Φκ x − κiκ+τ
                                                                                     i
                                                                                        I M − 1 =
√ R x− κi +τ IM       2                  2
  κ     κi       − κt2              − κt2
√
 2π       κi +τ e       dt and 1 ≥ e       for all t (as κ > 1 by construction),
     −(x−    κi
                  IM )
                           √                 √
                             κ                 κ
                  α(κi ) ≤ √ 2(x − e(κi )) ≤ √ 2(x − IM ) when x − e(κi ) ≥ 0.
                            2π                2π
and thus

                                                                    √
     κi                2                                               2 κ(x − IM )    2
E          α(κi ) · x + φκ [x − e(κi )]   < x · Prob[x − e(κi ) ≥ 0] ·    √         +√
   κi + τ              κ                                                    2π        2πκ
                                                       √
                                            x(x − IM ) κ         2
                                          <      √         +√
                                                   2π            2πκ

                     √                                                                  q
           IM (x−IM ) κ
Finally,        √           +   √ 2 IM   is increasing in IM when IM < x <                  2
                                                                                              ,   so
                  2π             2πκ x                                                      κ



     IM (x − IM )κ + 2 IxM
                                                                                         
 2                                              IM       κi                2
   >                       > 2φκ [x − e(κi )] ·    ·E          α(κi ) · x + φκ [x − e(κi )] .
 π            π                                  x     κi + τ              κ

Thus, when τb is large enough, then E[bi |Ii ≥ IM ] is small, and

                                                                                   
 2                      IM        κi                2
   > 2φκ [x − e(κi )] ·    · E          α(κi ) · x + φκ [x − e(κi )] + 2E[bi |Ii ≥ IM ]
 π                       x      κi + τ              κ

                    κi                                                            κ2i            κ2
Therefore, as      κi +τ
                           is increasing in κi , and if κ ≥ √ πτ      , then   (κi +τ )2
                                                                                           ≥   (κ+τ )2
                                                                                                         ≥   2
                                                                                                             π
                                                                                                                 and
                                                               2
                                                                 −1


                                                                                      
   2                      IM        κi                 2
     > 2φκ [x − e(κi )] ·    · E           α(κi ) · x + φκ [x − e(κi )] + 2E[bi |Ii ≥ IM ]
   π                       x      κi + τ               κ

so T (κi ) is increasing in κi , and therefore Cov[T (κi ), κi ] > 0, so (2) holds.                                    


                                                                                                             Appendix–6
Proof of Proposition 4: For a given ρi , a citizens’ overconfidence after ni signals is given
by:
                 ni + τ (1 + (ni − 1)ρi ) ni + τ (1 + (ni − 1)ρ)
                                         −                       > 0 ⇐⇒ ρi < ρ
                     1 + (ni − 1)ρi           1 + (ni − 1)ρ

The difference in overconfidence between the citizen at age ni + 1 and age ni is given by

                             ni (ρ − ρi )(2 + (ni − 1)(ρ + ρi − ρρi )
                                                                            >0
                       (1 + (ni − 1)ρi )(1 + ni ρi )(1 + (ni − 1)ρ)(1 + nρ)

which is positive because 0 < ρi < ρ < 1 and ni ≥ 2. When ρi < ρ, the increase in a citizens
posterior precision will be in excess of the new information transmitted, so older citizens will
be more overconfident.
                                                                    1+ρi τ
      To establish that E[Ei |n] is increasing in n if ρ ≥        1+2τ −ρi τ
                                                                             ,   consider a citizen who observes
ni signals eit who believes that the correlation between those signals is ρi . Following Lemma 2
                  ni
              1 X                                         ni ei
define ei =          eit , and her mean belief is ni +τ (1+(n  i −1)ρi )
                                                                         . In turn, ei is distributed accord-
             ni t=1
                h              i
ing to ei ∼ N x, 1+(nnii−1)ρ . Thus, the mean belief of citizens with ρi is distributed according
                                                   ni x                             1+(ni −1)ρ                 n2i
to a normal distribution with mean         ni +τ (1+(ni −1)ρi )
                                                                  and variance         ni
                                                                                                 ·   (ni +τ (1+(ni −1)ρi ))2
                                                                                                                             .
   Ii |ni , ρi is distributed as a normal, so Ei |ni , ρi is distributed as a folded normal. When
y ∼ N µ, σ12 , then
               

                                 hµi        h µ i                     d             hµi
                 E[|y|] = 2σ φ     + µ 1 − 2Φ −     ,                     E[|y|] = 2φ     >0
                                 σ              σ                      dσ              σ

where Φ is the standard normal c.d.f., and φ is the standard normal p.d.f. Thus, it is
sufficient to show that the variance of Ii |ni , ρi is increasing in ni as this implies Ei |ni , ρi will
be increasing in ni for all ρi . That is, we need to show

           1 + nρ        (n + 1)2           1 + (n − 1)ρ              n2
                  ·                       −              ·                           ≥0                                  (5)
            n + 1 (n + 1 + τ (1 + nρi ))2        n         (n + τ (1 + (n − 1)ρi ))2

We will argue that the LHS increasing in ρ. We first show that the derivative of the LHS


                                                                                                            Appendix–7
with respect to ρ is positive, that is

            n(1 + n)(n + (1 + (n − 1)ρi )τ )2 − (n − 1)n(1 + n + (1 + nρi )τ )2 ≥ 0

which, in turn, is equal to

           n + n2 + 2nτ + 2n2 τ + 2nτ 2 − 2nρi τ 2 + 2n2 ρi τ 2 + nρ2i τ 2 − n2 ρ2i τ 2 ≥ 0.

Since ρi ∈ [0, 1), ni ≥ 2, and τ > 0, then we must have 2nτ 2 − 2nρi τ 2 ≥ 0 and 2n2 ρi τ 2 −
n2 ρ2i τ 2 ≥ 0, which implies that that the condition is satisfied.
                                                                                        1+ρi τ
   Since this the LHS of (5) increasing in ρ, and a since we know ρ ≥                 1+2τ −ρi τ
                                                                                                 ,   then it
                                                              1+ρi τ
suffices to show that this condition holds when ρ =         1+2τ −ρi τ
                                                                       .   Replacing ρ with this value
and solving yields
                          (ρi − 1)2 τ 2 (1 + 2n + (2 + (2n − 1)ρi )τ )
                                                                       ≥ 0,
                                           1 + (2 − ρi )τ

which is always true since ρi ∈ [0, 1), n ≥ 1, and τ > 0.                                                 


Proof of Proposition 5 and Corollary 6: Consider an individual i with ideology I,
overconfidence κi , and preference bias bi . Suppose, without loss of generality that Ii > 0.
Note that Ei [x] = Ii − bi . This means that we have UR (bi |x) > UL (bi |x) if and only if
x > −bi . Thus, Probi [UR (bi |x) > UL (bi |x)] = Probi [x > −bi ] = 1 − Probi [x < −bi ]. By
construction this is equal to
                                             √            √         
                      1 − Φ (−bi − (Ii − bi )) τ + κi = Φ Ii τ + κi .                         (6)
                 √
    As Ii > 0, Ii τ + κi must be strictly increasing in κi conditional on Ii , and in Ii condi-
                                                    √
tional on κi . The same must therefore hold for Φ[Ii τ + κi ] , and hence for Probi [UR (bi |x) >
UL (bi |x)]. Note that specular results hold conditional on Ii < 0. Thus, we can replace Ii
with Ei = |I| in (6).
   Finally, Fc (·) and Fc0 (·) are c.d.f.s and thus increasing in their arguments. This, together
with the previous argument gives the second and third parts of the proposition and corollary.
This, combined with Proposition 1 gives the first part of Proposition 5 and Corollary 6. 


                                                                                            Appendix–8
Proof of Proposition 7: The posterior of citizen i about the bias of citizen j after observing
Ij is:

L(bj |Ij ) ∝ L(Ij |bj )L(bj )
             "Z        (                       2 )      (                   ) #      (          )
                +∞                                                                             2
                                                                                         τ   b
                              
                           κ      κ+τ                       κi + τ                         b   j
           ∝    exp −          x−     (Ij − b)      ∗ exp −        (x − Ii )2 dx ∗ exp −
               −∞          2       κ                           2                           2

This is a normal distribution with mean

                            
             κ+τ                                  κ(κi + τ )(κ + τ )
          Ij     − (Ii − bi ) ∗
              κ                 (κ + τ ) (τ + τ κ + τb κ) + κi (τ 2 + 2τ κ + κτb + κ2 )
                                           2



                                                                                               κ
                                                                                                 
where the second term is positive and increasing in κi . Thus, if Ij > (Ii − bi ) κ+τ              , then
                                                                    κ
                                                                       
Ei [bj ] > 0 and Ei [bj ] is increasing in κi . If Ij < (Ii − bi ) κ+τ   , then Ei [bj ] < 0 and Ei [bj ] is
decreasing in κi . Thus, |Ei [bj ]| is increasing in κi .
    The existence of αi , βi ∈ R++ s.t. the ideology of citizen i after communication is αi Ii +
βi Ij is a standard result of Bayesian updating. αi + βi 6= 1 because ideology is a signal of
both bias and beliefs. The fact that αi increases and βi decreases in κi is a direct consequence
of the standard result that citizens with a high prior precision update less, and also because
here they will tend to assign a higher probability to the fact that the differences in ideologies
are due to differences in preference biases. In particular, solving for αi , βi ∈ R+ :

                              (κi + τ ) (τ 2 + 2τ κ + κτb + κ2 )                       κ(1 − αi )
           αi =                                                             ,   βi =
                  (κ + τ ) (τ 2 + τ κ + τb κ) + κi (τ 2 + 2τ κ + κτb + κ2 )              κ+τ

and thus
                           dαi            τb κ2 (τb κ + (κ + τ )2 )
                               =                                         > 0.
                           dκi   (κi + τ )(κ + τ )2 + τb κ(κi + κ + τ )2

Thus, αi is increasing in κi , so βi is decreasing in κi .                                               


Proof of Proposition 8: We begin with the second and third parts of the proposition.



                                                                                             Appendix–9
                                                                                                                         τ +κj 
By Bayes’ rule: L(κj |Ij ) ∝ L(Ij |κj )L(κj ). Note that L(Ij |κj ) = φIi ,κi +τ Ij (                                      κj
                                                                                                                              ) ,   where
φµ,τ (·) denotes the p.d.f. of a normal distribution with mean µ and precision τ . To prove
that Ei [κj ] is increasing in κi , it is sufficient to prove that, for any κj , κ0j ∈ supp(F ), κj < κ0j ,
the ratio                                    
                          q                                              τ +κ0                  2 
                              κi +τ
                                       exp       − (κi2+τ )         Ij              j
                                                                                            − Ii
      L(Ij |κ0j )              2π                                             κ0j
                  = q                                                                             2 
      L(Ij |κj )                                                        
                                                                             τ +κj
                                                                                        
                      κi +τ
                               2π
                                       exp       − (κi2+τ )         Ij         κj
                                                                                            − Ii
                               (                                         2                 2 !)
                                                          τ + κ0j
                                                                                    
                                       κi + τ                                   τ + κj
                     = exp −                           Ij    0
                                                                    − I i − Ij           − Ii
                                          2                 κj                    κj

is increasing in κi . This holds if and only if

                                                                    2                                              2
                                           τ + κ0j
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                τ + κj
                                  Ij                     − Ii             <         Ij                       − Ii                     (7)
                                             κ0j                                                  κj

for all κj , κ0j ∈ supp(F ), κj < κ0j . If the converse of (7) holds for all κj , κ0j ∈ supp(F ),
κj < κ0j , this is sufficient for Ei [κj ] to be decreasing in κi .
         τ +κj                                       τ +κ0j                  τ +κj
    As     κj
                 is decreasing in κj , Ej (            κ0j
                                                            )   < Ej (         κj
                                                                                   )        since κj < κ0j . This implies (7) holds if
Ii ∗Ij < 0 or Ej > Ei . By contrast, the converse holds κj , κ0j ∈ supp(F ), κj < κ0j if Ii ∗Ij > 0,
            τ +κj
and Ei >      κj
                  Ej .
    Finally, as in the Proof of Proposition 7, the first part follows from standard properties
of Bayesian Updating.                                                                                                                  




Appendix B                     Survey Details—Not for Publication

The typical way psychologists measure overconfidence is not well suited to surveys. They
often use a very large number of questions—up to 150 (see, for example, Alpert and Raiffa,
1969/1982; Soll and Klayman, 2004)—and elicit confidence using confidence intervals, which
may be difficult for the average survey respondent to understand (see, for example, Juslin


                                                                                                                         Appendix–10
et al., 1999; Rothschild, 2011).
      Our methodology for measuring overconfidence on surveys uses three innovations. The
first two are due to Ansolabehere et al. (2011). First, the questions we use are about either
quantities that everyone knows the scale of, such as dates, or the scale is provided, as in
the case of unemployment or inflation. That is, when asking about unemployment rates,
the question gives respondents the historical minimum, maximum, and median of that rate.
This has been shown to reduce the number of incorrect answers simply due to a respondent
not knowing the appropriate scale (Ansolabehere et al., 2013). Second, confidence is elicited
on a qualitative scale, which is easily understandably by survey respondents and allows for
more conservative controls for actual knowledge.
      The third innovation is a modification of the second, and was only utilized on the 2011
CCES. For our general knowledge questions—the year the telephone was invented, the pop-
ulation of Spain, the year Shakespeare was born, and the percent of the U.S. population
that lives in California—we elicited confidence using an inverted confidence interval.1 That
is, rather than asking for a confidence interval directly, which we felt may have been too
challenging for survey respondents, we asked them to give their estimates of the probability
that the true answer was in some interval around their answer. So, for example, after giving
their best guess as to the date of Shakespeare’s birth, respondents were asked:

        What do you think the percent chance is that your best guess, entered above, is
        within 50 years of the actual answer?

Given a two-parameter distribution, such as a normal, this is enough to pin down the variance
of a respondent’s belief.
      The sum total of these innovations is that overconfidence can be elicited using a small
number of questions that are understandable to most survey respondents, rather than just
to university undergraduates.
  1
      Note that these general knowledge questions were all from previous research on overconfidence.




                                                                                            Appendix–11
Appendix B.1          Survey Questions

We next present the text of the questions used to construct our overconfidence measure on
the 2010 and 2011 CCES, as described in Section 2.2.1. Instructions in brackets indicate lim-
itations on possible answers implemented by the survey company—these were not displayed
to respondents. If a survey respondent tried to enter, say, text where only a positive number
was allowed, they would be told to edit their entry to conform with the limitations placed
on the response field. If a respondent tried to skip a question, the survey would request that
the respondent give an answer. If the respondent tried to skip the same question a second
time, they were allowed to do so.



  1. The unemployment rate is the percent of people actively searching work but not
     presently employed. Since World War II it has ranged from a low of 2 percent to
     a high of 11 percent.
     What is your best guess about the unemployment rate in the United States today?
     Even if you are uncertain, please provide us with your best estimate of the percent of
     people seeking work but currently without a job in the United States.
         % [only allow a positive number]

  2. How confident are you of your answer to this question?

        • No confidence at all
        • Not very confident
        • Somewhat unconfident
        • Somewhat confident
        • Very confident
        • Certain

  3. The inflation rate is the annual percentage change in prices for basic goods like food,
     clothing, housing, and energy. Since World War II it has ranged from a high of 14
     percent (a 14% increase in prices over the previous year) to a low of -2 percent (a 2%
     decline in prices over the previous year).
     What is your best guess about the inflation rate in the United States today? Even if
     you are uncertain, please provide us with your best estimate of about what percent do
     you think prices went up or down in the last 12 months.
     Do you think prices went up or down?

                                                                                Appendix–12
     • Up
     • Down

4. By what percent do you think prices went up or down?
      % [only allow a positive number]

5. How confident are you of your answer to this question?

     • No confidence at all
     • Not very confident
     • Somewhat unconfident
     • Somewhat confident
     • Very confident
     • Certain

6. The unemployment rate is the percent of people actively searching work but not
   presently employed. Since World War II it has ranged from a low of 2 percent to
   a high of 11 percent.
  What do you expect the unemployment rate to be a year from now? Even if you are
  uncertain, please provide us with your best estimate of the percent of people who will
  be seeking but without a job in the United States in November, 2011.
      % [only allow a positive number]

7. How confident are you of your answer to this question?

     • No confidence at all
     • Not very confident
     • Somewhat unconfident
     • Somewhat confident
     • Very confident
     • Certain

8. The inflation rate is the annual percentage change in prices for basic goods like food,
   clothing, housing, and energy. Since World War II it has ranged from a high of 14
   percent (a 14% increase in prices over the previous year) to a low of -2 percent (a 2%
   decline in prices over the previous year).
  What do you expect the inflation rate to be a year from now? Even if you are uncertain,
  please provide us with your best estimate of about what percent do you expect prices
  to go up or down in the next 12 months.
  Do you expect prices to go up or down?


                                                                            Appendix–13
        • Up
        • Down

  9. By what percent do you expect prices to go up or down?
        % [only allow a positive number]
 10. How confident are you of your answer to this question?
        • No confidence at all
        • Not very confident
        • Somewhat unconfident
        • Somewhat confident
        • Very confident
        • Certain

   Next, we list the questions from the 2011 CCES used to construct the overconfidence
measures discussed in Section 3.2. Note that the unemployment questions were changed
from 2010, in accordance with the evolving research agenda of Ansolabehere et al..



  1. In what year was the telephone invented? Even if you are not sure, please give us your
     best guess.


  2. How confident are you of your answer to this question?
        • No confidence at all
        • Not very confident
        • Somewhat unconfident
        • Somewhat confident
        • Very confident
        • Certain

  3. As a different way of answering the previous question, what do you think the percent
     chance is that your best guess, entered above, is within 25 years of the actual answer?
        %
  4. What is the population of Spain, in millions? Even if you are not sure, please give us
     your best guess.



                                                                              Appendix–14
 5. How confident are you of your answer to this question?

      • No confidence at all
      • Not very confident
      • Somewhat unconfident
      • Somewhat confident
      • Very confident
      • Certain

 6. As a different way of answering the previous question, what do you think the percent
    chance is that your best guess, entered above, is within 15 million of the actual answer?
       %

 7. In what year was the playwright William Shakespeare born? Even if you are not sure,
    please give us your best guess.


 8. How confident are you of your answer to this question?

      • No confidence at all
      • Not very confident
      • Somewhat unconfident
      • Somewhat confident
      • Very confident
      • Certain

 9. As a different way of answering the previous question, what do you think the percent
    chance is that your best guess, entered above, is within 50 years of the actual answer?
       %

10. What percent of the US population lives in California? Even if you are not sure, please
    give us your best guess.


11. How confident are you of your answer to this question?

      • No confidence at all
      • Not very confident
      • Somewhat unconfident
      • Somewhat confident
      • Very confident

                                                                               Appendix–15
      • Certain

12. As a different way of answering the previous question, what do you think the percent
    chance is that your best guess, entered above, is within 5 percentage points of the
    actual answer?
       %

13. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, since World War II the most non-agricultural
    jobs the US economy has lost in a year is 5.4 million. The most jobs gained in a year
    has been 4.2 million. Over the same period, the US economy has gained an average of
    1.4 million jobs a year.
    What is your best guess about the number of jobs gained or lost in the last year?
    Over the past year, I think the US economy has overall

      • Lost jobs
      • Gained jobs

14. How many jobs do you think have been lost or gained over the past year?
        million jobs [only allow a positive number]

15. How confident are you of your answer to this question?

      • No confidence at all
      • Not very confident
      • Somewhat unconfident
      • Somewhat confident
      • Very confident
      • Certain

16. The inflation rate is the annual percentage change in prices for basic goods like food,
    clothing, housing, and energy. Since World War II it has ranged from a high of 14.4.
    percent (a 14.4% increase in prices over the previous year) to a low of -1.2 percent (a
    1.2% decline in prices over the previous year).
    What is your best guess about the inflation rate in the United States today?
    Do you think prices went up or down?

      • Up
      • Down

17. By what percent do you think prices went up or down?
       % [only allow a positive number]


                                                                             Appendix–16
18. How confident are you of your answer to this question?

      • No confidence at all
      • Not very confident
      • Somewhat unconfident
      • Somewhat confident
      • Very confident
      • Certain

19. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, since World War II the most non-agricultural
    jobs the US economy has lost in a year is 5.4 million. The most jobs gained in a year
    has been 4.2 million. Over the same period, the US economy has gained an average of
    1.4 million jobs a year.
    What is your best guess about the number of jobs that will be gained or lost over the
    next year?
    Over the next year, I think the US economy will overall

      • Lose jobs
      • Gain jobs

20. How many jobs do you think the US economy will lose or gain over the next year?
        million jobs [only allow a positive number]

21. How confident are you of your answer to this question?

      • No confidence at all
      • Not very confident
      • Somewhat unconfident
      • Somewhat confident
      • Very confident
      • Certain

22. The inflation rate is the annual percentage change in prices for basic goods like food,
    clothing, housing, and energy. Since World War II it has ranged from a high of 14.4.
    percent (a 14.4% increase in prices over the previous year) to a low of -1.2 percent (a
    1.2% decline in prices over the previous year).
    What do you expect the inflation rate to be a year from now?
    Do you expect prices to go up or down?

      • Up
      • Down

                                                                             Appendix–17
 23. By what percent do you expect prices to go up or down?
            % [only allow a positive number]

 24. How confident are you of your answer to this question?

            • No confidence at all
            • Not very confident
            • Somewhat unconfident
            • Somewhat confident
            • Very confident
            • Certain




Appendix C                  Historical Data—Not for Publication

While the results in the text support our theory, they raise the concern, briefly discussed in
Section 3.3, that overconfidence and conservatism are somehow linked in a way not accounted
for in our theory. This section contains a limited, post-hoc, analysis to address this concern,
and concludes by gathering together a number of facts in order to construct a post-hoc
rationalization of this fact that goes beyond the findings in Section 3.3.
       As the data in the text are the only we are aware of that provide both good measures of
political ideology and of overconfidence, we turn to a survey with greater coverage over time,
but more limited measures of ideology, and only a proxy for overconfidence: the American
National Election Study (ANES). In particular, we follow a strategy based on the fact that
many studies over time, including ours, have found men to be more overconfident then women
and use male as a proxy for “more overconfident”.1
       To begin the analysis we add a basic result.
   1
    Barber and Odean (2001) use male as an instrument for overconfidence in a study of financial risk
taking. We have not adopted this strategy as being male is likely correlated with numerous other factors
which may also affect the dependent variables we are interested in (Grinblatt and Keloharju, 2009). The
curious reader may be interested to know that doing so approximately triples the effect size of overconfidence
in the regressions presented in the main text.




                                                                                              Appendix–18
                                   Figure 5: Men became significantly more conservative after 1980.


                             0.6                                                                              6
                                      Ideological Difference
                                      Thermometer Score Difference




                                                             Cutpoint
                             0.4                                                                              4




                                                                                                                   Termometer Score Difference
   Ideological Difference




                             0.2                                                                              2




                              0                                                                               0




                            −0.2                                                                              −2
                                           1970            1980                    1990            2000
Note: Thermometer scores were not collected in 1978.


Proposition C.1. If more overconfident citizens have the same average ideology as less
overconfident citizens, then overconfidence is equally correlated with ideological extremeness
for both those to the right and to the left of center.

Proof of Proposition C.1: Consider two citizens with κ1 > κ2 . As E[Ei [I|κ]] = τκx       +κ
                                                                                             ,
                                                     h                   i
                                                             τb (τ +κ)2
we have that τκ+κ
                1x
                  1
                    = τ
                       κ2 x
                        +κ 2
                             ⇐⇒ x = 0. Thus, I|κ ∼ N  0, τ b κ2 +(τ +κ)2   . As this is sym-
metric about zero for all κ, it implies Cov[E[E|κ, I ≥ 0], κ] = Cov[E[E|κ, I ≤ 0], κ] and
Var[I|I ≥ 0] = Var[I|I ≤ 0]. Finally, as this implies f (κ|I ≥ 0) = f (κ|I ≤ 0) = f (κ),
thus, Var[κ|I ≥ 0] = Var[κ|I ≤ 0].                                      Taken together this implies Corr[E, κ|I ≥ 0] =
Corr[E, κ|I ≤ 0].                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                          Appendix–19
   Next, we investigate if there is variation over time in the difference between the average
ideology of men and women. In particular, we have both self-reported ideology and the
difference between respondent’s thermometer scores for “liberals” and “conservatives”, which
is intended as a measure of ideology. Figure 5 plots the difference between men and women
on both of these scales over time with 95% confidence intervals in each year we have data.
There is a clear rightward shift for men between 1980 and 1982. We divide the sample into
two parts around 1981, and conduct a similar analysis to Table 7. The results can be found
in Table C.1.
Table C.1: Data from the ANES is broadly consistent with Proposition 3 and Proposition
C.1.

     Time Frame                          Up to 1980                           1982 and After
     Dep. Variable            Ideology        Extremeness    Ideology               Extremeness
                                            Left of Right of                      Left of Right of
     Sample
                                            Median Median                         Median Median

                                   Panel A: Self-Reported Ideology

     Male                       0.013       0.14∗∗∗      0.10∗∗∗      0.18∗∗∗      0.044∗∗      0.16∗∗∗
                                (.032)      (.027)       (.025)       (.022)       (.019)       (.017)
     Difference                                    0.035                                  0.11∗∗∗
                                                   (.037)                                 (.025)
     Year Fixed Effects            Y           Y            Y            Y            Y             Y
     N                          6,880        4,241        5,132       15,183        8,808       11,395

                                    Panel B: Thermometer Scores

     Male                      0.88∗∗∗      0.72∗∗∗      1.62∗∗∗      2.17∗∗∗      -0.092       1.96∗∗∗
                                (.28)        (.24)        (.25)        (.23)        (.19)        (.21)
     Difference                                    0.89∗∗                                 2.05∗∗∗
                                                   (.35)                                   (.28)
     Year Fixed Effects            Y           Y            Y            Y            Y             Y
     N                          11,439       6,551        8,709       18,105       10,455       12,992
     Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level with standard errors
     in parentheses. The N of the split-sample regressions do not sum to the N of the ideology
     regression due to the fact that those respondents with the median ideology are included in both
     regressions.




                                                                                               Appendix–20
       The results in Table C.1 are broadly consistent with the patterns predicted by Proposition
3 and Proposition C.1. For self-reported ideology, there is no statistical difference in average
ideology between men and women before 1982, and, consistent with Proposition C.1, men are
equally more ideologically extreme, regardless of their ideological direction. After 1982, men
are significantly further to the right then women on average, and, consistent with Proposition
3, being male exhibits greater correlation with ideological extremeness for those to the right
of the population median than for those to the left of the median.2 For the thermometer
scores, the difference in correlation between right and left expands as the ideological difference
between men and women increases.
       While the results presented here are broadly consistent with theory, and suggest that
overconfidence and ideological extremeness are correlated for both left and right, depending
on the time-frame under study, further research is needed. In particular, gender is correlated
with a multitude of political differences, and the shift in ideology that occurred in the 1980s
has many potential explanations that have nothing to do with overconfidence. We believe
it is best to note that the available data is consistent with theory, but that better data is
clearly needed.3


Is There a Connection between Overconfidence and Conservatism? Figure 2(b)
shows a clear correlation between overconfidence and conservatism. But is this a more general
phenomenon? While our data is limited, and our thinking about this issue is decidedly post-
hoc, we believe the answer is no.
       There are three pieces of weak evidence against a more general relationship between
overconfidence and conservatism. The first piece is noted in Section 3.3: if overconfidence and
   2
      The magnitudes of the coefficients are similar in magnitude to the coefficient on gender in the analysis
of the 2010 CCES in Sections 3.1 and 3.3. After 1988, the self-reported ideological extremeness measure
exhibits no statistically significant correlation with gender for those to the left of the median, which is
consistent with the analysis in Table 7.
    3
      Another proxy for overconfidence, especially given the results in Section 3.4, is age. However, across the
the entire timespan of the ANES cumulative dataset, age has a roughly constant, statistically significant,
positive correlation with ideology. That is, the hypothesis of Proposition C.1 is never met, and thus, there
is no way to contrast that proposition with the results in Section 3.3.



                                                                                               Appendix–21
conservatism were both caused by some underlying factor, then there should be a negative
correlation between extremeness and overconfidence for those left-of-center in Table 7, yet
there is not. Second, as noted in Section 3.4 older people on both the left and the right are
more ideologically extreme. Third is the analysis in this section, which suggests that in the
past overconfidence was equally linked to liberalism and conservatism.
   So if there is no general relationship between overconfidence and conservatism, what can
explain this relationship in 2010 (and 2011)? This relationship, and the facts above are con-
sistent with our theory, if we add that ideological direction, left or the right, is the product
of a person’s environment when they became politically active. To put this another way,
correlational neglect gives people the tendency to become both more ideologically extreme
and more overconfident as they age. However, the theory makes no prediction about which
ideological direction they will tend towards, and it is known that this responds to environ-
mental factors when a person first becomes politically active (Meredith, 2009; Mullainathan
and Washington, 2009). As the most ideologically extreme and overconfident people in 2010
began participating in politics in the late 70s and 80s, when conservatism was in the ascen-
dency, this would rationalize the patterns we see in the data. This further implies that in
other periods in time it may appear that there is a relationship between overconfidence and
liberalism.



Appendix D               Other Specifications—Not for Publication

Appendix D.1           Theoretical

This section addresses, in a casual way, a number of theoretical questions that have been
posed to us. While the result of our inquiry into these questions did not produce results that
merit a discussion in the main text, we thought it would be useful to record the results.




                                                                                  Appendix–22
Distributional Assumptions Throughout the paper we make heavy use of normal dis-
tributions. This has advantages for both tractability and interpretation. In particular,
tractability is helped by the fact that a normal is a self-conjugate prior, and that properties
of the normal are well studied in statistics. The advantage in interpretation comes from
the fact that the normal is a two-parameter distribution (the mean and precision), so it is
straightforward to implement and interpret overconfidence as a function of precision without
worrying about the effects of higher (or lower) order moments.
   However, this leads to questions about how much our results are driven by the use of
normal distributions. Or, conversely, many seminar attendees have conjectured that it would
be straight-forward to extend our results to well-behaved distributions. Here we give some
guidance on these questions.
   We start by discussing how our results might generalize to other distributions. Without
the normal distribution, the correlational neglect model becomes intractable. The value of
this model is that it allows us to make predictions about the role of age that could not be
obtained under any fully Bayesian model, as discussed in Section 3.4.
   However if one is willing to put aside these predictions, it is possible to discuss the role of
the normal when citizens receive uncorrelated signals they over-interpret (as in the “model”
of Lemma 2). The proof of Proposition 1 (once Lemma 2 is applied), for example, requires
only that the posterior belief of a citizen be given by f (κi ) ∗ ei , where f (·) is increasing.
This could be generalized to a large family of likelihood functions with the property that the
perceived likelihood function for a citizen with overconfidence κi second-order-stochasticlly
dominates the perceived likelihood function for a citizen with overconfidence κj when κi > κj .
Moreover, we have verified that our results hold with a uniform (or beta) prior with binary
signals that are interpreted as being of various strengths, depending on a citizen’s level of
overconfidence.
   If one uses a support with only two possible states, then our results may not always
hold. However, it is known that such a setup (without overconfidence) produces perverse


                                                                                   Appendix–23
results: see McMurray (2012). In particular, with only two states, the precision of beliefs
may decrease, rather than increase with more signals. However, this would be inconsistent
empirical results in Section 3.4.


Multi-Dimensional Issue Spaces: Our theory has implications for how ideology on
different dimensions would be related to overconfidence. For example, if the information
on a given dimension were all public, with agreed upon correlational structure, then there
should be no relationship between ideology and overconfidence on that dimension. While
this implication is straight-forward to work out, we did not feel that it was testable with
current data.
   In particular, in order to test this, one would need to know quite a bit about where
citizens get their data from, and how citizens infer about how this data affects them. For
example, even if most economic information is public, how that information relates to a
citizen’s permanent income is more opaque. Learning about that relationship would entail
seeing how nationwide economic performance seemed to affect a citizen’s own employment
situation. As these very personal signals would have an unknown correlational structure,
there is plenty of room for correlational neglect.
   Likewise, positions on a social issue like gay marriage may appear to have no informa-
tional content at all, and hence, there should be no relationship between overconfidence and
ideology on this dimension. However, it is perfectly reasonable that one’s position on gay
marriage may depend on beliefs about the likelihood that a loved one, say a child, is gay.
This likelihood may be drawn, in part, from the number of openly gay people in a citizen’s
social environment. If a citizen neglects the fact that they live in a religious community
where others are not open about their sexuality, then they will tend to underestimate the
probability that a loved may turn out to be gay. This will lead to both overconfidence and
more extreme positions, as before.
   We believe that applying our theory to multi-dimensional spaces would be interesting,



                                                                              Appendix–24
and possibly fruitful. We refrain from doing so in this paper because it does not add to the
predictions we can test in our data.


Appendix D.1.1             Voting

Our model of voter turnout, and partisan identification, is based on a specific form of ex-
pressive voting (Fiorina, 1976; Brennan and Hamlin, 1998). In particular a citizen i votes if
and only if
                                                                     1
                                 Probi [UR (bi |x) > UL (bi |x)] −     − ci > 0,             (8)
                                                                     2

where ci is an i.i.d. draw from some distribution Fc , which is strictly increasing on 0, 21 . In
                                                                                            

addition ci ⊥(ρi , bi , eit ).
    While any political economy model where turnout is exogenous implicitly uses an expres-
sive voting model (and others use it more explicitly, see Knight, 2013), there are a number
of other approaches in the political economy literature. As each approach has its partisans,
we thought it worthwhile to discuss those models, and show, where possible, how our model
relates to them.
    Before discussing alternative models, we should note that we focused on the expressive
approach because we believe it is correct, and because it is compatible (as shown below) with
a promising approach in the literature, that voters are choice- or regret-avoidant (Matsusaka,
1995; Degan and Merlo, 2011).
    In addition, this modeling approach allows for both non-trivial turnout and strong parti-
san identification even if the policies proposed by political parties are similar to each other,
as seems to be the case in reality (Snowberg et al., 2007a,b). This is generally not possible
in more traditional models. To make this specific, suppose that both parties propose very
similar platforms, and consider a citizen who is very confident that the best policy for her is
proposed by party R. According to our model, this citizen would strongly identify with, and
turn out to vote, for party R. However, if these behaviors were rooted in expected utility,
and the parties espoused similar platforms, this would not hold. For any reasonably smooth

                                                                                   Appendix–25
utility function there is a small difference in utility between the two parties—and hence no
reason to strongly identify with one party or the other, or turnout.


Pivotal Voting: In these models, the turnout decision is driven largely by whether or
not a voter is likely to be pivotal—that is, change the outcome of the election (Riker and
Ordeshook, 1968). In this model a citizen turns out to vote if and only if


                                     pBi − Ci + Di > 0                                     (9)


where p is the probability an individual citizen’s vote is pivotal—that is, changes the winner
of the election—and Bi is the benefit to the citizen of the citizen’s favored candidate winning
over the other candidate. The remaining terms, Ci and Di , are the instrumental costs and
benefits of voting, which are unrelated to the outcome of the election.
   It seems reasonable to assume that more-overconfident citizens would over-estimate their
probability of being pivotal. This would lead to the prediction that more overconfident
citizens would be more likely to turnout.
   However, whether or not more ideologically extreme people are more likely to turn out
will depend on their utility function. It is well known in the literature on pivotal voting
than in order for more ideologically extreme people to be more likely to turnout, utilities
need to be very concave: that is, they care much more about small differences in policy
when those policies are very far away from their ideal, than when those policies are close to
them. Adding overconfidence adds some additional issues: in particular, in order to have
more extreme citizens be more likely to turn out the utility function has to be more concave
than a quadratic loss function. We have examined a quartic loss-function, and even this
degree of concavity will not guarantee the result: it holds only for specific parameters and
values of the fourth moment of the distribution of beliefs.
   Finally, we do not know if it is possible to replicate our conditional predictions about the
role of overconfidence and extremeness using a pivotal voter model. As such, it seems that

                                                                                 Appendix–26
turning in our model for a pivotal voter model would be a poor choice.


Group Utilitarian: In the group-utilitarian framework a citizen votes not just because
voting may improve her utility, but because it will improve the utility of others like her
as well (Coate and Conlin, 2004; Feddersen and Sandroni, 2006). In these models there is
heterogeneity in the costs of voting, and this selects who, from a group, actually turns out. In
order to use our model of overconfidence, there needs to be a mapping from beliefs to the cost
of voting. An expression for the cost of voting like the left-hand-side of (8) works, and once
this is nested in the group-utilitarian framework will produce the same comparative statics
as in Proposition 5. This occurs because in the group utilitarian framework those with the
lowest costs of voting vote (up to some threshold), and the overconfident, and ideologically
extreme, have the lowest costs according to (8). While it would have been possible to use
the full group-utilitarian framework in Section 4.2, we felt that, for concision, it was best to
avoid that machinery and show directly the important assumption that gives the predictions
in that section.

      The remaining two models we discuss—like the expressive voting model—focus on the
idiosyncratic costs and benefits of turning out to vote. In particular, they focus on large
elections where the number of voters grows large, and hence, pi → 0.


Regret Avoidance: Matsusaka (1995) argues that voter turnout is driven in part by
whether citizens anticipate they will regret their vote. We view this theory as descriptively
accurate: indeed, we ran a survey on a convenience sample using Mechanical Turk, and
found that over 60% of respondents reported that they took into account whether they
might regret their vote when deciding whether or not to vote. Almost 40% could name
someone they regretted voting for.1
  1
     For more on regret-avoidance, see Connolly and Zeelenberg (2002), Zeelenberg (1999), Zeelenberg et
al. (2001). Models of regret have then been frequently used to explain behavioral patterns which are not
compatible with standard, expected-utility, models (Bell, 1982; Loomes and Sugden, 1982; Loomes and
Sugden, 1987; Sugden, 1993; and Sarver, 2008). Indeed, Matsusaka’s approach is a direct instantiation of


                                                                                         Appendix–27
    It is straightforward to show that our model is consistent with a model of regret-avoident
voting. In particular, as pi → 0, a citizen’s turnout decision depends only on the idiosyn-
cratic, instrumental costs and benefits of voting in (8), Ci and Di . We decompose the
instrumental cost into two parts: direct costs Ci0 , such as the opportunity cost of going to
vote, and a regret penalty Ri that accuser if the citizen votes for a candidate whose platform
turns out to be worse for the citizen, given the state. That is


                                  Di − Ci ≡ Di − Ri Ivote=wrong − Ci0


with Di , Ri and Ci0 i.i.d. draws from some (possibly different) distributions.2 We then have:

Proposition D.1. In large elections when Di − Ci ≡ Di − Ri Ivote=wrong − Ci0 , comparative
statics on voter turnout and partisan identification are the same as comparative statics on

                                                                  1
                              Probi [UR (bi |x) > UL (bi |x)] −     − ci > 0.
                                                                  2


Proof of Proposition D.1: When elections are large p → 0 in (9). Supposing citizen i
favors candidate R if he or she were to vote, citizen i will vote if and only if


                           Di − Ri E[Ivote=wrong ] − Ci0 > 0
                                                          Di − Ci0
                                  Prob[vote = wrong] <
                                                            Ri
                                                          Di − Ci0
                      1 − Prob[UR (bi |x) > UL (bi |x)] <
                                                            Ri
                                                      1   1 Di − Ci0
                      Prob[UR (bi |x) > UL (bi |x)] −   >   −        ≡ ci .
                                                      2   2     Ri

The absolute value follows from considering the case where i favors candidate L.                         
We chose to display this chain of logic here to simplify and shorten exposition in the text.
Sugden (1993), applied to politics.
   2
     We emphasize that, although we pick a particular formalization, (expected) regret can be seen as either
a reduction in the benefit of voting, or an increase in the cost of voting.


                                                                                            Appendix–28
Choice Avoidance: Degan and Merlo (2011) use the same idea as Matsusaka (1995).
However, they note that as it is unlikely that a citizen will discover the actual state, they
will not anticipate regretting their decision; instead, they discuss their model in terms of
choice avoidance. It should be clear from the form of (8) that citizens who make their voting
decision in this way are choice-avoidant. In particular, a citizen avoids choice unless the
choice is clear.3


Appendix D.1.2          Strength of Partisan Identification

Our initial model of strength of partisan identification assumed that citizens would invest in
a partisan identity only if they believed there was a sufficiently high probability that they
would stay on the same side of the ideological spectrum as they received more signals.
    This yields the same predictions as Corollary 6. More overconfident citizens would believe
that, with high-probability, future signals would just confirm what they already knew. As
such, there is little chance that they would end up on the opposite side of the ideological
spectrum. Thus, more-overconfident citizens would be more likely to strongly identify with
a party.
    More ideologically extreme citizens would know that they would need a more extreme
signal that the state is on the other side of the ideological spectrum in order to cross-over to
that side. As such, there is little chance they would end up on the opposite side, and they
would thus be more likely to strongly identify with a party.
    We removed this additional model from the text of the paper in order to simplify and
shorten the exposition.
   3
     For examples of choice avoidance in other contexts see Iyengar et al. (2004), Iyengar and Lepper (2000),
Boatwright and Nunes (2001), Shah and Wolford (2007), Schwartz (2004), Choi et al. (2009), DellaVigna
(2009), Reutskaja and Hogarth (2009), and Bertrand et al. (2010).




                                                                                             Appendix–29
Appendix D.2            Empirical

In the text we present our preferred specifications. Here we provide additional specifications
that we excluded from the text for brevity.
   First, in Table D.1 we present the regression equivalent of Figure 3. The age variable is
divided by its standard deviation, as are the dependent variables, to standardize regression
coefficients. Note that the coefficients on age are highly statistically significant in all uncon-
trolled regressions, which match the visual patterns in the figure. However, the rightward
drift in Panel C of the figure is statistically insignificant after adding controls. We do not
find this particularly problematic, however, as this result is not a prediction of the theory.
Moreover, our alternative measures of ideology display a rightward drift even when including
all controls, and this pattern is well-documented in the literature.
   Next, we present analogs of Tables 8 and 9 but use fixed effects to control for self-reported
ideology. The results are slightly stronger using this specification. We refrained from using
these specifications in the text in order to focus on our preferred measure of ideology, the
scaled ideology measure of Tausanovitch and Warshaw (2011). Table D.2 presents the results
for turnout, and Table D.3 presents the results for strength of partisan identification.
   In the text we present WLS specifications with CCES supplied sample weights because
the CCES oversamples certain groups. Some readers may prefer OLS specifications, so we
present them here. In particular, OLS analogs of Tables 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 9 are presented
in Tables D.4–D.9. The results are substantively and statistically similar, although the
coefficients tend to be a bit smaller than the WLS specifications presented in the paper.




                                                                                   Appendix–30
                                           Table D.1: Regressions support the visual patterns in Figure 3.

              Dependent Variable:           Overconfidence                Extremeness                    Ideology                    Deviation

              Age                          0.20∗∗∗      0.19∗∗∗       0.18∗∗∗       0.17∗∗∗       0.12∗∗∗           0.023     0.17∗∗∗       0.17∗∗∗
                                           (.037)       (.035)        (.031)        (.031)        (.030)            (.028)    (.033)        (.034)
              All Controls                   N             Y             N             Y             N                Y          N               Y
              N                                   2,927                                                     2,868
              Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level with standard errors, clustered by age (73 clusters), in
              parentheses. All specifications estimated using WLS with CCES sampling weights.




Appendix–31
       Table D.2: Turnout results are similar when using fixed effects for ideology.

Dependent Variable:                                         Turnout Decision

Overconfidence                 0.056∗∗∗      0.038∗∗       0.068∗∗∗      0.048∗∗∗      0.074∗∗∗      0.054∗∗∗
                                (.017)       (.017)         (.018)        (.017)        (.021)        (.018)
Ideological                    0.18∗∗∗        0.16∗∗∗
  Extremeness                  (.014)         (.014)
Ideology Fixed Effects                                     F =9.21       F =4.93
  (DK as Centrist)                                         p=0.00        p=0.00
Ideology Fixed Effects                                                                 F =4.18       F =2.79
  (DK dropped)                                                                         p=0.00        p=0.00
All Controls                      N              Y             N              Y            N              Y
N                                       2,808                        2,849                       2,696
Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level with standard errors, clustered
by age (73 clusters), in parentheses. All specifications estimated using WLS with CCES sampling weights.




Table D.3: Partisan identification results are similar when using fixed effects for ideology.
Treatment of
                                    Strong (1)                     Weak (0)                 Missing (.)
Independents

Overconfidence                 0.049∗∗∗      0.055∗∗∗      0.042∗∗∗      0.045∗∗∗      0.050∗∗∗      0.049∗∗∗
                                (.015)        (.015)        (.012)        (.014)        (.013)        (.014)
Ideology Fixed Effects         F =11.6                     F =18.0                     F =15.7
  (DK as Centrist)             p=0.00                      p=0.00                      p=0.00
Ideology Fixed Effects                       F =8.67                     F =14.2                     F =13.1
  (DK dropped)                               p=0.00                      p=0.00                      p=0.00
All Controls                      Y              Y             Y              Y            Y              Y
N                               2,910           2,754        2,910           2,754       2,587           2,479
Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level with standard errors, clustered
by age (73 clusters), in parentheses. All specifications estimated using WLS with CCES sampling weights.




                                                                                               Appendix–32
Table D.4: Ideological extremeness is robustly related to overconfidence in unweighted spec-
ifications.
                     Dependent Variable: Scaled Ideological Extremeness

       Overconfidence             0.20∗∗∗        0.16∗∗∗       0.18∗∗∗       0.17∗∗∗          0.12∗∗∗
                                  (.022)         (.022)        (.022)        (.024)           (.024)
       Income, Education
                                                   Y
       Race, Hispanic
       Union, Religion
                                                                 Y
       Church, State
       Gender (Male)                                                         0.25∗∗∗
                                                                             (.033)
       All Controls                                                                             Y
       N                                                       2,868
       Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level with standard
       errors, clustered by age (73 clusters), in parentheses.




Table D.5: Self-reported ideological extremeness is robustly related to overconfidence in
unweighted specifications.
                Treatment of
                                              Centrist                     Missing
                “Don’t Know”
                Overconfidence         0.14∗∗∗       0.11∗∗∗       0.12∗∗∗       0.10∗∗∗
                                       (.016)        (.016)        (.018)        (.018)
                All Controls              N              Y             N             Y
                N                              2,910                        2,754
                Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10%
                level with standard errors, clustered by age (73 clusters), in parentheses.




                                                                                                Appendix–33
Table D.6: A general knowledge-based measure of overconfidence produce similar results to
Table D.5.
                                             Panel A: OLS

 Dependent                                   Self-Reported Ideological Extremeness
 Variable:                                    (“Don’t Know” treated as centrist)

 Overconfidence                    0.14∗∗∗            0.11∗∗∗
  (Economy)                        (.032)             (.033)
 Overconfidence                                                          0.16∗∗∗            0.093∗∗
  (General Knowledge)                                                    (.034)             (.037)
 All Controls                         N                  Y                  N                  Y
 N                                                               989

                                             Panel B: 2SLS

 Dependent                    Overconfidence             Overconfidence
                                             Extremeness                Extremeness
 Variable:                     (Economy)                  (Economy)

 Overconfidence                                       0.50∗∗∗                                0.32∗∗
  (Economy)                                            (.12)                                 (.13)
 Overconfidence                   0.31∗∗∗                                0.29∗∗∗
  (General Knowledge)              (.031)                                 (.034)
                                  F =96.2                                F =69.5
 All Controls                         N                  N                  Y                  Y
 N                                                               989
 Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level with standard errors,
 clustered by age (69 clusters), in parentheses. The first stage specification also present an F test on
 excluding the instrument, Overconfidence (General Knowledge).




                                                                                           Appendix–34
Table D.7: Covariances left and right of center are similar using unweighted specifications..
                                                                       Self-Reported
 Measure:                         Scaled                        Treatment of “Don’t Know”
                                                              Centrist               Missing
                          Left of        Right of      Left of        Right of      Left of        Right of
                          Median         Median        Median         Median        Median         Median

 Covariance with          0.00066        0.076∗∗∗      -0.0094        0.067∗∗∗      -0.026∗        0.093∗∗∗
  Overconfidence           (.011)        (.0086)        (.014)        (.0094)        (.014)         (.025)
 Difference                      0.075∗∗∗                     0.076∗∗∗                        0.087∗∗∗
                                  (.014)                       (.017)                          (.017)
 All Controls                Y              Y             Y              Y             Y                  Y
 N                         1,434          1,434         1,608          1,456         1,472           1,426
 Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level with standard errors, clustered
 by age (73 clusters), in parentheses. The N of the two regressions may not sum to the N in those other
 tables due to the fact that those respondents with the median ideology are included in both regressions.
 Extremeness is measured from median ideology, as required by Proposition 3.




        Table D.8: Turnout results are similar when using unweighted specifications.

 Dependent Variable:                                        Turnout Decision

 Overconfidence               0.071∗∗∗      0.042∗∗∗       0.036∗∗∗      0.035∗∗∗      0.034∗∗∗          0.025∗∗∗
                               (.011)       (.0091)        (.0094)       (.0096)       (.0096)            (.010)
 Ideological                                 0.14∗∗∗       0.12∗∗∗        0.13∗∗∗       0.14∗∗∗          0.11∗∗∗
   Extremeness                               (.011)        (.011)         (.010)        (.011)           (.010)
 Income, Education
                                                                Y
 Race, Hispanic
 Union, Religion
                                                                               Y
 Church, State
 Gender (Male)                                                                         0.060∗∗∗
                                                                                        (.019)
 All Controls                                                                                                 Y
 N                                                                  2,808
 Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level with standard errors, clustered
 by age (73 clusters), in parentheses.




                                                                                                  Appendix–35
Table D.9: Overconfidence is correlated with strength of partisan identification, even con-
trolling for ideological extremeness.
   Treatment of
                              Strong (1)                    Weak (0)                 Missing (.)
   Independents

   Overconfidence       0.039∗∗∗      0.038∗∗∗      0.037∗∗∗      0.031∗∗∗      0.044∗∗∗      0.039∗∗∗
                         (.010)       (.0098)       (.0092)       (.0085)        (.010)       (.0095)
   Ideological                        0.078∗∗∗                    0.12∗∗∗                     0.12∗∗∗
     Extremeness                      (.0089)                     (.0086)                     (.0090)
   All Controls             N             Y             N              Y           N             Y
   N                                           2,868                                    2,545
   Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , ∗ denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level with standard errors,
   clustered by age (73 clusters), in parentheses.




                                                                                            Appendix–36
