                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE NEXT GENERATION OF THE PENN WORLD TABLE

                                           Robert C. Feenstra
                                            Robert Inklaar
                                            Marcel Timmer

                                         Working Paper 19255
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19255


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2013




This research received support through grants from the National Science Foundation and the Sloan
Foundation. We thank Erwin Diewert and Chad Jones for helpful comments as well as other seminar
participants at the University of Groningen, University of Pennsylvania, Norwegian School of Economics
and the Economic Growth group of the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Robert C. Feenstra, Robert Inklaar, and Marcel Timmer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Next Generation of the Penn World Table
Robert C. Feenstra, Robert Inklaar, and Marcel Timmer
NBER Working Paper No. 19255
July 2013
JEL No. O47

                                             ABSTRACT

We describe the theory and practice of real GDP comparisons across countries and over time. Effective
with version 8, the Penn World Table (PWT) will be taken over by the University of California, Davis
and the University of Groningen, with continued input from Alan Heston at the University of Pennsylvania.
Version 8 will expand on previous versions of PWT in three respects. First, it will distinguish real
GDP on the expenditure side from real GDP on the output side, which differ by the terms of trade
faced by countries. Second, it will distinguish growth rates of GDP based on national accounts data
from growth rates that are benchmarked in multiple years to cross-country price data. Third, data on
capital stocks will be reintroduced. Some illustrative results from PWT version 8 are discussed, including
new results that show how the Penn effect is not emergent but a stable relationship over time.


Robert C. Feenstra                                  Marcel Timmer
Department of Economics                             University of Groningen
University of California, Davis                     9700 AB Groningen
One Shields Avenue                                  The Netherlands
Davis, CA 95616                                     m.p.timmer@rug.nl
and NBER
rcfeenstra@ucdavis.edu

Robert Inklaar
University of Groningen
Faculty of Economics
PO Box 800
9700 AV Groningen
The Netherlands
R.C.Inklaar@rug.nl
1. Introduction

        For over four decades, the Penn World Table (PWT) has been a standard source of data

on real GDP across countries. Making use of prices collected across countries in benchmark

years by the International Comparisons Program (ICP), and using these prices to construct

purchasing-power-parity exchange rates, PWT converts GDP at national prices to a common

currency – U.S. dollars – making them comparable across countries. Each version of PWT is

based in a newer ICP benchmark, so that PWT version 7 is based on the 2005 ICP prices. PWT

version 8 will still be based on the 2005 benchmark, but its construction will pass to the

University of California, Davis and the University of Groningen, while retaining the PWT

initials and with continued input from Alan Heston at the University of Pennsylvania.1

        In this paper we describe the changes to the measurement of real GDP that will be

introduced in this “next generation” of PWT. We begin in section 2 with a brief overview of the

theory behind real GDP comparisons, including a new theorem. That discussion is intended to

indicate the challenges in making multilateral comparisons of real GDP. Diewert (1999) and Van

Veelen (2002) have argued that no multilateral measure of real GDP can satisfy all the axioms

we might like, so there are tradeoffs involved with any construction of this concept. Our

approach is a natural extension of what is already done in PWT, but will distinguish several

different concepts of real GDP.

        In section 3 we describe the PWT calculation of real GDP before version 7. As argued by

Feenstra, Heston, Timmer and Deng (2009), prior measurement of real GDP in PWT was closer

to what is called “command-basis GDP” in the United States, or “real income” in the United

Nations System of National Accounts. That is, it was a measure of real GDP that reflected the

1
 The data are available at www.ggdc.net/pwt. After the new ICP 2011 benchmark becomes available in 2014, then
PWT9 will be based on that new benchmark, again constructed at the University of California, Davis and the
University of Groningen.
                                                 2


standard of living in an economy rather than the production possibilities. Feenstra et al (2009)

refer to this concept as “real GDP on the expenditure side,” or real GDPe. Countries that have

strong terms of trade – meaning a higher than average prices for exports or lower than average

prices for imports – will have higher real GDPe as a result. We contrast this with “real GDP on

the output-side”, or real GDPo, which is intended to measure the production possibilities of an

economy. Both concepts are reported in PWT8.

       In section 4 we move to the measurement of real GDP over time. This is the area where

there is perhaps the greatest confusion over concepts. The term “real” in multilateral

comparisons of GDP refers to the use of some common “reference” prices to add up across

goods and obtain real GDP in different countries. When the calculation is made in two years, the

values of real GDP obtained are not necessarily comparable because reference prices can be

changing. Stated differently, the purchasing-power-parity (PPP) exchange rate used to convert

from national currencies to U.S. dollars changes each year. The terms “current-price real GDP”

or “real GDP at current PPPs” refer to calculations across countries that are not comparable over

time, because the comparison is based on changing PPP exchange rates each year. In contrast, the

terms “constant-price real GDP” or “real GDP at chained PPPs” refer to calculations across

countries that are also comparable over time, because an appropriate correction is made for

changing reference prices and PPP exchange rates. The latter constant-price or chained concept

is denoted by RGDPe and RGDPo on the expenditure and output sides, respectively. But these

variables require the initial construction of current-price real GDP, denoted by CGDPe and
    o
CGDP , so both concepts are reported in PWT8. The current and constant-price variables are

equal in the benchmark year 2005, but differ in other years because RGDPe and RGDPo use

“real” growth rates that correct for changing reference prices. We also include a third measure of
                                                         3


constant-price real GDP, denoted RGDPNA, that is equal to CGDPo and RGDPo in the 2005

benchmark and uses national-accounts growth rates of real GDP to extrapolate to all other years.

Earlier versions of PWT focused on RGDPNA .2

        As we explain in section 5, the growth rates of RGDPe and RGDPo are computed using

multiple ICP benchmarks, so these growth rates can differ considerably from that in the national

accounts, RGDPNA, and therefore differ from past versions of PWT. For this reason, users who

are really just interested in national accounts growth rates or who want to use a variable that is

most similar to past versions of PWT should simply use RGDPNA. In section 6 we extend our

results to show how total factor productivity (TFP) across countries can be constructed in theory

and in practice, using the labor and capital stock data in PWT8.

        In section 7 we discuss some results from PWT version 8.0. In particular, we show how

the change in RGDPe and RGDPo over time often differs substantially from the change in

RGDPNA. We also document how the new measure of factor inputs and total factor productivity

constructed from them can explain more of the cross-country variation in CGDPe per capita than

standard approaches in the literature. Finally, we show that our use of multiple ICP benchmarks

has important implications for estimating the Penn effect, the positive relationship between a

country’s relative price level (PPP over the exchange rate) and its income level. In contrast to the

finding of Bergin, Glick and Taylor (2006) that the Penn effect only gradually emerges over

time, we show that this effect is continuously positive and significant as long as we rely on

information from the ICP benchmarks. Section 8 concludes and the Appendix contains the proofs

of our theorems.

2
  Earlier versions of PWT up to v6 constructed real GDP using a weighted average of the national accounts growth
rates of the components of GDP, i.e. C, I and G. So the growth rate of total real GDP in PWT differed from that in
the national accounts due to these weights. That approach was criticized by Johnson et al (2013) because the weights
would change in different versions of PWT. To address this criticism, PWT7 used the national accounts growth rate
of total GDP instead of the components to construct RGDPNA, as we also do in v8.
                                                                      4


2. Theory of Real Output Comparisons

         Denote the final goods by i = 1,…,M, which includes all consumption goods, investment,

and government expenditures. These can be thought of as the goods for which prices are

collected by the ICP in benchmark years, and we treat them as non-traded in the sense that they

are purchased from local retail outlets. In addition, suppose there are i = M+1,…, M+N exported

and imported goods: these are treated as intermediate inputs and can be thought of as the

categories in the Standard International Trade Classification (SITC), for example. Any good that

is imported and then sold domestically would appear twice, once as an import and again as a

non-traded final good; and a third time of that good is also exported.

         The domestic price vector for the final goods is denoted by pj in country j=1,…,C, while

the free trade price vectors for exports and imports are p xj and p mj , all measured in the local

currency. The domestic prices for the traded goods are p xj  s j and p mj  t j , where sj is the

vector of export subsidies and tj is the vector of import tariffs. The column vector of prices is

then Pj = ( p j , p xj  s j , p mj  t j ) , and we let y j  ( q j , x j ,  m j ) denote the corresponding column

vector of quantities (negative for imports). The revenue function for the economy is defined by:

                           rj ( Pj , v j ) 
                                                     max
                                               qij , xij , mij  0,   Pj ' y j                      
                                                                                  Fj ( y j , v j )  1 ,    (1)


where F j ( y j , v j ) is a transformation function for each country, which depends on the vector vj

representing primary factor endowments and also depends on the index of country j due to

technological differences across countries.

         We will distinguish the reference prices  i for final goods, i =1,…,M, and two sets of

reference prices  ix ,  im for exports and imported intermediate inputs, i =M+1,…,M+N. Denote
                                                                   5


the M+2N dimensional vector of reference prices by   ( , x , m ) . We suppose that the

country is engaged in free trade at these reference prices, and evaluate GDP on the output-side

using the revenue function:

                        rj (  , v j ) 
                                                 max
                                           qij , xij , mij 0,    ' y j                     
                                                                            Fj ( y j , v j )  1 .   (2)


Then real output can be compared across countries using the ratio of revenue functions:

                                                rj (  , v j )
                                                                   .                                 (3)
                                                rk (  , vk )

       In contrast to this measure of real output, the standard of living across countries can be

measured by the ratio of expenditure functions as in Neary (2004). In practice, we should not

expect to estimate the revenue functions across countries as Neary does for the expenditure

function, because the revenue functions are indexed by the country j indicating technological

differences between them. Even with a parsimonious specification of such technological

differences it would be difficult to estimate revenue functions while pooling across all countries.

For this reason, we must rely on indexes that can be used to approximate (3).

       The simplest index that could be used to measure real output across countries is the ratio

of quantities evaluated at the prices of one country or the other. Gerschenkron (1951) was the

first to document that there is a systematic relationship between real output evaluated at each

country’s prices, which is called the “Gerschenkron effect”:

                                                Pj' y j       Pk' y j    
                                                '            '          .                       (4)
                                                Pj yk                    
                                                              Pk yk      

This inequality states that real GDP is higher when measured with the prices of another country,

or to put it most simply, “the grass is greener on the other side.” This relationship can be

interpreted by noting that the right-hand side (4) is the Laspeyres quantity index, which exceeds
                                                          6


the Paasche quantity index on the left. That inequality is familiar from consumer theory, where

goods whose prices have fallen the most will have the greatest quantity increase, and so the

Laspeyres quantity index which uses the last-period prices overstates the quantity increase. The

same finding holds in the cross-country comparison in (4), despite the fact that this comparison is

being made using production data rather than consumption data. In production theory, the

upward bias of the Laspeyres index is reversed (since those goods whose prices have risen the

most will have the greatest quantity increase). Nevertheless, Gerschenkron and many later

studies confirm that the “demand-side bias” in (4) holds. The reason for this finding is that prices

are determined in general equilibrium, and with similar tastes (demand curves) across countries

but different technologies (shifting supply curves), the highest-priced goods in a country will

tend to have less quantity than abroad, so the upward-bias of the Laspeyres index follows.

       Diewert (1983) refers to the measure of real output in (3) as a Samuelson-Swamy-Sato

index. An alternative measure of real output, referred to as the Malmquist index, can be obtained

by using the distance between the transformation functions. Specifically, Caves, Christensen and

Diewert (1982a,b) define two measures of the difference in real output  j and  k as follows:


                        F j ( yk  k , v j )  1 and Fk ( y j /  j , vk )  1 .               (5)

To interpret the first of these conditions, it states that if we start with the observed output vector

for country k, and inflate it by  k , then we obtain an output vector that is feasible to produce

with the technology and endowments of country j. If  k  1 we conclude that country j can

produce more output than k. Likewise, the second condition states that by deflating the observed

output vector in country j by  j , we obtain an output vector that is feasible to produce in country

k. Again, if  j  1 we conclude that country j can produce more output than k. So  j and  k are
                                                                  7


both measuring (or bounding) the output of country j relative to k.

           The question is as to how to measure the Malmquist distance factors without full

knowledge of the transformation function. Caves, Christensen and Diewert (1982a,b) provide a

powerful result by showing that if the transformation function is translog, then the geometric mean

of  j and  k is measured by a Törnqvist quantity index of the outputs. We will rely on a similar

result in section 6 when discussing the measurement of total factor productivity. But initially, we

provide a different result that does not depend on the form of the transformation or revenue

function, but just relies on the output vectors being chosen optimally at the observed prices:3


Theorem 1

Suppose that the outputs are revenue-maximizing and the Gerschenkron effect in (4) holds. Then

there exists a reference price vector  between Pj and Pk such that:

                                                                                                  0.5
                                   rj (  , v j )                P ' y       Pk' y j   
                            k                                 '          '                     j.
                                                                      j j
                                                     Q Fjk
                                   rk (  , vk )                 Pj yk   
                                                                               Pk yk
                                                                                           
                                                                                            


This result says that computing a Fisher ideal quantity index Q Fjk between the countries, which is a

geometric mean of the Paasche and Laspeyres quantity indexes, is a valid comparison of real output

between them. Remarkably, it does not depend on the functional form of the revenue function but

only on optimizing behavior.

           Theorem 1 gives us a compelling reason to use the Fisher quantity index when comparing

real output across countries. In practice, an extension of the Fisher quantity index is used to measure

real output by both by the World Bank in the World Development Indicators and by Eurostat and

the OECD (2006), as we discuss in the next section. There is, however, a critical limitation that

3
    The proof of Theorem 1 in the Appendix uses inequalities due to Malmquist (1953), as noted by Diewert (1981).
                                                           8


arises with its use: the reference prices  used in the comparison are not made explicit.4 This

limitation means that the cross-county real output comparisons made by the World Bank and

Eurostat-OECD are fundamentally flawed when comparing real output over time: because the

reference prices are not known, then it is impossible to correct for changes in these prices over

time to obtain constant-price comparisons. Accordingly, in the next section we also discuss the

leading alternative to the use of Fisher indexes, which is the Geary-Khamis (GK) method,5 as has

been used by PWT and that we shall extend. This is an attractive alternative as it involves the

explicit calculation of reference prices, so that it becomes possible to correct for changes in these

prices over time, as discussed in section 4.


3. Measurement of Real GDP in Practice

        In place of the Fisher ideal quantity index defined in Theorem 1, we can equivalently

deflate the ratio of nominal GDPs by the Fisher price index. There are two modifications that have

been made to the Fisher price index, however, before it is used for multilateral comparisons. First,

recall that the output vector y j  ( q j , x j ,  m j ) consists of final goods, exports and (the negative

of) imports. In practice, detailed data on exports and imports have never been incorporated into

international comparisons of real GDP (which we shall rectify with PWT 8) and only the prices

of final goods (as collected by the ICP) have been used. To mimic this approach, let the Fisher

price index between country j and k computed over final goods only be denoted by,

                                                                       0.5
                                           p ' q   p ' q  
                                    Pjk   '   '  
                                     F          j j       j k
                                                                             .                             (6)
                                           pk q j   pk qk  
                                                    



4
  Note that the reference price vector  referred to in Theorem 1 depends on the countries j and k being compared.
When the EKS extension of the Fisher index is used to compare real GDP across countries, then it is not known
whether a corresponding reference price vector like that in Theorem 1 exists.
5
  Due to Geary (1958) and Khamis (1970, 1972). A modern treatment of this method is provided by Balk (2008).
                                                              9


          If this formula is used to measure the price of final goods in country j relative to k, and then

again in country k relative to l, and we multiply these, we do not get the same numerical result as

if we directly measured the price of final goods in country j relative to l. In other words, the Fisher

price (or quantity) indexes are not transitive. To achieve transitivity, the second modification

made to the Fisher price index is to apply the so-called EKS transformation:6


                                                        PjlF PlkF 
                                                 C                    1/ C
                                       PjkEKS                              .                    (7)
                                                l 1


It is apparent that (7) is transitive by construction. Then to obtain real GDP in country j relative to k,

the ratio of nominal GDP in the two countries is deflated by this index:

                                       CGDPj  GDPj             EKS
                                                              / Pjk .                          (8)
                                       CGDPk  GDPk            

While this formula is used by the World Bank and Eurostat-OECD to measure real output, it has

three limitations. First, as noted above, the EKS price index is computed using only the prices for

final goods, even though it is used to deflate the ratio of nominal GDPs that include the trade

balance. Second, we cannot meaningfully sum the real GDP of two countries j relative to k and l

relative to k, because these two comparisons are made at different prices. Third, we likewise

cannot compare the real GDP of country j relative to k at two points in time, again because the

prices are changing. We shall address all these limitations in PWT8.

          In contrast to the EKS system, under the Geary-Khamis (GK) system the comparison of

real GDP is made by using reference prices  ie of final goods for consumption, investment and

government expenditures. The reference price denoted by e (for expenditure) are defined by:

                                   C                              C
                             ie   ( pij / PPPje )qij         qij ,           i =1,…,M.         (9)
                                  j 1                          j 1

6
    Or the GEKS system, after Gini (1931), Eltetö and Köves (1964), and Szulc (1964).
                                                     10


That is, the reference prices are defined as quantity-weighted average of the observed prices, after

deflating by a “PPP exchange rate” for each country, which is defined by:

                        PPPje   i 1 pij qij    i 1 ieqij ,
                                     M              M
                                                                   j =1,…,C.                   (10)

       The GK system (9)-(10) is M+C equations that under weak conditions have a solution

which is unique up to a normalization. Then real GDP on the expenditure side is measured by:

                             M
                CGDPje      ieqij  ( X j  M j ) / PPPje  GDPj / PPPje ,                 (11)
                            i 1


where the equality follows because the numerator in (10) equal nominal absorption, Cj+Ij+Gj,

and of course, GDPj= Cj+Ij+Gj+ Xj – Mj. This GK formula is the method used by PWT up to

version 7 to measure real GDP in a benchmark year. We use the notation CGDPe to emphasize

that (11) is actually current-price real GDP, because it uses reference prices  ie computed in the

current year. Equivalently, we see from (11) that CGDPe uses current-year PPP. By definition,

(11) also equals constant-price real GDP, or RGDPe, in the benchmark year 2005, but in other

years CGDPe is still computed as in (9)-(11) whereas RGDPe is computed in a different manner,

as discussed in the next section.

       Notice that the trade balance (Xj – Mj) in (11) is deflated by the PPP that is computed

over final goods without using any prices for exports or imports, much as was done in the EKS

system in (8), so the first limitation mentioned above still holds. The second limitation does not

hold: we can add real GDP across countries because they are computed at common reference

prices. The third limitation – not being able to compare CGDPe over time – still holds because

reference prices or PPPs will change in each year. We will show in the next section how the
                                                                   11


explicit use of reference prices in the GK system allows this third limitation to be addressed, so

that we can compute and compare constant-price real GDP, or RGDPe, over time.

          To address the first limitation, the measurement of real GDP on the output side under

PWT8 extends the GK system by incorporating prices for N export and import goods, pijx and

    pijm , i =M+1,…,M+N. These prices are used are used to obtain the reference prices for imports

and exports, in addition to final goods, as the weighted averages across countries:

                          C                              C
                   io   ( pij / PPPjo )qij             qij ,                  i =1,…,M,                              (12)
                         j 1                            j 1
                          C                              C
                   ix   ( pijx / PPPjo ) xij          xij ,                   i =M+1,…,M+N,                          (13)
                         j 1                            j 1
                           C                                C
                   im   ( pijm / PPPjo )mij             mij ,                 i =M+1,…,M+N,                          (14)
                          j 1                            j 1


from which we obtain the PPP exchange rate for each country,

                                                     GDPj
                  PPPjo                              M N
                                                                                      , j =1,…,C.                       (15)
                                               
                                    M o
                                         q
                                    i 1 i ij
                                                              ( x x
                                                      i  M 1 i ij
                                                                          immij )

The system of equations in (12)-(15) has a positive solution under certain conditions (Feenstra et

al, 2009), unique up to a normalization.7

          The concept of real GDPo is obtained by multiplying the reference prices for final outputs

 io , exports  ix and imports  im by their respective quantities, obtaining:

                 M               M N                              GDPj        Cj  I j  Gj        Xj          Mj
     CGDPjo     ioqij               ( ix xij   immij ) 
                                                                   PPPjo
                                                                           
                                                                                  PPPjq
                                                                                               
                                                                                                   PPPjx
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                               PPPjm
                                                                                                                       , (16)
                i 1          i  M 1


where the final equality follows by defining the PPPs of final goods, exports and imports:



7
 The GK system in (9)-(10) has a positive solution under very weak conditions. It is more difficult to ensure that the
extended system (12)-(15) has a positive solution because real GDPo in the denominator of (15) might become
negative. This outcome can be ruled out if the trade shares are not too large (Feenstra et al, 2009).
                                                    12

                                          M N                       M N
              pij qij ,                                        
                 M
                                                 pxx                       p mm
    PPPjq    iM1           PPPjx      i  M 1 ij ij
                                         M N
                                                        , PPPj 
                                                             m     i  M 1 ij ij
                                                                   M N
                                                                                  ,   j =1,…,C. (17)
              i 1 ioqij             i  M 1 i ij
                                                  x
                                                     x            i  M 1 i ij
                                                                            m
                                                                               m

It is apparent that nominal exports and imports in (16) are not deflated by a PPP computed over

final goods, but rather, are deflated by PPP exchange rates that are specific to exports and

imports. Feenstra et al (2009) argue that this feature makes real GDPo an appropriate measure of

the real output of countries, whereas real GDPe is a measure of the standard of living across

countries. As these two concepts are defined the in systems (9)-(10) and (12)-(16), however, they

require separate normalizations. We resolve this issue in PWT8 by re-defining real GDPe from

(10) by instead using the same reference prices for final goods  oj found in (12), obtaining:

                             M
                CGDPje    io qij + (Xj – M j)/ PPPjq = GDPj/ PPPjq .                         (18)
                             i 1


The system (12)-(18) defines both real GDPe and real GDPo, and is unique up to a single

normalization. It is apparent from our notation that both CGDPe and CGDPo are current-price

versions of real GDP, because they are using reference prices and PPPs computed in the current

year. By definition, they equal constant-price real GDP, RGDPe and RGDPo, in the benchmark

year 2005, but will differ in other years as discussed in the next section.

        Real GDP on the expenditure side and output side will differ due to the terms of trade

faced by countries. This is apparent by taking the difference between (18) and (17):

                                  PPPjx      Xj      PPPjm      Mj
        CGDPje    CGDPjo              1                1        .                     (19)
                                  PPPjq      PPPjx  PPPjq       PPPjm
                                                               

To simplify this expression, we can divide by CGDPjo and re-arrange terms to obtain:
                                                          13


        CGDPje  CGDPjo    1  PPPj PPPj   X j / PPPj M j / PPPj 
                                    x       m               x             m
                                                                       
             CGDPjo        2  PPPjq PPPjq   CGDPjo             CGDP  o 
             
                                                                        j
                Gap                     Terms of trade               Real Openess
                                                                                             .   (20)
                             1  PPP x  PPP m    X / PPP x M / PPP m 
                                               1  j                         
                                     j       j                   j      j      j
                                                                    
                            2     PPPj q           CGDP  o
                                                                       CGDP  o     
                                                  
                                        j             j
                                                                    
                                 Traded/Nontraded Price        Real Balance of Trade share


We see that the gap between real GDPe and real GDPo can be expressed as the sum of two terms:

the first is the terms of trade (expressed as a difference rather than a ratio) times real openness;

and the second is the relative prices of traded goods (again expressed as a difference) times the

real balance of trade. The influence of both these terms on the gap between real expenditure and

real output has also been shown by Kohli (2004, 2006) and Reinsdorf (2010), and we will

illustrate this relation with some examples from PWT8.0 in section 7.


4. Real GDP over Time

       To summarize our results so far, Theorem 1 gave us a compelling reason to use Fisher

index quantity indexes to compare real output across countries, or the EKS extension of that

method defined in (7)-(8). But as we noted earlier, there is a fundamental difficulty in applying

this approach to obtain a comparison of real GDP over time: because there are no explicit

reference prices, we cannot control for changes in such prices over time. So instead of the EKS

method, PWT8 will use the extended GK system defined in (12)–(18). To relate this extended

GK system back to Theorem 1, notice that the ratio of revenue functions in (6) is:

                                                    M N
                                i 1 i ij  i  M 1 i ij
                                    M
                rj (  , v j )        q*           ( x x*   immij* )
                             =                                            .                      (21)
                rk (  , vk )  M  q*   M  N ( x x*   mm* )
                                i 1 i ik   i  M 1 i ik         i ik


We use the superscript * to emphasize that the final goods, exports and imports are all evaluated

at the optimal quantities given the reference prices. In contrast, the ratio of real GDPo for
                                                                14


countries j and k measured by the extended GK system in (16) is:

                                                                     M N
                                       i 1 i ij  i  M 1 i ij
                                               M
                              CGDPjo         oq            ( x x   immij )
                                    =                                            .                                (22)
                              CGDPko  M  ioqik   M  N ( ix xik   immik )
                                       i 1         i  M 1


This measured ratio is evaluated at the observed rather than the optimal quantities, which is the

principal difference between the theoretical ratio in (21) and its measured counterpart in (22).8

           In the context of a similar consumer problem, Neary (2004) shows how an estimated

expenditure rather than revenue function can be used to obtain the theoretical ratio in (21). We

believe that it will be much harder to estimate a revenue function over many countries while

allowing for technological differences, and for this reason, are willing to accept (22) as an

approximation to (21). While this approximation is the cost of using the extended GK system,

the great benefit is that we will be able to correct for changing reference prices over time,

thereby obtain constant-price real GDP, or real GDP at chained PPPs. In this section we show

how such a constant-price comparison can be made in theory and in practice.

           We now introduce a subscript t on all variables to indicate time. It turns out that we can

readily apply Theorem 1 to obtain a consistent comparison of real GDP over space and time.

Specifically, suppose that we start in a situation where we have two reference price vectors at

two points in time,     t ,x , m  ,  = t-1, t, using the reference prices from the GK system

extended to include exports and imports. In order to also compare real output over time, it would

be desirable to use a single vector  and compute the ratios:

                                         r jt ( ,v jt )
                                                            ,          j = 1,…,C,                                 (23)
                                       r jt1( ,v jt1 )




8
    The other difference between (21) and (22) is that the reference prices used in each case can be different.
                                                           15


for each country. Notice that the endowments in (23) can change over time, as well as the revenue

function itself due to technological change.

        We can apply Theorem 1 by treating the bilateral comparison as between country j using

reference prices  t1 and  t in the two periods. The optimal outputs at these prices are

denoted by y*j  r j (  ,v j ) /   ,  t  1,t. We assume that the time-series analogue of the

Gerschenkron effect holds, which states that for country j:

                                     t y*jt    t1 y*jt 
                                                                   .                        (24)
                                     t y *jt 1    t1 y *jt 1 
                                                                    

Again, we interpret (24) as stating that the Laspeyres quantity index (on the right) exceeds the

Paasche quantity index (on the left). This inequality cannot hold for the optimal quantities

obtained from a revenue function in the absence of changes in endowments or technology, since

in that case the goods with rising relative prices will also have rising quantities, and the left side

of (24) will exceed the right. But as Gerschenkron (1951) found when comparing countries, the

time-series evidence within a country also supports the idea that goods with the greatest increase

in quantity (due to changing endowments or technology) have falling relative prices, so that (17)

holds. Then an immediate corollary of the earlier theorem is obtained by changing the notation to

compare time periods rather than countries, as follows:


Corollary 1

Suppose that the outputs are revenue-maximizing and the Gerschenkron effect in (24) holds. Then

there will exist reference prices  between  t1 and  t such that:
                                                                                    0.5
                           rjt (  , v jt )         y *     y *  
                                                      t 1 jt
                                                                         
                                                                      t jt
                                                                                          .      (25)
                         rjt 1 (  , v jt 1 )   t1 y jt 1  t y*jt 1  
                                                         *     
                                                                          
                                                                 16


In words, this result states that we can take the geometric mean of the growth rates obtained at the

reference prices of each period to obtain a constant-reference-price growth rate. To see the

usefulness of this result, suppose that instead of using the optimal quantities in (25) we apply this

formula using observed quantities, obtaining the growth rate of constant-price real GDP:

                                                           0.5
    RGDPjto    t1 y jt    t y jt  
                                             
    RGDPjto 1    t1 y jt 1   t y jt 1  
                                              
        o q   x x   m m
                                                                                                                 0.5           (26)
                it 1 ijt     it 1 ijt    it 1 ijt
                                                              ito qijt   itx xijt   itm mijt  
                                                                                                       
       i
                                                           
                                                                 i
                                                                                                                     .
       it 1qijt 1   it 1xijt 1   it 1mijt 1     it qijt 1   it xijt 1   it mijt 1  
            o                x                m                    o              x             m

      i                                                  i                                             

Thus, the quantities of final goods, exports and imports change from t–1 to t in both ratios, and

are evaluated using the reference prices from one period or the other, and then taking the

geometric mean. PWT8 uses the growth rates from this formula to compute constant-price real
   o
GDP in all years other than the 2005 benchmark, where in that benchmark year the extended

GK system (12)-(18) is used with RGDPo = CGDPo.
                                                                e
        In addition, the constant-price growth rates of real GDP are obtained by using only the

reference prices  to1 and  to of the M final consumption goods. RGDPe = CGDPe is defined by

(18) in the benchmark year 2005, and its growth rate to other years is obtained as:

                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                       M jt  
                                                                
                                          X jt       M jt                        X jt
                          o
                                                                   o
                                                                                       
                                                                                         PPPjtq  
                                 q                                       q
    RGDPjt  
            e               it 1 ijt       q
                                        PPPjt 1       q
                                                   PPPjt 1          it  ijt
                                                                                PPPjt q

                   i                                       i                                                      .   (27)
    RGDPjte 1                                                                              
                    ito1qijt 1  jt q1  jtq1     ito qijt 1  jt q1  jt q1  
                                          X          M                           X         M
   
                    i                                       i                                
                                         PPPjt 1   PPPjt 1                     PPPjt     PPPjt



Notice that in (27) we deflate nominal exports and imports by PPPjtq 1 and PPPjtq , computed

from the reference prices for final goods as in (17). This is in contrast to (26) where the actual

reference prices of exports and imports are used.
                                                   17


5. Data, Interpolation and Normalization

        While the above sections give an accurate theoretical description of the calculations in

PWT8, we should clarify how these calculations are implemented and especially how the growth

rates of real GDPe and real GDPo make use of multiple years of ICP data. Like past versions of

PWT, we begin with aggregation of ICP data using the EKS technique. The Fisher price indexes

in (6) are computed over the prices of final goods obtained from the ICP, within the categories of

consumption, investment, and government expenditures. Then the EKS transformation in (7) is

applied to obtain the price indexes PjtC , PjtI , PjtG for each country relative to the U.S., so that M

=3 is the number of final goods used in the extended GK system.

        Notice that this aggregation procedure for final goods can be done for the set of countries

in each year that ICP prices are available, i.e. 1970, 1975, 1980, 1985, 1996, 2005. There is an

expanded set of countries available from the ICP in each benchmark, and in total, 167 countries

are used in one benchmark or another. That becomes the set of countries included in PWT8 (this

set will expand as more countries are included in future benchmarks). For each country, we keep

track of which benchmarks were used: those benchmark years are denoted by B; years in-

between benchmarks will have the prices for final goods interpolated using the corresponding

price trends from national accounts data, and are denoted by I; and for years before the first or

after the last benchmark for each country the prices of final goods are extrapolated using

national account data, and are denoted by E.

        We should explain exactly how the interpolation procedure is done, since in it we are

reconciling cross-country benchmarks in two years with (possibly inconsistent) price trends from

national accounts data. Consider the case of India, which was included in all ICP benchmarks

except for 1996, and for illustration purposes, focus on household consumption. We apply an
                                                              18


EKS aggregation procedure to compute the relative price of household consumption in

India (and every other country included in the ICP) relative to the U.S. in each benchmark year,
            C
obtaining PIND ,t . In the years after 2005, we have no further benchmarks, so we extrapolate

forward using the trend in consumption prices from the national accounts:
                                                                          CPI
                                                                        PIND
                                        C
                                      PIND ,2006        C
                                                       PIND ,2005        CPI
                                                                             ,2006
                                                                                     ,
                                                                        PIND ,2005


where the last ratio in this expression is taken from the Indian CPI data. For years in-between the

1985 and 2005 benchmarks, we extrapolate forward from 1985 and backward from 2005, using

appropriate weights to make this interpolation for 1985  t  2005:

                                          , t  2005  t                                t  1985 
                                      CPI                                    CPI
                                    PIND                                   PIND  ,t 
              , t  PIND ,1985                                        
           C          C                                           C
         PIND                                               IND ,2005
                                                                P                                 .
                                   PIND ,1985  2005  1985 
                                     CPI
                                                                          PIND ,2005  2005  1985 
                                                                            CPI



       This approach to interpolation and extrapolation is similar in spirit to the approach of Rao

et al (2010), who also discuss a method for estimating PPPs for a full set of years and countries

using benchmark PPPs and National Accounts deflators. The key distinction is that we always

force the price series to be equal to the benchmark estimates, while this is a special case of Rao

et al (2010); see also Hill (2004).

       For traded goods, the prices used are actually quality-adjusted unit values obtained from

Feenstra and Romalis (2012). These prices are available in every year from 1984 to 2007, and

then EKS aggregation is used to obtain the prices of exports and imports for every country

relative to the U.S. in the six Broad Economic Categories, i.e. food and beverages, other

consumer goods, capital, fuels, intermediate inputs, and transport equipment (while excluding

miscellaneous goods). So N=6 in the extended GK system, and there is no need to interpolate in-

between any years. Before 1984 and after 2007, however, we extrapolate these export and import

prices using the price movement in aggregate exports and imports from national accounts data.
                                                 19


       The prices for final goods, exports and imports can then used in the extended GK system

(12)-(18) for each year, to compute reference prices. A normalization is needed, and denoting the

                                                          GDP
national accounts GDP deflator for the United States by PUS , t , we normalize each year by:



                                     , t  PUS , t , t = 1950, …, 2011,
                                   o         GDP
                               PPPUS                                                          (28)

which states that the PPP for GDP in the U.S. equals GDP deflator from national accounts,

relative to 2005. Since the PPP for the United States is used to deflate nominal U.S. GDP in (16),

this normalization implies that all reference prices are in 2005 U.S. dollars and therefore correct

for U.S. inflation. By using the resulting reference prices for each year in the calculation of

CGDPo and CGDPe in (16) and (18), we obtain current-price real GDP. As just noted, these

values correct for U.S. inflation but are still using different reference prices each year. They

allow for a consistent comparison of real GDP across countries, but as we have stressed, they do

not allow for a consistent comparison across time because of changing reference prices.

       To achieve a consistent comparison across countries and time, we apply the growth rates

in (28) and (29) to compute RGDPo and RGDPe, respectively, in all years other than the 2005

benchmark. In addition, PWT8 provides a third measure of real GDP that equals CGDPo and

RGDPo in the 2005 ICP benchmark and then uses national-accounts growth rates for real GDP to

extrapolate to all other years, obtaining RGDPNA. PWT8 also includes the nominal national

accounts data on which our calculations are based. There can be substantial changes to these

national accounts data over time, which will be the principal source of changes to any of our

interpolated values for the growth of RGDPo and RGDPe as new versions of PWT become

available. That is, our methods guarantee in principal that the growth of RGDPo and RGDPe will

not change in-between existing benchmark years even as new benchmarks become available,

unless the underlying national accounts data or the quality-adjusted trade prices are revised. This
                                                       20


“invariance of growth rates between benchmarks” was not previously the case in PWT, as

discussed by Johnson et al (2013), where new ICP benchmarks often led to a change in real GDP

growth rates for all prior years. This invariance has been achieved here by virtue of our

interpolation procedures. That invariance comes at a cost, however: because we interpolate

between multiple ICP benchmarks, there is no guarantee that the growth rates of RGDPo and

RGDPe will necessarily be close the national accounts growth rate, RGDPNA. So except for this

latter series, we violate a long-standing tenet of PWT whereby the growth rates should be

“similar” to those in the national accounts.9 Our growth rates of RGDPo and RGDPe can be quite

different from that in national accounts if that is what is indicated by ICP data, as we shall

illustrate in section 7.


6. Total Factor Productivity

        PWT version 8 will re-introduce a capital stock series for countries up to 2011, which

was last available for 1990. The calculation of the capital stock as well as the measurement of

labor input, human capital and the share of labor income in GDP is given in Inklaar and Timmer

(2013). In this section, we extend our earlier theoretical discussion to show how total factor

productivity can be computed, across countries and over time. We rely heavily on the results of

Caves, Christensen and Diewert (CCD, 1982a,b) and Diewert and Morrison (DM, 1986).

        We drop the time subscript and return to the ratio of revenue functions given in (3),

rj (  , v j ) / rk (  , vk ) , which measures real output in country j relative to k. Real output can vary

due to differing factor endowments, as indicated by vlj and vlk for factors l = 1,…,L, or due to

differing technologies, as indicated by the country subscript j and k on the revenue function. We


9
 As discussed in note 2, versions of PWT up to v6 constructed real GDP using a weighted average of the national
accounts growth rates of the components of GDP. That is why the growth rate of real GDP did not exactly match the
growth rate from the national accounts.
                                                                        21


can isolate the effect of technological differences alone by considering two alternative ratios:

                                         rj (  , v j )                          r j (  , vk )
                              Aj                         , and          Ak                      .
                                         rk (  , v j )                          rk (  , vk )

Both of these ratios measure the overall productivity of country j to country k, holding fixed the

level of factor endowments. Neither ratio can be measured directly from the data, however,

because the numerator or the denominator involves a revenue function that is evaluated with the

technology of one country but the endowments of the other. But the results of CCD and DM tell

us that if the revenue function has a translog functional form, then we can precisely measure the

geometric mean of these two ratios:


Theorem 2

Assume that the revenue functions rj (  , v j ) and rk (  , vk ) are both translog functions that are

homogeneous of degree one in  and in v j and have the same coefficients on factor endowments,

but can have different coefficients on prices and on interaction terms due to technological differences

across countries. Then the overall productivity of country j relative to k can be measured by:

                                                     rj (  , v j )
                               A j Ak 
                                           1/2
                                                                     / QT ( v j , vk , w*j , wk* ) ,             (29)
                                                     rk (  , vk )

where QT ( v j , vk , w*j , wk* ) is the Törnqvist quantity index of factor endowments, defined by:

                                             L
                                               1  wlj vlj
                                                             *       *
                                                                   wlk vlk                          vlj    
        ln QT ( v j , vk , w*j , wk* )                                                         ln      ,   (30)
                                          l 1 2   m wmj vmj    m wmk vmk
                                                       *              *                          
                                                                                                    lk     
                                                                                                         v

                     rj (  , v j )                 rk (  , vk )
and where wlj*                             *
                                         , wlk                     are the factor prices using goods prices  .
                           vlj                          vlk
                                                    22


CCD establish a result like Theorem 2 using the distance function, whereas DM establish an

analogous result using a time-series rather than cross-country comparison. For completeness, we

include a proof in the Appendix which clarifies how the coefficients of the factor endowments must

be the same for countries j and k, but other coefficients can differ.

        Theorem 2 tells us that by deflating the observed difference in real GDPo by the

Törnqvist quantity index of factor endowments, we obtain a meaningful measure of the

productivity difference between the countries. The Törnqvist quantity index is constructed using

the factor prices that are implied by the reference prices for goods  . In practice we do not

observe these factor prices, and so we replace the theoretical expressions in (29)-(30) with

versions that we can measure from the data:

                                            CGDPjo
                                CTFPjk               / QT ( v j , vk , w j , wk ) ,         (31)
                                            CGDPko

where we use CTFPjk to denote the (current-price) productivity of country j relative to k, and the

Törnqvist quantity index of factor endowments is evaluated with observed factor prices and

shares. PWT8 includes CTFPjk computed with current reference prices for each country j

relative to the United States. Combining (31) with (20), we obtain a decomposition of current-

price real GDP on the expenditure side:

                        CGDPje                                            1  Gap j   
                                  CTFPjk  QT ( v j , vk , w j , wk )               ,    (32)
                        CGDPke                                            1  Gapk    

where the Gap between real GDPe and real GDP0 is defined by the various terms-of-trade and

balance-of-payments expressions on the right of (20). We report summary statistics from this

decomposition in the next section.
                                                         23


           An analogous expression can be obtain for the productivity growth in each country,

which is defined by re-introducing time subscripts and using constant-price real GDP:

                                              RGDPjtNA
                                NA
                            RTFPj,t,t1                 / QT (v jt ,v jt1,w jt ,w jt1) .           (33)
                                                   NA
                                              RGDPjt1

                      NA
PWT8 also reports RTFPj,t,t1 computed with constant-price real GDP growth rates from the

national accounts.

7. Results from PWT version 8.0

           One of the main consequences of using computing real GDP based on multiple

benchmark comparisons is that the change in RGDPo or RGDPe can be very different from the

change in RGDPNA. To illustrate this point, Figure shows (the log of) RGDPe per capita and

RGDPNA per capita for India since 1970, the year of the first ICP benchmark, in which India

participated. This benchmark year and the other four in which India participated are indicated by

dots. The figure shows that while RGDPNA has grown almost continuously over the 1970-2005

period, comparative living standards as measured by RGDPe has not. Between 1975 and 1985,

comparative living standards declined at an average pace of 0.7% per year, while RGDPNA

increased by an average annual rate of 4.2%.10

           This result indicates that between 1975 and 1985, the overall PPP for India computed

from the ICP benchmark prices increased at a much more rapid pace than indicated by the

relative inflation rates (from national accounts) of India and the U.S. That finding could reflect

measurement error in the ICP benchmark prices and therefore in the PPPs, and/or in the inflation

rates. However, these differences may well be informative. Deaton (2012) discusses this problem




10
     Though not shown, Figure 1 would look very similar if RGDPo had been graphed instead of RGDPe.
                                                        24


                Figure 1: Real GDP per capita in India since 1970, RGDPe vs. RGDPNA
   8.5
   8
   7.5
   7
   6.5




         1970              1980                 1990                 2000                 2010

                           log of RGDPe/capita                 log of RGDPNA/capita

Note: the dots on the ‘log of RGDPe/capita’ line indicate the ICP benchmark years in which India participated.




in general and emphasizes how inflation and changes in PPPs can be very different because the

aim in measurement is different. Inflation only tracks domestic price changes and should thus

only take domestic budget shares into account. In contrast, PPPs aim to compare prices across

countries, which requires taking budget shares from multiple countries into account. Deaton

(2012) shows that if budget shares and inflation rates for different products differ across

countries and over time, the type of discrepancy shown in Figure can easily arise. It is thus

important to conceptually distinguish the change in RGDPNA, measuring economic growth, from

the change in RGDPe, which measures the change in comparative living standards, or RGDPo,

which measures the change in comparative productive capacity.

           The difference shown in Figure is not unique to India and depending on the country and
                                                                                        25


time period, RGDPe and RGDPo can change at a faster or slower pace than RGDPNA. In Figure 2,

we compute the average annual change in real GDP between each set of ICP benchmark

observations for RGDPe and RGDPNA and plot the difference between these for different levels of

RGDPe per capita. The first observation is that differences are often substantial and the

differences seen for India in Figure are not atypical. Furthermore, the differences are smaller at

higher levels of RGDPe per capita. This finding could occur because higher-income countries are

more similar in terms of expenditure shares and product-level inflation rates, thus reducing the

conceptual gap between relative inflation rates and changes in PPPs. Alternatively, measurement

errors in the original ICP price surveys could be less for higher-income countries.


     Figure 2: Difference in average annual real GDP changes between ICP benchmarks
                                and levels of RGDPe per capita
                        .2




                                                 NGA
                                                                 SYR
    Change in RGDPe minus change in RGDPNA




                                                           YEM
                                                                                                         QAT
                                                                                  IRN
                      0             .1




                                                           IND
         -.1




                                                                           GIN
                                                                              LKA
                                                                       NGA
                        -.2




                                             5         6                7              8            9      10   11
                                                                       log of initial RGDPe per capita

Notes: Every observation denotes on the y-axis the difference between average annual change in RGDPe and
RGDPNA between two consecutive ICP benchmarks. So for India, the four included observations are for growth
between 1970 and 1975, 1975 and 1980, 1980 and 1985, and 1985 and 2005. On the x-axis, the initial level of
RGDPe per capita is shown, so India’s 1975 level with the difference in RGDP change between 1975 and 1980.
                                                                                                   26


                                               Although there is no systematic relationship from Figure 2 between the difference in

RGDPe and RGDPNA growth and the initial RGDPe per capita level, Figure 3 shows that there are

signs of a relationship depending on the importance of oil in the economy. The left-hand panel

plots the same differences between the change in RGDPe and RGDPNA between benchmarks, but

now against the share of fuel exports in CGDPo. The left panel shows that oil-exporting countries

tend to have faster increases in RGDPe than in RGDPNA. The right-hand panel shows no such

positive relationship when comparing the change in RGDPo to RGDPNA, which indicates that

those oil-exporting countries benefited from improvements in their terms of trade, rather than

from improvements in productive capacity.


             Figure 3: Difference in average annual real GDP changes between ICP benchmarks
                                            and fuel export shares

                                                                Change in RGDPe                                            Change in RGDPo
                          .2




                                                                                                   .2




                                                                           NGA
                                                         SYR
                                                                                                                   SYR
                                                                                                             LBN
                                                           YEM
                                                                                       QAT                                         NGA
    Change in RGDPe/o minus change in RGDPNA




                                                                                                             ZMB     YEM
                                                                           IRN
                                        .1




                                                                                                   .1




                                                   LBN

                                                   ZMB
                                                                                OMN                                                         QAT
                                                                             GAB             COG

                                                                      VEN        NOR                                       NGA         OMN
                                                                NGA                                                                 NOR
                                                                                                                               VEN GAB
                                                                                                                            NOR NOR                       COG
                        0




                                                                                                   0




                                                                       NOR
                                                               VEN
                                                                NOR
                                                                 KAZ                                                      VEN
                                                                                                                            KAZ
                                                                                                                                         COG
                                                               TTO                                                        TTO
                                                                                       COG
                                                         IRN

                                                                     SYR                                     GIN
       -.1




                                                                                                   -.1




                                                                                                             LKA IRN           SYR IRN
                                                   GIN
                                                   LKA

                                                               NGA                                                       NGA
                          -.2




                                                                                                   -.2




                                               0           .2        .4        .6     .8      1          0           .2          .4         .6       .8    1
                                                             Fuel export share in CGDPo                                   Fuel export share in CGDPo


Notes: See the notes to Figure 2 for a discussion of the variable on the y-axis. On the x-axis is the share of fuel
exports in CGDPo, variable csh_x3 in the detailed trade data file available on the PWT website.
                                                          27



         We now turn to the decomposition of differences across countries in CGDPe per capita

from equation (32). That decomposition can be performed for each country and year and, in line

with earlier work by Hall and Jones (1999), Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997) and Caselli

(2005), the variation in CGDPe per capita can then be decomposed into the variance of each of

the components in equation (32) and their covariances.


             Table 1: Decomposing the cross-country variation in CGDPe per capita

                                           2005                                              1996            1988
                                        Baseline           & simple k       & simple k  & simple k
var(log(CGDP e ))                          1.542        1.542             1.542               1.243            1.106
var(log(Q ))                               0.485        0.332             0.362               0.334            0.357
var(log(CTFP ))                            0.398        0.512             0.474               0.381            0.304
var(log(1+Gap ))                           0.005        0.005             0.005               0.003            0.002
covar(log(Q ),log(CTFP ))                  0.323        0.343             0.347               0.248            0.210
covar(log(Gap ),log(CTFP ))                0.000        0.000            -0.001               0.005            0.006
covar(log(Gap ),log(Q ))                   0.004        0.004             0.005               0.008            0.006

Variance explained by factor inputs        0.314        0.215             0.235               0.269            0.323
Number of countries                          111          111               111                 110               94

Notes:  is the share of capital income in GDP, which varies by country and year in the baseline. ‘simple k’
indicates that the capital stock is computed using information on total investment and assuming a constant
depreciation rate of 6%. In the baseline, investment in up to 6 assets is distinguished and depreciation rates vary by
asset. ‘Variance explained by factor inputs’ is computed as var(log(Q))/var(log(CGDPe)).



         Table 1 shows the results of this decomposition for a number of cases. The first column

uses the data on factor inputs as given in PWT8 for 2005, i.e. using estimates of the capital and

labor share and accounting for differences in the asset composition of the capital stocks (see

Inklaar and Timmer, 2013). The cross-country variance of CGDPe is 1.542 and nearly all of this

is explained by the variance of factor inputs, the variance of CTFP and the covariance between

these two. The “success” measure of Caselli (2005) is the share of variance in CGDPe that is

explained by the variation of factor inputs, and in the baseline case this share is 0.314, reported

near the bottom of the first column.
                                                28


       The subsequent two columns in Table 1 simplify the capital measure, by first assuming a

common capital share of 0.3 in column 2 and then by assuming that the capital stock consists of

a single asset that depreciates at 6 percent a year in column 3. The move from country-specific to

a common capital share greatly reduces the cross-country variation that can be explained by

factor inputs. The final two columns show the same decomposition as in column 3 but in earlier

years, to match earlier decomposition analyses for 1996 (Caselli, 2005) and 1988 (Hall and

Jones, 1999). Factor inputs explain less of the cross-country variation in CGDPe per capita in

2005 than in previous years, and the variance explained in those earlier years is smaller than in

the earlier studies: Caselli (2005) found that factor inputs explained almost 40 percent of

variation in GDP per worker in both 1988 and 1996. Since the method for computing factor

inputs in column 3-5 matches the earlier studies, this difference in outcome could reflect a

different country coverage or data revisions, such as in the educational attainment data of Barro

and Lee (2010). The finding that factor inputs as included in PWT8.0 explain more of the cross-

country variation in CGDPe per capita than simpler capital measures is found across all years,

though. The fact that this is driven by the use of country-specific capital shares confirms

Caselli’s (2005) argument that such results are sensitive to this measure. Furthermore, the

finding of Inklaar and Timmer (2013) that, in contrast to Gollin (2002), labor shares vary

considerably across countries and over time is further reason to use these country-specific labor

and capital shares in PWT8.0.

       The other main finding in Table is that the Gap between CGDPe and CGDPo, reflecting

differences in terms of trade and the trade balance, explains almost nothing of the cross-country

variation in CGDPe per capita: the variance is relatively small and the covariances are also close

to zero. The finding that the covariance between the Gap and CTFP is almost zero is consistent
                                                   29


with the argument by Kehoe and Ruhl (2008) that terms of trade shocks are very different from

productivity shocks: the data in PWT8.0 show that there is little to no systematic correlation

between these measures across countries.

           The gap is between CGDPe and CGDPo can still be of interest for some countries and

years, however. To illustrate, Figure 4 shows the Gap for Switzerland and the growth of

RGDPNA between 1950 and 2011. While RGDPNA declined substantially beginning in 1975,

living standards held up considerably better as indicated by the increase in the gap. This example

illustrates the differing opinions of Kehoe and Prescott (2002) and Kehoe and Ruhl (2005), who

characterize of the Swiss economy as being in a great depression over the period 1974-2000,

versus Kohli (2004), who focuses on the improving terms of trade between 1980 and 1996.

Although this terms of trade gain was fortuitous for the Swiss, a relationship between strong

terms of trade (measured by the Gap) and low growth of RGDPNA is not found for all years either


Figure 4: Gap between CGDPe and CGDPo and RGDPNA growth in Switzerland, 1950-2011
  .1
  .05
  0
  -.05
  -.1




         1950       1960       1970       1980          1990       2000       2010

                     Gap between CGDPe and CGDPo               Growth of RGDPNA
                                                          30


in Switzerland or systematically for the dataset as a whole. Still, this figure helps to illustrate that

there can be substantial deviations between CGDPe and CGDPo that imply meaningful

differences between output and the standard of living for some countries and periods.11

         As discussed earlier, PWT8.0 makes a distinction between observations based on

benchmark or interpolated PPP estimates and PPP estimates based on extrapolations using

information on national accounts price trends. This distinction turns out to be important for

estimates of the “Penn effect”, i.e. the positive relationship between the log of a country’s price

level (its PPP over its exchange rate) and the log level of CGDP per capita. Named as such by

Samuelson (1994), the effect inspired the work by Balassa (1964) and Samuelson (1964) who

hypothesized that productivity increases in the traded sector and stagnant productivity in the non-

traded sector would lead to increases in prices. More recently, Bergin, Glick and Taylor (2006)

found that there was no evidence of a Penn effect in the early 1950s, but that effect gradually

became significant and strengthened over time. Their analysis was based on PWT version 6 and

we revisit it using version 8.0. Consider the following model:

                                 PPPite                   CGDPite 
                            log            0  1t log             it ,                               (34)
                                 XR                      
                                    it                    POPit 

where XR is the exchange rate and POP is the population of country i at time t.12 For each year, a

separate cross-sectional regression is run and coefficient 1t and its 95% confidence interval is

reported in Figure 5. The figure shows a qualitatively similar pattern as in Bergin et al. (2006),

with a low and insignificant coefficient in the early years, which rises steadily and becomes

11
   Australia has benefited from an increase in mineral prices since 2003, as discussed by Gregory (2012). When
Figure 4 is constructed for Australia, it indeed shows a rising Gap after 2003.
12
   Bergin et al. (2006) divide the country’s GDP per capita level by the U.S. level in every year, but this only affects
the estimate of 0. Also note that sometimes the exchange-rate-converted GDP per capita level is used as the
explanatory variable instead of the PPP-converted GDP per capita level. We follow the approach of Bergin et al.
(2006), which was also advocated by Officer (1982). Officer also argued that a productivity measure would be
preferable to a GDP per capita level. Results using CGDPo per capita or CTFP are very similar.
                                                          31


                             Figure 5: The Penn effect in PWT8.0, 1950-2011
     .3
     .2
     .1
     0
     -.1




           1950       1960          1970           1980          1990           2000           2010

Notes: The figure plots 1t from equation (34) and its 95% confidence interval for all observations in PWT8.0. Each
1t is from a cross-sectional regression for all observations in year t. Excluded are those observations for which, due
to extreme swings, the market exchange rate is replaced by an exchange rate based on a relative PPP assumption.




highly significant in later years. The main substantive difference is that it takes until 1974 before

the Penn effect coefficient turns significantly positive, versus the mid-1950s in Bergin et al.

(2006).13 This is a challenging finding, as the Penn effect was already identified in data for the

1950s and 1960s, in e.g. Balassa (1964), therefore raising the question why the effect shows up

so much later in PWT8.0.

            To determine what is driving the result in Bergin et al. (2006) and in Figure 5, we

distinguish between observations from PPP benchmarks or interpolated between benchmarks on

the one hand, and observations that are extrapolated on the other hand. Figure 6 shows the result


13
  The same analysis based on PWT7.1 shows a qualitatively similar pattern, but the coefficient does not turn
significantly positive until 1988.
                                                                                      32


from the same cross-sectional regressions as in Figure 5, but run separately on the two

subsamples. Note that there are no benchmark observations before 1970 and that the latest global

comparison was in 2005. Figure 6 shows that in the benchmark/interpolated sample there is a

consistently positive and significant Penn effect of 0.3 on average, while in the extrapolated

sample, the estimated Penn effect is rarely significantly different from zero. As the bars at the

bottom of each panel indicate, the number of observations in the benchmark/interpolated sample

increases, from 16 countries in 1970 to 146 countries in 2005, while the reverse is the case for

the ‘extrapolated’ sample.


                                            Figure 6: The Penn effect in PWT8.0 for benchmark or interpolated
                                                       and for extrapolated observations, 1970-2005
                                          Benchmark or interpolated                       Extrapolated
                                                                                400




                                                                                                                                      400
                                                                                350




                                                                                                                                      350
                                                                                300




                                                                                                                                                             300
                                 .6




                                                                                      .6
  Slope of price-income regression




                                                                                                                                      Number of observations
                                                                                250




                                                                                                                                                      250
                         .4




                                                                                      .4
                                                                                200




                                                                                                                                              200
                  .2




                                                                                      .2
                                                                                150




                                                                                                                                       150
         0




                                                                                      0
                                                                                100




                                                                                                                                      100
 -.2




                                                                                      -.2
                   -.4




                                                                                      -.4
                                                                                50




                                                                                                                                      50
                   -.6




                                                                                      -.6
                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                      0




                                      1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005               1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

                                                  Slope coefficient (l)                                 Slope coefficient (l)
                                                  Number of observations (r)                            Number of observations (r)

Note: the figure plots 1t from equation (34) and its 95% confidence interval for all observations in PWT8.0. Each
1t is from a cross-sectional regression in year t. The left-hand panel only includes observations from PPP
benchmarks or interpolated between PPP benchmarks. The right-hand panel includes observations extrapolated from
PPP benchmarks using inflation rates, i.e. all other observations. Excluded are those observations for which, due to
extreme swings, the market exchange rate is replaced in PWT8.0 by an exchange rate based on a relative PPP
assumption.
                                                 33


       The pattern in Figure 5 can thus be best understood as a weighted average between a

positive and significant coefficient in the benchmark/interpolated sample and a zero coefficient

in the extrapolated sample. As the weight of the benchmark/interpolated sample increases over

time, the overall coefficient increases and turns significant. The Bergin et al. (2006) result is thus

the result of the extrapolation methodology used exclusively in earlier versions of PWT and

partially in PWT8.0, rather than an economically relevant phenomenon. By distinguishing

between benchmark/interpolated/extrapolated observations in PWT8, we are thus able to show

how the Penn effect is always valid in in-between benchmarks. This finding reinforces the

importance of incorporating historical benchmark material, since an economically relevant

phenomenon like the Penn effect would otherwise disappear from the data when going back

further in time.


8. Conclusions

       From its inception, the ICP only collected the prices of final products – for consumption,

investment and the government – across countries. It was prohibitively expensive to further

collect comparable prices for the whole range of industrial and intermediate inputs used in

economies, many of which are also traded. This limitation means that the PWT calculations

based on ICP prices are best thought of as representing the standard of living of countries rather

than their production possibilities. Feenstra et al (2009) argued that a measure of the productive

capacity of countries could be obtained by combining the ICP data with prices for exports and

imports. These two approaches lead to real GDP on the expenditure-side and real GDP on the

output-side, respectively, both of which will be included in PWT version 8.0.

       The second contribution of PWT8 will be to improve upon the growth of real GDP

previously reported in PWT, which was based on national accounts data. Johnson et al (2013)
                                                 34


criticized that growth rate as being dependent on the benchmark year of ICP data, and thereby

dependent on the version of PWT being used. That problem is resolved in two ways: (i) by

including the series RGDPNA that uses the 2005 benchmark and then the growth rates of real

GDP from the national accounts to extrapolate to all other years; (ii) by using multiple ICP

benchmarks to construct RGDPe and RGDPo. Under this second approach, the relative living

standards or productive capacity of a country can change at a different pace than implied by

national accounts GDP growth. India, for example, is found to have a higher standard of living in

its 1975 ICP benchmark than predicted from the 1985 benchmark and back-casting using the

growth of national accounts prices. It follows that the change in real GDP from 1975 onwards is

correspondingly reduced. We have shown that incorporating multiple ICP benchmarks also

ensures that relationships such as the Penn effect remain apparent in the dataset, rather than

disappearing when going back further in time.

       The final contribution of PWT8 is to reintroduce a measure of the capital stock and, for

the first time, include a measure of relative TFP across countries. We have shown that, compared

to standard approaches in the literature, cross-country variation in factor inputs can account for

more of the cross-country variation in CGDPe per capita. This is mostly because PWT8.0

incorporates new estimates of the labor share in GDP that vary in a meaningful fashion across

countries and over time.

       Taken together, these contributions show that PWT version 8 breaks new ground in

providing a cross-country dataset that is broader, more consistent over time and more transparent

in its methods. To facilitate this, we have also made available a User’s Guide in Feenstra, Inklaar

and Timmer (2013). We hope that this new version provides a fresh impetus for research aiming

to explain cross-country differences in economic performance and living standards.
                                                                  35


Appendix A

Proof of Theorem 1:

        Because the outputs yk are feasible for country k, but not optimal at the prices Pj, it

follows that rk ( Pj , vk )  Pj' yk . This establishes the first inequality below and the second is

established similarly:

                 r j ( Pj , v j )  Pj' y j                 r j ( Pk , v j ) Pk' y j         
                                               and                                        .
                 rk ( Pj , v k )  Pj' y k   
                                                            rk ( Pk , vk )  Pk' y k         
                                                                                               

Using the Gerschenkron effect it follows that:

                                                                                    0.5
                                 Pj' y j
                 r j ( Pj , v j )               Pj' y j       Pk' y j                Pk' y j    r j ( Pk , v j )
                                               '          '                      '                          .   (A1)
                 rk ( Pj , vk )  Pj' yk      
                                                Pj yk
                                                               
                                                                 Pk yk
                                                                             
                                                                              
                                                                                           
                                                                                            Pk yk
                                                                                                        rk ( Pk , vk )
                                                                                                       

Now consider the first condition in (5), which states that yk  k is feasible using the technology of

county j. Because these outputs are not optimally chosen for the prices Pj it is immediate that:

                                      P j' ( y k  k )  P j' y j .


It follows that  k  Pj' y j / Pj' y k . Then consider the second condition in (5), which states that

( y j /  j ) is feasible using the technology of county k. Because these outputs are not optimally

chosen for the prices Pk it is immediate that:

                                      Pk' ( y j /  j )  Pk' yk .


It follows that  j  Pk' y j / Pk' y k . Using the Gerschenkron effect again we have therefore shown:

                                                                                    0.5
                                   Pj' y j     Pj' y j       Pk' y j                Pk' y j   
                             k   '            '                                 '         j .                 (A2)
                                   Pj y k                     Pk' yk                  Pk yk     
                                               Pj yk                                        
                                                                     36


Using (A1) and (A2), and by continuity of the function r j (  , v j ) / rk (  , vk ) , there exists a value

for  between Pj and Pk such that Theorem 1 holds. QED


Proof of Corollary:

This follows immediately from Theorem 1 by indexing country j with the time subscript t, and

then treating country k as identical to country j in year t-1.


Proof of Theorem 2:

Since the reference prices  are equal in the revenue functions rj (  , v j ) and rk (  , vk ) we can

be quite flexible about how they appear. In particular, suppose that rj (  , v j ) is of the form:

                                         L                   L M N                                      L     L
    ln rj (  , v j )  ln h j (  )    lj ln vlj                      lij ln vlj ln  i    1
                                                                                                    2      lm ln vlj ln vmj ,                    (A3)
                                        l 1                l 1 i 1                                   l 1 m 1


where h j (  ) is homogenous of degree one. The function ln rk ( , vk ) is specified similarly but

with k replacing j. Without loss of generality we can assume that lm = ml , and notice that only

these coefficients do not depend on countries j or k. In order for the translog function to be

homogeneous of degree one in  and in v j , the coefficients must satisfy the restrictions:

                              L                       L                 L             L              M N
                            lj =1            and     lm    lm    lij                                lij  0.
                             l 1                    l 1            m 1            l 1               i 1


Using the definition of the factor prices w*jl  rj (  , v j ) / v jl and the fact that rj (  , v j ) is
                                                                                                 wlj* vlj               ln rj (  , v j )
homogeneous of degree one in endowments, we have that                                                                                       . It
                                                                                             m wmj* vmj                    ln v jl
follows from (A3) that:

                                    wlj* vlj                 M N                           L
                                                   lj             lij ln  i    lm ln vmj .                                                 (A4)
                              m wmj* vmj                     i 1                        m 1
                                                                        37


Then using the definition of Aj and Ak along with (A3) and (A4), we can compute:


                       1
              1/ 2
ln A j Ak                  rj (  , v j )  rk (  , v j )  rj (  , vk )  rk (  , vk ) 
                         2

                                        1
  rj (  , v j )  rk (  , vk )    rj (  , v j )  rk (  , v j )  rj (  , vk )  rk (  , vk ) 
                                        2

  rj (  , v j )  rk (  , vk ) 

 1 L              M N
                                                 vlj  L L                         L L                  
    lj   lk   (  lij   lik )ln  i  ln       lm ln vlj ln vmj     lm ln vlk ln vmk 
 2  l 1           i 1                        vlk  l 1 m 1                 l 1 m 1              

  rj (  , v j )  rk (  , vk ) 

 1 L              M N                         vlj  L L                                            
    lj   lk   (  lij   lik )ln  i  ln       lm (ln vmj  ln vmk )(ln vlj  ln vlk ) 
 2  l 1           i 1                        vlk  l 1 m 1                                      

                                        1  L  wlj vlj                                       vlj    
                                                        *
                                                                  wlk* vlk
  rj (  , v j )  rk (  , vk )                                                   ln        ,
                                        2  l 1   m wmj
                                                          *
                                                            vmj  m wmk*
                                                                          vmk                 vlk    
                                                                                           


where the first equality follows directly from the definition of Aj and Ak; the second equality

follows from simple algebra; the third equality follows from the translog formula in (A3); the

fourth equality follows from algebra on the double-summations; and the final equality follows

from the share formula in (A4). QED
                                              38



References

Balassa, Bela, 1964, “The Purchasing-Power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal” Journal of
       Political Economy, 72: 584–96.
Balk, Bert, 2008, Price and Quantity Index Numbers: Models for Measuring Aggregate Change
       and Difference. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Barro, Robert and Jong-Wha Lee, 2010, "A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the
       World, 1950-2010." NBER Working Paper No. 15902.
Bergin, Paul R., Reuven Glick and Alan M. Taylor (2006), “Productivity, Tradability, and the
       Long-Run Price P uzzle” Journal of Monetary Economics 53: 2041-2066.
Caselli, Francesco, 2005, “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences” in Handbook of
        Economic Growth, Volume 1A, Phillipe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf (eds.),
        Amsterdam: Elsevier, 679-741.
Caves, Douglas W., Laurits R. Christensen and W. Erwin Diewert, 1982a, “The Economic
       Theory of Index Numbers and the Measurement of Input, Output, and Productivity,”
       Econometrica, 50(6), 1393-1414.
Caves, Douglas W., Laurits R. Christensen and W. Erwin Diewert, 1982b, “Multilateral
       Comparisons of Output, Input, and Productivity Using Superlative Index Numbers,”
       Economic Journal, 92, March, 73-86.
Deaton, Angus, 2012, “Consumer Price Indexes, Purchasing Power Parity Exchange Rates, and
      Updating,” paper for the PWT Workshop May 2012, Philadelphia.
Diewert, W. Erwin, 1981, “The Economic Theory of Index Numbers: A Survey”, pp. 163-208 in
      Essays in the Theory and Measurement of Consumer Behaviour in Honour of Sir Richard
      Stone, Angus Deaton (ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Diewert, W. Erwin, 1983, “The Theory of the Output Price Index and the Measurement of Real
      Output Change”, pp. 1049-1113 in Price Level Measurement, W.E. Diewert and C.
      Montmarquette, eds., Ottawa: Statistics Canada.
Diewert, W. Erwin, 1999, “Axiomatic and Economic Approaches to International Comparisons,”
      in International and Interarea Comparisons of Income, Output and Prices, A. Heston and
      R.E. Lipsey (eds.), NBER Studies in Income and Wealth Volume 61, Chicago:
      University of Chicago Press, 13-87.
Diewert, W. Erwin and Catherine J. Morrison, 1986, “Adjusting Outputs and Productivity
      Indexes for Changes in the Terms of Trade,” Economic Journal, 96, 659-679.
Eltetö, O. and P. Köves, 1964, “On an Index Number Computation Problem in International
        Comparison” (in Hungarian), Statisztikai Szemle 42, 507-518.
Eurostat and OECD, 2006, EUROSTAT-OECD Methodological Manual on Purchasing Power
       Parities (PPPs), Paris.
                                               39


Feenstra, Robert C., Alan Heston, Marcel P. Timmer, and Haiyan Deng, 2009, “Estimating Real
       Production and Expenditures Across Countries: A Proposal for Improving the Penn
       World Tables,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(1), 201-212.
Feenstra, Robert C., Hong Ma and D.S. Prasada Rao , 2009, “Consistent Comparisons of Real
       Income Across Countries and Over Time,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 13(S2), 169-193.
Feenstra, Robert C. and John Romalis, 2012, “International Prices and Endogenous Quality,”
       NBER Working Paper, 18314.
Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar and Marcel P. Timmer, 2013, “PWT8.0: A User’s Guide”,
       mimeo, available at: www.ggdc.net/pwt.
Geary, R.C., 1958, “A Note on the Comparison of Exchange Rates and Purchasing Power
       between Countries”, Journal of the Royal statistical Society, Series A (General), 121(1),
       97-99.
Gerschenkron, Alexander, 1951, A Dollar Index of Soviet Machinery Output, 1927-28 to 1937,
      Report R-197, Santa Monica: Rand Corporation.
Gini, Corrado, 1931, “On the Circular Test of Index Numbers”, Metron, 9:9, 3-24.
Gollin, Douglas, 2002, “Getting Income Shares Right” Journal of Political Economy 110(2):
        458-474.
Gregory, Robert G., 2012, “Living Standards, Terms of Trade and Foreign Ownership:
      Reflection on the Australia Mining Boom,” The Australian Journal of Agricultural and
      Resource Economics, 56, 171-200.
Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones, 1999, “Why do Some Countries Produce so Much More
       Output per Worker than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(1): 83-116.
Hill, Robert J., 2004, “Constructing Price Indexes across Space and Time: The Case of the
        European Union,” American Economic Review, 94(5): 1379-1410.
Inklaar, Robert and Marcel P. Timmer, 2013, “Capital and TFP in PWT8.0” mimeo, available at:
        www.ggdc.net/pwt.
Johnson, Simon, William Larson, Chris Papageorgiou and Arvind Subramanian, 2013, “Is Newer
      Better? Penn World Table Revisions and Their Impact on Growth Estimates,” Journal of
      Monetary Economics 60(2): 255-274.
Kehoe, Timothy J. and Edward C. Prescott, 2007, Great Depressions of the Twentieth Century,
       Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Kehoe, Timothy J. and Kim J. Ruhl, 2005, “Is Switzerland in a Great Depression?” Review of
       Economic Dynamics 8(3): 759-775.
Kehoe, Timothy J. and Kim J. Ruhl, 2008, “Are Shocks to the Terms of Trade Shocks to
       Productivity?” Review of Economic Dynamics 11: 904-19.
Khamis, Salem H. 1970, “Properties and Conditions for the Existence of a New Type of Index
      Numbers”, Sankhya, Series B, 32, 81-98.
                                              40


Khamis, Salem H. 1972, “A New System of index Numbers for National and International
      Purposes”, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A, 135(1), 96–121.
Klenow, Peter, and Andres Rodriguez-Clare, 1997, “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth
      Economics: Has It Gone Too Far?” in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds.,
      NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997 Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kohli, Ulrich, 2004, “Real GDP, Real Domestic Income, and Terms-of-Trade Changes,” Journal
       of International Economics, 62, 83–106, 2004.
Kohli, Ulrich, 2006, “Real GDP, Real GDI, and Trading Gains: Canada, 1981–2005,”
       International Productivity Monitor, 13 (Fall), 46–56.
Malmquist, S., 1953, “Index Numbers and Indifference Surfaces”, Trabajos de Estatistica 4,
     209-242.
Neary, Peter, 2004, “Rationalizing the Penn World Table: True Multilateral Indexes for
       International Comparisons of Real Income“, American Economic Review, 94(5),
       December, 1411-1428.
Officer, Lawrence H., 1982, Purchasing Power Parity and Exchange Rates: Theory, Evidence
       and Relevance, JAI Press: Greenwich, Connecticut.
Rao, D. S. Prasado, Alicia Rambaldi and Howard Doran, 2010, “Extrapolation of Purchasing
       Power Parities using Multiple Benchmarks and Auxiliary information: A New
       Approach”, Review of Income and Wealth, 56(S1), S59-S98
Reinsdorf, Marshall, 2010, “Terms of Trade Effects: Theory And Measurement,” The Review of
      Income and Wealth, 56(Special Issue 1), June, S177-S205.
Samuelson, Paul A., 1964, “Theoretical Notes on Trade Problems,” Review of Economics and
      Statistics, 46(2)” 145–54.
Samuelson, Paul A., 1994, “Facets of Balassa-Samuelson Thirty Years Later,” Review of
      International Economics, 2(3): 201–26.
Szulc, B., 1964, “Index Numbers of Multilateral Regional Comparisons” (in Polish), Przeglad
       Statysticzny 3, 239-254.
Van Veelen, Matthijs, 2002, “An Impossibility Theorem Concerning Multilateral International
      Comparison of Volumes,” Econometrica, 70(1), 369-375.
