                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       OFF-BALANCE-SHEET FEDERAL LIABILITIES

                                         James D. Hamilton

                                        Working Paper 19253
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19253


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2013




I am grateful to Marjorie Flavin, Robert Hall, Douglas Holtz-Eakin, Jeffrey Miron, Phillip Swagel,
and seminar and conference participants at U.C. San Diego and the Cato Institute for helpful comments
on this paper. This study was prepared for Cato Papers on Public Policy. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by James D. Hamilton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Off-Balance-Sheet Federal Liabilities
James D. Hamilton
NBER Working Paper No. 19253
July 2013
JEL No. H6

                                            ABSTRACT

Much attention has been given to the recent growth of the U.S. federal debt. This paper examines
the growth of federal liabilities that are not included in the officially reported numbers. These take
the form of implicit or explicit government guarantees and commitments. The five major categories
surveyed include support for housing, other loan guarantees, deposit insurance, actions taken by the
Federal Reserve, and government trust funds. The total dollar value of notional off-balance-sheet
commitments came to $70 trillion as of 2012, or 6 times the size of the reported on-balance-sheet debt.
The paper reviews the potential costs and benefits of these off-balance-sheet commitments and their
role in precipitating or mitigating the financial crisis of 2008.


James D. Hamilton
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
jhamilton@ucsd.edu
1. Introduction.

        U.S. federal debt has exploded in recent years, growing from $5 trillion (or 36%

of GDP) in 2007 to an estimated $12 trillion (72% of GDP) by the end of 2013. Making

the interest payments on this debt poses a permanent burden on future taxpayers. At the

moment, interest rates are at historic lows, with the government paying an average rate of

only 2% to service its outstanding debt.1 That contrasts with an average rate of 4.5% paid

over 2000-2009 and 6.6% over 1990-1999.

        Most projections call for interest rates to rise back to more usual historical levels

over the next several years. For example, the consensus Blue Chip Financial Forecast

anticipates a yield on 10-year Treasury bonds of 4.7% by 2017 (Bernanke, 2013).

Returning to those levels of interest rates or the even higher rates seen on average during

the 1990s would mean a doubling or tripling of the government’s current annual interest

expense, bringing it to 2.8-4.2% of GDP, even if there are no further increases in federal

debt from now on. The Congressional Budget Office currently anticipates that net

interest expense will exceed the entire defense budget by 2021.2

        But the officially reported debt is only one respect in which current policy has left

a burden for future taxpayers. In addition the government has made a number of implicit

and explicit commitments that are not included in the net debt figures just reported, but

which could potentially require much larger adjustments in future spending or taxes than

those associated with paying interest on the official debt itself. The biggest items in this


1
  Federal net interest expense in 2012 was $220 B, which was 2% of the $11,281 T debt held by the public.
Data are from Congressional Budget Office, Historical Budget Data, May 2013
(http://www.cbo.gov/publication/44197).
2
  “Updated Budget Projections: Fiscal Years 2013-2023,” May 2013
(http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/44172-Baseline2.pdf).


                                                                                                        1
category come from Social Security and Medicare which, if current policy is maintained,

will require enormous sacrifices from future taxpayers. Gokhale (2013) and the 2013

trustees reports for Social Security and Medicare recently provided updates of the size of

these commitments. However, there are a number of other government guarantees and

implicit commitments that are also quite significant. This paper tabulates the growth of

the major categories of off-balance-sheet commitments with a particular focus on their

possible role in precipitating or mitigating the financial crisis of 2008. Adding all the off-

balance-sheet liabilities together, I calculate total federal off-balance-sheet commitments

came to $70.1 T as of 2012, or about 6 times the size of the on-balance-sheet debt. In

other words, the budget impact associated with an aging population and other challenges

could turn out to have much more significant fiscal consequences than even the mountain

of on-balance-sheet debt already accumulated.

       The paper begins with an examination of the motivations for off-balance-sheet

commitments. These include preventing or responding to financial crises, subsidizing

socially desired activities, and commitments to retirees. I then review five of the most

important current sources of federal off-balance-sheet liabilities, which are support for

housing, other loan guarantees, deposit insurance, actions taken by the Federal Reserve,

and government trust funds. I explore how these commitments have changed over the last

6 years and their possible role in contributing to or mitigating the financial strains

associated with the Great Recession. A final section briefly draws on some other

historical episodes to offer some concluding thoughts on how concerned we should be

about the growth of off-balance-sheet federal liabilities.




                                                                                            2
2. Reasons for off-balance-sheet commitments.

       There are three traditional motivations for the government to make commitments

in addition to the explicit liabilities embodied in outstanding sovereign debt, which I now

briefly review.

       A. Preventing or responding to financial crises.

       Financial institutions like banks function as intermediaries between potential

lenders and borrowers. The lenders value such intermediation because they desire to hold

their assets in highly liquid form such as bank deposits that could be withdrawn at any

time. The borrowers have longer term investment projects with incompletely observed

fundamentals, as a result of which the bank’s loans are inherently illiquid. The financial

sector issues short-term liquid liabilities to the lenders and holds long-term, illiquid assets

(claims against the borrowers), earning a profit on the interest-rate spread.

       Diamond and Dybvig (1983) suggested that such arrangements are inherently

unstable. If all the bank’s depositors were ever to want their money back at the same

time, an immediate sale of the bank’s assets would involve a loss as a necessary result of

their illiquid character. In such an event, depositors would not get all their money back

and a bank run could be self-fulfilling. Diamond and Dybvig showed that this problem

can be prevented if the government guarantees all deposits on the basis of its taxing

authority which ideally would never need to be invoked in equilibrium.

       Other economists have argued that the deposit insurance could itself introduce a

moral hazard problem, causing banks to make riskier loans than they would have in the

absence of a government guarantee; see for example Kareken and Wallace (1978) and the

surveys in Bhattacharya, Boot, and Thakor (1998) and Santos (2001). Moreover, bank



                                                                                             3
runs could alternatively be prevented by requiring the bank to carry a level of equity--

initial capital provided by the bank’s owners rather than obtained from depositors or

short-term lenders-- that is sufficient to cover the losses should the bank be forced to

liquidate. This involves a potential efficiency loss relative to government deposit

insurance in that it requires capital to be tied up as reserves as a contingency against

liquidity needs; for discussion see Diamond and Rajan (2000) and Cooper and Ross

(2002).

          An alternative role for the government could arise ex post in deciding how to

respond to a financial panic if one were to occur. If banks are forced to sell off their

illiquid assets at the height of a financial panic, such “fire sales” would depress the

market price of illiquid assets even further. There would be social benefits in such a

setting from having the government or central bank offer emergency loans, which the

banks would be able to repay over time through a more orderly sale of bank assets. A

classic discussion of the role for government lending in such a situation was provided by

Bagehot (1873); see Flannery (1996) and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2012) for modern

assessments.

          B. Subsidizing socially desired activities.

          It is also possible to make a case for government loans or loan guarantees as a

steady-state policy even if bank runs are not a concern. The government is able to

borrow at lower rates than any private borrower. To the extent this is because of private-

lending frictions such as principal-agent problems or credit rationing, it may be welfare

improving to have the government directly provide loans or guarantees to many private

borrowers. Nevertheless, moral hazard and other problems could again cause such




                                                                                            4
government assistance to be counterproductive; see for example Chaney and Thakor

(1985), Smith and Stutzer (1989), and Bencivinga and Smith (1993).

       Alternatively, a social planner might choose to direct more capital to certain

activities than would be the outcome in an unregulated market if those activities are

associated with positive economic externalities. For example, home ownership may be

perceived to lower crime rates and increase community involvement, and education

could provide a range of external social benefits. Such arguments could serve as possible

justification for the large government participation in housing and student loans discussed

in Section 3 below. In that discussion I will also review the potential downside of such

programs.

       C. Commitments to retirees.

       Finally, the government would need to offer retirement benefits to any of its

employees in order to compete for workers successfully with private-sector employers.

The government’s existing commitment to its future retired workers may take the form of

off-balance-sheet liabilities. More broadly, the U.S. government has also undertaken

limited provision for almost all retired and many disabled workers in the form of the

Social Security Trust Fund. Such government involvement in retirement assistance to

private-sector workers could be motivated on the basis of a perceived public good. As a

nation, we do not want to see the elderly suffer, even if it is a result of their own decision

not to save when they were working. Assisting such individuals is a public good in the

sense that providing the good for me (giving me the satisfaction that Person X is

adequately cared for) does not reduce the benefit to you of that same good. Such




                                                                                             5
programs could be regarded as an off-balance-sheet liability if existing policies commit

the government to a certain level of assistance to be offered to retirees in years to come.



3. Key U.S. off-balance-sheet commitments.

       A. Housing.

       One of the most important areas of federal off-balance-sheet commitments

involves assistance to the housing market. These programs began in 1934 when

Congress established the Federal Housing Administration (FHA), which insures approved

mortgages. Such insurance creates a contingent liability of the federal government that is

not counted as part of the federal debt, and, if the loan is repaid, never shows up on the

Treasury’s income or balance sheet. Since its inception, the FHA has insured 40 million

loans. During 2012, the FHA insured $213 B in new mortgages, bringing its total

portfolio of insured mortgages to $1,300 B (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban

Development, 2012).

       In 1938, Congress created the Federal National Mortgage Association, commonly

known as Fannie Mae, as a separate entity to purchase the loans that were guaranteed by

the FHA. Although originally created through an act of Congress, Fannie Mae has for

much of its history had some of the characteristics of a private corporation, with the

Federal National Mortgage Association Charter Act of 1954 giving the federal

government and private stockholders mixed ownership of the enterprise. In 1968, Fannie

Mae was split into two separate entities. The Government National Mortgage

Association (Ginnie Mae) was to be an entirely government-owned corporation intended

particularly to assist lower-income households, while the remainder (which continued to



                                                                                              6
be referred to as Fannie Mae) was intended to function mostly as a private enterprise

separate from the government. In 1970, Congress chartered the Federal Home Loan

Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac) to serve a similar role and act as a competitor to

Fannie Mae.

       Because both Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were originally created by an act of

Congress, they are referred to as “government-sponsored enterprises”, or GSEs. It is hard

to regard them as ever being truly private companies. For example, they were exempt

from all state and local taxes other than property taxes, and bankruptcy procedures were

never clear. The Federal National Mortgage Association Charter Act did specify that in

issuing any debt, Fannie Mae “shall insert appropriate language in all of its obligations

issued under this subsection clearly indicating that such obligations, together with the

interest thereon, are not guaranteed by the United States and do not constitute a debt or

obligation of the United States or of any agency or instrumentality thereof other than the

corporation” (Section 304.2.b). But lenders to the GSEs did not act as if they actually

believed that. For example, a 2001 assessment by the Congressional Budget Office

estimated that the GSEs would have had to pay an average interest rate that would be 41

basis points higher than the rate they actually paid to borrow, if lenders did not perceive a

significant probability that the U.S. Treasury would step in, if necessary, to prevent a

GSE default on the debt. See Haffner (2008) for further discussion.

       Fannie and Freddie used the funds borrowed at advantageous rates to purchase

significant volumes of new mortgages. As seen in Figure 1, their combined holdings

increased by almost $1.3 trillion between 1994 and 2004, or over a 300% increase; U.S.

nominal GDP increased only 67% over that same period. As of the end of 2009, Fannie




                                                                                             7
owed $780 B in short-term and long-term debt, which it used to finance $736 B in

mortgages that it held at the time.3 Freddie owed $781 B and held $718 B in mortgages.4

        Separate government-sponsored enterprises were also using funds borrowed at

favorable rates to purchase mortgages. For example, at the end of 2009, the Federal

Home Loan Banks held $616 B in financial assets and the Farm Credit System $80 B.5

These 4 enterprises, along with the Financing Corporation and the Resolution Funding

Corporation had total debt outstanding of $2.7 T as of the end of 2009 (Flow of Funds,

Table L1).

        Even more important in dollar terms were the guarantees that Fannie and Freddie

provided for a vastly larger volume of loans. The system worked as follows. A private

entity would lend its own funds to a household for purposes of buying a house, and

would then sell the mortgage to Fannie or Freddie. The GSE would then bundle a set of

loans into an asset known as a mortgage-backed security (MBS) and sell these to

individual investors. Fannie described its business model as follows:6

        We support market liquidity by securitizing mortgage loans, which means we
        place loans in a trust and Fannie Mae MBS backed by the mortgage loans are then
        issued. We guarantee to the MBS trust that we will supplement amounts received
        by the MBS trust as required to permit timely payment of principal and interest on
        the trust certificates. In return for this guaranty, we receive guaranty fees.

        Although these guarantees represented a liability of the GSE, these were not

counted as part of the GSE’s own balance sheet-- they were in effect an off-balance-sheet

liability of an enterprise that could itself be regarded as an off-balance-sheet liability of

the federal government. As of the end of 2009, the assets in agency- and GSE-backed

3
  This number refers to sum of mortgages and MBS held for trading, available for sale, and held for
investment. Data are from 2010 Fannie Mae Annual Report, page F-3.
4
  Data are from 2010 Freddie Mac Annual Report, page 175.
5
  See Federal Reserve Board, Flow of Funds, Table L122, “Government-Sponsored Enterprises.”
6
  From Fannie Mae 2011 Annual Report, page 22.


                                                                                                      8
mortgage pools came to $5.4 T (Flow of Funds, Table L1). The combined net equity of

Fannie and Freddie that could be used to honor this guarantee came to only $70B as of

2006.

        That such enterprises would be capable by themselves of actually guaranteeing

such a vast sum stretches credulity. As housing prices began to fall after 2006, the GSE’s

net equity turned negative and the federal government placed both Fannie and Freddie

into conservatorship. Beginning in 2010, the guarantees began to be reported as on-

balance-sheet liabilities of the GSEs (see Figure 2).

        Having been originally created through an act of Congress, and with the federal

government today being the sole owner of Fannie and Freddie, it seems appropriate to

consider both the direct debt obligations of the GSEs and other government housing

agencies, as well as their outstanding mortgage guarantees, as an off-balance sheet

liability of the federal government. It should be recognized that such liabilities do not

have the same status as the direct debt obligations of the Treasury itself. For one thing,

there are some offsetting assets, namely the mortgages held outright. The value of the

mortgages would never fall to zero, so that using the notional exposure is a significant

overstatement of the conceivable net outlays that would ever be required from the federal

government to honor these commitments. Nevertheless, it seems a useful exercise to

calculate the total notional value of these off-balance-sheet debts and guarantees.

        Line 2 of Table 1 reports the par value of the outstanding value of the direct debt

of Fannie, Freddie, the Federal Home Loan Banks, Farm Credit System, Federal

Agricultural Mortgage Corporation, Financing Corporation, and Resolution Funding

Corporation at the end of various fiscal years, while line 3 reports the notional value of




                                                                                              9
the separate mortgage guarantees issued by Fannie, Freddie, Government National

Mortgage Association, and Federal Farmers Home Mortgages plus mortgages held

outright by the Federal Financing Bank. The big jump in line 2 and fall in line 3 after

September 2008 represents the accounting decision to move Fannie’s and Freddie’s

guarantees on balance sheet. Lines 2 and 3 sum to $7.5 T as of the end of FY 2012, two-

thirds as big as the entire stock of Treasury debt held by the public. Note that we have

left out of this calculation the $1.3 T in loan guarantees7 issued by the Federal Housing

Administration, Veterans Housing Benefit Programs, and Rural Housing Services, on the

assumption that most of these loans ended up being held as assets or part of the

guaranteed pools of the GSEs and agencies that are already included in lines 2 and 3 of

Table 1.

        The top panel of Figure 3 provides historical perspective by plotting the combined

mortgage debt either held outright by the GSEs or in mortgage pools that were

guaranteed by the GSEs or other federal agencies. This nearly quadrupled between 1991

and 2006, and more than doubled as a percent of GDP over those 15 years (see the

middle panel of Figure 3).

        What have been the public benefits of this off-balance sheet commitment? One

goal of these policies was to increase the home ownership rate. There was indeed a

significant rise in home ownership from 64% in 1994 to 69% by 2005. However, these

gains proved to be temporary, as they were mostly wiped out by the housing crash and

Great Recession (see Figure 4).




7
 This number comes from General Accountability Office, Financial Statements of the United States
Government: Notes to Financial Statements," Fiscal Year 2012.


                                                                                                   10
           Prior to the crash, however, the U.S. housing boom was pretty spectacular.

Household mortgage debt grew significantly faster than GDP in the decade leading up to

the crash (Figure 5). U.S. real house prices, which according to Shiller’s (2000) data had

been relatively stable for a century, nearly doubled within the span of a decade before

crashing just as dramatically (Figure 6).

           That the tremendous growth in implicit federal guarantees contributed to the

housing bubble seems difficult to deny. However, it is important to recognize that an

even bigger contribution came from outside the GSEs and federal agencies. As seen in

the bottom panel of Figure 3, despite the rapid growth of mortgage debt held or

guaranteed by the GSEs, the fraction of mortgage debt associated with the GSEs climbed

only modestly between 1995 and 2003, after which it began to decline as a result of an

even faster growth in private-label MBS.8 These represented an adaptation of the Fannie

and Freddie model. As with the GSEs, a mortgage originator would make the initial loan

to a household. But rather than sell the mortgage to Fannie or Freddie, the originator

would sell the loan to a private loan aggregator such as New Century Financial (which

went bankrupt in 2007) or Countrywide Financial (which was purchased by Bank of

America in 2008). The aggregator would collect a group of thousands of mortgages into

a pool, and the income flows resulting from interest payments on the pool were then

assigned to tranches, with the more senior tranches guaranteed to be paid first. The

theory was that the diversification provided by pooling along with the protection

provided by a more senior position in the tranche system could make such securities safe

even without an explicit guarantee from a government-sponsored enterprise, despite the



8
    See Ashcraft and Schuermann (2007) for a description of private-label MBS.


                                                                                          11
fact that the credit-worthiness of the borrowers was substantially worse than that required

for securitization by a GSE.

       Figure 7 summarizes changing funding sources for U.S. mortgages over time.

During the 1980s, GSE pools gradually displaced private banks and savings and loans as

the dominant provider of mortgage funds in the U.S. During the 1990s, the GSE share

increased only modestly as private-label MBS grew rapidly. The private-label MBS were

far more important than the GSEs in the explosion of U.S. mortgage debt in the 2000s.

       One could nevertheless make an argument that the implicit guarantees associated

with the GSE and agency mortgages made an indirect contribution to the explosion of

private-label MBS. The primary risk for both private and GSE MBS was that of a crash

in real-estate prices. As long as prices kept rising, even the poor-quality subprime loans

had very low default rates, because borrowers could refinance at a profit, turning their

initial position of zero or even negative net equity into a handsome profit. As noted

above, the potential federal losses from a major real-estate meltdown were quite

significant. Some might have believed that, insofar as the government would do

whatever necessary to prevent significant losses on the GSE debt and guarantees, the

same policies would help the issuers of private MBS to keep their noses above water as

well (Hamilton, 2007b).

       B. Other federal loan guarantees.

       There are a number of important federal loan guarantee programs in addition to

those involving housing. One of the most important involves loans for post-high-school

education. Donghoon Lee (2013) estimated from household-level credit data that the

outstanding stock of student loans grew from a little over $300 B in 2004 to nearly a




                                                                                           12
trillion dollars by 2012. Federal loans and loan guarantees have played a key role in

funding this explosion of student debt.

        The Department of Education has historically provided assistance through two

programs. Under the Federal Family Education Loan Program, the Department of

Education guaranteed certain loans issued by state governments or private entities. There

were $493 B in outstanding student loan guarantees at the program’s peak in 2009.9 This

program was discontinued in July 2010 with the intention of replacing it with greater

reliance on direct loans from the Department of Education.

        The financing for the latter works as follows. The U.S. Treasury borrows from

the public through its general auctions, and earmarks some of those funds for the

Department of Education. One of the things the Department of Education then does with

those funds is make direct loans to students. Treasury borrowings earmarked for the

Department of Education grew from $104 B at the end of FY 2007 to $714 B at the end

of FY 2012.10 This $714 B is already included in the $11,299 B Treasury debt reported

in line 1 of Table 1 to have been held by the public at the end of FY 2012, and indeed

accounts by itself for 6% of the total publicly held debt. It is thus already on balance

sheet as far as the reported debt is concerned. Interestingly, however, this activity is off

balance sheet from the perspective of the reported deficit. Treasury borrowing earmarked

for student loans is one of the reasons that the reported growth in publicly held debt in

recent years has been bigger than the reported deficit.




9
  General Accountability Office, “Federal Student Loan Programs: Opportunities Exist to Improve Audit
Requirements and Oversight Procedures,” Report GAO-10-668, July 2010.
10
   This sum is reported in Table FD-7 of the Treasury Bulletin as an entry in the category "Treasury
holdings of securities issued by government corporations and other agencies."


                                                                                                        13
           Insofar as this borrowing for student loans has been associated with the

acquisition of an asset (namely, the promise by the students to repay the loans), one can

make a case that the $714 B in Department of Education debt should also be moved off

balance sheet. On the other hand, there is growing evidence of problems with these

loans. Lee’s (2013) analysis of micro data suggest that of the nearly trillion dollars in

outstanding student loans, 44% are not being asked to make any payment yet, and for

more than 2/3 of these, the outstanding balance due is growing. Of the 56% that are

supposed to be in repayment, about 1/3 are delinquent. Presumably the Department of

Education has much more information on exactly why so little is being collected on

outstanding students loans, though I have not found an official report of the relevant data.

           However, there are some interesting details in the financial notes to the

Department of Education’s annual reports of the Federal Student Aid programs. Of the

$714 B in Treasury borrowing at the end of FY 2012 that had been earmarked for the

Department of Education, only $549 B actually went to direct student loans.11 Another

$165 B was associated with FFEL, which as noted above had been discontinued in July

2010.

           It is interesting to trace how that sum earmarked for FFEL has grown and

continues to grow over time. In August 2008, the Department of Education began buying

certain FFEL loans directly under programs such as the Loan Participation Purchase

Program and Loan Purchase Commitment Program “to ensure credit market disruptions

did not deny eligible students and parents access to federal student loans for the 2008–09

academic year” (FSA 2012 Annual Report, page 10). The dollar value of loans

purchased in these programs is summarized in Table 2. Although they are described in
11
     See Note 10: Debt, in FSA 2012 Annual Report.


                                                                                            14
the FSA passage just cited as if they were a temporary response to the financial instability

in the fall of 2008, the balances have declined very little in the 4 years since then, and

still stand at $119 B at the end of FY 2012. Even more interesting is the category for

“Guaranteed Loan Program.” New loans extended in this category since October 2010

totaled $32 B; recall that the guaranteed loan program officially ended in July 2010.

       I could not find much explanation for these entries provided in the financial

statements. The natural inference is that the Department of Education has been using

funds borrowed from the Treasury to buy up nonperforming guaranteed student loans not

only during the financial crisis but every year since. To the extent that is the case, the

Department of Education has been gradually moving these obligations from the category

of off-balance-sheet liabilities (debt guarantees) to on-balance-sheet liabilities (debt owed

by the U.S. Treasury to the public).

       Lines 5 and 6 of Table 1 summarize the net implications of the student loan

program for total off-balance-sheet federal liabilities. Line 5 is an estimate of the

outstanding student loan guarantees. Line 6 subtracts out that portion of guaranteed debt

that I calculate has now de facto been included in the officially reported on-balance-sheet

debt of the U.S. Treasury.

       There are a few other categories of explicit loan guarantees that the GAO

recognizes as official off-balance sheet liabilities of the U.S. government. The biggest

among these are small business loans and loans from the Export-Import Bank of the

United States. These loans added $205 B to the off-balance-sheet total, as seen in line 7

of Table 1.




                                                                                             15
        C. FDIC

        The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) is a government corporation

that was created as part of the Banking Act of 1933. The FDIC’s role was to insure small

depositors against losses if their banks became insolvent. As noted in Section 2.A, in the

Diamond-Dybvig (1983) model such insurance could help prevent bank runs, which had

been a significant problem in the U.S. in the initial years of the Great Depression (1929-

1933). Deposits insured by the FDIC grew from $2.8 T in 1990 to $7.4 T at the end of

2012 (see the top panel of Figure 8). The insurance is funded by a fee on banks. As of

the end of 2012, the Deposit Insurance Fund had $33 B in assets, primarily in the form of

debt obligations from the U.S. Treasury that are not included in the $11.3 T debt held by

the public. Even if the $33 B represented assets other than the future taxation authority

of the Treasury, this equity alone would hardly be sufficient to cover losses if there were

to be a major nationwide bank panic. The Competitive Equality Banking Act of 1987

reaffirmed that “deposits up to the statutorily prescribed amount in federally insured

depository institutions are backed by the full faith and credit of the United States.” For

this reason, these insured deposits are added in our tally of off-balance-sheet federal

liabilities in line 1 of Table 3.

        As seen in the bottom panel of Figure 8, FDIC-insured deposits declined as a

percent of GDP up until 2007 but climbed swiftly during and after the financial crisis.

The Diamond-Dybvig logic suggests that large depositors would have the same

incentives to withdraw funds as small depositors, meaning that FDIC insurance of small

depositors might not be enough to prevent bank runs. On October 3, 2008, Congress

raised the limit on deposit insurance from $100,000 to $250,000, and on October 14, the




                                                                                             16
FDIC instituted the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program, which consisted of two

components. The Transaction Account Guarantee Program “guaranteed in full all

domestic noninterest-bearing transaction deposits, low-interest NOW [negotiable order of

withdrawal] accounts, and Interest on Lawyers Trust Accounts... held at participating

banks and thrifts.”12 This was initially intended to expire at the end of 2009. It was later

extended twice to run through the end of 2010, and was replaced by the Dodd-Frank Act

with a full guarantee that ran through the end of 2012. Deposits that were insured under

Dodd-Frank in excess of the $250,000 limit grew from $854 B at the end of 2010 to

$1,492 B at the end of 2012.13 Note that this number is included in the $7,406 B in total

FDIC-insured deposits as of the end of 2012 mentioned earlier. This coverage ended on

December 31, so that the current figure for total FDIC-insured deposits would be

approximately $5.9 T.

        A second, separate component of the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program

was an FDIC guarantee on certain senior unsecured debt issued between October 14,

2008 and October 31, 2009. The FDIC was guaranteeing an additional $346 B in debt

through this program at its peak. These guarantees ended as of December 31, 2012. The

FDIC reports that total fees collected under the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program

exceeded expenses, and bank runs by depositors were never experienced during the

financial crisis.14

        To summarize, FDIC guarantees in themselves are currently about half as large as

the officially reported on-balance-sheet federal debt. However, the stresses of the most

12
   FDIC, “Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program,” February 27, 2013
(http://www.fdic.gov/regulations/resources/TLGP/index.html).
13
   FDIC, Quarterly Banking Profile, Fourth quarter 2012, Table 1.
14
   FDIC, “Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program,” February 27, 2013
(http://www.fdic.gov/regulations/resources/TLGP/index.html).


                                                                                           17
recent financial crisis were not enough to cause these guarantees to result in direct cash

outflows from the U.S. Treasury, and the program seems to have worked in this instance

as intended.

        D. Federal Reserve.

        The Federal Reserve System was created by an act of Congress in 1913.

Although it is a government entity, it maintains a separate balance sheet of assets and

liabilities from the U.S. Treasury. Up until 2007, the Fed’s contributions to net

government indebtedness were quite straightforward. As the housing decline threatened

more financial institutions, the Federal Reserve came to play a much more active role in

financial markets. In this subsection, I review these recent developments and discuss

their implications for overall federal liabilities.

        Prior to 2007, the primary actions of the Federal Reserve consisted of simple open

market operations, in which the Fed would buy a debt obligation previously issued by the

Treasury, paying for it by crediting the account that the seller maintained with the Federal

Reserve System. These newly created Federal Reserve deposits (which I will refer to as

“reserves”) represent claims on the Federal Reserve which the bank could, if it wished,

subsequently ask to be delivered in the form of currency. Historically, the volume of

reserves was very small, averaging $10 B in 2006. New Fed purchases of Tbills were

usually followed by conversion of the newly created reserves into currency. One can thus

think of the primary function of the Federal Reserve over this period to be swapping one

federal liability (Tbills) for another (currency held by the public). The Fed would also

occasionally create reserves in order to make a short-term loan to banks through the

discount window or through a repurchase agreement (repo), where the latter can be




                                                                                             18
viewed as a collateralized short-term loan from the Fed. These also were typically quite

small, averaging $0.4 B and $26 B, respectively, in 2006.

       As financial conditions deteriorated in 2008, the Fed made much greater use of

existing lending facilities as well as introduced a number of new emergency programs, as

seen in Figure 9. Most important among these were currency swaps (agreements in

which the Fed temporarily made dollar loans to foreign central banks, collateralized with

foreign currency), term auction credit (which supplemented traditional discount

borrowing with longer term collateralized loans to depository institutions), and the

Commercial Paper Funding Facility, through which the Fed financed unsecured and

asset-backed commercial paper. Some analysts have greatly exaggerated the size of these

programs by adding together loans made by the Federal Reserve at different points in

time. This is clearly inappropriate accounting, since it would count an overnight loan that

is rolled over each day for a month as involving 30 times as much lending as would a

single 30-day loan in the exact same amount to the same institution. The accurate

measure of the Fed’s total exposure through the emergency lending programs is given by

the total outstanding loans as of any indicated date, which corresponds to the height of

the top line plotted in Figure 9. This reached a maximum of $1,703 B on December 17,

2008, at which point currency swaps outstanding were $583 B, term auction credit $448

B, commercial paper lending $319 B, and all other emergency lending $353 B.

       As financial conditions eased, the Fed wound down loans and sold off assets

associated with all of the programs shown in Figure 9. The Fed and the Treasury ended

up making a profit as a result of all of them, with receipts from interest and loan

repayments exceeding the total amount lent (Hamilton, 2012).




                                                                                           19
       Although these programs were wound down, the Fed’s balance sheet did not

return to its pre-crisis values, but instead subsequently grew considerably through a series

of operations popularly referred to as “quantitative easing” or “large-scale asset

purchases.” The hope of these programs was that by buying a large enough volume of

long-term securities, the Fed might be able to lower the long-term interest rate and

thereby stimulate aggregate demand (Hamilton and Wu, 2012). Total Federal Reserve

assets stood at $3,259 B on April 3, 2013, of which $1,806 consisted of Treasury

securities, $1,071 mortgage-backed securities with federal agency or GSE guarantees,

and $382 B other assets (see Figure 10).

        How do these various Federal Reserve actions affect the net liabilities of the

combined Treasury-Fed balance sheet? Consider first an open-market purchase of a

Tbill. As noted above, this swaps one government liability (the Tbill) for another

(currency held by the public). Should the latter be viewed as an actual or potential

liability of the U.S. government? In the early days of currency issue, it very much would

be-- the public was holding the paper on an explicit understanding that it could be

redeemed for gold or silver on demand or at a future announced fiscal date. In the

modern era, the public appears willing to hold currency indefinitely, though one could

imagine circumstances in which a drop in currency demand might force the Federal

Reserve to sell some assets (in effect, redeem the currency for other assets) in order to

prevent inflation. For example, Judson (2012) estimated that about half the growth in

U.S. currency demand between 1988 and 2011 came from holders outside the United

States. Similarly, if the Federal Reserve were to make a loss on its loans to the private

sector or its holdings of long-term assets, real resources in the form of Treasury tax




                                                                                            20
revenues might be necessary to recapitalize the Fed, again to prevent inflation. As noted

above, in the event it turned out that the Fed made a profit rather than a loss on its

emergency lending. However, Bernanke (2013) noted that recent interest-rate forecasts

made by the Congressional Budget Office, Blue Chip consensus forecast, Survey of

Professional Forecasters, and the Fed’s interest-rate models all suggested long-term rates

could rise in the next few years. Analyses by Carpenter, et. al. (2013), Greenlaw, et. al.

(2013), and Hall and Reis (2013) all note that, if this were to happen, the Fed would

realize substantial losses on its current holdings of MBS and long-term treasuries. On the

other hand, the Fed also has significant unrealized capital gains on its gold holdings,

currently valued at $42.22 an ounce. In the calculations for this project, I have decided to

treat currency held by the public as entailing zero net off-balance-sheet liabilities for the

Treasury or the Federal Reserve, meaning that I regard a standard open-market purchase

of a Treasury security that ends up as more currency held by the public as reducing

outstanding federal indebtedness by the amount of the purchase.

       However, currency is no longer the most important entry on the liability side of

the Fed’s balance sheet. Figure 11 plots total Fed liabilities. Note that the height of this

graph is by definition every week exactly equal to the height of the graph of total assets

in Figure 10. As of April 3, 2013, currency held by the public came to $1,180 B, whereas

reserves were $1,838 B, and all other liabilities $242 B-- most of the reserves that the Fed

created to pay for its large-scale asset purchases are being held idle in banks’ accounts

with the Fed at the end of each day.

       One key reason why banks are content to hold this huge new volume of reserves

is that the deposits now earn interest. Granted, the rate is quite low-- 25 basis points, or a




                                                                                             21
0.25% annual rate. However, with Tbills as of April 2013 only paying 7 basis points,

reserves are a more attractive asset than Tbills. As interest rates rise, the Fed will have to

pay a higher interest rate in order to persuade banks to continue to hold the deposits with

the Fed overnight. Purchasing a 10-year Treasury bond with newly-created interest-

bearing reserves is thus just a swap of one form of government debt (a 10-year bond) for

another (in effect, an overnight interest-bearing loan from the bank to the Fed). If we are

going to subtract the Fed’s holdings of Tbonds from net government indebtedness, we

need to add reserve deposits with the Fed as an alternative new liability of the combined

Treasury-Fed balance sheet.

       Lines 4-7 of Table 3 show how the actions of the Federal Reserve change the on-

and off-balance-sheet liabilities of the federal government. In line 4 we add reserve

balances held by member banks. Although this is an unambiguous liability of the U.S.

government, it is appropriate to treat it as an off-balance-sheet item, since it is matched

by corresponding assets. We then subtract that part of Treasury debt which is held by the

Federal Reserve (line 5) as well as subtract off agency debt and MBS purchased by the

Federal Reserve (lines 6 and 7), because we have already been counting the latter as part

of our off-balance-sheet total, and thus view the Fed’s purchase of MBS as swapping one

off-balance sheet liability (the government’s implicit MBS guarantee) for another

(interest-bearing reserves created by the Federal Reserve). If, however, one had not been

persuaded that the MBS were already a federal liability, the Fed’s actions should be

viewed as making them more so, insofar as interest-bearing reserves are a more direct

federal liability than the mortgage guarantees.




                                                                                              22
       The bottom line is that the Federal Reserve’s net contribution to off-balance-sheet

liabilities (line 8) changed from -$773 B in 2006 to +$360 B at the end of 2008, a net

swing of $1,133 B. In other words, the net effect of the Fed’s emergency lending

between 2006 and 2008 was to increase the net indebtedness of the federal government

by over a trillion dollars, balanced by acquisition of corresponding assets (the emergency

loans). As emergency lending was phased out, the Fed has returned to a position of on

balance reducing total government liabilities by $1,128 B. Although the Fed’s assets are

greatly expanded relative to their historical levels, most of these new assets were already

on- or off-balance-sheet liabilities of the broader federal government, so swapping these

for reserves left total off-balance-sheet federal liabilities unchanged.

       E. Federal government trust funds.

       In addition to the $11,582 B in Treasury debt held by the public at the end of

calendar year 2012, the Treasury had issued an additional $4,851 in obligations that were

regarded as an asset held by other federal government entities. By far the most important

of these is the Social Security Trust Fund, which held $2,610 B, a little more than half of

the intragovernmental total. This sum is counted as a liability by the Treasury and as an

asset by the Social Security Trust Fund. One perspective is that this is therefore money

that the government owes to itself, and as a consequence should not be included in a

sensible accounting of net government indebtedness. But if we are to take the entirely

reasonable position that the $2.6 T in Treasury securities held by the Social Security

Trust Fund should not be counted as a net federal liability, we are forced also to regard

the Social Security Trust Fund as holding no assets.




                                                                                            23
       However, there is a reason that Social Security wants to regard these Treasury

obligations as an asset, which is, the program anticipates significant liabilities associated

with payments expected by current and future retirees. It is true that these liabilities do

not rise to the status of the “full faith and credit of the United States.” The federal

government might well choose to reduce payments to beneficiaries relative to those

anticipated under the program’s current practice, or might increase future payroll taxes.

But these are of course the same options that the government would consider in figuring

out how to honor its official on-balance-sheet liabilities as well. The political difficulties

that the government might face in making changes to the public’s perceived Social

Security obligations should reasonably be regarded as an important influence on the

government’s ability to honor its on-balance-sheet liabilities. For this reason it seems

entirely appropriate to include these implicit commitments in an accounting of the federal

government’s combined off-balance-sheet liabilities.

       The Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and

Federal Disability Insurance Funds makes several efforts to estimate the present value of

these obligations along with their offsetting tax receipts. Obviously there is a lot of

guesswork that goes into such calculations and the results can be extremely sensitive to

assumptions. For example, if one were to use an interest rate for discounting that is less

than the assumed growth rate, the concept of present value calculated over an infinite

horizon does not even exist. For an interest rate only slightly bigger than the growth rate,

small changes can produce big effects in long-horizon calculations. Nevertheless, for a

sense of scale if nothing else I use for these calculations one of the present-value

concepts that has been relied on in both the Social Security and the Medicare annual




                                                                                              24
reports, which is to calculate the present value of future benefits to be paid to all current

participants (that is, all Americans currently age 15 or older). The annual reports also

calculate the present value of future Social Security taxes to be paid by that same group.

As of the end of calendar year 2012, the difference between the two, or the present value

of the unfunded obligation for current participants, came to $26.5 T, up from $16.5 T in

2006 (see line 1 of Table 4).

       Note that the numbers reported in my earlier Tables 1 and 3 referred to gross off-

balance-sheet liabilities with no effort made to subtract offsetting assets. By contrast, the

$26.5 T in Table 4 already subtracts the off-balance-sheet asset of Social Security

represented by future tax revenues targeted for the program. However, insofar as these

tax revenues are indeed used for this purpose, they will not be available for servicing the

costs of the $11.3 T on-balance-sheet debt. For this reason, a case could be made for

using the gross Social Security liability of $52.0 T, rather than the net liability of $26.5 T

reported in Table 4, in our tabulation of total off-balance-sheet federal liabilities.

       These numbers are so huge it is hard even to discuss them in a coherent way. As

noted above, the calculations that go into them are easily challenged. But although one

can quarrel with the specific numbers, there is an undeniable important reality that they

reflect-- the U.S. population is aging, and an aging population means fewer people paying

in and more people expecting benefits. This reality is unambiguously going to be a key

constraint on the sustainability of fiscal policy for the United States. One would think we

should be saving as a nation today as preparation for retirement, and if in fact we are not,

the current enormous on-balance-sheet federal debt is all the more of a concern.




                                                                                            25
       Similar calculations are reported by the Boards of Trustees of the Federal Hospital

Insurance and Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Funds. Medicare Part A

(hospital insurance) reported a present value of unfunded obligations for current program

participants of $14.5 T as of the end of 2008. The Health Care and Education

Reconciliation Act of 2010 added new revenues and reduced the Trustees’ anticipated

costs, so that this was down to $8 T by the end of 2010 but has risen back to $9.6 T by

the end of 2012 (see line 2 of Table 4). Medicare Part B (medical insurance) was adding

an additional $13.1 T as of the end of 2012, while Part D (prescription drug insurance)

adds another $4.9 T, for a total of $27.6 T in unfunded obligations currently reported for

Medicare.

       Again these numbers represent the net off-balance-sheet liabilities associated with

Medicare. For the gross liabilities (that is, without subtracting off targeted taxes), we

would add $4.8 T to the total for Medicare B and $1.1 T for Medicare D. The Trustees

report does not itemize separately the numbers behind the net calculations for Medicare

A, but it is clear that the upward adjustment necessary to arrive at a gross figure would be

quite substantial. For example, in 2013 alone Medicare A is expecting to collect $231.2

B from payroll taxes and taxation of Hospital Insurance Benefits. By 2022 the annual

number is expected to grow to $410.8 B (see Table III.B4). A projection of these future

revenues has already been subtracting in arriving at the $9.6 T unfunded liability for

Medicare A reported in Table 4.

       There are also a number of other government trust funds that, like Social Security

and Medicare, claim as their assets debt obligations of the U.S. Treasury that are not

included in the $11.3 T in Treasury debt held by the public. Like the Social Security




                                                                                            26
Trust Fund, these are neither an asset nor a liability of a unified federal balance sheet, but

are simply an I.O.U. from one arm of the government to another. But, like Social

Security and Medicare, although the government has no assets backing these funds, they

may entail significant future fiscal obligations.

       The largest of these are the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund, which

claimed $904 B in Treasury obligations among its assets as of the end of calendar year

2012, and the Military Retirement Fund, to which the Treasury owes $429 B. Rather

than try to go through each of these programs and assess the implicit or explicit

commitments the government has made through them, I have taken the conservative

approach-- and I suspect, a recklessly conservative approach-- of assuming that the

programs are actuarially balanced, that is, assuming that the present value of

commitments associated with the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund is exactly

$904 B. Since there are no assets to back these commitments, future tax increases or

spending cuts will be necessary to honor them, so I count this trust fund as adding $904 B

to the 2012 off-balance-sheet federal liabilities. Adding together all the government trust

funds not treated elsewhere in this analysis, I calculate the contribution of these

commitments to total off-balance-sheet liabilities to have been $1,862 B as of 2012. The

combined contribution of Social Security, Medicare, and other trust funds of $55,962 B.

       F. Other off-balance-sheet liabilities.

       There are a number of other off-balance-sheet commitments that are potentially

substantial but that are not included in the above totals. One that could prove to be quite

important is the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, an independent agency of the

United States government that was created by the Employee Retirement Income Security




                                                                                           27
Act of 1974. The PBGC guarantees basic pension benefits for about 43 million

Americans participating in 26,000 private-sector defined benefit pension plans. The

potential notional liabilities are enormous but very difficult to assign a dollar value. The

federal government has never declared these guarantees to be backed by the full faith and

credit of the U.S. government, and unlike Fannie and Freddie, PBGC is not in

conservatorship. For these reasons I have not attempted to include pension guarantees as

a current off-balance-sheet liability of the U.S. government. But this does not mean that

pension benefits will not prove to develop into a very important fiscal challenge at the

federal, state, and local government levels.

          Another important commitment involves veterans’ benefits. A 2010 assessment

by the Congressional Budget Office estimated that by 2020, the annual cost of providing

health care services to veterans who seek benefits through the Department of Veterans

Affairs could be $69 B to $85 B, which would represent increases of 45-75% over 2010

levels.

          Federal flood insurance is another potentially important off-balance-sheet federal

liability. King (2013) estimated that government payouts for Hurricane Sandy under the

National Flood Insurance Program could be $12 B to $15 B, in comparison with the $4 B

cash assets of the program. A study by the Congressional Budget Office (2007)

estimated that as of February 2007, the 5.4 million policies issued through the Federal

Emergency Management Agency had a total coverage of $1 trillion. Again I have made

no effort to include the potential liabilities of these and other programs in the totals

reported in this paper.




                                                                                           28
4. How concerned should we be?

       Table 5 summarizes the contributions of the various components surveyed in

Sections 3A-E. I calculate total off-balance-sheet federal liabilities to have been $70.1 T

as of 2012, six times the size of the federal debt itself. This total comes from a range of

different programs, each of which is associated with its own benefits and its own

concerns. In the case of the FDIC guarantees and emergency Fed lending, these seemed

to accomplish what they were intended and in my opinion do not pose significant risks to

taxpayers in the current environment. Other programs, such as the federal government’s

big role in lending for housing and education, have less clear benefits and have been

associated with more tangible costs. The biggest off-balance-sheet liabilities come from

recognition of the fiscal stress that will come in the form of an aging population and

rising medical expenditures.

       It is worth noting that there are many historical episodes in which off-balance-

sheet liabilities ended up having quite significant on-balance-sheet implications. One

example is provided by the problems with saving and loans in the 1980s. Losses at these

institutions ended up dwarfing the capabilities the now-defunct Federal Savings and Loan

Insurance Corporation to honor its promise to guarantee depositors. Curry and Shibut

(2000) estimated that the final on-balance-sheet cost to U.S. taxpayers of honoring those

off-balance-sheet guarantees came to $124 B.

       Some economists see the Asian crisis of 1997 as providing a more dramatic

illustration. A number of Asian countries experienced rapid and dramatic currency

depreciation and spiking interest rates that led to significant drops in real economic

activity. According to Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2001), “a principal cause of



                                                                                          29
the 1997 Asian currency crisis was large prospective deficits associated with implicit

bailout guarantees to failing banking systems.” The authors noted for example that the

costs of restructuring and recapitalizing the banking system in those episodes amounted

to 65% of GDP for Indonesia, 24% of Korea’s GDP, 22% for Malaysia, and 35% for

Thailand. The authors suggested that market perceptions of the prospective deficits

associated with bailing out problem banks were the trigger for the rapid capital flight

from those countries.

       More recently, the Irish government entered the Great Recession in a seemingly

very strong fiscal position, with gross government debt totaling only 25% of GDP. But

on September 30, 2008, in response to developing strains on the financial system, the

government guaranteed all deposits, covered bonds, senior debt, and dated subordinated

debt of the country’s 6 largest banks. By July 2011, Ireland had needed to inject €64 B

(45% of 2010 GDP) into the banking system. As a result, for 2010 the Irish government

budget deficit amounted to 31% of the country’s GDP, and its debt level rose above

100% of GDP. Interest rate on 10-year Irish government bonds went from 4.2% in 2008

to 14% in July 2011, as investors fled Irish sovereign debt.

       I am not predicting that a similar crisis is on the verge of unfolding for the United

States. Some may argue that the current off-balance-sheet liabilities of the U.S. federal

government are smaller than those tabulated here; others could arrive at larger numbers.

These off-balance-sheet concerns may or may not translate into significant on-balance-

sheet problems. But one thing seems undeniable-- they are huge. And implicit or

explicit commitments of such a huge size have the potential to have huge economic




                                                                                            30
consequences, perhaps for the better, perhaps for the worse. Acknowledging their size is

a necessary first step for making wise policy decisions.




                                                                                      31
                                         References

Ashcraft, Adam B., and Til Schuermann. 2007. “Understanding the Securitization of

       Subprime Mortgage Credit,” Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Bagehot, Walter. 1873. Lombard street: A Description of the Money Market. London: H.

       S. King.

Bencivenga, Valerie R., and Bruce D. Smith. 1993. “Some Consequences of Credit

       Rationing in an Endogenous Growth Model.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and

       Control 17: 97-122.

Bernanke, Ben S. 2013. “Long-Term Interest Rates.” http://www.federalreserve.gov/

       newsevents/speech/bernanke20130301a.htm.

Bhattacharya, Sudipto, Arnoud W. A. Boot, and Anjan V. Thakor. 1998. “The Economics

       of Bank Regulation.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 30: 745-770.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov. 2012. “A Macroeconomic Model with a

       Financial Sector.” Working paper, Princeton University.

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2001. “Prospective Deficits and

       the Asian Currency Crisis.” Journal of Political Economy 109: 1155-1197.

Carpenter, Seth B., Jane E. Ihrig, Elizabeth C. Klee, Alexander H. Boote, and Daniel W.

       Quinn (2013). "The Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet: A Primer and Projections,"

       Working paper, Federal Reserve Board (http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/

       2013/201301/201301abs.html).

Chaney, Paul K., and Anjan V. Thakor. 1985. “Incentive Effects of Benevolent

       Intervention: The Case of Government Loan Guarantees.” Journal of Public

       Economics 26: 169-189.



                                                                                      32
Cooper, Russell, and Thomas W. Ross. 2002. “Bank Runs: Deposit Insurance and Capital

       Requirements.” International Economic Review 43(1): 55-72.

Congressional Budget Office. 2001. “Federal Subsidies and the Housing GSEs.”

       (http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/ftpdocs/28xx/doc2841/gses.pdf).

Congressional Budget Office. 2007. “Value of Properties in the National Flood Insurance

       Program.” (http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/ftpdocs/82xx/

       doc8256/06-25-floodinsurance.pdf).

Congressional Budget Office. 2010. “Potential Costs of Veterans’ Health Care.”

       (http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/ftpdocs/118xx/doc11811/2010_10

       _7_vahealthcare.pdf).

Curry, Timothy, and Lynn Shibut. 2000. “The Cost of the Savings and Loan Crisis: Truth

       and Consequences.” FDIC Banking Review 13: 26-35.

Diamond, Douglas W., and Philip H. Dybvig. 1983. “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and

       Liquidity.” Journal of Political Economy 91: 401-419.

Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram G. Rajan. 2000. “A Theory of Bank Capital.”

       Journal of Finance 55(6): 2431-2464.

Flannery, Mark J. (1996). “Financial Crises, Payment System Problems, and Discount

       Window Lending.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 28(4, Part 2): 804-824.

Gokhale, Jagdeesh. (2013). Spending Beyond Our Means: How We Are Bankrupting

       Future Generations. Washington D.C.: Cato Institute.

Greenlaw, David, James D. Hamilton, Peter Hooper, and Frederic S. Mishkin. 2013.

       “Crunch Time: Fiscal Crises and the Role of Monetary Policy.” U.S. Monetary




                                                                                      33
       Policy Forum, New York City (http://dss.ucsd.edu/~jhamilto/

       USMPF13_final.pdf).

Haffner, Marietta E. A. 2008. “Subsidization as Motor to Residential Mortgage

       Securitization in the U.S.” Journal of Housing and the Built Environment 23: 337-

       351.

Hall, Robert E., and Ricardo Reis. 2013. “Maintaining Central-Bank Solvency under

       New-Style Central Banking,” working paper, Stanford University.

Hamilton, James D. 2007a. “Fannie, Freddie, and Ben.” Econbrowser, March 11, 2007

       (http://www.econbrowser.com/archives/2007/03/ fannie_freddie.html).

Hamilton, James D. 2007b. “Commentary: Housing and the Monetary Transmission

       Mechanism,” in Housing, Housing Finance, and Monetary Policy, Federal

       Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 415-422.

Hamilton, James D. 2012. “U.S. government profits from AIG bailout,” Econbrowser,

       December 13, 2012 (http://www.econbrowser.com/archives/2012/12/

       us_government_p.html).

Hamilton, James D., and Jing Cynthia Wu. 2012. “The Effectiveness of Alternative

       Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment.” Journal of Money,

       Credit and Banking 44 (no. 1, Supplement): 3-46.

Judson, Ruth. 2012. “Crisis and Calm: Demand for U.S. Currency at Home and Abroad

       from the Fall of the Berlin Wall to 2011,” working paper, Federal Reserve.

Kareken, John H. and Neil Wallace. 1978. “Deposit Insurance and Bank Regulation: A

       Partial-Equilibrium Exposition.” Journal of Business 51(3): 413-438.




                                                                                     34
King, Rawle O. 2013. “The National Flood Insurance Program: Status and Remaining

       Issues for Congress.” Congressional Research Service (http://www.fas.org/sgp/

       crs/misc/R42850.pdf ).

Lee, Donghoon. 2013. “Household Debt and Credit: Student Debt.” Slide presentation,

       Federal Reserve Bank of New York (http://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/

       mediaadvisory/2013/Lee022813.pdf)

Santos, Joáo A. C. 2001. “Bank Capital Regulation in Contemporary Banking Theory: A

       Review of the Literature.” Financial Markets, Institutions & Instruments 10(2):

       41-84.

Shiller, Robert J. 2000. Irrational Exuberance, Princeton University Press.

Smith, Bruce D., and Michael J. Stutzer. 1989. “Credit Rationing and Government Loan

       Programs: A Welfare Analysis.” American Real Estate and Urban Economics

       Association Journal 17(2): 177-193.

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 2012. “Annual Report to

       Congress: Fiscal Year 2012 Financial Status of FHA Mutual Mortgage Insurance

       Fund.”




                                                                                         35
Table 1. Treasury debt held by the public and contribution of guarantees and obligations of
government-sponsored enterprises to off-balance-sheet federal liabilities as of end of indicated
fiscal year, in billions of dollars.

                                                                             2006    2008    2010     2012
1. Treasury debt held by public                                              4,867   5,837   9,052   11,299

2. Direct debt obligations of government-sponsored enterprises               2,618   3,153   6,498   6,112
3. MBS guaranteed by agencies and GSEs                                       3,769   4,883   1,096   1,408
4. Total off-balance-sheet commitment to housing                             6,386   8,036   7,594   7,520


5. Student loan guarantees                                                    321     405     382     285
6. Less: student loan guarantees already imputed to on-budget federal debt     0      (11)   (137)   (165)
7. Other loan guarantees                                                      147     153     174     205
8. Combined GSE debt and loan guarantees                                     6,854   8,583   8,013   7,845

Notes to Table 1. Line 1: Public debt securities and agency securities held by the public from
Table FD-1 ("Summary of Federal Debt"), Treasury Bulletin, Dec 2008 and Dec 2012. Line 2:
Short-term and long-term debt issued by Freddie, Fannie, FHLB, Farm Credit System, Federal
Agricultural Mortgage Corporation, FICO, and REFCORP. After September 2008 also includes
MBS guarantees of Fannie and Freddie. From line 14 ("credit market debt owed by GSEs"),
Table L.1 ("credit market debt outstanding"), Flow of Funds, Federal Reserve System. Line 3:
Mortgages held in pools from GNMA, Freddie, Fannie, and Federal Farmers Home
Administration plus mortgages held by Federal Financing Bank. After 2008 Fannie and Freddie
MBS are included in line 2 but not line 3. From line 28 ("agency and GSE-backed mortgage
pools"), Table L.217 ("Total Mortgages"), Flow of Funds, Federal Reserve System. Line 4: Sum
of lines 2 and 3. Line 5: Principal amount guaranteed by the government for Federal Family
Education Loans, from General Accountability Office, Financial Statements of the Untied States
Government: Notes to Financial Statements, indicated fiscal years. Line 6: Debt owed by
Department of Education to Department of Treasury associated with Federal Family Education
Loans. From columns 3-6 of Table 2. Line 7: Principal amounts guaranteed by the government
for programs other than FHA, Rural Housing Services, Veterans Housing Benefit Programs, and
education loans, from General Accountability Office, Financial Statements of the Untied States
Government: Notes to Financial Statements, indicated fiscal years. Line 8: Sum of lines 4-7.




                                                  36
Table 2. Treasury debt owed by the Department of Education, totals and contributions of
separate components as of end of indicated fiscal year, in billions of dollars.

Fiscal year       (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)         (6)
               Treasury     Direct Loan      Loan         Loan         Guaranteed     Other
              debt owed      Program       Purchase    Participation     Loan
              by Dept. of                 Commitment    Program         Program
              Education
   2005          104           104             0             0             0              0
   2006          105           105             0             0             0              0
   2007          104           104             0             0             0              0
   2008          128           117            0             11            0               0
   2009          235           154            25            54             1              1
   2010          374           237            45            80            11              1
   2011          546           392            44            79            29              2
   2012          714           549            42            77            43              3

Notes to Table 2. Data from financial notes to Federal Student Aid Annual Reports, 2010 and
2012, U.S. Department of Education.




                                              37
Table 3. Contribution of Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and Federal Reserve to off-
balance-sheet federal liabilities as of end of indicated calendar year, in billions of dollars.

                                                                        2006      2008       2010     2012
1. Insured deposits                                                     4,154     4,751      6,308    7,406
2. Plus: debt guarantee program                                           0        224        267       0
3. Net contribution of FDIC                                             4,154     4,975      6,575    7,406


4. Reserve balances held by member banks                                  6        856       1,019     1,533
5. Less: Treasury securities held by Federal Reserve                    (779)     (476)     (1,016)   (1,657)
6. Less: agency debt held by Federal Reserve                              0        (20)      (147)      (77)
7. Less: MBS debt held by Federal Reserve                                 0          0       (992)     (927)
8. Net contribution of Federal Reserve                                  (773)      360      (1,136)   (1,128)

Notes to Table 3. Line 1: FDIC insured deposits, from FDIC “Statistics at a Glance,” December
2012 (http://www.fdic.gov/bank/statistical/stats/index.html). Line 2: from FDIC, Annual
Reports, 2008 and 2010. Line 3: Sum of lines 1-2. Lines 4-7: From Federal Reserve Release
H.4.1 ("Factors affecting reserve balance”s), balance as of last Wednesday of calendar year.
Line 8: Sum of lines 4-7.




                                                  38
Table 4. Contribution of government trust funds to off-balance-sheet federal as of end of
indicated calendar year, in billions of dollars.

                                                                        2006      2008       2010      2012
1. Social Security                                                     16,500    18,700     21,400    26,500

2. Medicare Part A (hospital insurance)                                11,800    14,500      8,000    9,600
3. Medicare Part B (medical insurance)                                 10,400    13,500     11,500    13,100
4. Medicare Part D (prescription drug insurance)                        6,300     5,200      5,400     4,900
5. Sum of Medicare liabilities                                         28,500    33,200     24,900    27,600

6. Other government trust funds                                        1,308     1,487      1,646     1,862

7. Combined contribution of government trust funds                     46,308    53,387     47,946    55,962

Notes to Table 4. Social Security and Medicare entries represent values as of end of calendar
year, except last entry which is the end of calendar year 2011, the most recent available as of the
time this was written. Other government trust funds represent values as of end of indicated fiscal
year. Line 1: Present value of future OASDI cost less future taxes for current participants. From
Table IV.B7, Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors
Insurance and Federal Disability Insurance Funds, 2007, 2009, 2011, and 2013. Line 2: Present
value of future expenditures less income for current participants in Medicare Part A. From Table
III.B11 or V.G2, Annual Report of the Boards of Trustees of the Federal Hospital Insurance and
Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Funds, 2007, 2009, 2011, and 2013. Line 3:
Present value of future contributions for current participants in Medicare Part B coming from
general federal revenues. From Table III.C16, III.C12, or V.G4, Annual Report of the Boards of
Trustees of the Federal Hospital Insurance and Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust
Funds, 2007, 2009, 2011, and 2013. Line 4: Present value of future contributions for current
participants in Medicare Part D coming from general federal revenues. From Table III.C24,
III.D8, or V.G6, Annual Report of the Boards of Trustees of the Federal Hospital Insurance and
Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Funds, 2007, 2009, 2011, and 2013. Line 5:
Sum of lines 2-4. Line 6: Government account series held by Airport and Airway Trust Fund,
Employees Life Insurance Fund, Exchange Stabilization Fund, Federal employees retirement
funds, FSLC Resolution Fund, Highway Trust Fund, National Service Life Insurance Fund,
Postal Service Fund, Railroad Retirement Account, Unemployment Trust Fund, and Other.
From Table FD-3, Treasury Bulletin, Dec 2008 and Dec 2012. Line 7: Sum of lines 1, 5, and 6.




                                                   39
Table 5. Treasury debt held by the public and combined federal off-balance sheet liabilities

                                                                      2006       2008      2010       2012
1. Treasury debt held by public                                       4,867      5,837     9,052     11,299

2. Housing-related commitments                                         6,386     8,036     7,594      7,520
3. Student and other loan guarantees                                    468       547       419        325
4. FDIC                                                               4,154      4,975     6,575      7,406
5. Federal Reserve                                                     (773)      360     (1,136)    (1,128)
6. Social security                                                    16,500    18,700    21,400     26,500
7. Medicare                                                           28,500    33,200    24,900     27,600
8. Other government trust funds                                        1,308     1,487     1,646      1,862
9. Total off-balance-sheet commitments                                56,544    67,305    61,398     70,085

Notes to Table 5. Line 1: taken from line 1 of Table 1. Line 2: taken from line 4 of Table 1.
Line 3: sum of lines 5-7 of Table 1. Line 4: taken from line 3 of Table 3. Line 5: taken from line
8 of Table 3. Line 6: taken from line 1 of Table 4. Line 7: taken from line 5 of Table 4. Line 8:
taken from line 6 of Table 4. Line 9: sum of lines 2-8 in Table 5.




                                               40
Figure 1. Retained mortgage portfolios of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, billions of
dollars, 1990:Q1-2006:Q3.


  1000
   900
   800
   700
   600
                                                                               Fannie
   500
                                                                               Freddie
   400
   300
   200
   100
     0
     1990    1992    1994    1996    1998        2000   2002   2004   2006

Notes to Figure 1. Source: Hamilton (2007a).




                                            41
Figure 2. Total on-balance-sheet liabilities of government-sponsored enterprises, billions
of dollars, 1952:Q1 - 2012:Q3.

  7,000
  6,000
  5,000
  4,000
  3,000
  2,000
  1,000
      0
      1950       1960     1970      1980      1990      2000     2010

Notes to Figure 2. Data source: Flow of Funds, Federal Reserve Board, Table L122.
Includes Federal Home Loan Banks, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, Farmer Mac, Farm Credit
System, the Financing Corporation, and the Resolution Funding Corporation. The
Student Loan Marketing Association (Sallie Mae) was included until it was fully
privatized in 2004:Q4. Beginning 2010:Q1, almost all Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
mortgage pools are consolidated on Fannie Mae’s and Freddie Mac’s balance sheets.




                                            42
Figure 3. Mortgage debt held by government-sponsored enterprises or in agency- or
GSE-backed mortgage pools, 1952:Q1 - 2012:Q3.
                                        GSE- and agency- mortgage debt
  7000
  6000
  5000
  4000
  3000
  2000
  1000
       0
            1952 1955 1958 1961 1964 1967 1970 1973 1976 1979 1982 1985 1988 1991 1994 1997 2000 2003 2006 2009 2012

                                                As a percent of GDP
  40

  30

  20

  10

   0
           1952 1955 1958 1961 1964 1967 1970 1973 1976 1979 1982 1985 1988 1991 1994 1997 2000 2003 2006 2009 2012

                                           As a percent of all mortgages
  50

  40

  30

  20

  10

   0
           1952 1955 1958 1961 1964 1967 1970 1973 1976 1979 1982 1985 1988 1991 1994 1997 2000 2003 2006 2009 2012


Notes to Figure 3. Top panel: in billions of dollars. Middle panel: as a percent of GDP.
Bottom panel: as a percent of all mortgages. Data source: Flow of Funds, Federal
Reserve Board, Table L217.




                                                           43
Figure 4. U.S. home ownership rate, in percent, 1965-2012, fourth quarter of each year.

  70

  68

  66

  64

  62

  60
    1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990     1995   2000   2005   2010

Notes to Figure 4. Data source: United States Census Bureau, Historical Table 14
(http://www.census.gov/housing/hvs/data/histtabs.html).




                                           44
Figure 5. Total mortgage debt as a percent of GDP, 1952:Q1 - 2012:Q3.

  120

  100

   80

   60

   40

   20

    0
    1950      1960      1970     1980      1990      2000     2010

Notes to Figure 5. Data source: Flow of Funds, Federal Reserve Board, Table L217.




                                          45
Figure 6. Shiller’s real house price index, 1890-2012.

  250

  200

  150

  100

   50

     0
     1880     1900     1920      1940     1960     1980     2000   2020

Notes to Figure 6. Data source: Shiller (2000), as updated at
ttp://www.irrationalexuberance.com/index.htm.




                                            46
Figure 7. Percent of U.S. mortgage debt financed by different sectors, 1952:Q1 -
2012:Q4.

  70

  60

  50                                                        banks, S&Ls
                                                            GSE & agency
  40                                                        insurance
  30                                                        ABS
                                                            households
  20                                                        other

  10

   0
   1950    1960   1970   1980   1990   2000     2010

Notes to Figure 7. Banks: sum of U.S.-chartered depository institutions, foreign banking
offices in U.S., in U.S.-affiliated areas, and unions; GSE and agency: sum of mortgages
held by government-sponsored enterprises and in agency- and GSE-backed mortgage
pools; insurance: sum of mortgages held by property-casualty insurance companies and
life insurance companies; ABS: mortgages held in the form of privately-issued asset-
backed securities; households: mortgages owned by U.S. household sector; other: all
other mortgage holdings. Data source: Flow of Funds, Federal Reserve Board, Table
L217.




                                           47
Figure 8. Total FDIC-insured deposits, 1990-2012.
                                           FDIC-insured deposits
  8000

  7000

  6000

  5000

  4000

  3000

  2000

  1000

       0
            1990    1992    1994    1996     1998    2000   2002   2004   2006   2008   2010   2012


                                           As a percent of GDP
  50


  40


  30


  20


  10


   0
           1990    1992    1994    1996     1998    2000    2002   2004   2006   2008   2010   2012

Notes to Figure 8. Top panel: in dollars. Bottom panel: as a percent of GDP. Data
source: FDIC, December 2012 (http://www.fdic.gov/bank/statistical/stats/index.html).




                                                      48
Figure 9. Fed emergency lending, in billions of dollars, seasonally unadjusted, from Jan
1, 2007 to Apr 3, 2013.

   1800

   1600
                                                           AIG
   1400                                                    Maiden 1
                                                           MMIFL
   1200
                                                           TALF
   1000                                                    ABCP
                                                           PDCF
    800                                                    discount
                                                           swaps
    600
                                                           CPFF

    400                                                    TAC
                                                           RP
    200

      0
   Ju 7


   Ju 8


   Ju 9


   Ju 0


   Ju 1


   Ju 2

       13
  Ja 07


  Ja 8


  Ja 09


  Ja 0


  Ja 11


  Ja 2
       0


       0


       0


       1


       1


       1
     l0




     l1




     l1
    n


    n


    n


    n


    n


    n


    n
     l




     l




     l
  Ja




Notes to Figure 9. AIG: sum of credit extended to American International Group, Inc.
plus net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane II and III plus preferred interest in AIA
Aurora LLC and ALICO Holdings LLC; Maiden 1: net portfolio holdings of Maiden
Lane LLC; MMIFL: net portfolio holdings of LLCs funded through the Money Market
Investor Funding Facility; TALF: loans extended through Term Asset-Backed Securities
Loan Facility plus net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC; ABCP: loans extended to Asset-
Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility; PDCF: loans
extended to primary dealer and other broker-dealer credit; discount: sum of primary
credit, secondary credit, and seasonal credit; swaps: central bank liquidity swaps; CPFF:
net portfolio holdings of LLCs funded through the Commercial Paper Funding Facility;
TAC: term auction credit; RP: repurchase agreements. Data source: “Factors Affecting
Reserve Balances,” H41 release, Federal Reserve.




                                           49
Figure 10. All Federal Reserve assets, in billions of dollars, seasonally unadjusted, from
Jan 1, 2007 to Apr 3, 2013.

   3500
                                                            Maiden 1
   3000                                                     MMIFL
                                                            TALF
   2500                                                     AIG
                                                            ABCP
   2000                                                     PDCF
                                                            discount
                                                            swaps
   1500
                                                            CPFF
                                                            TAC
   1000
                                                            RP
                                                            MBS
    500                                                     agency
                                                            misc
      0                                                     other FR
                                                            treasuries
   Ju 2

       13
   Ju 7


   Ju 8


   Ju 9


   Ju 0


   Ju 1
  Ja 1


  Ja 12
  Ja 7


  Ja 8


  Ja 9


  Ja 0



       1
       1
       0


       0


       0




       1
     l0


     l0


     l0


     l1


     l1
    n


    n
    n
    n


    n


    n




    n




     l
  Ja




Notes to Figure 10. MBS: mortgage-backed securities held outright; agency: federal
agency debt securities held outright; misc: sum of float, gold stock, special drawing rights
certificate account, and Treasury currency outstanding; other FR: Other Federal Reserve
assets; treasuries: U.S. Treasury securities held outright; treasuries: U.S. Treasury
securities. For other category definitions, see notes to Figure 9. Data source: “Factors
Affecting Reserve Balances,” H41 release, Federal Reserve.




                                            50
Figure 11. All Federal Reserve liabilities, in billions of dollars, seasonally unadjusted,
from Jan 1, 2007 to Apr 3, 2013.

   3500

   3000

   2500
                                                            treasury
                                                            reserves
   2000
                                                            misc
                                                            other
   1500
                                                            reverse RP
                                                            currency
   1000

    500

         0
      Ju 7
     Ja 7
      Ju 8


      Ju 9
     Ja 08


     Ja 9
      Ju 0
     Ja 10
      Ju 1
     Ja 1
      Ju 2
     Ja 12
          13
        l0




        l0




        l1
          0


          0


          0


          1


          1


          1
        l
     n




        l
       n




        l
       n


       n


       n


       n


       n
  Ja




Notes to Figure 11. Treasury: sum of U.S. Treasury general and supplementary funding
accounts; reserves: reserve balances with Federal Reserve Banks; misc: sum of Treasury
cash holdings, foreign official accounts, and other deposits; other: other liabilities and
capital; service: sum of required clearing balance and adjustments to compensate for
float; reverse RP: reverse repurchase agreements; currency: currency in circulation. Data
source: “Factors Affecting Reserve Balances,” H41 release, Federal Reserve.




                                             51
