                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 HOW IMPORTANT CAN THE NON-VIOLATION CLAUSE BE FOR THE GATT/WTO?

                                         Robert W. Staiger
                                          Alan O. Sykes

                                        Working Paper 19256
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19256


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2013




We thank Giovanni Maggi and Ralph Ossa, our discussants at the 2013 Princeton IES Summer Workshop,
for very helpful and detailed comments. We also thank Kyle Bagwell, Petros C. Mavroidis and seminar
participants at the 2012 American Law and Economics Association meetings, Princeton and The University
of New South Wales. Woan Foong Wong and Junhui Zeng provided outstanding research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19256.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Robert W. Staiger and Alan O. Sykes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
How Important can the Non-Violation Clause be for the GATT/WTO?
Robert W. Staiger and Alan O. Sykes
NBER Working Paper No. 19256
July 2013
JEL No. D02,F1,F13,K12,K33

                                             ABSTRACT

The "non-violation" clause was a major focus of the drafters of GATT in 1947, and its relevance was
revisited and reaffirmed with the creation of the WTO in 1995. And according to the terms-of-trade
theory of trade agreements, it has an important role to play in facilitating the success of the "shallow
integration" approach that the GATT/WTO has adopted. Yet despite the prominence given to the non-violation
clause by its legal drafters and suggested by economic theory, in GATT/WTO practice the observed
performance of the non-violation complaint has been weak. Can a model account for the observed
features of the usage and outcomes of non-violation claims? And if so, what is implied by these weak
performance measures about the (on- and off-) equilibrium impacts of the non-violation clause on
the joint welfare of the GATT/WTO member governments? We develop a model of non-violation
claims in trade agreements, demonstrate that it can account for the observed features of the usage and
outcomes of non-violation claims, and show that the weak performance measures of observed non-violation
claims are not inconsistent with a valuable role for the non-violation clause in the GATT/WTO.


Robert W. Staiger
Department of Economics
The University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
rstaiger@wisc.edu

Alan O. Sykes
Law School
New York University
40 Washington Square South, 308A
New York, NY 10012
SykesA@exchange.law.nyu.edu
1. Introduction

The “non-violation”clause of the General Agreement on Tari¤s and Trade (GATT) is Exhibit
A for the proposition that international trade agreements are incomplete contracts. This clause,
which is also included in GATT’s successor, the World Trade Organization (WTO), allows one
GATT/WTO member government to seek compensation from another for adverse trade e¤ects
of the other’s policies, even though those policies do not violate speci…c GATT/WTO treaty
obligations. The possibility of a non-violation complaint is thus explicit acknowledgment that
the GATT/WTO contract does not expressly address all of the potential policy measures that
might undermine the GATT/WTO bargain.
       Non-violation claims are of interest not only because of their role in the international trading
system, but because they represent a fascinating attempt to solve the broader problem of
contract incompleteness. To our knowledge no other treaty regime creates a legal cause of action
against measures that do not violate the treaty but that nevertheless upset the reasonable
expectations of the parties, and there are no clean analogues to the non-violation claim in
private contracts either.1 Against this backdrop, can the non-violation claim play a useful role
in a treaty system like the GATT/WTO? Or is it an aberration of little real signi…cance?
       The non-violation clause was an important focus of the drafters of GATT in 1947 (see for
example Hudec, 1990), and its relevance was revisited and rea¢ rmed with the creation of the
WTO in 1995 (see Petersmann, 1997). And according to the terms-of-trade theory of trade
agreements, the non-violation clause has an important role to play in facilitating the success of
the “shallow integration”approach that the GATT/WTO has adopted (see for example Bagwell
and Staiger, 2001, 2002, 2006, 2010 and Staiger and Sykes, 2011).
       Yet despite the prominence given to the non-violation clause by its legal drafters and legal
scholars and suggested by economic theory, in GATT/WTO practice the observed performance
of the non-violation complaint has been weak. In particular, relative to GATT/WTO disputes
that feature more traditional “violation” complaints, GATT/WTO rulings on non-violation
complaints have been both rare and mostly unsuccessful.
       In this paper we document these and other stylized features of the performance of the non-
   1
     The closest analogies with any widespread signi…cance are certain duties of “good faith performance” that
are said to exist in international law generally, and in the law of private contracts. See Panizzon (2006); Uniform
Commercial Code Section 1-304. Under GATT/WTO doctrine, however, successful non-violation claims do not
require any showing of bad faith. See Staiger and Sykes (2013).



                                                        1
violation complaint in GATT/WTO disputes, and we ask: Can a model account for these weak
performance measures? And if so, what is implied about the (on- and o¤-) equilibrium impacts
of the non-violation clause on the joint welfare of the GATT/WTO member governments?
   To speak to these questions, a model must predict that disputes are actually observed in
equilibrium. But in the models of non-violation claims referenced above, all disputes are es-
sentially o¤ equilibrium (see, for example, Bagwell and Staiger, 2006, note 6), so those models
are generally silent on these questions. A model of trade agreements that does predict equilib-
rium disputes is developed by Maggi and Staiger (2011), but that model does not consider the
possibility of non-violation claims. We adopt and extend the model of Maggi and Staiger to
incorporate the possibility of non-violation claims, and then use the extended model to consider
the nature and potential importance of the role of the non-violation clause in the GATT/WTO.
   As in Maggi and Staiger (2011), our model features an importing government who makes
a policy choice and an exporting government who decides whether to initiate a dispute and
challenge the policy choice in court. And as in Maggi and Staiger, when a dispute arises
in our model it is because one of the parties acts opportunistically to exploit the absence of
a complete contract and the potential inaccuracy of the court rulings: either the exporting
country is attempting to force liberalization with an incorrect court ruling when the importing
country’s intervention is in fact globally e¢ cient, or the importing country is attempting to “get
away with”intervention with an incorrect court ruling when laissez faire is in fact the e¢ cient
policy. The model captures key features of the institutional and policy environment with a few
parameters, and we establish that the observed dispute behavior hinges on these parameters.
   From this perspective, we show that the relative infrequency of non-violation rulings in
GATT/WTO disputes can be understood according to our model as primarily attributable to
two underlying forces, one that re‡ects features of the GATT/WTO institutional environment
and keeps in check the exporter’s incentive to use the non-violation claim against policies that
are globally e¢ cient, and the other that re‡ects features of the policy environment and keeps
in check the importer’s incentive to use domestic tax and regulatory policies for terms-of-trade
manipulation. And we show that the relatively low success rate of non-violation claims as
compared to violation claims can be understood as a re‡ection of dispute selection e¤ects that
work to raise the success rate of violation claims but that are rendered inoperative when it
comes to non-violation claims as long as the court is su¢ ciently accurate.
   Our model also indicates that, despite the paucity of GATT/WTO rulings on non-violation


                                                2
claims and their limited success, these observed features of disputes are not inconsistent with the
possibility that the non-violation clause nevertheless plays an important role in the GATT/WTO.
We establish this by comparing model outcomes with and without the non-violation clause un-
der the restricted set of model parameter values implied by the observed dispute features. And
we …nd that according to our model, the weak performance measures of observed non-violation
claims are consistent with a world in which governments make market access commitments
with contracts over border measures while preserving autonomy over domestic policies, and the
non-violation clause functions mostly o¤-equilibrium to reroute policy interventions into forms
that are explicitly addressed by the GATT/WTO contract and to thereby prevent the circum-
vention of these market access commitments, a function that is in line with the role emphasized
by economists and legal scholars and envisioned by the drafters of GATT.
   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section provides some institutional back-
ground and describes some stylized features of non-violation claims in GATT/WTO disputes.
Section 3 then presents the model setup, while section 4 derives the equilibrium outcomes.
Section 5 explores the ability of a restricted set of model parameter values to capture the styl-
ized features of the usage and outcomes of violation and non-violation claims in GATT/WTO
disputes. Section 6 then considers the potential impacts of the non-violation clause, and asks
whether the non-violation clause could serve a valuable role in the GATT/WTO system under
the restricted set of parameter values identi…ed in section 5. Finally, section 7 concludes.


2. The Non-Violation Clause

We begin with a brief institutional overview of the non-violation clause and a description of sev-
eral stylized features concerning the role that non-violation claims have played in GATT/WTO
disputes. This overview and description will guide the analysis in the following sections. In
Staiger and Sykes (2013) we provide a more detailed legal and institutional discussion of these
issues (see also Petersmann, 1997, and Hudec, 1990 and 1993).
   To understand the origins of the non-violation clause in GATT, one must recall that the
central purpose of the GATT/WTO is to facilitate market access integration among its member
countries. To achieve this, the GATT and (albeit to a lesser extent) the WTO have taken a
“shallow” approach to integration, focusing primarily on the reduction of tari¤s, with a set
of attendant rules (e.g., non-discrimination as embodied in the national treatment obligation)
that create an agreed code of conduct on non-tari¤ measures. But even with these rules, it

                                                3
was well-understood by GATT drafters (see Hudec, 1990) that the market access implications
of tari¤ cuts could be nulli…ed by behind-the-border policies that would not and could not be
subjected to negotiations. It is for this reason that the non-violation clause was included in the
original 1947 GATT dispute settlement articles and incorporated into the articles of the WTO.
   The non-violation clause is contained in GATT’s Article XXIII:1 on “Nulli…cation or Im-
pairment,”which states:

          If any contracting party should consider that any bene…t accruing to it directly or
      indirectly under this Agreement is being nulli…ed or impaired or that the attainment
      of any objective of the Agreement is being impeded as the result of
          (a) the failure of another contracting party to carry out its obligations under
      this Agreement, or
          (b) the application by another contracting party of any measure, whether or not
      it con‡icts with the provisions of this Agreement, or
          (c) the existence of any other situation,
      the contracting party may [have recourse to the dispute resolution process]. . .

In principle, Article XXIII provides for a total of six possible “causes of action:”three for “nulli…-
cation or impairment”of bene…ts, either for reasons of (a) “the failure. . . to carry out. . . obligations,”
or (b) “the application by another. . . of any measure, whether or not it con‡icts”with GATT, or
(c) “the existence of any other situation;”and three where the “attainment of any objective. . . is
being impeded”(as a result of any of the same three reasons).
   The GATT negotiators were aware that this language is quite vague and open-ended in
terms of the circumstances that might trigger a right to dispute resolution. But as Hudec (1990,
chapter 4) explains, they chose to retain the “any measure” and “other situation” provisions,
with the hope that the GATT membership would interpret these provisions sensibly over time.
In practice, only two of the six actions provided in Article XXIII have proven signi…cant in the
context of GATT/WTO disputes, and they each focus on “nulli…cation or impairment.” The
so-called “violation” claims invoke Article XXIII:1(a), while “non-violation” claims proceed
with respect to Article XXIII:1(b). All claims are made to a “panel” of judges consisting of
trade law experts who are not nationals of the disputants, and the panel issues a ruling (which
under WTO procedures can be appealed to a higher level of judges). Henceforth we refer to
the collection of judges in a GATT/WTO dispute as the “DSB”(dispute settlement body).

                                                   4
       As the name suggests, violation claims are conceptually straightforward, and simply involve
a claim by some government that another government is violating its obligations under the
agreement (with a presumption that such violations then nullify the complaining government’s
bene…ts under the agreement). Non-violation claims, on the other hand, are less familiar, as
they involve no claim that a government is actually violating any of its agreed obligations.
Rather, non-violation claims target policies that have “frustrated the legitimate market access
expectations”of the claimant under the agreement even if these policies have not violated any
obligations under the agreement.
       Violation claims can therefore only be leveled at policies that have been contracted over
(or that display features, e.g., discrimination, that have been contracted over). Non-violation
claims, by contrast, can potentially be made against any policies, whether or not those policies
have been contracted over (or display features that have been contracted over). And if it is
contracted over, a single policy can be the subject of both a violation claim and a non-violation
claim. In such a case, there is a typical hierarchy of claims: the DSB generally rules …rst on
the violation claim, and only moves on to rule on the non-violation claim if it has ruled against
the claimant on the violation claim. Hence, a non-violation claim can be aimed at policies
that would otherwise be beyond the reach of the GATT/WTO contract; or it can be used as a
“backup claim”to a violation claim concerning a contracted (or contracted feature of a) policy.2
       Finally, under a successful violation claim there is typically a legal presumption that the
defendant will bring its policy into compliance with the agreement.3 But under a successful
non-violation claim there is no such presumption. A successful non-violation claim only creates
a legal right for the claimant to receive compensation from the defendant, which the defendant
can either pay, or can avoid paying by removing the policy in question (or making other policy
adjustments) so as to eliminate the nulli…cation of bene…ts for the claimant.
   2
      An example of a non-violation claim aimed at a policy that would otherwise be beyond the reach of the
GATT/WTO contract can be found in the 1984 GATT dispute Australia v. European Community: Operation of
Beef and Veal Regime, where Australia invoked Article XXIII:1(b) to claim that the EC CAP regime subsidies on
beef and veal were distorting world prices and eroding Australia’s ability to export to third markets (see Hudec,
1993, p. 521). An example of a non-violation claim used as a “backup claim” to a violation claim concerning
a contracted (or contracted feature of a) policy can be found in the 1949 GATT dispute Chile v. Australia:
Subsidy on Ammonium Sulfate, where Chile claimed that a domestic consumption subsidy granted to purchasers
of ammonium sulfate fertilizer but not to purchasers of sodium nitrate fertilizer violated the most-favored-nation
obligation (GATT Article I:1), and as a backup claim argued that the recent discontinuance of only the sodium
nitrate subsidy program constituted Article XXIII:1(b) non-violation nulli…cation and impairment of Australia’s
recent tari¤ concessions (see Hudec, 1993, pp. 421-422).
    3
      We discuss this further at later points in the paper (see especially note 14)



                                                        5
       With this institutional background in place, we next record three stylized features about
the role that non-violation claims have played in GATT/WTO disputes.4 In later sections we
will return to these stylized features and ask whether our model can capture them.
       A …rst feature is the paucity of GATT/WTO disputes in which the DSB has ruled on a
non-violation claim. This is arguably true in absolute terms – over the more than 60 years
that the GATT/WTO has been in operation, there have been only 19 disputes that involved
a ruling on a non-violation claim – but the feature of the data that we emphasize here is the
paucity of rulings on non-violation claims relative to the total number of disputes: of the 232
GATT/WTO disputes initiated through the end of 2009 for which a ruling on any kind of claim
occurred, the 19 disputes that involved a ruling on a non-violation claim represent a mere 8%,
a number that would shrink further if it were limited to panel rulings on non-violation claims
that were “adopted”as o¢ cial by the wider GATT/WTO membership.5
       A second feature is that the …ling of non-violation claims – as distinct from DSB rulings
on those claims – is not particularly uncommon: 20% (47 disputes) of the 232 GATT/WTO
disputes initiated through the end of 2009 for which a ruling on any kind of claim occurred
included a non-violation claim. In light of the …rst feature emphasized above, this implies a
relatively low probability that non-violation claims are actually ruled upon. Indeed, if a non-
violation claim is made in a GATT/WTO dispute that results in a ruling on any kind of claim,
the non-violation claim is less than half as likely to be ruled upon by the DSB as compared to
the DSB’s likelihood of ruling on a violation claim. Hence, of those GATT/WTO disputes that
resulted in a DSB ruling on any kind of claim, the fraction that involved a ruling on a non-
violation claim is quite small, while the fraction that included a non-violation claim, whether
or not that claim was ruled upon, is not particularly small.
       And a third feature is that, conditional on getting a DSB ruling, the success rate of violation
claims is fairly high, while the success rate of non-violation claims is quite low. In particular, in
GATT/WTO disputes initiated through the end of 2009 for which a DSB ruling on a violation
   4
      The data behind the calculations we present below come from Hudec (1993) for the GATT-era disputes and
from the World Bank’s WTO Dispute Settlement Database (see Horn, Johannesson and Mavroidis, 2011 for a
description) and the WTO web site for the WTO-era disputes.
    5
      Panel rulings that were not adopted by the GATT membership in the GATT era or that were overturned
on appeal in the WTO era do not have o¢ cial status in GATT/WTO law, and so it may be appropriate to
exclude such rulings from calculations like those we present here. Doing so would only provide further support
for the features we emphasize. Also, as we discuss later (see notes 8 and 31), many GATT/WTO disputes settle
before a ruling occurs, and so we focus here on the number of disputes for which a ruling on a non-violation
claim occurred relative to the total number of disputes for which a ruling on a claim of any kind occurred.


                                                      6
claim occurred, the DSB ruled in favor of the claimant on (at least some portion of) the violation
claim approximately 73% of the time.6 By contrast, in GATT/WTO disputes initiated through
the end of 2009 for which a DSB ruling on a non-violation claim occurred, the DSB ruled in
favor of the claimant on the non-violation claim approximately 37% of the time.
       To summarize: relative to the number of GATT/WTO disputes in which a ruling on any
kind of claim occurred, (i) the number of these disputes in which a ruling on the non-violation
claim occurred is small, and (ii) the number of these disputes in which a non-violation claim
was made is not small; and (iii) the success rate of violation claims in GATT/WTO disputes
is fairly high, while the success rate of non-violation claims is low.
       Can a model account for these observed features of the usage and outcomes of violation
and non-violation claims? And if so, what is implied from the weak performance measures of
observed non-violation claims about the (on- and o¤-) equilibrium impacts of the non-violation
clause on the joint welfare of the GATT/WTO member governments? To speak to these
questions, a model must predict that disputes are actually observed in equilibrium, and as noted
in the Introduction the models highlighting the role of the non-violation clause are generally
silent on this issue. One model that does predict equilibrium disputes is developed by Maggi
and Staiger (2011), but that model does not consider the possibility of non-violation claims.
In the next section we adopt and extend the model of Maggi and Staiger to incorporate the
possibility of non-violation claims, and we then use the extended model to consider the nature
and potential importance of the role of the non-violation clause in the GATT/WTO.


3. A Model of Violation and Non-Violation Claims

Maggi and Staiger (2011) develop a two-country partial equilibrium model of dispute settlement
in international trade agreements in which an importing government has a binary trade policy
choice. Ex ante, before uncertainty over the value of trade policy commitments is resolved,
the governments of the importing and exporting country can write an incomplete contract and
exchange lump-sum transfers, and they can also set up a dispute settlement body (DSB) and
   6
    These calculations again include all DSB rulings, whether or not they were adopted by the GATT/WTO
membership (see also note 5). The WTO reports related success rates that are somewhat higher (see WTO,
2007, p. 273) under a di¤erent criterion for the inclusion of rulings. The WTO report does not break out
separate success rates for violation claims and non-violation claims as we do here. Hudec (1990, p. 278) reports
success rates that are in line with the numbers we report in the text, though Hudec does not break out separate
success rates for violation and non-violation claims either.



                                                       7
de…ne its mandate. Then ex post, once uncertainty is resolved, lump-sum transfers are no
longer available, the importing government makes its trade policy choice, and the exporting
government decides whether to initiate a dispute, which if initiated is resolved by the DSB
according to its given mandate.
        We build from the model of Maggi and Staiger (2011), extending it in two ways. First,
in addition to its trade policy choice, we allow the importing government to make a domestic
regulatory choice. And second, in addition to the (violation) claim considered in Maggi-Staiger,
we introduce the possibility of bringing a non-violation claim.
        Our setup is partial-equilibrium, and it focuses on a single industry in which the Home (im-
porting) government chooses a binary import policy                2 fF T; P g (Free Trade or Protection)
and also makes a binary choice over a domestic regulation r 2 fF T; Rg (Free Trade or Regu-
lation). The payo¤ of the Home government is !( ; r; s), where s                       (s1 ; s2 ; :::; sN ) is a vector
of state variables. Each state variable si represents a binary event (such as “there is/is not
an import surge” or “the product does/does not contain asbestos”), with p(s) the probability
that state s occurs and         the set of possible states. The Foreign (exporting) government has
no export policy in this industry, and its payo¤ is given by ! ( ; r; s). To reduce the number
of cases we must consider, we assume that it is never internationally e¢ cient or unilaterally
optimal for Home to set both            = P and r = R at the same time. Hence there are three
relevant policy settings to consider: FT             f = F T; r = F T g, P                 f = P; r = F T g, and
R        f = F T; r = Rg.7
                                                                                P
        We denote the impact of trade protection on Home payo¤s by                   (s)     !(P; s) !(FT ; s) >
                                                                           R
0, and the impact of domestic regulation on Home payo¤s by                     (s)         !(R; s)   !(FT ; s) > 0.
These impacts may be thought of as arising from a combination of terms-of-trade and purely
domestic considerations. We assume that Foreign loses from Home policy intervention in all
states s; and for simplicity we …x the impact of Home intervention on Foreign payo¤s in a given
state to be the same across both policies, and we denote this impact (de…ned positively) by
    (s)     ! (FT ; s)   ! (P; s) = ! (FT ; s)        ! (R; s) > 0: in e¤ect, we are assuming that the
    7
    Inclusion in our analysis of the fourth possibility, where Home sets both = P and r = R at the same
time, would not alter our results in any substantive way, but would simply increase the number of cases to be
considered. By excluding this case we do miss the “intensive margin” possibility that Home might over-utilize
R for protective purposes (by adding P ). However, this possibility is more naturally captured in a continuous
policy setting where the stringency of R can be adjusted upward for protective e¤ect, and in Staiger and Sykes
(2011) we focus on that possibility (though in a model that does not produce disputes in equilibrium). In the
present paper we stick to dichotomous policy choices, and thereby restrict our focus to policy distortions at the
“extensive margin” that involve the choice of the wrong policy rather than over-utilization of the right policy.


                                                       8
impact of Home policies on Foreign payo¤s is transmitted through the trade e¤ects of the Home
policy choice, and that in a given state s the trade e¤ects of P and R are the same. Finally, we
rule out negotiations between governments at the ex-post stage (after the state s is realized).8
         De…ning the“…rst-best”policy for a given state s as the policy that maximizes the govern-
ments’joint payo¤ ( ; r; s)                                !( ; r; s) + ! ( ; r; s), we may now partition the states of the
world into three sets: those where the …rst-best involves no policy intervention, those where
the …rst-best involves import protection and those where the …rst-best involves domestic regu-
                                                P            P
lation. Formally, we let                            (s)          (s)     (s) = (P; s)               (FT ; s) denote the joint (positive
or negative) gain from protection relative to free trade for the two governments; and we let
 R                    R
     (s)                  (s)         (s) = (R; s)                 (FT ; s) denote the joint (positive or negative) gain from
                                                                                                                                 FT       P
domestic regulation relative to free trade for the two governments. We may then use                                                   ,
              R
and               to denote the sets of states for which the …rst-best policy is respectively FT , P and R:

                                        FT                                         P          R
                                                          fs such that max[            (s);       (s)]        0g;
                                            P                              P                        R
                                                          fs such that         (s) > max[0;              (s)]g; and
                                            R                              R                        P
                                                          fs such that         (s) > max[0;              (s)]g:

We assume that the realized state s is observed by the governments and by the DSB, while
 P                    R
         and              are observed by the governments but not by the DSB (so that payo¤ levels are not
veri…able and hence non-contractible).
                  P
         In           where the …rst-best involves import protection, we do not take a stand on whether
the alternative form of intervention –domestic regulation –is better or worse than free trade,
i.e., we allow                  R
                                    (s) T 0. Similarly, in             R
                                                                           where the …rst-best involves domestic regulation,
the alternative of import protection may be better or worse than free trade, i.e., we allow
 P
     (s) T 0. But in                   FT
                                            where the …rst-best is free trade, it is natural that Home would prefer
                                                                                        P                R
import protection to domestic regulation –that is,                                          (s) >            (s) –which, as both P and R
     8
     Maggi and Staiger (2011) also abstract from ex-post negotiations, with an assumption that e¤ective ex-post
transfers are not available to governments (see Maggi and Staiger on a justi…cation for this assumption within
the context of GATT/WTO disputes). As will become clear below, we can appeal to a similar assumption here,
provided that the ex-post transfers that are available to governments in our model are su¢ ciently ine¢ cient.
Alternatively, su¢ ciently high ex-post bargaining frictions of any form would be su¢ cient for our purposes. In
reality, many GATT/WTO disputes are in fact settled through ex-post negotiations, and Maggi and Staiger
(2012) consider the intermediate case in which ex-post transfers are ine¢ cient but not so ine¢ cient as to preclude
ex-post negotiation and settlement of disputes (although they do not focus on non-violation complaints as we do
here). We leave the extension to that case as an important direction for future work on non-violation complaints
(see also note 31).


                                                                               9
                                                                            P           R
are associated with the same level of                (s), then implies          (s) >       (s): the reason is that,
                                                                                             FT
in a wide set of environments, the bene…ts to Home of intervening in                              where intervention
is jointly ine¢ cient are associated with terms-of-trade manipulation (see Bagwell and Staiger,
1999, 2001), and import protection (a tari¤) is the …rst-best policy instrument for this purpose.9
To capture this feature we introduce a parameter                   2 (0; 1) to re‡ect the degree to which the
policy R is a good substitute for P for the purpose of terms-of-trade manipulation, and we
impose
                                         R               P                 FT
                                             (s) =           (s) for s 2        :                   (Assumption 1)

The policy substitution parameter             will play a key role in our analysis.
       We next discuss the contracting possibilities. Following Maggi and Staiger (2011), we as-
sume that it is costless to describe the trade policy                in a contract but prohibitively costly to
describe precisely all the relevant state variables (s1 ; s2 ; :::; sN ) that would be necessary to write
a complete contingent contract covering , and we focus instead on what Maggi and Staiger
term a “vague contract”that takes the form “ = P allowed if and only if ;”where                           is a vague
sentence such as “there is serious injury to the domestic industry due to increased imports.”
Vague contracts use “o¤ the shelf” language and are costless to write, but their meaning is
ambiguous in some states of the world; and following Maggi and Staiger, in those states of the
world where their meaning is unambiguous we assume that vague contracts are written so that
they specify the …rst-best policy choice. By contrast, we assume that writing r in an ex-ante
contract would itself be prohibitively expensive, re‡ecting the notion that r could encompass
any of a myriad of domestic regulations that might be implemented ex post. Hence, the vague
contract cannot be written to cover r, nor for the same reason can any other ex-ante contract
cover r. In short, due to prohibitively high writing costs, r is left out of the ex-ante contract
altogether. Or, using Maggi and Staiger’s terminology and as we discuss further below, r is
covered by the “empty contract.”10
   9
      More speci…cally, a state in P could correspond to a situation in which signi…cant distributional concerns
arise for Home, with the implicit policy ranking that import protection dominates domestic regulation on global
e¢ ciency grounds as the preferred policy response in such situations, but where domestic regulation might still
be preferred on e¢ ciency grounds relative to free trade as a second-best form of redistribution. Similarly, a state
in R might correspond to a situation in which signi…cant safety concerns associated with the imported product
arise for Home, where domestic regulation now dominates import protection as the preferred policy response but
where import protection might still be preferred relative to free trade as a second-best policy response. Finally,
states in F T would correspond to situations where there is no legitimate grounds for deviation from free trade
from the perspective of global e¢ ciency, and where Home’s incentive to deviate from free trade then arises from
beggar-thy-neighbor terms-of-trade considerations that are most e¤ectively pursued with import protection.
   10
      Of course, it might be possible to describe r in vague terms in an ex-ante contract, much like the use of

                                                          10
    In addition to writing the ex-ante contract covering , governments can introduce a court
–the DSB – and can give the DSB a mandate to follow if it is invoked to settle a dispute ex
                                                                                                                  P
post. Recall that the DSB is assumed to observe the realized state s but not the values of
       R
and        ; thus, the DSB does not know what the “best” (joint-payo¤-maximizing) policy is for
the realized state s. What role can the DSB play? Here we identify two possible roles: the DSB
can address a violation complaint, and/or the DSB can address a non-violation complaint.
    A violation complaint occurs when Home selects                  = P in state s and Foreign invokes the
DSB, and claims that the contract speci…es              = F T in state s and hence that the contract has
been violated by Home’s policy choice. If the trade policy obligation speci…ed in the contract
( = F T or       = P ) is unambiguous for state s, then the DSB simply enforces the contract, and
we ignore such disputes in what follows.11 We focus instead on states s where the obligation
speci…ed in the contract is ambiguous; and we assume that, if invoked in such a state, the
                                                             P
DSB observes an unbiased but noisy signal of                     , which can be thought of as the outcome
of an independent investigation in which the DSB “interprets” the contract. The DSB then
                                                          DSB
issues a ruling –that is a policy determination                  , which we assume in the case of a violation
complaint is automatically enforced –with the objective of maximizing the expected joint payo¤
                                                                                                DSB
of the governments given the signal. In particular, the DSB issues the ruling                           = F T if its
                     P                                       DSB                                    P
signal indicates           0, and it issues the ruling             = P if its signal indicates          > 0.
    Notice that when ruling on a violation claim against                = P the DSB does not consider the
Home policy option r = R. Implicitly we are assuming that when Home selects                         = P in state
s, it is not possible for Home to switch to r = R within the time frame of dispute resolution.
And so the issue that has arisen for the DSB to resolve is simply whether or not to allow import
vague language to describe state contingencies. But there is an important di¤erence between contingencies and
policies where the use of vague language is concerned: states of the world can reasonably be viewed as exogenous,
but the same cannot be said for the design of policies. As a consequence, while a well-crafted vague sentence
describing certain contingencies might have unambiguous meaning in an important set of states of the world,
policies can often be designed around the unambiguous proscriptions of a vague sentence meant to describe
them. This di¤erence makes inclusion of a vague sentence describing domestic policies in an ex-ante contract
especially problematic, as the breadth required to encompass all of the available policy options (e.g., “domestic
taxes and regulations”) would limit the possibility of desirable ex-ante constraints (to, e.g., broad proscriptions
against discrimination, such as national treatment). On the other hand, a more narrow class of policies (e.g.,
“subsidies”) might be usefully described with a vague sentence and more tightly constrained once such policies
were found to be especially relevant in practice, and in the Conclusion we discuss further the possibility that
classes of domestic policies which turn out to be relatively frequent targets of successful non-violation complaints
might be later carved out and added to the ex-ante contract with vague language, a possibility which can itself
contribute to an explanation of the relative paucity and low success rate of non-violation rulings.
  11
     Indeed, as we introduce just below a cost of disputes borne by each party, our model implies that no such
disputes would ever arise in equilibrium.


                                                        11
protection in state s. Our modeling of DSB behavior therefore broadly echoes Posner’s (2005,
p. 8) description of the interpretive role of courts: “Gap …lling and disambiguating are both
‘interpretive’in the sense that they are e¤orts to determine how the parties would have resolved
the issue that has arisen had they foreseen it when they negotiated their contract.”
       Hence, in our model the approach to contracting over the import policy                is analogous to
the combination of a vague contract and an interpretive DSB mandate as introduced in Maggi
and Staiger (2011). Maggi and Staiger also consider other forms for the ex-ante contract and
DSB mandate, optimize among the possible contract/DSB mandate pairings, and show that
the vague contract and interpretive DSB mandate can be optimal provided that the noise in the
DSB signal is relatively small. Rather than optimizing the contract/DSB mandate pair across
a variety of options, in what follows we simplify and focus exclusively on the vague contract
and interpretive DSB mandate for the import policy               in order to emphasize di¤erent themes:
nevertheless, as we describe further below, we will concentrate our attention on the relatively-
small-DSB-noise environment where this contract/DSB mandate is likely to be optimal.12
       In contrast to a violation complaint, a non-violation complaint does not involve a claim that
a contractual obligation has been violated, and hence we assume (in line with GATT/WTO
practice) that a non-violation claim can be brought either against               (when Home sets        = P ),
which is covered by the ex-ante contract, or against r (when Home selects r = R), which is
not covered by any ex-ante contract. If the DSB is asked to rule on a non-violation complaint
involving            (r), we again assume that the DSB observes an unbiased but noisy signal of
 P          R                                                  DSB
        (       ) and issues a ruling/policy determination           (rDSB ), again with the objective of
maximizing the expected joint payo¤ of the governments given the signal. Therefore, when
                                              DSB                                   P             DSB
Home sets           = P , the DSB ruling is         = F T if its signal indicates        0 and          = P if
                            P                                                               DSB
the signal indicates            > 0; and when Home selects r = R, the DSB ruling is r             = F T if its
signal indicates        R
                             0 and rDSB = R if the signal indicates     R
                                                                            > 0.13 However, and unlike in a
  12
     More speci…cally, as Maggi and Staiger (2011) demonstrate, when the noise in the DSB signal is in a small-
to-intermediate range the vague contract and interpretive DSB mandate will be optimal, but if the noise in
the DSB signal is su¢ ciently small the vague contract and interpretive DSB mandate can become dominated
by other contract/DSB mandate pairings. However, this possibility is most likely to arise when there would
be no observed disputes under the vague contract and interpretive DSB mandate, and so our focus below on
parameter ranges which in combination with relatively small DSB noise yield observed disputes makes this
possibility unlikely to arise in our environment.
  13
     Our discussion above concerning the interpretation of the DSB ruling applies without modi…cation to
non-violation claims brought against , and it applies as well with appropriate modi…cation to the case of non-
violation claims brought against r. That is, for this latter case we are implicitly assuming that when Home
selects r = R in state s, it is not possible for Home to switch to = P within the time frame of dispute


                                                       12
violation complaint, in the case of a non-violation ruling that goes against the Home government
    DSB
(         = F T or rDSB = F T ), we assume (again in line with GATT/WTO practice) that Home
is under no obligation to implement F T . Instead the non-violation complaint operates as a
liability rule, in that Home has the option of either implementing the DSB policy determination
or paying damages b(s) to Foreign.14
     What level of damages must the Home government pay if it wishes to keep its intervention
in place when a non-violation ruling goes against it? We assume that the DSB sets damages at
b(s) =      (s), the level of harm done to the Foreign country; and hence we assume that                    (s) is
                                         P             R                       P         R
observable to the DSB (but that              (s) and       (s) and therefore       and       are not). Below we
will discuss the desirability/feasibility of setting damages in this way. We record this in

                                             b(s) =    (s) for s 2 :                            (Assumption 2)

Finally, we denote by b (s) the damages actually received by Foreign when Home pays b(s), and
we assume that Foreign receives less than Home pays, re‡ecting the dead-weight loss associated
with reciprocal tari¤ retaliation, the typical form of “self-help” compensation authorized in
GATT/WTO disputes.15 To capture this feature we introduce a parameter                         2 (0; 1) to re‡ect
(inversely) the extent of the ine¢ ciency in government-to-government transfers in the context
of GATT/WTO disputes, and we impose:

                                          b (s)        b(s) for s 2 :                           (Assumption 3)

The transfer cost parameter          will play a key role in our analysis.
     Notice that if Home sets          = P , then Foreign may bring a violation complaint, a non-
violation complaint, or bring both, or do nothing. We assume that if both a violation and
non-violation claim are brought against Home’s selection of                    = P , the DSB …rst rules on
resolution. And so the issue that has arisen for the DSB to resolve is simply whether or not to allow domestic
regulation in state s.
  14
     In this regard, there is an important question as to the practical distinction between violation and non-
violation complaints in the GATT/WTO, in light of the fact that the same reciprocity-of-trade-e¤ects rule
generally guides the permissible retaliation for continued application of the intervention at issue in either case.
This has fueled a debate among legal scholars about whether the typical violation complaint in a GATT/WTO
dispute might be better interpreted as a liability rule, rather than as a “property rule” implying automatic
enforcement as we have interpreted it above (see Jackson, 1997, and Schwartz and Sykes, 2002). And even
setting aside this issue, there are some rule violations (e.g., the WTO rules on “actionable” subsidies) that
operate as liability rather than property rules. We return to this issue in the Conclusion, and discuss there the
case where both violation and non-violation claims are treated as liability rules.
  15
     See Maggi and Staiger (2012) for a discussion of methods of compensation in GATT/WTO disputes and
the deadweight loss typically associated with these methods.

                                                        13
the violation claim, and it moves on to rule on the non-violation claim only if it has ruled for
                                             DSB
the Home country (i.e., determines                 = P ) in the violation claim. This is the sequencing
followed in GATT/WTO practice, and it can be rationalized on grounds of “judicial economy.”16
    On the other hand, if Home sets r = R, the possible responses of Foreign are to …le a
non-violation claim or do nothing, as r is not covered in an ex-ante contract and so a violation
claim cannot be brought. Hence, our model captures the idea that non-violation claims can
serve as an alternative to violation claims for disciplining policies that would be too costly to
describe in a contract, an idea that we touched on in section 2 and that is well-re‡ected in the
following quote from Hudec (1990) on the origins of the non-violation clause in GATT:

           “The dominant purpose of a trade agreement was the exchange of tari¤ reduc-
       tions. The concept of a balanced exchange [reciprocity] was central...Concern for
       reciprocity stimulated the general code of trade policy rules that traditionally went
       along with the exchange of tari¤ reductions. Tari¤s were only one instrument of
       trade policy, and unless other trade policy measures were held in check, the commer-
       cial opportunity of a tari¤ reduction could easily be nulli…ed by some other collateral
       measure. To maintain reciprocity, therefore, prohibitions against quantitative re-
       strictions, discrimination, and the like were essential. Even so, it was impossible
       fully to guarantee reciprocity by means of legal commitments. The standard trade
       policy rules could deal with the common types of trade policy measure governments
       usually employ to control trade. But trade can also be a¤ected by other “domestic”
       measures, such as product safety standards, that have nothing directly to do with
       trade policy. It would have been next to impossible to catalogue all such possibil-
       ities in advance. Moreover, governments would never have agreed to circumscribe
       their freedom in all these other areas for the sake of a mere tari¤ agreement. The
       shortcomings of the standard legal commitments were recognized in a report by a
       group of trade experts at the London Monetary and Economic Conference of 1933.
       The group concluded that trade agreements should have another more general pro-
       vision which would address itself to any other government action that produced an
  16
     In particular, with the property rule/liability rule distinction across violation and non-violation claims, the
sequencing of rulings described in the text is in line with the principle of judicial economy, because a ruling
against the Home government on the violation claim would render meaningless to the Foreign government a
subsequent ruling on the non-violation claim.



                                                        14
         adverse e¤ect on the balance of commercial opportunity.”(pp. 19-20).17

       Notice also that with damages in a successful non-violation complaint against Home set at
b(s) =      (s) by Assumption 2, it follows that when Home faces a successful non-violation com-
                                                   FT
plaint (concerning either        or r) for s 2          , Home will comply with the policy determination
(F T ) rather than choose to maintain its policy and pay damages b(s). But when Home faces a
                                                              P
successful non-violation complaint over            for s 2        it will choose to maintain       = P and pay
the damages b(s); and similarly, when Home faces a successful non-violation complaint over
               R
r for s 2          it will choose to maintain r = R and pay the damages b(s). In other words,
as modeled, Home’s policy choices under the non-violation complaint have the ‡avor of those
induced by an “e¢ cient breach”rule.18
       At this point in may be useful to summarize how our approach to modeling the non-violation
claim relates formally to Maggi and Staiger (2011) and Bagwell and Staiger (2001). Relative
to Maggi and Staiger, our modeling of the non-violation claim in the context of the domestic
regulatory policy is analogous to an empty contract (over r) paired with a mandate of the DSB
to …ll gaps (along the lines described by Posner, 2005, in the passage quoted above), except that
in the setting of Maggi and Staiger the DSB announces a policy which would be automatically
enforced (a property rule), whereas we model the non-violation claim as a liability rule, with
the DSB announcing damages that must be paid by Home if it wishes to keep its policy choice.
The liability rule, in turn, plays the role of the market access preservation rule which Bagwell
and Staiger use to formalize the “reciprocity-preserving”feature of the non-violation complaint
described by Hudec (1990) in the passage quoted above, in terms of the ability of this rule
to induce e¢ cient policy choices by the Home country without the need to contract directly
over domestic regulatory policies.19 Relative to Maggi and Staiger, we also allow the non-
  17
     The idea that non-violation claims can serve as an alternative to violation claims for disciplining policies
that would be too costly to describe in a contract is also highlighted by Sykes (2005) in the context of disciplines
on domestic subsidies: “A nice feature of the nonviolation doctrine is the fact that it does not require subsidies
to be carefully de…ned or measured. A complaining member need simply demonstrate that an unanticipated
government program has improved the competitive position of domestic …rms at the expense of their foreign
competition.”
  18
     See Schwartz and Sykes (2002) on an e¢ cient-breach interpretation of GATT rules more generally, and see
Grossman and Sykes (2010) for a discussion of some of the practical limitations associated with this interpre-
tation. We say “the ‡avor of” e¢ cient breach because by Assumption 3 the damage payment b(s) made by
Home carries with it a dead-weight loss so that Foreign receives b (s) < b(s); and hence, while the policy choice
mimics that of an e¢ cient breach rule in the presence of lump-sum/e¢ cient transfers, there are nonetheless
ine¢ ciencies associated with the transfer payments.
  19
     In Bagwell and Staiger (2001, see especially the discussion in section III.C), and similarly in Bagwell and


                                                         15
violation complaint to be brought against the policy covered by the vague contract (the import
policy ), and when it is brought in combination with a violation complaint the non-violation
compliant serves here as a “back-up” complaint should the DSB fail to rule in favor of the
Foreign exporter’s violation claim.20
    We denote the probability that the DSB issues the “wrong”ruling by q 2 (0; 1=2), a parame-
ter that applies to both violation and non-violation claims and captures (inversely) the overall
quality of the DSB information.21 Implicit in this formulation is that the DSB investigation is
better than a coin ‡ip, and that the DSB is not an active player in the game between the Home
and Foreign governments.22 If the DSB rules on both a violation and a non-violation claim in
the same dispute, we assume that the error rate q applies to each ruling independently: with
this assumption we capture in a reduced form way the fact that the non-violation claim is a
legally separate claim from the violation claim in the GATT/WTO, and so the DSB investi-
gations of the two types of claims hinge on distinct legal issues.23 And …nally, we assume that
disputes are costly: if the exporter (complainant) invokes the DSB, then for each complaint
Staiger (2006) and Staiger and Sykes (2011), there is no uncertainty at the time the agreement is negotiated,
and so tari¤ negotiations in combination with a reciprocity-based market access preservation rule can induce the
e¢ cient choice of domestic (non-contracted) and trade (contracted) policies and achieve the e¢ cient frontier. In
those papers reciprocity can therefore be used to engineer a perfect “e¢ cient breach” rule. When, as we allow
here, there is ex-ante uncertainty at the time of contracting which is resolved ex post, the reciprocity-based
market access preservation rule continues to display an e¢ cient-breach-type property as we have observed,
though now the e¢ ciency properties are quali…ed (see note 18).
  20
     Notice, too, the dual role of the terms-of-trade theory of trade agreements in our analysis: …rst, the terms-
of-trade theory predicts that global ine¢ ciencies in domestic policies will be absent as long as contracted tari¤
commitments do not induce governments to turn to domestic policies as second-best tools for terms of trade
manipulation, and it thereby provides an intellectual foundation for the “shallow integration”focus on negotiated
border measure commitments as a means to achieve globally e¢ cient policies; and second, the terms-of-trade
theory serves as the justi…cation for our Assumption 1.
  21
     A natural extension would be to allow one DSB error rate for violation claims and another for non-violation
claims and consider the possibility that the former is smaller than the latter. We discuss this extension brie‡y
in the Conclusion.
  22
     For example, we are ruling out the possibility that the DSB might attempt to draw inferences about the
appropriate ruling from the observed …ling behavior induced by the actions of the two governments. Maggi and
Staiger (2011) make an analogous assumption. Modeling the DSB as an active player would be an interesting
extension, though if governments could commit the DSB not to be an active player it would be optimal for them
to do so (for a related discussion, see also Maggi and Staiger, 2012).
  23
     More speci…cally, in a richer model one could imagine a contract covering import protection that both
featured vague phrases and contained gaps, and under such a contract violation claims would amount to asking
the DSB to interpret vague phrases of the contract while non-violation claims would take aim at the contract
gaps. Our simple parameterization of the DSB accuracy rate (1 q) can be thought of as a reduced form way
of capturing the probability that the DSB rules for the right policy –whether for the right reason (e.g., …nds a
violation when in fact there was a violation of an appropriately interpreted vague phrase of the contract) or the
wrong reason (e.g., …nds a violation when in fact there was no violation but there was a non-violation) –when
asked to evaluate a violation or a non-violation claim.


                                                       16
   that the exporter brings the exporter incurs cost c and the importer (defendant) incurs cost c.
          Formally, we consider the following timing:

Stage 0. The state s is realized;

Stage 1. Home chooses         2 fF T; P g and r 2 fF T; Rg;

Stage 2. Foreign decides whether to …le a violation and/or non-violation complaint with the DSB;

                                                                                        DSB
Stage 3. If invoked for a violation complaint, the DSB issues a ruling                        2 fF T; P g; if in-
                                                                                    DSB
            voked for a non-violation complaint, the DSB issues a ruling                  2 fF T; P g or rDSB 2
            fF T; Rg; if invoked for both a violation and a non-violation complaint, the DSB issues
                                          DSB
            a …rst (violation) ruling           2 fF T; P g, and issues a second (non-violation) ruling
             DSB                                                    DSB
                   2 fF T; P g if and only if its …rst ruling is          = P;

Stage 4. If the DSB is invoked and issues a non-violation ruling that goes against Home, then
            Home chooses whether to revert to F T or maintain its policy and pay damages b(s); DSB
            violation rulings against Home are automatically enforced;

Stage 5. Payo¤s are realized.

   In what follows, we characterize the subgame perfect equilibrium of this game.
          Notice that according to the above sequence of moves, after observing Home’s policy choice
   Foreign does not have the option of a unilateral policy response but instead submits to the
   limits on unilateral retaliation described by Stages 2              4. In e¤ect, then, according to our
   model, as part of their ex-ante contracting governments agree to forgo “vigilante justice” and
   instead operate within the rule of law dictated by the DSB. As Petersmann (1997) explains,
   such institutional limits on retaliatory actions were the essence of what governments hoped to
   achieve with their design of the GATT dispute settlement procedures:24

               “The drafting history of Article XXIII:2 con…rms that it was designed to limit
            the customary law right of unilateral reprisals, whose exercise had contributed so
     24
       Not explained by our model is why governments would wish to tame retaliatory actions in this way. A
   formal answer to this question is also outside the model of Maggi and Staiger (2011), but in their Conclusion
   they discuss a possible extension of their model to a multi-country world that could provide a formal answer. See
   also Bown (2005) who presents empirical evidence suggesting that governments have not been entirely successful
   in wringing vigilante justice from the GATT/WTO system.


                                                          17
       much to the ‘law of the jungle’in international economic a¤airs during the 1930’s,
       and to introduce, as stated by one of the drafters, ‘a new principle in international
       economic relations. We have asked the nations of the world to confer upon an
       international organization the right to limit their power to retaliate. We have sought
       to tame retaliation, to discipline it, to keep it within bounds. By subjecting it to
       the restraints of international control, we have endeavoured to check its spread
       and growth, to convert it from a weapon of economic warfare to an instrument of
       international order.’ ”Petersmann (1997, p. 82)

As indicated by Petersmann (1997) and re‡ected in our formal model, observed disputes in
the GATT/WTO therefore correspond not to non-cooperative “law-of-the-jungle trade wars,”
but rather to instances in which the system of rules and procedures set up ex-ante to resolve
disputes is utilized ex post. In the next section we characterize the equilibrium policy and
dispute behavior under these rules and procedures.


4. Analysis

We now derive the equilibrium policy choices and …ling behavior. Earlier we partitioned the
                                                  R
states of the world        into three sets:           , those states for which the …rst-best policy is R
                      P
f = F T; r = Rg;          , those states for which the …rst-best policy is P            f = P; r = F T g; and
 FT
      , those states for which the …rst-best policy is FT               f = F T; r = F T g. It is helpful to
                                   R                                         FT                P
proceed …rst with states in             , and then follow with states in          and …nally       .

4.1. When the …rst-best policy is R
                          R
Consider a state s 2          . We begin by deriving the Stage-2 …ling behavior of Foreign conditional
on a Home policy choice, and then derive the Stage-1 Home policy choice. We will establish
                R
below that in       the relevant policy choice for Home is either R or FT . Given this, the relevant
…ling decision for Foreign is, if Home chooses R, whether or not to …le a non-violation claim
with the DSB. In particular, Foreign …les a non-violation complaint against R if and only if the
expected bene…t to Foreign of …ling exceeds its cost of …ling, that is
                                                                    R
                              Pr(DSB NV ruling is r = F T j             ) b (s) > c ;                   (4.1)

where here and throughout we let Pr( j i ) for i 2 fR; P; FT g denote the probability of an
                                    i
outcome conditional on s 2              . Condition (4.1) is the “…ling” condition for Foreign to invoke

                                                          18
                 R
the DSB in           with a non-violation claim in response to a policy choice by Home of R. Notice
                                                                                  R
that (4.1) re‡ects the fact that, under Assumption 2, for states in                   Home will not alter its
policy choice of R in response to a successful non-violation complaint against it by Foreign,
but will instead pay damages b(s) resulting in a payment b (s) to Foreign. Note also that for
             R
states in        we have Pr(DSB NV ruling is r = F T j s) = q, and so using Assumptions 2 and 3
we may rewrite (4.1) as
                                            c
                                               for s 2 R :
                                                  (s) >                                                           (4.2)
                                             q
                                                                         R
Hence, Foreign …les a non-violation claim against R for s 2                  if and only if the harm from R
su¤ered by Foreign exceeds the threshold described in (4.2).
                                                                                      R
       Next consider the Home government’s Stage-1 policy choice for s 2                  . It is easy to see that
                                              R                                                   R           P
Home will never choose P for s 2                  . This is because by de…nition we have              (s) >       (s) in
 R
     , so the only reason that Home might wish to choose P rather than R would be to induce a
more favorable expected dispute outcome. When (4.2) fails, this is clearly not possible, as the
selection of R does not result in a dispute. And conditional on a dispute over P occurring, the
best that Home could hope for is to face a non-violation claim, and under such a claim Home’s
expected payo¤ is higher under R than under P.25 Hence, when (4.2) holds and Foreign would
…le a non-violation claim against R, Home could only do better by selecting P if by doing so
it could avoid a dispute altogether. But when (4.2) holds, Foreign is guaranteed to bene…t
from launching a dispute over P as well, and so Home cannot avoid a dispute with this policy
selection.26 We may conclude that Home will never choose P for s 2                    R
                                                                                          .
                                                                         R
       This leaves two relevant Home policy options for s 2                  : either R or FT . And Home
chooses R if either (4.2) fails –because then Home can choose R without triggering a dispute
– or if (4.2) holds and the expected bene…t to Home from choosing to implement domestic
regulation exceeds the cost to Home of a DSB dispute:
                                  R       R                                        R          R
 Pr(DSB NV ruling is R j              )       (s) + Pr(DSB NV ruling is F T j          ) [        (s)    b(s)] > c:

To reduce the number of cases and focus on the more interesting ones, we will follow Maggi
  25
      To see this, observe …rst that facing both a violation and a non-violation claim over P is clearly worse
for Home than facing one claim or the other; and between a non-violation claim and a violation claim, Home
can expect to do (weakly) better under the non-violation claim because that claim operates as a liability rule.
Finally, it is straightforward to check that in R Home’s expected payo¤ when it selects R and faces a non-
violation claim (which we present in the text just below) is higher than its expected payo¤ from selecting P and
facing a non-violation claim.
   26
      For example, Foreign’s expected payo¤ from …ling a violation claim against P in R would be q (s) c
     P
if     (s) > 0 and (1 q) (s) c if P (s) 0, both of which are guaranteed to be positive under (4.2).

                                                          19
and Staiger (2011) and assume that for each disputant the cost of a dispute is relatively small.
In particular, here we assume that even in the case of maximal DSB noise, i.e., q ! 1=2, the
                                               R
condition above is satis…ed for s in               :

                                               R                       R
                                                   (s) > 2c for s 2        :                               (Assumption 4)

                                                                                  R
Assumption 4 ensures that Home always chooses R for s 2                                (i.e., when R is the …rst-best
policy) whether or not this triggers a non-violation complaint by Foreign.
          We may now state:

                                   R
Proposition 1. For s 2                 and under Assumption 1-Assumption 3 and Assumption 4, Home
                                                                                       c
chooses R: Foreign …les a non-violation complaint when                         (s) >       q
                                                                                               ; otherwise Foreign does not
…le a complaint.

4.2. When the …rst-best policy is FT
                                  FT
Next we turn to states in              . Again we begin by deriving the Stage-2 …ling behavior of Foreign
conditional on a Home policy choice, and then derive the Stage-1 Home policy choice.27
          If Home chooses R, the relevant …ling decision for Foreign is whether or not to …le a non-
violation claim with the DSB. In particular, if Home chooses R, Foreign …les a non-violation
complaint if and only if the expected bene…t to Foreign of …ling exceeds its cost of …ling, that
is
                                                                      FT
                              Pr(DSB NV ruling is r = F T j                )       (s) > c :                           (4.3)

Condition (4.3) is the “…ling”condition for Foreign to invoke the DSB with a non-violation claim
                                                                                                         FT
in response to a policy choice by the Home government of R for states in                                      . Notice that,
                                                        R
contrary to (4.1) which applies for states in               , (4.3) re‡ects the fact that, under Assumption 2,
                    FT
for states in            Home will alter its policy choice of R in response to a successful non-violation
complaint against it by Foreign (rather than maintaining its policy and paying the required
                                                            FT
damages b(s)). Observing that for states in                      we have Pr(DSB NV ruling is r = F T j s) =
(1 q), we may rewrite (4.3) as (1 q) (s) > c . Again to reduce the number of cases and focus
on the more interesting ones, we assume that …ling costs for Foreign are su¢ ciently small so
     27
     As discussed earlier, the vague contract that covers will unambiguously obligate Home to = F T in a
subset of states in F T . For this subset of states, Home selects = F T and there will be no equilibrium …ling
of either violation or non-violation claims by Foreign. For simplicity of exposition we ignore these states here
and throughout, by in e¤ect assuming that they constitute an insigni…cant number of states.


                                                            20
                                                     FT
that it always …les against R for states in               (i.e., when FT is the …rst-best policy), regardless
of the noise in the DSB signal, or:

                                                                      FT
                                            (s) > 2c for s 2                  :                                  (Assumption 5)

                                                                                  FT
       On the other hand, if Home chooses P for states in                              , then Foreign has more …ling
choices. But it is immediate that Foreign would never (strictly) prefer to …le a non-violation
claim against       = F T for states in         FT
                                                      over a violation claim.28 Moreover, the payo¤ to
                                                                                                                       c
Foreign from …ling a violation complaint will be positive provided that                             (s) >            (1 q)
                                                                                                                           ,   which is
guaranteed by Assumption 5. Hence, the relevant choice for Foreign when Home selects P in
 FT
        is whether to add a non-violation complaint to its violation complaint, which it will do if
and only if
                                                      c                       FT
                                         (s)                    for s 2            :                                                 (4.4)
                                                 (1       q)q
                                                                                                    FT
Therefore, Foreign always …les a violation claim against P for states in                                    , and …les a non-
violation claim as well if the harm to Foreign from P exceeds the threshold described in (4.4).
                                                                                                            FT
       Consider next the Home government’s Stage-1 policy choice for states in                                   . Here, if Home
chooses R, it will face a non-violation complaint from Foreign and can expect the payo¤

                                                                     FT            R
                            Pr(DSB NV ruling is r = R j                   )            (s)    c:

On the other hand, if Home chooses P, then it will face a violation complaint from Foreign if
(4.4) fails and can expect the payo¤

                                                                    FT             P
                             Pr(DSB V ruling is           =P j            )            (s)   c;

while if (4.4) holds then Home will face both a violation and non-violation complaint from
Foreign and can expect the payo¤

                                          FT                                                       FT            P
         Pr(DSB V ruling is      =P j          ) Pr(DSB NV ruling is                     =P j           )            (s)       2c:
  28
     In fact, Foreign is indi¤erent between a violation and a non-violation claim against P in F T , and we break
this indi¤erence in favor of a violation claim. But Foreign’s preference for the violation claim in these states
would be strict if it were assumed that the DSB had even slightly higher accuracy in evaluating violation claims
than in evaluating non-violation claims (due perhaps to the extra guidance o¤ered by the contract in the case of
violation complaints). We choose to conserve on notation with the assumption that DSB accuracy is the same
across violation and non-violation claims, and we then break the resulting Foreign indi¤erence that arises for
this case in favor of the violation claim.



                                                          21
                                                                                                                    FT
   The above payo¤s can be used to characterize the Home policy choice for states in                                     .
When (4.4) fails this characterization is particularly simple, because Home then faces the same
consequences whether it chooses P or R (namely, the …ling of a single complaint by Foreign
which, if successful, will result in FT ), and with Assumption 1 it then follows that Home
chooses P and Foreign …les a violation complaint if

                                                   P           c
                                                       (s) >                                                       (4.5)
                                                               q
and Home chooses FT otherwise.
   When (4.4) holds, Home’s policy choice is more involved, and hinges on the magnitude of
                                                                                                     FT
 , the parameter governing the attractiveness to Home of R relative to P in                               in accordance
                                                                                  q
with Assumption 1. When is low, and speci…cally for 2 (0;                         2
                                                                                    ],   Home will never choose R over
                                              FT
P as a means of policy intervention in             , even though Home’s choice of P will now trigger
the …ling of an additional (violation) claim by Foreign. Rather, in this case Home chooses P
and Foreign …les both a violation and a non-violation complaint if

                                               P               2c
                                                   (s) >                                                           (4.6)
                                                               qq
and Home chooses FT otherwise. At the other extreme, when                                  is high, and speci…cally for
                                                                                                                     FT
 2 [q; 1), Home will always prefer R to P because it is a means of policy intervention in
which can avoid the additional (violation) claim by Foreign. In this case Home chooses R and
Foreign …les a non-violation complaint if

                                               P                c
                                                   (s) >                                                           (4.7)
                                                               q
and Home chooses FT otherwise. Finally, for               in the intermediate range of                2 ( 2q ; q), Home’s
                                              FT                            P
preferred instrument of intervention in                varies with               (s). For this case Home chooses P
and Foreign …les both a violation and a non-violation complaint if

                                          P                    c
                                              (s) >                     ;                                          (4.8)
                                                         q(q        )
Home chooses R and Foreign …les a non-violation complaint if

                                     P                  c    c
                                         (s) 2 (          ;                 );                                     (4.9)
                                                       q q(q            )
and Home chooses FT otherwise.
   We may now state:

                                                        22
                                   FT
Proposition 2. For s 2                     and under Assumption 1-Assumption 3 and Assumption 5,
                         c
(i) when       (s) <   (1 q)q
                                Home chooses either P or FT : Home chooses P and Foreign …les a
violation complaint when          P
                                      (s) > qc ; otherwise Home chooses FT .
                       c
(ii) when      (s)  (1 q)q
                           :
                    q
   (a) if 2 (0; 2 ] Home chooses P and Foreign …les both a violation and a non-violation
                             2c
complaint when P (s) > qq       and Home chooses FT otherwise;
                 q
   (b) if 2 ( 2 ; q) Home chooses P and Foreign …les both a violation and a non-violation
complaint when P (s) > q(qc ) ; Home chooses R and Foreign …les a non-violation complaint
when P (s) 2 ( qc ; q(qc ) ); and Home chooses FT otherwise; and
   (c) if 2 [q; 1) Home chooses R and Foreign …les a non-violation complaint when P (s) > qc
and Home chooses FT otherwise.

4.3. When the …rst-best policy is P
                                      P
Finally we turn to states in              . Once again we …rst derive the Stage-2 …ling behavior of Foreign
conditional on a Home policy choice, and then derive the Stage-1 Home policy choice.29
       If Home selects P, Foreign must choose whether to …le with the DSB a violation claim, a
non-violation claim, both or neither. If Foreign …les a violation complaint alone it can expect
the bene…t
                                                                       P
                                Pr(DSB V ruling is           = FT j        )      (s)    c;

if Foreign …les a non-violation complaint alone, it can expect the bene…t
                                                                       P
                            Pr(DSB NV ruling is               = FT j           ) b (s)   c;

where notice that re‡ected in the above expression is the fact that under Assumption 2 Home
                                                                                                                   P
will choose to maintain P and pay damages under a successful non-violation complaint in                                ;
and if Foreign …les both a violation and a non-violation complaint against Home’s choice of P
it can expect the bene…t

                                             P
  Pr(DSB V ruling is            = FT j           )   (s) +
                                                     P                                            P
             Pr(DSB V ruling is             =P j         ) Pr(DSB NV ruling is           = FT j       ) b (s)   2c :
  29
    As we describe earlier, the vague contract that covers will unambiguously allow = P in a subset of states
in P . For this subset of states, Home selects = P and there will be no equilibrium …ling of either violation
or non-violation claims by Foreign. As before (see note 27), for simplicity of exposition we ignore these states
here and throughout, by in e¤ect assuming that they constitute an insigni…cant number of states.

                                                             23
     These payo¤s can be used to characterize the Foreign …ling behavior if Home selects P.
                                                                                                         P
Using Assumption 3, it is direct to con…rm that for states in                                                , if Home selects P then
Foreign does not …le a complaint if
                                                          c                P
                                               (s)          for s 2                ;                                           (4.10)
                                                          q
Foreign …les a violation complaint alone if
                                               c   c                                            P
                                      (s) 2      ;                       for s 2                    ;                          (4.11)
                                               q (1 q)q
and Foreign …les both a violation and non-violation complaint if
                                                          c                             P
                                         (s)                        for s 2                 :                                  (4.12)
                                                     (1       q)q
                                                                                                P
Hence, Foreign does not …le a complaint against P for s 2                                               if the harm to Foreign from
P is below the threshold described in (4.10), …les a violation claim alone if the harm is in an
intermediate range described in (4.11), and …les both a violation and a non-violation claim if
the harm exceeds the threshold described in (4.12).
     Alternatively, if Home selects R, Foreign must choose whether to …le a non-violation com-
                               R
plaint or do nothing. If           (s) > 0 so that Home’s bene…t from selecting R relative to FT is
larger than the harm caused to Foreign by this policy selection, then Foreign can expect the
bene…t
                                                                               P
                           Pr(DSB NV ruling is r = F T j                               ) b (s)               c

if it …les a non-violation complaint, re‡ecting the fact that under Assumption 2 and with
 R
     (s) > 0 Home will choose to maintain R and pay damages under a successful non-violation
                     R
complaint. And if        (s)   0 so that Home’s bene…t from selecting R relative to FT is smaller
than the harm caused to Foreign by this policy selection, then Foreign can expect the bene…t
                                                                               P
                           Pr(DSB NV ruling is r = F T j                           )            (s)          c

if it …les a non-violation complaint; re‡ected here is the fact that under Assumption 2 and with
 R
     (s)   0 Home will choose to remove R under a successful non-violation complaint.
     These payo¤s can be used to characterize the Foreign …ling behavior if Home selects R.
                                                                    P                  R
Proceeding as before, we have that for states in                        , if               (s) > 0 then Foreign …les a non-
violation complaint against R if and only if
                                                          c                    P
                                               (s) >         for s 2               ;                                           (4.13)
                                                           q

                                                              24
                R
while if            (s)           0 then Foreign …les a non-violation complaint against R if and only if
                                                                           c                                P
                                                        (s) >                         for s 2                   :                                             (4.14)
                                                                      (1       q)
                                                                                                                                                              P
      We may now summarize the Foreign government’s Stage-2 …ling behavior for s 2                                                                                . In
e¤ect, as            (s) rises, Foreign’s …ling behavior becomes increasingly aggressive: Foreign does not
                                                    c                                   c
…le against P or R for                      (s)   (1 q)
                                                        ;    for      (s) 2                ;c
                                                                                      (1 q) q
                                                                                                            Foreign does not …le against P, but
                                                                                                                                      c
…les a non-violation claim against R if and only if                                        R
                                                                                               (s)          0; for        (s) 2        q
                                                                                                                                           ; cq       Foreign …les
                                                                                                                                                        R
a violation claim against P, and …les a non-violation claim against R if and only if                                                                        (s)     0;
                      c             c
for        (s) 2          q
                              ;   (1 q)q
                                            Foreign …les a violation claim against P and …les a non-violation claim
                                                    c
against R ; and for                        (s)    (1 q)q
                                                         ,    Foreign …les both a violation and a non-violation claim
against P and …les a non-violation claim against R.
                                                                                                                                                  P
      Consider next the Home government’s Stage-1 policy choice for states in                                                                         . As above
to reduce the number of cases and focus on the more interesting ones, we assume that c is
su¢ ciently small so that, even in the case of maximal DSB noise, i.e. if the DSB ‡ips a coin,
                                                                 P
Home would prefer P to FT for s 2                                    (i.e., when P is the …rst-best policy) whether or not
this triggers a (violation or violation-plus-non-violation) complaint. It is straightforward to
check that this is guaranteed by:

                                                             P                                      P
                                                                 (s) > 8c for s 2                       :                                    (Assumption 6)

With Assumption 6, the remaining question is then whether Home chooses P or rather R for
                 P                                                                    c
states in            . Certainly Home chooses P if                         (s)         q
                                                                                           , because then Home can choose P without
triggering a dispute. The more di¢ cult question is determining when Home would choose R
                                                                                                                               c
to avoid a dispute over P. This possibility can only arise if                                                         (s) >     q
                                                                                                                                    , and to proceed it is
                                                                                 R                                                                      R
useful to describe separately the case where                                         (s) > 0 and then the case where                                        (s)     0.
In each case, the incentive for Home to choose R to avoid a dispute over P varies with the
aggressiveness of Foreign’s …ling behavior.
            R
      If        (s) > 0, Home’s bene…t from selecting R relative to FT is larger than the harm caused
                                                                                 c
to Foreign by this policy selection. For                             (s) 2        q
                                                                                      ; cq we know that Home’s choice of P would
be met by a violation claim and hence yield the Home expected payo¤

                                                                                                P               P
                                             Pr(DSB V ruling is                  =P j               )               (s)   c;



                                                                               25
                                                                                                               R
while a choice of R would not trigger a dispute and therefore yield                                                    (s). This implies that in
this case Home chooses P if
                                                  R                                   P
                                                      (s) < (1                  q)        (s)     c                                                   (4.15)
                                                        c             c
and chooses R otherwise. For                (s) 2           q
                                                                ;   (1 q)q
                                                                                     , Home’s choice of P would again be met by
a violation claim but a choice of R would now trigger a non-violation claim and hence (using
 R
     (s) > 0) yield the Home expected payo¤

                                             R                  P                                                                    P         R
Pr(DSB NV ruling is r = R j s)                   (s 2               )+Pr(DSB NV ruling is r = F T j                                      )[        (s) b(s)] c;

implying that in this case Home chooses P if

                                             R                                   P
                                                 (s) < (1                q)          (s) + q (s)                                                      (4.16)

                                                                                           c
and chooses R otherwise. And …nally, for                                 (s)             (1 q)q
                                                                                                  Home’s choice of R would continue
to be met by a non-violation claim, but now a choice of P would trigger both a violation and
                                                                        R
a non-violation claim yielding (again using                                 (s) > 0)

                                         P                                                                     P           P
  Pr(DSB V ruling is          =P j           ) Pr(DSB NV ruling is                                    =P j         )           (s) +
                                         P                                                                         P           P
  Pr(DSB V ruling is          =P j           ) Pr(DSB NV ruling is                                    = FT j           ) [         (s)        b(s)]       2c;

and implying that in this case Home chooses P if

                                        R                                   P
                                            (s) < (1                q)          (s)       c + qq (s)                                                  (4.17)

and Home chooses R otherwise.
                         R
     Alternatively, if       (s)   0, Home’s bene…t from selecting R relative to FT is smaller than
                                                                                                               c             c
the harm caused to Foreign by this policy selection. For                                              (s) 2     q
                                                                                                                       ;   (1 q)q
                                                                                                                                         Home’s choice
of P would be met by a violation claim while a choice of R would be met by a non-violation
                                        R
claim, but in this case (using              (s)        0, which implies that Home would now remove R under
                                                                                                                                                            c
a successful non-violation complaint) Home always chooses P. And …nally, for                                                              (s)             (1 q)q
Home’s choice of R would be met by a non-violation claim and a choice of P would trigger
                                                                                                                                                R
both a violation and a non-violation claim, implying that in this case (and using                                                                   (s)      0)
Home chooses P if
                                                                    P
                                   R              (1    q)              (s)          c     (1     q)q (s)
                                       (s) <                                                                                                          (4.18)
                                                                                     q
and Home chooses R otherwise.

                                                                         26
       We may now state:

                                                        P
Proposition 3. For s 2                                      and under Assumption 1-Assumption 3 and Assumption 6,
                R
(i) when            (s) > 0, Home chooses either P or R:
                               c
       (a) if       (s)         q
                                        Home chooses P and Foreign does not …le a complaint;
                                            c
       (b) if       (s) 2                    q
                                                 ; cq       Home chooses P and Foreign …les a violation complaint when
 R                         P
     (s) < (1        q)        (s)               c, otherwise Home chooses R and Foreign does not …le a complaint;
                                    c              c
       (c) if       (s) 2               q
                                            ;    (1 q)q
                                                             Home chooses P and Foreign …les a violation complaint when
 R                          P
     (s) < (1         q)        (s) + q (s), otherwise Home chooses R and Foreign …les a non-violation
complaint; and
                               c
       (d) if   (s)          (1 q)q
                                                  Home chooses P and Foreign …les both a violation and a non-violation
                            R                                     P
complaint when                  (s) < (1                     q)       (s)   c + qq (s), otherwise Home chooses R and Foreign
…les a non-violation complaint.
                R
(ii) when           (s)         0, Home chooses either P or R:
                               c
       (a) if       (s)         q
                                        Home chooses P and Foreign does not …le a complaint;
                               c
       (b) if       (s) 2       q
                                  ; (1c q)q Home chooses P and Foreign …les a violation complaint; and
                                c
       (c) if   (s)          (1 q)q
                                      Home chooses P and Foreign …les both a violation and a non-violation
                                            P
complaint when              R
                              (s) < (1 q) (s) cq (1 q)q (s) , otherwise Home chooses R and Foreign …les a
non-violation complaint.

4.4. Summary

Observe that, according to Propositions 1-3, the outcome for a given state s is the …rst-
best/e¢ cient outcome if and only if there is no dispute in state s, and there will be no dispute
in state s if and only if the DSB is su¢ ciently accurate (low q).30 That is, as Propositions 1-3
con…rm, when a dispute arises in this model, it is because one of the parties is acting oppor-
tunistically to exploit the absence of a complete contract and the inaccuracy of the DSB rulings:
either the Foreign country is attempting to force free trade (or the payment of compensation)
with an incorrect DSB ruling when the Home-country intervention is in fact e¢ cient, or the
Home country is attempting to “get away with”intervention with an incorrect DSB ruling when
  30
    We note as well that this property is shared by Maggi and Staiger (2011), conditional on the vague contract
and interpretive DSB mandate, but Maggi and Staiger also emphasize that it need not hold globally once the
choice of contract and DSB mandate is optimized with respect to q.


                                                                                27
free trade is in fact the e¢ cient policy. An implication of this observation is that the clearest
e¢ ciency-enhancing role of the DSB occurs o¤-equilibrium.
   In addition to the DSB error rate q, note also that the dispute costs c and c , the transfer
cost parameter         and the policy substitution parameter             all help to determine our model’s
predictions about the frequency of disputes and the kinds of claims …led. In the next section we
seek to characterize ranges for these parameters that would yield model predictions consistent
with the stylized features of violation and non-violation claims in GATT/WTO disputes as
described in section 2, and thereby use our model to o¤er an explanation for these features.


5. What Explains the Features of Violation and Non-Violation Claims
   in the GATT/WTO?

Armed with the characterization of equilibrium policy choices and …ling behavior contained
in Propositions 1-3, we are ready to consider the model’s predictions about the frequency of
violation and non-violation claims and rulings and their rates of success. We …rst de…ne the
relevant probability measures according to our model.
  We begin with the probability of observing non-violation claims and rulings. Letting mR
P            P
                  P                  FT
                                            P
 s2 R p(s), m       s2 P p(s) and m           s2 F T p(s) denote respectively the probability
               R       P         FT
of states in       ,       and        , Propositions 1-3 imply that the probability of observing a non-
violation claim –either alone or in combination with a violation claim –can be written as

  mN V claim = mR Pr(fR : N V gj            R
                                                ) + mP [Pr(fR : N V gj     P
                                                                               ) + Pr(fP : V &N V gj   P
                                                                                                           )]
                                                + mF T [Pr(fR : N V gj      FT
                                                                                 ) + Pr(fP : V &N V gj     FT
                                                                                                                )];

where fR : N V g denotes the outcome in which Home chooses R and Foreign …les a non-
violation complaint and fP : V &N V g denotes the outcome in which Home chooses P and
Foreign …les both a violation and a non-violation complaint. Recalling that, in disputes where
both a violation and a non-violation claim are …led, a ruling on the non-violation claim occurs
if and only if the ruling on the violation claim goes against the Foreign (claimant) government,
we may write the probability of observing a non-violation ruling as

  mN V rule = mR Pr(fR : N V gj           R
                                              ) + mP [Pr(fR : N V gj   P
                                                                           ) + (1    q) Pr(fP : V &N V gj        P
                                                                                                                      )]
                                           + mF T [Pr(fR : N V gj      FT
                                                                            ) + q Pr(fP : V &N V gj        FT
                                                                                                                )]:


                                                         28
       Turning to the probability of observing violation claims and rulings, notice that as our model
abstracts from settlement, every violation claim will be ruled upon by the DSB, regardless of
whether it is …led alone or in combination with a non-violation claim.31 Hence the probabilities
of observing violation claims and rulings are one and the same, and according to Propositions
1-3, this probability can be written as

  mV claim = mV rule = mP [Pr(fP : V gj          P
                                                     ) + Pr(fP : V &N V gj       P
                                                                                     )]
                                               + mF T [Pr(fP : V gj         FT
                                                                                 ) + Pr(fP : V &N V gj   FT
                                                                                                              )]:

       Finally, we de…ne the probability of a dispute (with a claim of any kind):

  Dispute = mR Pr(fR : N V gj          R
                                           )+mP [Pr(fR : N V gj      P
                                                                         )+Pr(fP : V gj   P
                                                                                              )+Pr(fP : V &N V gj    P
                                                                                                                         )]
                       + mFT [Pr(fR : N V gj       FT
                                                        ) + Pr(fP : V gj    FT
                                                                                 ) + Pr(fP : V &N V gj   FT
                                                                                                              )]:

Throughout we restrict our attention to parameter ranges under which Dispute > 0. With
this we may then de…ne the share of disputes that include a non-violation claim by sN V claim
mN V claim                                                                                             mN V rule
 Dispute
           ,   and the share of disputes that result in a non-violation ruling by sN V rule            Dispute
                                                                                                                 .

5.1. Frequency

With the relevant probability measures de…ned, we now turn to a consideration of model pa-
rameters under which the model predictions would be consistent with the stylized features of
GATT/WTO disputes described in section 2. We begin with the relative frequency of non-
violation claims and rulings. As summarized in section 2, in this regard two features stand
out: relative to the number of GATT/WTO disputes in which a ruling on any kind of claim
occurred, (i) the number of these disputes in which a ruling on the non-violation claim occurred
is small, and (ii) the number of these disputes in which a non-violation claim was made is not
small. As observed above, in our model a dispute always results in a ruling of some kind; and
  31
     As we have already observed (see note 8) and as Busch and Reinhardt (2000) emphasize, settlement is
an important phenomenon in GATT/WTO disputes. It is therefore possible that the paucity of non-violation
rulings as described in section 2 could be accounted for by higher settlement rates in disputes involving non-
violation claims. In this regard, Maggi and Staiger (2012) provide evidence that, over the WTO-era, settlement
rates have indeed been higher in disputes involving non-violation claims than for the typical violation claim; but
they also provide evidence that during the GATT era, the reverse is true, with lower settlement rates in disputes
involving non-violation claims than for the typical violation claim. Hence, the settlement margin cannot account
for the paucity of non-violation rulings over the full GATT/WTO period. We therefore feel justi…ed abstracting
from settlement here in order to focus on other distinctive features of the comparison between violation and
non-violation claims, though a more complete account would of course incorporate both of these distinctions.

                                                         29
so the …rst feature translates into the model prediction that sN V rule is small, while the second
feature translates into the model prediction that sN V claim is not small. Or equivalently, these
two features can be stated as the model prediction that sN V rule is small while [sN V claim sN V rule ]
is not small. We therefore look for parameter ranges that can deliver these model predictions.
We assume that mR >> 0, mP >> 0 and mF T >> 0, but beyond this we place no restrictions
on the relative probabilities of states where the various intervention possibilities are …rst best.
    To see what is required for our model to deliver [sN V claim                                                sN V rule ] not small, we express
[sN V claim   sN V rule ] as

                                     (1        q) mFT Pr(fP : V &N V gj                       FT
                                                                                                   )        q mP Pr(fP : V &N V gj                     P
                                                                                                                                                           )
[sN V claim    sN V rule ] =                                                                           +                                                       :
                                                      Dispute                                                      Dispute
As this expression makes clear, the possibility that a non-violation claim will not be ruled upon
arises in the model only for disputes where both violation and non-violation claims are …led.
The …rst term on the right-hand side re‡ects the share of disputes for which the non-violation
claim is not ruled upon because the DSB correctly ruled on the violation claim against the
                                                             FT
Home government’s choice of P in                                  , while the second term re‡ects the share of disputes
for which the non-violation claim is not ruled upon because the DSB incorrectly ruled on the
                                                                                                            P
violation claim against the Home government’s choice of P in                                                    .
    Evidently, to generate [sN V claim                         sN V rule ] not small and recalling that q 2 (0; 1=2), we
              Pr(fP:V &N V gj         FT   )                                 q Pr(fP:V &N V gj P )
must have           Dispute
                                               not small and/or                    Dispute
                                                                                                   not small. On the other hand,
                                                     Pr(fR:N V gj   R)       Pr(fR:N V gj ) Pr(fP:V &N V gj P ) Pr(fR:N V gj F T )
                                                                                         P
for sN V rule small, we must have                        Dispute
                                                                         ,       Dispute
                                                                                            ,       Dispute
                                                                                                               ,    Dispute
                                                                                                                                   and
q Pr(fP:V &N V gj   FT   )
       Dispute
                                 each small. With these observations, a corollary to Propositions 1-3 follows:

Corollary. As implied by Propositions 1-3, sN V rule is small and [sN V claim                                                             sN V rule ] is not
                                                                                       Pr(fR:N V gj    R)        Pr(fR:N V gj   P)       Pr(fP:V &N V gj   P)
small if and only if the following conditions hold:                                        Dispute
                                                                                                            ,        Dispute
                                                                                                                                     ,        Dispute
      Pr(fR:N V gj   FT      )                            Pr(fP:V &N V gj     FT   )
and       Dispute
                                 are each small;                Dispute
                                                                                       is not small; and q is small.

                                                                                                           Pr(fP:V &N V gj F T )
Notice that the conditions for small sN V rule imply that it must be                                             Dispute
                                                                                                                                 not small
                                                                                                Pr(fP:V &N V gj F T )
that accounts for [sN V claim                    sN V rule ] not small,            and with            Dispute
                                                                                                                      not small it then
                                                                                   q Pr(fP:V &N V gj F T )
follows that we must have q small to ensure that                                          Dispute
                                                                                                           and hence sN V rule is small.
                         Pr(fP:V &N V gj        FT   )
Intuitively, with              Dispute
                                                         not small and q small, we would then observe signi…cant num-
bers of disputes with both violation and non-violation claims …led, but only on rare occasions
will the DSB rule against the Foreign (claimant) government on the violation complaint in these
disputes and move on to a ruling on the non-violation complaint.

                                                                             30
      We next consider the parameter ranges that can deliver the conditions on outcomes identi…ed
                                                                                                                                           Pr(fR:N V gj         R)
in the Corollary to Propositions 1-3. Consider …rst the requirement that                                                                       Dispute
                                                                                                                                                                        is small.
                                                                                                                                                                               R
To formalize this requirement, we de…ne ~ R (L) according to the condition Pr( (s) > ~ j                                                                                           )=
                                                                                                                                                                R
L for arbitrary L 2 (0; 1). Using Proposition 1, it then follows that Pr(fR : N V gj                                                                                )         L pro-
                            c                                                                                                                                                  P
vided                  q ~ R (L)
                                      . Similarly, if we de…ne ~ P (L) according to the condition Pr( (s) > ~ j                                                                    )=
                                                                                                        P                                                                 P
L, then using Proposition 3 it follows that Pr(fR : N V gj ) L and Pr(fP : V &N V gj ) L
provided            c
                 q ~ P (L)
                           . Therefore, de…ning ~( cq ; L) min[1; min[ q ~c (L) ; q ~c (L) ]] and noting
                                                                          R          P

that ~( c ; L) is weakly increasing in L and strictly positive for L 2 (0; 1), we have that
          q
Pr(fR:N V gj           R)                                         P)                          &N V gj P )
    Dispute
                                         L
                                      Dispute
                                              , Pr(fR:N V gj
                                                    Dispute
                                                                            L
                                                                         Dispute
                                                                                  and Pr(fP:V
                                                                                           Dispute
                                                                                                             L
                                                                                                          Dispute
                                                                                                                  are assured for
arbitrarily small L > 0 provided that                                     ~( c ; L). Hence, non-violation claims …led against P
                                                                              q
                                            P              R
or R will be rare in                            and            provided that             is su¢ ciently small.
                                                                Pr(fR:N V gj   FT   )                          Pr(fP:V &N V gj              FT   )
      We also need to ensure that                                   Dispute
                                                                                        is small and                 Dispute
                                                                                                                                                     is not small. To
                                                                                                                                            FT
this end, we de…ne ~ FT (H) according to the condition Pr( (s) > ~ j                                                                             ) = H for an ar-
                                                                                                   Pr(fP:V &N V gj          FT   )
bitrary H 2 (0; 1). According to Proposition 2, for                                                      Dispute
                                                                                                                                     not small we must have
                   c
Pr(    (s)    (1       q)q
                           j    FT   )                                                             Pr( (s) (1 c q)q j        FT      )        H
         Dispute
                                         not small, and we are assured that                                 Dispute                         Dispute
                                                                                                                                                           provided that
c       (1             q)q ~ FT (H)                 c~ (q; H). Note that c~ (q; H) is weakly decreasing in H and strictly
positive for H 2 (0; 1). Next we denote by ~ F T the set of s 2                                                             FT
                                                                                                                                     for which              (s)                 c
                                                                                                                                                                              (1 q)q
                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                              Pr( qc <      P (s)<c
                                                                                                                                      j~ F T           )
and with this de…ne ~(c; q; L) according to the condition                                                                 P
                                                                                                                               q(q
                                                                                                                               c FT
                                                                                                                   Pr( (s)> q j~
                                                                                                                                    )
                                                                                                                                       )
                                                                                                                                                            = L, where
   c                                                                                      Pr( qc   <   P (s)<
                                                                                                          q   q(q
                                                                                                                 c
                                                                                                                     )
                                                                                                                       j~ FT )

q(q )
          = 1 for                        q is understood. Note that       Pr(
                                                                                          equals 0 for       and
                                                                                                       P (s)> c j~ F T )
                                                                                                          2   q

equals 1 for                        = 1, so ~(c; q; L) drops to 2q as L drops to 0. Observing from Proposition 2
                                                                                                                                                           FT
that Pr(fR : N V gj FT )     Pr(fR : N V gj~ F T ), it now follows that Pr(fR:N V gj
                                                                            Dispute
                                                                                     )    L
                                                                                       Dispute
is assured by     ~(c; q; L). Hence, non-violation claims …led against R will be rare in F T
provided that                        is su¢ ciently small.
                                                                                                                                                                                 c
                                    Pr(fP:V &N V gj   FT   )                                                                                               Pr(          (s)    (1 q)q
                                                                                                                                                                                      j FT   )
      Finally, for                        Dispute
                                                               not small we have already noted that we must have                                                         Dispute
                                                                                                                                         P (s)   2c F T
                                                                                                                                 Pr(             qq
                                                                                                                                                    j~      )
H, which is assured by c                                        c~ (q; H); but we must also have                                          Dispute
                                                                                                                                                                    not small,
                                                                                               Pr(     P (s)>~ j~ F T   )
and de…ning ~ PFT (H) according to the condition                                                       Dispute
                                                                                                                             = H we are assured that
      P (s)   2c F T
Pr(           qq
                 j~             )          H                                        qq   ~P    (H)
       Dispute                           Dispute
                                                    provided that c                       FT
                                                                                           2
                                                                                                            c~(q; H), with c~(q; H) decreasing in
H and strictly positive for H 2 (0; 1). Hence, c       c~ (q; H) and c c~(q; H) then ensure that
Pr(fP:V &N V gj F T ) H2             ~(c; q; L) for L su¢ ciently close to 0. And for H su¢ ciently
        Dispute
                           when           Dispute
close to 1 and L su¢ ciently close to 0 we then have mN V claim                                                     mF T . In words, when c and c
                                                                                                                   FT
are su¢ ciently small there will be a dispute in every state in                                                             , and for                su¢ ciently small


                                                                                    31
these disputes will all involve the …ling of a violation and a non-violation claim against the
Home choice of P.
    We may now state:

                                                                                    FT
Proposition 4.        For any sN V rule > 0 and [sN V claim    sN V rule ] 2 (0; mPm+mF T ), there exists a
q~ > 0 and an L 2 (0; 1) and H 2 (0; 1) such that

(i) sN V rule   sN V rule and
(ii) [sN V claim   sN V rule ]   [sN V claim   sN V rule ]

whenever q 2 (0; q~), c 2 (0; c~ (q; H)), c 2 (0; c~(q; H)),   2 (0; ~( cq ; L)) and     2 (0; ~(c; q; L)).

According to Proposition 4, the relative infrequency of non-violation rulings in GATT/WTO
disputes is primarily a re‡ection of two underlying forces. The …rst re‡ects features of the
GATT/WTO institutional environment: due to the levels of compensation speci…ed under
GATT/WTO rules (self-help reciprocity) and the ine¢ ciency of GATT/WTO compensation
mechanisms (low ), the payo¤ for a government to bring a non-violation complaint against
                                                                                R          P
another’s policy that it knows is e¢ cient from a global perspective (in            and        ) –and hence
understands will not result in the removal of the policy but at best only lead to compensation
through authorized retaliation –is low. The second re‡ects features of the policy environment:
due to the poor substitute that domestic regulation provides relative to border measures as a
means of terms-of-trade manipulation (low ), the payo¤ for a government to utilize domes-
tic regulation rather than border measures when laissez faire would be globally e¢ cient (in
 FT
      ) is low. Together these features help to keep the frequency of non-violation rulings low.
And given these features, the relatively common occurrence of non-violation claims …led as
opposed to ruled upon then re‡ects the relatively low dispute costs (low c and low c ) and
relatively high DSB accuracy (low q), which together ensure that there are substantial numbers
                                                                                                        FT
of GATT/WTO disputes that involve opportunistic policy intervention (the use of P, in                         )
and elicit the …ling of both violation and non-violation claims which usually end in a (correct)
DSB ruling on the violation claim against the policy intervention.
    Finally, of particular relevance in light of the relative paucity of observed rulings on non-
violation claims in GATT/WTO disputes is the case described by Proposition 4 as L approaches
0. Under mild regularity conditions on the distribution of (s) we can ensure that limL!0 ~ R (L)
and limL!0 ~ P (L) are …nite, and we may then de…ne ~0 ( cq ) limL!0 ~( cq ; L) with ~0 ( cq ) > 0.

                                                         32
With this and recalling that ~(c; q; L) drops to                     q
                                                                     2
                                                                         as L drops to 0, we may state the following:

                                                                          FT
Corollary. For any [sN V claim               sN V rule ] 2 (0; mPm+mF T ), there exists a q > 0 and an H 2 (0; 1)
such that

(i) sN V rule is arbitrarily close to 0 and

(ii) [sN V claim     sN V rule ]    [sN V claim        sN V rule ]

whenever q 2 (0; q), c 2 (0; c (q; H)), c 2 (0; c(q; H)),                       2 (0; ~0 ( cq )) and   2 (0; 2q ).

5.2. Success

We turn next to success rates. According to Propositions 1-3, the probability of a successful
violation claim conditional on a DSB ruling on the violation claim is given by

                 mP [Pr(fP : V gj        P
                                         ) + Pr(fP : V &N V gj P )]
  V success =                                                       q
                                         mV rule
                                         mFT [Pr(fP : V gj F T ) + Pr(fP : V &N V gj                        FT
                                                                                                                 )]
                                       +                                                                              (1   q):
                                                              mV rule
The probability of a successful violation claim is a weighted average of q –the probability that
the DSB “gets it wrong” – and (1                   q) – the probability that the DSB “gets it right” – with
                                                                                            P          FT
weights that re‡ect the relative frequency of disputes that arise in                            and         respectively and
include a violation claim (because a violation claim is always ruled upon by the DSB).
     To express the probability of a successful non-violation claim conditional on a DSB ruling
on the non-violation claim, we …rst denote by ~ P1 the set of s 2                           P
                                                                                                for which     R
                                                                                                                  (s) > 0 and
by   ~ P2   the set of s 2    P
                                   for which       R
                                                       (s)      0, corresponding to the sets of states associated
                                                         ~ P1 and m
with Proposition 3(i) and 3(ii) respectively. And we let m        ~ P2 denote the probability of
states in ~ P1 and ~ P2 respectively. With this, the probability of a successful non-violation claim
conditional on a DSB ruling on the non-violation claim is given by

                   mR Pr(fR : N V gj           R
                                                   ) + mP (1  q) Pr(fP : V &N V gj P ) + m~ P1 Pr(fR : N V gj~ P1 )
  N V success =                                                                                                     q
                                                                  mN V rule
     ~ P2 Pr(fR : N V gj~ P2 ) + mFT
     m                                        [Pr(fR : N V gj F T ) + q Pr(fP : V &N V gj F T )]
+                                                                                                (1 q):
                                                  mN V rule
The probability of a successful non-violation claim is also a weighted average of q and (1                                   q),
but notice that here the weights re‡ect the frequency of rulings on the non-violation claim –


                                                                 33
as distinct from the frequency of disputes that include a non-violation claim – that occur in,
respectively,           R
                             or     P
                                            for fP : V &N V g or ~ P1 for fR : N V g, and ~ P2 for fR : N V g or                                      FT
                                                                                                                                                           .
      As described in section 2, the success rate of violation claims in GATT/WTO disputes is
fairly high while that of non-violation claims is very low. Hence, we look for model parameter
ranges within those described in Proposition 4 that deliver V success high and N V success low.
  To this end, consider the subset of parameters described by Proposition 4 for which cq <
max[~ (L); ~ (L)], implying ~( c ; L) < 1. For this subset of parameters, by Proposition 3
         R            P                                  q
             ~ > 0 such that when < ~( c ; L)
there exists L                               ~ we must have Pr(fR : N V gj~ P2 ) = 0. And
                                          q
for close to ~( c ; L)
                    ~ we must also have max[Pr(fR : N V gj R ); Pr(fP : V &N V gj P ); Pr(fR :
                             q
                                                                         q
N V gj~ P1 )] > 0. Finally, recall that                           <      2
                                                                              is always within the parameter ranges described in
                                                    q                                                                                          FT
Proposition 4, and when                         <   2
                                                        we have from Proposition 2(ii) that Pr(fR : N V gj                                          ) = 0.
                                        q
      Therefore, for              <     2
                                            and q su¢ ciently small, within this subset of parameters it must be that
~P
m     Pr(fR:N V    gj~ P
                       2 )                    mF T [Pr(fR:N V gj         FT)+q Pr(fP:V &N V gj     FT   )]
  2
       mN V rule
                             = 0 and                                     mN V rule
                                                                                                             approaches 0 so that the prob-
                                                                                   success
ability weight on (1                    q) in the expression for N V                         goes to 0, while the probability weight
                                                                  mR Pr(fR:N V gj        R )+mP   (1 q) Pr(fP:V &N V gj           P )+m
                                                                                                                                      ~P   Pr(fR:N V gj~ P
                                                                                                                                                         1 )
on q in the expression for N V success ,                                                                mN V rule
                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                               ,
remains strictly positive; and therefore N V success must approach q. What does this parameter
range imply for V success ? That will depend on the magnitude of Pr(fP : V &N V gj                                                              FT
                                                                                                                                                     ). This
probability will approach 1 for parameters described by Proposition 4 that are associated with
                                                              mF T                                   mF T [Pr(fP:V gj           FT )+Pr(fP:V &N V gj F T )]
[sN V claim        sN V rule ] approaching                   Dispute
                                                                     ,   and for that case                                       mV rule
                    mF T                                                                                                          mP               FT
approaches         mV rule
                           ,      implying in turn that V success must then be larger than                                      mP +mF T
                                                                                                                                          q+ mPm+mF T
(1     q), which will itself approach (1                            q) if mF T >> mP .
      We summarize with:

                                                                                                                        FT
Proposition 5. For any sN V rule > 0 and [sN V claim sN V rule ] 2 (0; mPm+mF T ), and for 2 (0; 2q )
and q > 0 but su¢ ciently small, there exists a ^ 2 (0; ~( cq ; L)) and an L~ > 0 with L 2 (0; L)~
and H 2 (0; 1) such that

(i) sN V rule         sN V rule ,

(ii) [sN V claim             sN V rule ]        [sN V claim         sN V rule ],

(iii) N V success is arbitrarily close to q, and
                                                                                                             h              i              h               i
                                                          mF T                                                     mF T                          mP
(iv) for [sN V claim               sN V rule ] !        mP +mF T
                                                                      , V success ! V success >                  mP +mF T
                                                                                                                                 (1 q)+        mP +mF T
                                                                                                                                                               q

whenever c 2 (0; c~ (q; H)), c 2 (0; c~(q; H)),                                c
                                                                                q
                                                                                               ~ ~ (L)]
                                                                                    < max[~ R (L); P
                                                                                                     ~ and                        2 (^; ~( cq ; L)).
                                                                                                                                                ~

                                                                                    34
As Proposition 5 indicates, the substantive additional parameter restrictions under which our
model predicts V success high and N V success low are that                      and q are su¢ ciently small within the
                                                                                                                                     FT
ranges described by Proposition 4. The low                      ensures that the probability Pr(fR : N V gj                               )
                                                                                                                      R
is su¢ ciently small relative to at least one of the probabilities Pr(fR : N V gj                                         ), Pr(fP :
V &N V gj   P
                ), and Pr(fR : N V        gj~ P1 ),   and the low q ensures that the probability q Pr(fP :
V &N V gj   FT
                 ) is also su¢ ciently low (with the low L ensuring that Pr(fR : N V gj~ P2 ) = 0).
                                                                                        FT
    In e¤ect, under these conditions most disputes occur in                                  where the Home country is
                                                                                                 R         P
attempting to “get away with”violating the contract rather than in                                   or        where the Foreign
country is attempting to force free trade (or the payment of compensation); and as a result of
this selection of disputes, when an accurate DSB rules on a violation claim it will mostly rule
in favor of the Foreign government (claimant), making V success high. But this selection e¤ect
loses its force with respect to rulings on non-violation claims, because the non-violation claim
will only be ruled upon in these disputes in the rare instance when the violation claim is not
successful, and so non-violation claims will rarely be ruled upon precisely when they too would
have the highest chance of winning. This “censoring”keeps N V success low.
    Finally, as with Proposition 4, we may also state the following Corollary to Proposition 5:

                                                                           FT
Corollary.                          sN V rule ] 2 (0; mPm+mF T ), and for 2 (0; 2q ) and q > 0 but
                   For any [sN V claim
su¢ ciently small, there exists an H 2 (0; 1) such that for ! ~0 ( cq ) from above,

(i) sN V rule is arbitrarily close to 0,

(ii) [sN V claim     sN V rule ]   [sN V claim        sN V rule ],

(iii) N V success is arbitrarily close to q, and
                                                                                    h                i                h              i
                                           mF T                                           mF T                              mP
(iv) for [sN V claim      sN V rule ] !   Dispute
                                                  ,   V success ! V success >           mP +mF T
                                                                                                          (1   q) +       mP +mF T
                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                     c
whenever c 2 (0; c (q; H)), c 2 (0; c(q; H)) and                      q
                                                                          < max[limL!0 ~ R (L); limL!0 ~ P (L)].


6. Assessing the Importance of the Non-Violation Clause

We next use our model to shed light on the nature and importance of the role that the non-
violation clause plays in the existing GATT/WTO system as we have modeled it. To this end in
this section we ask how the institution would perform if the non-violation clause were removed
and no other changes to the institution were made. It is important to distinguish this question


                                                                35
   from a related but more ambitious question that we do not attempt to answer here, namely, the
   extent to which the performance of the institution would su¤er if the non-violation clause were
   removed and the institution were re-optimized without it. While an answer to that question is
   beyond the scope of the present paper, an answer to the more limited question that we pose
   here is also valuable, as it can help to illuminate the role that the non-violation clause may be
   playing in the current system.32
          Formally, we now consider the following timing for the model absent the non-violation clause:


Stage 0. The state s is realized.

Stage 1. Home chooses               2 fF T; P g and r 2 fF T; Rg.

Stage 2. Foreign decides whether to …le a violation complaint with the DSB.

                                                             DSB
Stage 3. If invoked, the DSB issues a ruling                       2 fF T; P g.

Stage 4. Payo¤s are realized.


   As before, we characterize the subgame perfect equilibrium of this game.
          Following analogous steps to those described in the previous section, it is direct to establish:

   Proposition 6.              Absent the non-violation clause, under Assumption 1-Assumption 6 the
   equilibrium policy choices and …ling behavior are as follows:
                    R
   (i) For s 2          Home chooses R, and Foreign does not …le a complaint.
                     FT                                                 P                c
   (ii) For s 2           Home chooses either P or R: if                    (s) >   (q       )
                                                                                                 Home chooses P and Foreign
   …les a violation complaint; otherwise, Home chooses R and Foreign does not …le a complaint.
                     P                                                         c
   (iii) For s 2          Home chooses either P or R: if               (s)      q
                                                                                    Home chooses P and Foreign does
                                               c
   not …le a complaint; if             (s) >    q
                                                    Home chooses P and Foreign …les a violation complaint when
    R                     P
        (s) < (1    q)        (s)     c, otherwise Home chooses R and Foreign does not …le a complaint.

                                                     R
   These outcomes are intuitive. In                      Home always chooses R and Foreign has no basis to …le
                           FT
   a complaint. In                  Home chooses P and triggers a dispute as long as Home’s payo¤ from P
     32
        As will become clear below, we do not attempt to quantify the value of the non-violation clause, along the
   lines for example of the quanti…cation exercise in Ossa (2011). Rather our goal here is simply to assess whether
   an important role for the non-violation clause could be consistent with its weak observed performance measures.

                                                                36
is above a threshold level, while below this level Home chooses R to avoid the dispute. And in
 P
      Home chooses P when the harm to Foreign is insu¢ cient to generate a dispute, but when
a dispute over P would arise Home switches to a choice of R to avoid the dispute as long as
Home’s payo¤ from R is above a threshold level.
      Notice that, in contrast to our results in Propositions 1-3 where the non-violation claim is
available, Proposition 6 implies that the absence of a dispute in a state is no longer su¢ cient to
indicate that the …rst best outcome has been achieved for that state. In particular, when the
                                                                                               FT            P
non-violation claim is unavailable, the absence of a dispute in                                     or           is simply an indication
that Home has chosen to avoid a dispute with the selection of R which, without the possibility
that Foreign could bring a non-violation claim, Home can do with impunity.
      A comparison of Propositions 1-3 and 6 reveals a rich set of potential on- and o¤-equilibrium
impacts that the ability to bring non-violation claims can have according to our model. We
                                                                                                         R
…rst catalog and interpret these impacts, beginning with states in                                           . As Propositions 1 and
6(i) con…rm, for these states the impact of the non-violation clause is only present when a non-
violation claim is actually …led (i.e., the impact is only on-equilibrium), which occurs whenever
             c
     (s) >       q
                     . In such states, Foreign will …le a non-violation complaint against Home’s choice of
R when it has the ability to do so (i.e., in the presence of the non-violation clause), at a cost
to joint surplus of [q(1              ) (s) + (c + c )] > 0, re‡ecting the possibility that the DSB will rule
in error and compensation will be paid (q(1                                  ) (s)) as well as the direct costs of the dispute
                                                                      P
(c + c ). Figure 1a depicts, for a given                                  (s), the outcomes described by Propositions 1 and
                                                    R
6(i) for the relevant range of                          (s) (on the vertical axis) and              (s) (on the horizontal axis).
For comparison, outcomes in the presence of the non-violation clause (Proposition 1 outcomes)
are displayed inside curly brackets, while outcomes in the absence of the non-violation clause
(Proposition 6(i) outcomes) are displayed in square brackets. As depicted, for the relevant range
      R                                 c                                                R
of        (s) and when          (s)         q
                                                the …rst best is achieved in                  whether or not the non-violation
                                                           c
clause is present, but when                     (s) >          q
                                                                   the introduction of the non-violation clause leads to the
…ling of non-violation complaints against R and an associated loss in joint surplus.
                                                P
      Consider next states in                       . Here a comparison of Proposition 3 with Proposition 6 (iii)
indicates the subtle array of both on- and o¤- equilibrium impacts of the non-violation clause
                                P                                                        R
that are possible in                depending on parameters. With                            (s) on the vertical axis and              (s)
                                                                                                                  P
on the horizontal axis, Figure 1b depicts these possibilities for a given                                             (s), again using the
convention that outcomes in the presence of the non-violation clause (Proposition 3 outcomes)


                                                                            37
are displayed inside curly brackets, while outcomes in the absence of the non-violation clause
(Proposition 6(iii) outcomes) are displayed in square brackets.
                                              c                                                 P
   As Figure 1b depicts, for         (s)       q
                                                   , the …rst best is achieved in                   whether or not the non-
violation clause is available. For          (s) 2 ( cq ; cq ), the …rst best is not achieved but the outcome
is again the same whether or not the non-violation clause is available, with the exception of
                            R                          P
states that also satisfy        (s) 2 ((1     q)           (s)        c;   (s)). Notice that for these states, the non-
violation clause has an interesting o¤-equilibrium impact: it converts what would have been an
undisputed choice of R into a choice of P that results in a violation complaint. In this way the
non-violation clause can serve a complementary role to violation claims (i.e., there are states of
the world in which violation claims are made which would not have been made in the absence
of the non-violation clause), for the simple reason that the presence of the non-violation clause
can cause the Home government to substitute into choices over contracted policies which are
themselves susceptible to violation complaints. The associated impact on joint surplus of this
                                                            P              R
o¤-equilibrium e¤ect is given by [(1               q)           (s)            (s)   (c + c )], which can be positive or
              P
negative in       but is guaranteed to be positive when q, c and c are each su¢ ciently small.
   Figure 1b also depicts the various o¤- and on-equilibrium impacts of the non-violation
                        P                          c
clause that arise in        when      (s)              q
                                                           . The only possible o¤-equilibrium impact over this
parameter range is the same as the one described just above, in which the presence of the
non-violation clause converts what would have been an undisputed choice of R into a choice
of P that results in a violation complaint. The new possibilities over this parameter range
all involve on-equilibrium impacts of the non-violation clause in which, when it is available,
the non-violation complaint is used. Figure 1b catalogs four distinct on-equilibrium impacts,
of which two have a negative impact on joint surplus (the two for which Home would choose
P in the absence of the non-violation clause) and two can have either a positive or negative
impact on joint surplus depending on parameters (the two for which Home would choose R in
                                                                                     P
the absence of the non-violation clause). Intuitively, in                                the on-equilibrium impact of the
non-violation clause must reduce joint surplus if Home would have chosen P in the absence of
the non-violation clause, because the non-violation clause in this case can only work against
the chance that the …rst-best policy will be implemented; and the on-equilibrium impact of the
non-violation clause can increase joint surplus if Home would have chosen R in the absence of
the non-violation clause, because then the non-violation clause can be used to help secure a
policy which may be more e¢ cient (FT ).


                                                                 38
                                        FT
      Consider now states in                 . Here the relevant comparison is between Proposition 2 –the
                      FT                                                                                                                  FT
outcomes in                with the non-violation clause –and Proposition 6(ii) –the outcomes in
                                                                                                                                      c
without the non-violation clause. We begin by comparing Proposition 2(i), where                                        (s) <        (1 q)q
                                                                                                                                           ,
with Proposition 6(ii). For this range of parameters the only di¤erences in outcomes when the
                                                                                                           P               c
non-violation claim is introduced occur when it is also the case that                                          (s)    (q       )
                                                                                                                                   and by
Proposition 6(ii) Home would choose R in the absence of the non-violation clause. For this
parameter range only o¤-equilibrium impacts of the non-violation clause can arise, and there
                                                                             c
are two possibilities depending on whether                      P
                                                                    (s)      q
                                                                                 or   P
                                                                                          (s) > qc . In the former case, the
introduction of the non-violation clause converts an undisputed choice of R into a …rst-best
                                                                                           R
choice of FT with associated gain in joint surplus equal to                                    (s) which is strictly positive in
 FT
      ; and in the latter case the introduction of the non-violation clause converts an undisputed
choice of R into a choice of P that results in a violation complaint, with associated impact
                                        P             R
on joint surplus given by [q                (s)           (s)   (c + c )] which can be positive or negative but is
guaranteed to be positive when q, c and c are each su¢ ciently small. Notice that in this latter
                  P
case, as in           , the non-violation clause plays a complementary role to violation claims, in the
sense that there are states of the world in which violation claims are made which would not
have been made in the absence of the non-violation clause.
                               c
      When         (s)       (1 q)q
                                      it is a comparison of Proposition 2(ii) with Proposition 6(ii) that
                                                                           FT
reveals the impacts of the non-violation clause in                               . Here the impact hinges on the value
                                                                      P                    P
of the parameter             in addition to the level of                  (s). With            (s) on the vertical axis and
on the horizontal axis, Figure 1c illustrates how the impacts of the non-violation clause vary
           P                     FT
with           (s) and      in        . As before, outcomes in the presence of the non-violation clause
(Proposition 2 outcomes) are displayed inside curly brackets, while outcomes in the absence of
the non-violation clause (Proposition 6(ii) outcomes) are displayed in square brackets; and for
                                                                                            c
each case, the …rst entry displays the outcome when                              (s) <    (1 q)q
                                                                                                   , which we have described
                                                                                                            c
just above, and the second entry displays the outcome when                                      (s)       (1 q)q
                                                                                                                 .   As the second
                                               c
entries reveal, when             (s)         (1 q)q
                                                      both on-equilibrium and o¤-equilibrium impacts of the
                                                      FT                                              P
non-violation clause are possible in                       , depending on the values of                   (s) and .
                                           c                                                                                           FT
      Speci…cally, when          (s)     (1 q)q
                                                  there are now two possible o¤-equilibrium impacts in                                      .
One is the same as the …rst o¤-equilibrium impact described just above: as Figure 1c depicts,
for    P
           (s)    min[ (q c ) ; qc ], the introduction of the non-violation clause converts an undisputed
                                                                                                                                      R
choice of R into a …rst-best choice of FT with associated gain in joint surplus equal to                                                  (s)


                                                                 39
                                           FT
which is strictly positive in                    . The second possible o¤-equilibrium impact occurs when
 P
     (s) 2 ( (q c ) ; min[ qq
                           2c c
                              ; q ]). For this parameter range, the introduction of the non-violation
clause converts a choice of P that results in a violation complaint into a …rst-best choice of FT
                                                                       P
with associated gain in joint surplus equal to [ q                         (s) + (c + c )] which is strictly positive in
 FT
      . Notice that here the non-violation clause now acts as a substitute for violation claims, in
the sense that there are states of the world in which violation claims would have been made in
the absence of the non-violation clause but are not made in its presence.
     And …nally, there are three possible on-equilibrium impacts of the non-violation clause when
             c            FT
  (s)      (1 q)q
                    in         . A …rst converts a choice of P that results in a violation complaint into a
choice of P that results in both a violation and non-violation complaint. As Figure 1c depicts,
                                                                       2c
this possibility occurs for            < q when        P
                                                           (s)    max[ qq ; q(qc      )
                                                                                          ], resulting in an impact on joint
                                           P
surplus given by [ (1                q)q       (s)   (c + c )] which can be positive or negative, but which
approaches 0 when q, c and c are each su¢ ciently small. A second possibility converts a choice
of P that results in a violation complaint into a choice of R that results in a non-violation
complaint (and here again the non-violation clause acts as a substitute for violation claims).
As Figure 1c depicts, this possibility occurs for                     2 ( 2q ; q) when           P
                                                                                                     (s) 2 (max[ (q c ) ; qc ]; q(qc    )
                                                                                                                                            ),
                                                                                            P
resulting in an impact on joint surplus given by [ q(1                                )         (s)] which is strictly negative.
And a third possibility converts an undisputed choice of R into a choice of R that results in a
non-violation complaint. As Figure 1c depicts, this possibility occurs when                                       P
                                                                                                                      (s) 2 ( qc ; (q c ) ),
                                                                                  R
resulting in an impact on joint surplus given by [ (1                        q)       (s)        (c + c )] which can be positive
                     FT
or negative in            but is guaranteed to be positive when q, c and c are each su¢ ciently small.
     With the set of potential on- and o¤-equilibrium impacts of the non-violation clause now
described, we next impose the parameter restrictions suggested by the observed GATT/WTO
dispute behavior according to Proposition 5 and its Corollary to identify those impacts whose
signi…cance is consistent with the observed dispute behavior. To develop a benchmark calcula-
tion, we focus on the parameter restrictions described in the Corollary to Proposition 5. Two
of these parameter restrictions have especially important impacts on the implied value of the
non-violation clause. The …rst is that approaches the level ~0 ( cq ) from above. Recalling the
de…nition of ~0 ( c ), this ensures in turn that Pr( (s) > c j R ) ! 0 and Pr( (s) > c j P ) ! 0.
                     q                                                        q                                               q
But as Figure 2a illustrates, with this restriction on the level of                                  we may then conclude that
                                                                                                                        R
the non-violation clause has no impact on expected joint surplus for states in                                              ; and as Fig-
                                 P
ure 2b illustrates, in               the impact on expected joint surplus of the non-violation clause is


                                                                 40
then restricted to the set of states de…ned by                                       P
                                                                                     1      fs 2            P
                                                                                                                 such that                (s) 2 ( cq ; cq ) and
 R                           P
     (s) 2 ((1       q)          (s)     c;     (s))g, where what would have been an undisputed choice of R is
converted into a choice of P that results in a violation complaint.
      The other parameter restriction described in the Corollary to Proposition 5 that is especially
important is that                 2 (0; 2q ). As Figure 2c illustrates, with this restriction on the level of ,
       FT
in          we may then conclude that the impact on expected joint surplus of the non-violation
clause is attributable to the impact in …ve sets of states. Two sets of states, where what would
have been an undisputed choice of R is converted into a …rst-best choice of FT , are de…ned by
                                                              c
 FT
 1          fs 2    FT
                             such that          P
                                                    (s)       q
                                                                g   and        FT
                                                                               2          fs 2         FT
                                                                                                            such that                P
                                                                                                                                         (s) 2 ( qc ; (q c ) ) and
              c
     (s)    (1 q)q
                   g.       A third set of states, where what would have been an undisputed choice of R is
                                                                                                                                              FT              FT
converted into a choice of P that results in a violation complaint, is de…ned by                                                              3        fs 2
such that      P
                   (s) 2 ( qc ; (q c ) ) and              (s) <       c
                                                                    (1 q)q
                                                                           g.        A fourth set of states, where what would have
been a choice of P that resulted in a violation complaint is converted to a …rst-best choice of
FT , is de…ned by                FT
                                 4       fs 2        FT
                                                          such that            P
                                                                                    (s) 2 ( (q c     2c
                                                                                                   ) qq
                                                                                                        )       and        (s)             c
                                                                                                                                         (1 q)q
                                                                                                                                                g.   And a …nal
set of states, where what would have been a choice of P that resulted in a violation complaint
is converted to a choice of P that results in both a violation and a non-violation complaint, is
                   FT                    FT                         P           2c                                c
de…ned by          5         fs 2             such that                 (s)     qq
                                                                                      and        (s)            (1 q)q
                                                                                                                       g.
      Using these sets and the associated joint surplus measures described above, we now state:

Proposition 7.                Under the parameter restrictions described in the Corollary to Proposition
5, the impact of the non-violation clause on expected joint surplus is given by
                             P                            P               R
                                                                                                                      P                         R
       rE[ ]                          p(s)[(1       q)        (s)             (s)        (c + c )] +                                 p(s)[           (s)] +
                            s2    P                                                                         s2f   FT   [   FT    g
                                  1                                                                               1        2
                              P                 P               R
                                                                                                   P                         P
                                       p(s)[q       (s)             (s)        (c + c )] +                   p(s)[ q             (s) + (c + c )] +
                            s2    FT                                                              s2   FT
                                  3                                                                    4
                              P                                 P
                                       p(s)[ (1           q)q       (s)        (c + c )]:
                            s2    FT
                                  5


Together the terms in the expression in Proposition 7 describe four impacts of the non-violation
clause whose potential signi…cance is consistent with the observed behavior of GATT/WTO dis-
putes, three o¤-equilibrium impacts and one on-equilibrium impact. The three o¤-equilibrium
impacts are that, what would have been an undisputed choice of R is converted either to a
                                                                                              P                  FT
choice of P that results in a violation complaint (for                                        1    and           3    ) or to a …rst-best choice of
               FT            FT
FT (for f      1        [    2     g); and that, what would have been a choice of P resulting in a violation

                                                                               41
                                                                      FT
complaint is converted to a …rst-best choice of FT (for               4    ). The on-equilibrium impact is
that, what would have been a choice of P resulting in a violation complaint is converted to a
                                                                                                     FT
choice of P that results in both a violation and a non-violation complaint (for                      5    ).
   The on-equilibrium impact described just above and the …rst of the described o¤-equilibrium
impacts can either increase or reduce expected joint surplus, while the second and third de-
scribed o¤-equilibrium impacts must strictly increase expected joint surplus. Hence, despite
the paucity of DSB rulings on non-violation claims and their low rate of success, Proposition
7 indicates that these observed features of GATT/WTO disputes are not inconsistent with a
valuable role for the non-violation clause. A stronger conclusion can be stated under further
parameter restrictions, which we record in the following:

Corollary. Under the parameter restrictions described in the Corollary to Proposition 5 and
for q, c and c su¢ ciently small, the impact of the non-violation clause on expected joint surplus
is strictly positive, and is approximated by
                         P                                        P
              rE[ ] =        p(s) [ P (s)   R
                                              (s)] +                                    p(s)   (s) > 0:
                        s2   P                         s2f   FT   [   FT   [   FT   g
                             1                               1        2        3


Notice that under the conditions of the Corollary, the on-equilibrium impact of the non-violation
clause on expected joint surplus goes to zero, and all that is left is a set of o¤-equilibrium im-
pacts, which under these conditions must be strictly positive, and could potentially be large.
These o¤-equilibrium impacts re‡ect the set of states in which what would have been an undis-
                                                                                                                         P
puted choice of R is either converted to a choice of P that results in a violation complaint (in                         1
      FT
and   3    , which under these conditions then secures the …rst-best policy with near certainty and
                                                                                                          FT       FT
insigni…cant dispute costs) or converted directly to a …rst-best choice of FT ( in f                      1    [   2    g).
   In e¤ect, then, the Corollary to Proposition 7 describes a world consistent with the observed
features of non-violation claims in GATT/WTO disputes and in which the non-violation clause
can nevertheless have important impacts. In this world, governments make market access com-
mitments with contracts over border measures while preserving policy autonomy over domestic
taxes and regulations, and the non-violation clause functions mostly o¤-equilibrium to reroute
policy interventions into forms that are explicitly addressed by the GATT/WTO contract and
to thereby prevent the circumvention of these market access commitments, a function that is in
line with the role emphasized by economists (see, e.g., Bagwell and Staiger, 2001, and Staiger
and Sykes, 2011) and legal scholars (see, e.g., Petersmann, 1977, p. 172) and envisioned by the
drafters of GATT (see, e.g., Hudec, 1990).

                                                 42
7. Conclusion

The non-violation clause was a major focus of the drafters of GATT in 1947, and its relevance
was revisited and rea¢ rmed with the creation of the WTO in 1995. And according to the
terms-of-trade theory of trade agreements, it has an important role to play in facilitating the
success of the “shallow integration”approach that the GATT/WTO has adopted. Yet despite
the prominence given to the non-violation clause by its legal drafters and suggested by economic
theory, in practice the observed performance of the non-violation complaint has been weak. Can
a model account for the observed features of the usage and outcomes of non-violation claims?
And if so, what is implied by these weak performance measures about the impacts of the non-
violation clause on the joint welfare of the GATT/WTO member governments? In this paper we
have developed a model of non-violation claims in trade agreements, demonstrated that it can
account for the observed features of the usage and outcomes of non-violation claims, and shown
that the weak performance measures of observed non-violation claims are not inconsistent with
a valuable role for the non-violation clause in the GATT/WTO.
       To derive these results we have simpli…ed along a number of important dimensions. In this
light, we conclude by discussing some of the most important directions for future work.
       First, we have allowed the salient institutional features of the GATT/WTO to guide our
modeling of violation and non-violation claims, but we have not shown that these features could
be optimal in the environment that we consider. An important direction for future work is to
push at least some distance in this direction. For example, in our model as in the GATT/WTO
dispute system, the Foreign government (complainant) is allowed to choose both whether to
…le against a Home government policy choice and what claims to bring. Given that in our
model the Foreign government knows more in any state about the true payo¤ level of the Home
government than does the DSB, and therefore knows more in any state about the likely Home
policy response to a successful non-violation (liability rule) claim, it seems possible that, at least
when the DSB is su¢ ciently accurate, it would indeed be optimal to delegate these decisions to
the complainant (rather than, for example, letting the complainant make the decision of whether
or not to initiate a dispute but allowing the DSB to choose the claims to investigate).33 But
  33
    Intuitively, the Foreign government uses its knowledge of the Home government payo¤ from protection in
a given state in deciding whether or not to add a non-violation claim on top of the violation claim, and the
Foreign government therefore tends to tilt its use of the non-violation claim toward states where protection is
ine¢ cient (and hence where a successful non-violation claim would result in the removal of protection) and away
from states where protection is e¢ cient (and hence where a successful non-violation claim would simply result


                                                      43
the optimality of these and other features are worthy of formal investigation.34
    Second, we have ruled out the use of ex-post transfers to settle disputes. As we have in-
dicated however (see notes 8 and 31), while e¢ cient transfer mechanisms in the context of
GATT/WTO dispute resolution are typically unavailable, settlement is nevertheless an impor-
tant part of the GATT/WTO dispute resolution process in practice. Moreover, as Maggi and
Staiger (2012) have shown, allowing for settlement ex post in the presence of costly transfers
can generate interesting predictions about the optimality of liability versus property rules in the
GATT/WTO system. Hence, both because settlement features prominently in GATT/WTO
dispute resolution, and because allowing for settlement in the model could pave the way for
establishing conditions under which it would be optimal to design certain (violation) claims as
property rules and other (non-violation) claims as liability rules, the introduction of settlement
possibilities into our model is an important if challenging direction for future research.
    Third, as we have indicated (see note 14), we have modeled violation complaints as prop-
erty rules, but in reality the distinction for violation complaints in the GATT/WTO between
property and liability rules is less clear cut than we have assumed. Thus, an important question
is how our results might change under the alternative assumption that both non-violation and
violation claims were treated as liability rules. Here it is straightforward to show that nothing
                                                                        R        FT                         P
would change under this alternative assumption for states in                or        . And for states in       ,
                                       P
we can show that Pr(fR : N V gj            ) must drop under this alternative, for the intuitive reason
that in the range of states where only one claim would be …led there is now no bene…t for Home
to switch to R so as to avoid a violation claim on P, and similarly in the range of states where
P would induce the …ling of both a violation and non-violation claim there is now less of a
reason for Home to switch to R. And if the DSB is accurate enough, we can show that this
is su¢ cient to ensure that N V success would be higher when the violation claim is also modeled
as a liability rule. Hence, while a systematic exploration of our model under this alternative
assumption is beyond the scope of this paper, our preliminary investigation of this extension
in compensation), something that the DSB would not be capable of doing on its own.
   34
      A related question is whether the institution we have considered would dominate simple alternative con-
tracting options under reasonable conditions. Here again a systematic answer must await future research, but
it is plausible that the answer could be a¢ rmative. For instance, in the low-(c; c ; q; ) environment that we
emphasize, our institution would dominate a simple liability-rule type contract of the form “make any domestic
regulatory choices you want but if you regulate you must compensate.”Similarly, our institution would dominate
a blanket laissez faire rule of the form “no domestic regulation allowed”provided that the set R is large. And
as we have observed (see note 10), writing a vague contract to cover domestic regulation poses challenges that
may make that approach suboptimal as well.


                                                     44
indicates that it yields some interesting further predictions.35
    And …nally, as we discuss in more detail in Staiger and Sykes (2013), our formal model is
too narrow to capture a number of additional avenues that may be important for understanding
the observed performance of non-violation claims in the GATT/WTO. These would include the
possibility of adding policies to the contract over time (as well-illustrated by the evolution of
the treatment of domestic subsidies in the GATT/WTO–see Sykes, 2005), allowing the level
of DSB accuracy to depend on the level of guidance given to it by the contract (so that DSB
accuracy in the context of violation claims might be naturally higher than DSB accuracy in
the context of non-violation claims), and considering in depth both the optimality and the
practicality of setting the level of damages equal to the harm su¤ered by the claimant in the
dispute. We see each of these avenues as representing a promising direction for future research.


8. References

Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (1999). “An Economic Theory of GATT,” American
Economic Review.89(1), pp. 215-48.
    Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (2001). “Domestic Policies, National Sovereignty and
International Economic Institutions,”Quarterly Journal of Economics 116: 519-562.
    Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (2002). The Economics of the World Trading
System (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
    Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (2006). “Will International Rules on Subsidies Disrupt
the World Trading System?”American Economic Review. June: 877-895.
    Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger (2010). “Backward Stealing and Forward Manipula-
tion in the GATT/WTO,”Journal of International Economics 82: 49-62.
    Bown, Chad P. (2005). “Trade Remedies and World Trade Organization Dispute Settlement:
Why Are So Few Challenged?”Journal of Legal Studies 34(2) (June: Special Issue): 515-555.
    Busch, Marc and Eric Reinhardt (2000). “Bargaining in the Shadow of the Law: Early
Settlement in GATT/WTO Disputes”, Fordham International Law Journal 24(1-2): 158-172.
   35
      For example, the success rate of non-violation claims appears to have been higher in the GATT era than
it has been since the creation of the WTO; and many legal scholars (e.g., Jackson, 2007) argue that GATT
violation claims were treated as liability rules at least in the early GATT era but transitioned largely to a system
of property rules by the WTO era. Our …nding here that N V success would be higher when the violation claim
is also modeled as a liability rule than when it is modeled as a property rule could thus contribute to a possible
explanation for this evolution in the success of non-violation claims in the GATT/WTO.


                                                        45
   Grossman, Gene M. and Alan O. Sykes (2010). “Optimal Retaliation in the WTO – A
Commentary on the Upland Cotton Arbitration,”World Trade Review 10: 133-64.
   Horn, Henrik, Louise Johannesson and Petros C. Mavroidis (2011). “The WTO Dispute
Settlement System 1995-2006: Some Descriptive Statistics,”Journal of World Trade 45(6).
   Hudec, Robert E. (1990). The GATT Legal System and World Trade Diplomacy
(Salem, NH: Butterworth).
   Hudec, Robert E. (1993). Enforcing International Trade Law: The Evolution of the
Modern GATT Legal System (Salem, NH: Butterworth).
   Jackson, John H. (1997). “The WTO Dispute Settlement Understanding–Misunderstandings
on the Nature of Legal Obligation,”The American Journal of International Law 91 (1): 60-64.
   Maggi, Giovanni and Robert W. Staiger (2011). “The Role of Dispute Settlement Procedures
in International Trade Agreements,”Quarterly Journal of Economics 126: 475–515.
   Maggi, Giovanni and Robert W. Staiger (2012). “Trade Disputes and Settlement,”mimeo,
December.
   Ossa, Ralph (2011). “A “New Trade” Theory of GATT/WTO Negotiations,” Journal of
Political Economy 119(1): 122-152.
   Panizzon, Marion (2006). Good Faith in the Jurisprudence of the WTO (Oxford:
Hart Publishing).
   Petersmann, Ernst-Ulrich (1997). The GATT/WTO Dispute Settlement System
(London: Kluwer).
   Posner, Richard A. (2005). “The Law and Economics of Contract Interpretation,” Texas
Law Review 83: 1581–1614.
   Schwartz, Warren F. and Alan O. Sykes (2002). “The Economic Structure of Renegotiation
and Dispute Settlement in the World Trade Organization,”Journal of Legal Studies 31: 179-04.
   Staiger, Robert W. and Alan O. Sykes (2011). “International Trade, National Treatment
and Domestic Regulation,”Journal of Legal Studies 40(1): 149-203.
   Staiger, Robert W. and Alan O. Sykes (2013). “Non-Violations,”mimeo, June.
   Sykes, Alan O. (2005). “The economics of WTO rules on subsidies and countervailing mea-
sures,”in Appleton, A., Macrory, P., Plummer, M. (Eds.), The World Trade Organization:
Legal, Economic And Political Analysis. Springer Verlag, New York.
   World Trade Organization (2007), World Trade Report, Geneva.


                                            46
                    Figure 1a: s R for fixed  P(s)
     γR (s)
                             {R:NV}
                                          1
                              [R]




              {R}
              [R]


γP (s)




                                                        γ* (s)
     0
                       c*
                       q
                    γR (s)                  Figure 1b: s P for fixed  P(s)
   (1 q )  P ( s )  c
             q


                                                           {R:NV}
                                                                                         1
                                                             [R]
                                                                           {R:NV}
                                                                             [R]



                                        q                      {P: V}
                                                 {R}            [R]
                                                 [R]
            P                {P}                                                                (1  q)
    (1  q) ( s)                   qq                                  {P:V&NV}
                             [P]                                            [R]
                                                       {P:V}
         P                                              [R]
(1  q) ( s)  c
                                                                                                           {R:NV}
                                                                                                           [P: V]



                                                                                    {P:V&NV}
                                              {P: V}
                                                                                     [P: V]
                                              [P: V]
                                                               {P: V}
                                                               [P: V]




                                                                                                                    γ* (s)
                     0             c*                   c*   c*
                                    q                   q q(1q)
     Figure 1c: s FT for  (0,1)
 γP (s)                                          c                c
                                              q(q )           (q )

          {(P: V); (P: V&NV)}

             [(P: V); (P: V)]


                                                        {(P: V); (R: NV)}
2c
qq                                                            [(R); (R)]

                {(P: V); (FT)}

               [(P: V); (P: V)]
                                                                                 c
                                      {(P: V); (FT)}                            q
                                         [(R); (R)]
 c
 q                                    {(FT); (FT)}
                                         [(R); (R)]

 0                                q                       q                 1
                                  2
                                            
                    Figure 2a: s R for fixed  P(s)
     γR (s)
                             {R:NV}
                                          1
                              [R]




              {R}
              [R]


γP (s)




                                                        γ* (s)
     0
                       c*
                       q
γR (s)              Figure 2b: s P for fixed  P(s)

                                   {R:NV}
                                     [R]
                                                   {R:NV}
                                                     [R]



                                       {P: V}
                         {R}            [R]
                         [R]

         {P}                                    {P:V&NV}
         [P]                                        [R]
                               {P:V}
                                [R]
                                                                       {R:NV}
                                                                       [P: V]



                                                            {P:V&NV}
                      {P: V}
                                                             [P: V]
                      [P: V]
                                       {P: V}
                                       [P: V]




                                                                                γ* (s)
0              c*               c*   c*
                q               q q(1q)
    Figure 2c: s FT for  (0,1)
γP (s)

                                             {(P: V); (P: V&NV)}
    {(P: V); (P: V&NV)}
                                              [(P: V); (P: V)]
         [(P: V); (P: V)]


                                                                   {(P: V); (R: NV)}
                                                                       [(R); (R)]


            {(P: V); (FT)}

          [(P: V); (P: V)]
                                                {(P: V); (FT)}
                            {(P: V); (FT)}         [(R); (R)]
                              [(R); (R)]
               {(FT); (FT)}                     {(FT); (FT)}
                [(R); (R)]                         [(R); (R)]

0                                        q                           q                 1
                                         2
                                                       
