NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRUTH-TELLING BY THIRD-PARTY AUDITORS AND THE RESPONSE OF POLLUTING FIRMS:
EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM INDIA
Esther Duflo
Michael Greenstone
Rohini Pande
Nicholas Ryan
Working Paper 19259
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19259

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2013

We thank Sanjiv Tyagi, R. G. Shah, and Hardik Shah for advice and support over the course of this
project. We thank Pankaj Verma, Eric Dodge, Vipin Awatramani, Logan Clark, Yuanjian Li, Sam
Norris and Nick Hagerty for excellent research assistance and numerous seminar participants for comments.
We thank the Sustainability Science Program (SSP), the Harvard Environmental Economics Program,
the Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research (CEEPR), the International Initiative for
Impact Evaluation (3ie), the International Growth Centre (IGC) and the National Science Foundation
(NSF Award #1066006) for financial support. Ryan thanks an AMID Early Stage Researcher Fellowship
for financial support. All views and errors are solely ours. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19259.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Esther Duflo, Michael Greenstone, Rohini Pande, and Nicholas Ryan. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Truth-telling by Third-party Auditors and the Response of Polluting Firms: Experimental
Evidence from India
Esther Duflo, Michael Greenstone, Rohini Pande, and Nicholas Ryan
NBER Working Paper No. 19259
July 2013
JEL No. L51,M42,O13,Q56
ABSTRACT
In many regulated markets, private, third-party auditors are chosen and paid by the firms that they
audit, potentially creating a conflict of interest. This paper reports on a two-year field experiment in
the Indian state of Gujarat that sought to curb such a conflict by altering the market structure for environmental
audits of industrial plants to incentivize accurate reporting. There are three main results. First, the
status quo system was largely corrupted, with auditors systematically reporting plant emissions just
below the standard, although true emissions were typically higher. Second, the treatment caused auditors
to report more truthfully and very significantly lowered the fraction of plants that were falsely reported
as compliant with pollution standards. Third, treatment plants, in turn, reduced their pollution emissions.
The results suggest reformed incentives for third-party auditors can improve their reporting and make
regulation more effective.

Esther Duflo
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-252G
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
eduflo@mit.edu

Rohini Pande
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rohini_pande@harvard.edu

Michael Greenstone
MIT Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive, E52-359
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
mgreenst@mit.edu

Nicholas Ryan
Harvard Weatherhead Center
K239 1737 Cambridge St.
Cambridge, MA 02138
nickryan@fas.harvard.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19259

I

Introduction

The use of third-party auditing to monitor the compliance of firms with regulation is ubiquitous. Third-party audits are the norm in financial accounting, and in many countries credit
ratings from third-party agencies serve an important regulatory role (White, 2010). Consumer and commodity markets use third-party auditors to monitor standards, including those
for food safety, healthcare, flowers, timber and many durable goods (Hatanaka et al., 2005;
Raynolds et al., 2007; Dranove and Jin, 2010). With respect to environmental regulation, the
focus of this paper, several countries use third-party auditors to verify firm compliance with
national laws and regulations (Kunreuther et al., 2002; Paliwal, 2006). Third-party auditing is
also used to enforce international environmental standards, including ISO 14001 certification
and verification of carbon abatement in the carbon offset market (Potoski and Prakash, 2005;
Bhattacharyya, 2011).
These markets share a common characteristic—the auditor is chosen by, paid by and reports
to the audited firm. This feature creates a conflict of interest between reporting the truth and
reporting what is beneficial for the client. To maintain business, third-party auditors have
incentives to shade or falsify their reports, which may corrupt information provision and, in
turn, undermine regulation. Events brought to light by the recent financial crisis suggest this
is a real concern.1 Yet, despite periodic calls for reform to increase the independence of thirdparty auditors, we are unaware of a single instance of an enacted reform that fundamentally
alters the incentives of third-party auditors.2
This paper reports on a two-year field experiment conducted in collaboration with the
environmental regulatory body in Gujarat, India. Since 1996, the state has had a third1

For overviews of problems in the U.S. corporate audit and credit ratings markets see Ronen (2010) and
White (2010), respectively. Biased reporting appears to be a key issue for credit rating agencies: for a single
credit agency, Griffin and Tang (2011) show higher accuracy of the internal surveillance team’s judgments
on CDO ratings than the business-oriented ratings team’s, and that the accuracy difference predicts future
downgrades. Strobl and Xia (2011) compared ratings for the same companies provided by two credit rating
agencies, where one agency uses a issuer-pay model and the other an investor-pay model. The difference in
ratings is more pronounced when the issuer-pay rating agency plausibly has more business at stake.
2
In 2002, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act made auditors of public companies subject to oversight by a private-sector,
nonprofit corporation. This corporation determines who can perform audits, conducts investigations and sets
fines. Three former SEC Chairmen testified in favor mandatory auditor rotation, which was not adopted. (The
Act also required SEC to report to Congress on credit rating agencies but did not reform this sector.) In 2003
the Securities and Exchange Commission adopted rules on auditor independence that focused on restrictions
on and disclosure of non-audit activities. In 2008 New York State Attorney General Andrew Cuomo reached
an agreement with credit rating agencies which required upfront payment for their ratings. The Dodd-Frank
financial reform bill and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act restrict the services that auditors or credit rating agencies
can offer plants that they audit.

2

party audit system for plants with high pollution potential, wherein certified auditors annually
submit pollution readings and suggested pollution control measures for the audited plants to
the Gujarat Pollution Control Board (Gujarat High Court, 1996). Although the Gujarat
High Court put in place several safeguards to limit conflicts of interest, the basic financial
arrangement underlying these audits is typical of the practice the world over—plants hire
and pay auditors directly, and the work of those auditors is subject to very little oversight. In
conversations we had before beginning this study, the regulators, auditors, and polluting plants
all agreed that the status quo audit system produced unreliable information. As evidence of
this common opinion, the reported market price for an audit was often lower than the cost of
collecting pollution readings, suggesting that at least some readings were not even taken.
Our experiment altered the market structure in several complementary ways in order to incentivize accurate reporting. All 473 audit-eligible plants in two populous and heavily polluted
industrial regions of Gujarat entered the experimental sample. In each region, half the plants
were randomized into a treatment with four parts. First, treatment plants were randomly
assigned an auditor that they were required to use. Second, auditors were paid from a central
pool, rather than by the plant, and their fee was set in advance at a flat rate, high enough to
cover pollution measurement and leave the auditor a modest profit margin. Third, a random
sample of each auditor’s pollution readings were verified with follow-up visits to the audited
plants by an independent technical agency that collected readings for the same pollutants at
the same places as the auditor, usually within a couple weeks of the auditor readings. We
refer to the follow-up visits as backchecks for the remainder of the paper. While the 20%
probability of a backcheck was public knowledge, actual backcheck visits were unannounced.
Fourth and finally, at the start of the second year, treatment auditors were informed that their
pay would be linked to their reporting accuracy, as measured by the backchecks. (During the
first year, we did not specify any explicit consequence of good or poor performance. Auditors,
however, may have anticipated lower chances of staying included in the scheme if found to be
systematically biased.)
We collate data from several sources. We collected all audit reports for years one and two
filed with the regulator. We directly obtained backcheck readings from the agencies conducting
backchecks. Towards the end of the second year, we hired the same technical agencies to do
identical backchecks in a random sample of control plants; these backchecks were unannounced

3

and not used to monitor or reward auditor behavior. The availability of auditor and backcheck
readings from the same plants and at nearly the same times offers a unique opportunity to
compare true pollution levels with the auditors’ reports of pollution in both the treatment and
control plants. Finally, roughly six months after the last audit visit in the experiment, we ran
an independent endline survey of pollution outcomes in all treatment and control plants.
We have three main findings. First, status quo audit reporting is corrupted, as auditors
systematically report plant pollution readings just below the regulatory standard. The average
difference between audit and backcheck pollution readings across all reported pollutants is -0.30
standard deviations in the control group. A comparison of audit and backcheck readings in
the control indicates that 29% of audit reports falsely report readings as below the relevant
regulatory standard. Further, much of this false reporting comes in the form of extra reports
just below the standard, which are presumably less likely to attract regulatory attention than
would be reports showing compliance by a wide margin.
Second, the treatment caused auditors to report more truthfully and reduced the fraction of plants that were falsely reported as compliant with pollution standards. Relative to
backcheck readings, auditors for treatment plants report pollution readings that are 0.15 to
0.21 standard deviations—or 50% to 70% higher—than control auditors. This result is robust to the inclusion of auditor fixed effects, which allows us to compare the behavior of the
same auditors simultaneously working in both treatment and control plants. This, in turn,
suggests that the results are not due to a selection of different auditors in treatment versus
control plants. Further, auditors working in treatment plants are 23 percentage points or 80%
less likely to falsely report a pollution reading as in compliance with the relevant regulatory
standard.
Third, treatment plants reduced emissions, presumably because they understood that the
regulatory authority would receive more reliable audit reports. Average pollution in the treatment group fell by 0.21 standard deviations, with reductions concentrated among plants with
the highest readings. We document that in practice, the regulator reserves the harshest penalties for plants with readings that significantly exceed the standard, so it is not surprising that
that the dirtiest plants responded by reducing emissions the most.
The treatment, which included multiple parts, was implemented as a single package. Hence,
we cannot separately identify the effects of the treatment components—auditor assignments,

4

fixed pay from a central pool, backchecks and incentive pay—using experimental variation.
It is clear that the treatment may have changed auditor behavior through several plausible
channels. First, the assignment of auditors to plants at a fixed price means that plants cannot
dismiss their auditor to obtain a better report and/or a lower price. Further, auditors cannot
hold up plants by extracting their entire willingness to pay to avoid a bad report once they are
assigned. Second, the regulator can use backchecks to monitor auditor quality and, though no
sanctions for low quality were specified in the experiment in the first year, auditors may have
anticipated a higher return to accurate reporting. Third, although auditors working in the
treatment could have decided to just pocket the extra pay and not report differently, the abovemarket rate may have increased auditors’ expected return to accurate reporting through an
efficiency wage channel. Specifically, auditors for treatment plants may have decided to report
more accurately because they had more to lose if decertified. We provide non-experimental
evidence that financial incentives for accuracy in the second year independently contributed
to improved reporting.
The paper contributes to several literatures. We provide empirical evidence on economic
incentives in third-party audit markets, a literature that has been mainly theoretical so far
(Dranove and Jin, 2010; Bolton et al., 2012). More broadly, we contribute to the empirical
literature on corruption and development (for an overview, see Olken and Pande, 2012). We
analyze data from multiple sources to measure the incidence of corruption by third-party
auditors, adding to the set of papers that measure corruption by comparing outcomes reported
by a potentially corrupt provider with independent estimates (see, for instance, Olken (2007)
and Niehaus and Sukhtankar (2012)). Arguably, a unique strength of our paper is that we
trace the impacts of a reform intended to reduce corruption all the way through to the key
welfare outcome of interest—industrial pollution levels. Such pollution has been shown to be
harmful to labor productivity and health (Hanna and Oliva, 2011; Graff-Zivin and Neidell,
2012; Greenstone and Hanna, 2013; Chay and Greenstone, 2003; Chen et al., 2013).
Turning to the specific channels underlying our experimental treatment, on assignments,
Bazerman et al. (1997) and Bazerman et al. (2002) suggest that auditors find it psychologically
impossible to remain impartial when deeply involved in their clients’ interests. In this vein, the
treatment provides a test of whether such ties are impervious to changes in market structure
that incentivize truthful reporting. On monitoring, Becker and Stigler (1974) argued that

5

agents with higher wages will be less corrupt if they are under supervision. Rahman (2012)
argues theoretically for a contract where the principal randomly changes a state variable and
measures whether the agent reports on this change; backchecks are a good substitute for such
manipulation in this context given that pollution itself varies with some randomness. Absent
supervision or monitoring, evidence remains mixed on whether higher pay matters in and of
itself (Rauch and Evans, 2000). Speaking to the monitoring and wage interaction, Di Tella
and Schargrodsky (2003) show that higher wages reduce corruption in hospital procurement
in Buenos Aires only when the probability of audit is reasonably high, which is consistent with
our findings.
Our findings on auditor and plant behavior are valid in the specific context of the reform
evaluated and, of course, may not apply to other sectors or to environmental regulation in
other countries. That caution notwithstanding, this paper presents clear evidence that altering
economic incentives can cause third-party auditors to switch from biased reporting towards
truth-telling, causing regulated plants to respond in turn.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe the background and experimental design. In Section III we discuss our data collection and present
summary statistics. Section IV presents the econometric approach and results and Section V
concludes.

II
A

Background and Experimental Design
Study Context

Our study was conducted in Gujarat, one of India’s fastest growing industrial states (Chakravorty, 2003). Since 1991-92, the peak of industrial licensing reform, net state domestic product
in Gujarat has grown at an average of 8% per year. Today, the state accounts for about 5%
of the Indian population, but 9% of India’s registered manufacturing employment and 19% of
output (Authors’ calculation, Annual Survey of Industries, 2004-05). Rapid industrial growth
has, however, been accompanied by a severe degradation of air and water quality. Gujarat
contains the two most polluted industrial clusters in India, and three of India’s five most polluted rivers (Central Pollution Control Board, 2007, 2009b). Essentially all large cities in the
state, as well as some industrial areas, violate the National Ambient Air Quality standards for

6

Respirable Suspended Particulate Matter (RSPM) (Central Pollution Control Board, 2009a),
an air pollutant dangerous for human health.
High levels of industrial pollution persist despite a stringent regulatory framework for pollution control (Greenstone and Hanna, 2013).3 National laws set minimum levels of stringency
for pollution standards, but basically all enforcement of environmental regulations occurs at
the state level. State Pollution Control Boards, such as the Gujarat Pollution Control Board
(GPCB) are responsible for enforcing the provisions of the Water Act (1974) and the subsequent Air (1981) and Environmental Protection (1986) Acts and their attendant commandand-control pollution regulations. GPCB is responsible for the monitoring and regulation of
approximately 20,000 plants.

B

Environmental Audit Regulation

The main instruments that GPCB uses to limit industrial pollution are plant-level inspections
and third party environmental audits. This paper focuses on the environmental audit system.
In 1996, in order to remedy the perceived failure of inspections in enforcing pollution
standards, the High Court of Gujarat introduced the first third-party environmental audit
system in India (Gujarat High Court, 1996). Under the scheme, plants with high pollution
potential must submit a yearly environmental audit, conducted by an audit firm hired and
paid for by the plant. Audit-eligible plants are classified as Schedule I (most polluting) or
Schedule II (highly, but somewhat less polluting) on a basis of three dimensions: what the
plant produces, where it sends its effluent (i.e., wastewater), and the volume of that effluent.4
Schedule I plants must be audited by Schedule I auditors, usually an engineering college
or similar institution. Schedule II plants must be audited by a private audit firm, called a
Schedule II auditor. This study concerns reporting of Schedule II auditors and henceforth we
refer to plants in Schedule II as “audit eligible.” We also refer to regulated industrial plants
as “plants” throughout and reserve the word “firms” for audit firms.
Auditors visit each plant for about one day in each of three seasons of the year to observe
environmental management practices and measure pollution. Auditors compile their findings
3
The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act of 1974 created the Central Pollution Control Board
as a coordinating body to set pollution standards and the state boards as enforcement agencies.
4
For example, plants that produce certain types of dyes and dye intermediates are classified in Schedule II,
roughly, if their effluent is between 25 and 100 thousand liters per day, with variations around this classification
based on whether the effluent discharged by the plant goes on to further treatment in a common effluent
treatment plant (CETP). A plant with effluent below 25,000 liters would be exempt from the audit requirement.

7

from the three visits in a standardized format, fixed by the audit regulation, and submit the
audit report to the plant and GPCB by February 15th of the following year. The final audit
report describes the production process and physical state of the plant, including the measures
the plant has taken for pollution control and the results of pollution sampling during each of
the visits. Finally, auditors provide recommendations on pollution control to the plant.
On paper, the audit system also includes several safeguards and severe penalties for auditors
found cheating. Each four-member audit team must meet technical standards and be recertified by the regulator every two years.5 Audit teams can audit at most 15 plants per year,
and an audit firm, which may employ several teams, can audit a plant at most three years
in a row. Auditors with reports found to be inaccurate are liable to be decertified and their
reports on behalf of other plants declared void.
On the other side of the market, for an eligible plant, failure to submit an audit is punishable by closure and disconnection of water and electricity.6 A report showing noncompliance
with the terms of a plant’s environmental consent can also be punished by closure or fine
(Gujarat High Court, 1996). As we demonstrate below, the GPCB issues penalties to plants
with a surprisingly high frequency when they have evidence of violations.
Nevertheless, all sides consider the audit system, as currently implemented, to function
poorly. Industry recently litigated against the scheme, somewhat ironically and without success, to get the High Court of Gujarat to throw out the audit requirement on account of
GPCB not following up on audit reports (Gujarat High Court, 2010). The regulator, for its
part, believes that inaccurate reporting renders audits useless for enforcement, so review of
submitted audits by GPCB is mostly pro forma.
Consistent with auditor shopping, we observe strong price competition in the environmental
audit market. In interviews conducted prior to the experiment, both auditors and plants
claimed that an audit report could be purchased for as low as INR 10,000-15,000 (roughly
$200-$300). Our data on actual prices paid by control plants indicate that, conditional on
reporting any payment, plants reported a mean payment of roughly INR 24,000. It is highly
relevant that these measures of the price for an audit are significantly less than our best
estimates of the true costs of conducting an audit for most of the plants in the sample, which
5

Team members are required to have degrees in environmental engineering, chemical engineering, chemistry and biology, and minimum of two members must have at least one year’s experience in environmental
management.
6
In practice, some plants do not submit reports, usually claiming they are not eligible.

8

includes sending audit teams to plants three times per year, taking the requisite pollution
readings, and having the results analyzed at a certified laboratory (more on this below); the
implication is that auditors were frequently not taking complete pollution measurements and
presumably reporting readings based on other factors.

C

Experimental Sample and Design

In collaboration with GPCB, we designed and evaluated a modified audit system which sought
to improve the accuracy of auditor reporting.7
Our sample is the population of audit-eligible plants in the GPCB regions of Ahmedabad
and Surat, the two largest cities of Gujarat. We obtained from GPCB a list of all 2,771
red category (i.e. high pollution potential) plants with reported capital investment less than
INR 100 million (about USD 2 million), which are designated small or medium scale. Based
on available data and in accord with the eligibility criteria, we selected 633 plants as the
provisional sample of audit-eligible plants.8 Just before the 2009 audit season, we randomly
assigned half of the plants within this provisional sample, stratified by region, to the audit
treatment group. After the randomization, we collected the detailed sectoral information
needed to determine eligibility and, using exactly the same criteria, eliminated plants found
to be ineligible from both the treatment and control groups, reaching the study sample of 473
plants, 49.2% of which belong to the treatment group.
Treatment plants were assigned to the audit treatment once, in 2009, for the audit years
2009 (hereafter year one) and 2010 (year two). Treatment plants were formally notified of the
changes in the audit regulation that would apply to them by a letter from GPCB.9 Relative to
the status quo, the treatment altered three components of the audit system during year one:
an auditor was randomly assigned to the plant, paid from a central pool at a fixed rate and
its reports were backchecked for accuracy. In year two only, direct incentive pay for auditor
accuracy was added. These components were implemented as follows.
Assignment and Fixed Pay. Auditors were randomly assigned to treatment plants by
7

This experiment was designed and undertaken concurrently with the evaluation of another intervention,
an increase in inspection frequency for some plants, which was conducted stratified on the audit treatment and
which we study in a separate paper.
8
GPCB did not have a definitive list of audit-eligible firms at the time of sample selection.
9
The text of the letter sent to treatment plants is in the Online Appendix. Plants commonly receive
regulatory notices and we do not believe the letter itself was a treatment channel, since it did not induce
treatment plants to submit audits at a higher rate than control plants.

9

the research team and paid from a central pool of funds raised for the study. The payment was
fixed at INR 45,000 in the first year. This rate was estimated by applying GPCB’s sampling
charges to the average plant characteristics in the audit sample and adding a small margin.
Variation in actual cost arises due to a plant’s sector and other characteristics; textile plants
which dominate our sample are at the high end of this range with an estimated audit cost of
roughly INR 40,000. Payment for auditors working in treatment plants thus should cover the
average cost of completing an audit. That said, the treatment payment was significantly above
the average price of INR 24,000 that control plants report paying for an audit. As we noted
above, this status quo price appears to be well below what would be required for auditors to
collect the required pollution samples.
For auditor recruiting, at the start of each year all GPCB-certified Schedule II auditors
were solicited for their interest to participate in the treatment. In both years interest was
oversubscribed, relative to the number of treatment plants. (Auditor interest in the program
likely reflected the fact that it offered better working terms, including payments which were
in the high range of the market.) Consequently, at the beginning of each year, auditors were
randomly allocated a number of plants in proportion to their capacity, measured by number
of certified audit teams, which was predetermined.
Auditors could use auditing capacity not allocated in the treatment to conduct audits in
the control group. Thus, some of the audit firms were working under two very different sets
of incentives at the same time, and we exploit this variation. In the first year, out of 42 audit
firms, 24 worked in control only, 9 in treatment only, and 9 in both. In 2010, out of 34 audit
firms, 7 worked in control only, 12 in treatment only, and 15 in both.10
Backchecks. A randomly selected 20% of auditor plant readings in the treatment were
backchecked in the field by technical staff of independent engineering colleges. (These colleges
were certified as Schedule I auditors and hence would never directly audit the Schedule II
plants in our sample.) Backchecks measure the same pollutants and in the same manner as
audits; since they are Schedule I auditors, backcheckers have much experience collecting and
analyzing pollution samples themselves. The median backcheck occurred ten days after an
audit visit in the treatment. Auditors were aware of the possibility of being backchecked, and
10

The increase of auditors working in treatment only or both in the second year comes from the fact that,
in the first year, some auditors were not able to participate because they had already reached their capacity
when the program was announced.

10

knew that results would be used for quality control, although in year one no sanctions for
poor performance were specified in advance and all auditors were paid the same regardless of
accuracy.11
Incentive Pay. In year two, an explicit incentive pay for auditor accuracy, as measured by
backchecks in the treatment, was added to the basic set of reforms. Incentive payments used a
formula that was first applied to auditor readings in year one to demonstrate to each auditor
how accuracy was measured. The pay formula first calculated the difference δp between audit
report pollution concentration readings and backcheck readings, normalized by the standard
deviation of backcheck readings, for each pollutant p. It then averaged the scores for six water
and three air pollutants into indices for each media and created the overall measure of auditor
quality as the average of these two:

∆W ater =

X
p∈W ater

δp ,

∆Air =

X

δp ,

∆All = (∆W ater + ∆Air )/2.

p∈Air

Auditor readings that matched backchecks exactly would thus mean an index value of ∆All = 0,
while a value of one means that the weighted average auditor reading exceeded the weighted
average backcheck reading by one standard deviation.
Auditors were grouped into three payment categories based on this summary of the difference between their reported readings and the backcheck readings. The least accurate quartile
of auditors was paid INR 35,000 per audit. The next least accurate quartile received INR
40,000 per audit, and the most accurate half was paid INR 52,500 per audit. The bonus
scheme therefore maintained the average pay of INR 45,000 from year one.

D

How Does the Treatment Change Auditor and Plant Incentives?

Under the status quo market structure, several factors likely contributed to auditor misreporting. First, plants could shop for an auditor who would provide a favorable report and
condition payments on the contents of that report. In such a market, an audit firm has an
incentive to build a reputation for leniency to make it more likely that it would be hired by
the same or another plant in the future. This market structure also rewarded cost-cutting by
11
At the end of year one, GPCB received aggregated reports that summarized the accuracy of auditors and
the ranges that determined the bonuses in year two. This format did not give them the information necessary
to levy sanctions or penalties against specific auditors.

11

auditors, since they could offer plants reports indicating compliance with the standards at the
lowest price if they skimped on data collection, which is anyway unnecessary if the contents
of the report are agreed on beforehand. Indeed, this possibility is consistent with data that
showed the equilibrium audit price in the control or status quo is below the estimated cost
of collecting samples and conducting laboratory tests. Working against these incentives for
auditors to misreport, the GPCB has the power to decertify auditors found to file false reports.
The treatment increased auditors’ incentives to file accurate reports for several reasons.
First, assignment to a plant by an external authority and a fixed pay structure meant that
auditor compensation was independent of what it reported. This independence reduced auditor
incentives to report a plant as compliant in order to maximize current and future payments
from the plant. Second, the introduction of backchecks increased auditor monitoring and
likely raised the perceived likelihood that, although not explicitly part of the experiment, the
regulator would disbar auditors who submitted false reports (or at least not assign them to
treatment plants in year two). In equilibrium, this also raises the bribe a plant would have
to pay the auditor to induce false reporting. The introduction of incentive pay in the second
year, which explicitly rewarded accuracy, enhanced this effect.
Third, the level of pay was fixed to be high enough for auditors to cover the costs of
conducting an audit, including collecting and analyzing the air and water samples. This
increase in pay relative to the status quo market price was arguably necessary to induce
auditors to do the work. However, the higher payments, relative to the control market pay,
may have interacted with increased monitoring to further incentivize accurate reporting in the
treatment, if treatment auditors decided to report more accurately because they had more to
lose if disbarred from auditing. This efficiency wage channel might have been weakened by
two factors, however. First, the experiment was limited to a two-year horizon, reducing the
incentive to behave well to stay included. Second, the increase in profits for an auditor who
switched from not even measuring pollution, in the status quo, to collecting and analyzing
pollution samples, in the treatment, was likely small.12
The different treatment elements are complementary. In particular, without the threat
12

We estimate that doing the work in the treatment would cost INR 6,000 in travel and around INR 20,000
in sample collection and analysis charges for a total INR 26,000 increase in costs. This is larger than the
increase in INR 21,000 in average payment to an audit firm in the treatment, relative to the control. Of course,
there was heterogeneity in these changes in costs and payments, so for some auditors, profits were higher if
they chose to report accurately in the treatment if they chose not to in the control.

12

of monitoring via backchecks, just setting a higher level of pay could be easily undermined
by side payments. The ease of making side payments is greater without random assignment.
In addition, absent random assignment, backchecks alone provide weak incentives since a
reputation for leniency would remain valuable for any auditor seeking to be rehired. And to
close the loop, random assignment alone is insufficient if the price is not regulated to ensure
that it covers the costs of performing an audit.
Finally, improvement in auditor incentives to truthfully report plant pollution should have
increased plants’ incentives to reduce pollution levels. Specifically, treatment plants will respond to more accurate reporting by increasing abatement activities if the expected cost of
GPCB penalties is sufficiently high relative to the cost of abatement.

III

Data and Summary Statistics

In this section we describe the multiple data sets used in the analysis, and provide summary
statistics on our plant sample.

A

Data Sources

The key outcomes of interest are accuracy of auditor reporting and the pollution response of
plants. Two data sources are used to measure accuracy. First, audit reports filed with GPCB
in 2009 and 2010. These reports cover a mandated set of water pollutants (i.e., biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, total dissolved solids, total suspended solids,
ammoniacal nitrogen) and air pollutants (sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and suspended particulate matter) described in Table A1.13 Both treatment and control plants followed the
same practice of scheduling audit dates in advance of actual auditor visit to collect air and
water samples. This opens the possibility that plants alter short-run behavior to ensure low
pollution readings, for example by running air pollution control equipment or reducing boiler
load when pollution is to be measured. We expect that, if anything, this should be more likely
in the treatment, reducing estimates of how much the treatment increased pollution readings
in audits.
13

Auditors record these pollutants at various stages in the treatment process and with respect to different
systems in the plant. We use pollutant concentrations at the final outlet from the plant for water samples,
as these are the readings with a direct impact on the environment and are therefore most closely attended by
both auditors and GPCB. For air, we focus on boiler-stack samples for the widest comparability across the
sample, as most plants have boilers.

13

The second source of data for auditor accuracy is the backchecks, which were conducted
in a sample of treatment plants throughout 2009 and 2010. These backchecks were conducted
on the same pollutants and locations as the audits, and were scheduled to occur close to the
audit visits. Auditors and backcheckers use the same technology and standardized procedures
to measure pollution. Treatment backcheck data were complemented by “midline” backchecks
after the third season of audit visits in year two in both treatment and control groups, using the
same process and agencies. Auditors were not informed about the probability of backchecks
in the control plants, and these backchecks were neither transmitted to GPCB nor used to
compute any specific auditor payment.14 The midline data allow for a direct measurement of
the comparative accuracy of auditors working in treatment and control plants, measured as
the difference between auditor and backcheck readings.
The third source is data on plant pollution emissions which comes from an endline survey
conducted from April through July of 2011, approximately six months after the last audit
visits in the treatment group. Pollution sampling in the survey was mostly conducted by the
agencies that did backchecks and included the same pollutants as discussed above. The endline
analysis includes all plants in the audit sample (treatment and control). Overall, we collected
2,953 pollution samples from 408 plants in the study sample, an average of 7.2 pollutants per
plant.15 Attrition in the endline survey was balanced across treatment and control groups.16
Finally, we utilize GPCB administrative data to better understand plant and auditor incentives in the status quo and their response to the treatments. These data cover GPCB’s
plant inspections for plants in the audit sample between 2008 and 2011. We link 8,627 GPCB
inspections, with their accompanying pollutant readings, to 4,269 subsequent actions or penalties as documented by the regulatory files on each plant. The actions range in severity from
14

The midline sample was drawn from treatment and control groups in order to maximize the number
of plants covered by auditors working simultaneously in both the treatment and control groups, and to use
information on the dates of audit visits to conduct backchecks that were as close as possible to the date of the
initial visit. In the treatment group, the sample plants were randomly selected stratified by auditor. In the
control group, the sample plants were drawn non-randomly in order to ensure coverage of auditors working
in the treatment simultaneously. Priority for the survey was first given to plants that previously submitted
an audit report by an auditor working in the treatment group. The control sample was completed by adding
those plants for which auditors submitted a date for the audit visit and finally by adding randomly selected
plants for which auditors had not submitted a date.
15
The audit intervention was conducted concurrently with another treatment, an increased frequency of
regulatory inspection, which directly affected plants, but not auditors. For ease of interpretation of our pollution results, we restrict the pollution sample to the subset of audit sample plants not subject to the other
experimental intervention.
16
While a somewhat greater share of plants were surveyed in the treatment group, 88.8% versus 83.8% of
control plants, the difference of 5.09 percentage points (standard error 3.16 percentage points) in these rates
is not statistically significant. Most attrition was attributable to plant closure.

14

letters of warning up to orders that the plant be disconnected from electricity supply.

B

Summary Statistics

Despite being prima facie audit-eligible, some plants in the sample failed to submit audits in
year one and/or year two. There were several reasons for these instance of non-submission:
GPCB had judged them not-audit-eligible in the past, they changed products since data used
to determine eligibility was compiled, they protested their audit-eligible status, they chose not
to submit and incur the risk of a penalty, or they closed. Table I shows that treatment and
control plants were about as likely to submit audit reports. Treatment plants were slightly less
likely to report in the first year (70% versus 74%) slightly more likely in the second year (70%
versus 64%), though neither difference is statistically significant. These rates of submission
are comparable to those in 2008, the year prior to the experiment (72% in treatment plants
and 69% in control plants). The treatment, therefore, does not appear to have induced more
plants to submit audit reports.
Though balanced in aggregate, there may be heterogeneity in which plants submit across
the treatment and control groups. We use GPCB administrative data from prior the experiment to estimate probits for audit submission.17 The results are presented in Online Appendix
Table 1. We fail to reject the null hypothesis that the effect of the plant characteristics on
submitting an audit during the experiment is equal in the treatment and control groups; the
exceptions are that treatment plants are relatively more likely to submit in the second year of
the experiment and that, relative to the treatment group, textile plants in the control group
are relatively more likely to submit audit reports (though, across the board, treatment plants
have higher submission rates).
We take multiple approaches to address the possibility that selection bias influences the
estimates of the treatment on audit reporting. First, several specifications control for true
pollution levels measured in the backchecks; in these specifications, the source of any selection
bias would have to be on a dimension other than pollution emissions to influence the results.
Second, we implement DiNardo et al.’s (hereafter DFL) reweighting scheme, using administrative data from before the experiment, so that the distribution of audit submitters’ observables
17

We use the following variables to predict submission: whether a plant is located in an industrial estate,
whether it is in the textiles sector, whether its effluent flows to a common treatment plant, the amount of
wastewater it generates, whether it submitted an audit before the experiment, whether it was cited by the
regulator for a violation before the experiment, and a dummy for the second year of the experiment.

15

resembles that of all plants (DiNardo et al., 1996). The reweighting is based on the results of
the estimation of a probit for submission as a function of baseline plant characteristics (without the treatment indicator or its interaction with the characteristics), shown in column 2 of
Online Appendix Table 1. The distributions of predicted submission from the model have a
broad support that is common across plants that do and do not submit. For completeness, we
also use the standard selection correction approach (Heckman, 1979).
Table II presents summary statistics and a randomization check using baseline characteristics of plants in the study sample, among plants that did submit a report in either year.
Plants submitting audits are similar across treatment and control. In Panel A we consider
plant characteristics. Most sample plants are textile factories eligible for environmental audit
due to high effluent volume. Textiles is the largest registered manufacturing sector by employment in India and second largest in Gujarat (Authors’ calculation, ASI (2005)). Both
treatment and control plants have similar pollution potential as measured by effluent quantity
and type of fuel used. Treatment plants are 10 percentage points less likely to have a bag
filter, a type of air pollution control equipment, installed, but are similar to control plants
with respect to other air pollution control equipment such as cyclones and scrubbers.18
Table II, Panel B reports on the interactions of sample plants with GPCB in the year prior
to the study by treatment status. A little over 80% of this group submitted an audit report
in the year prior to the study’s initiation. Roughly the same fraction was inspected and over
40% of sample plants were mandated to install equipment.19 Based on the GPCB records, a
significant number of sample plants have been subject to costly regulatory actions: around a
quarter were cited for any type of violation and fully 10% of plants, in both treatment and
control, had their utilities disconnected at least once. About three percent were required to
post a bank guarantee (i.e., bond) against future environmental performance. These variables
are balanced across treatment and control plant. Consistent with being less likely to have
a bag filter, treatment plants were more likely (at the ten percent level) to have received a
citation for an air pollutant violation than control but equally likely for water pollutants and
all citations together.
18

In the same comparison of covariate balance for the full study sample, unconditional on submission (not
shown), bag filter installation remains the only difference between treatment and control plants significant at
the five-percent level.
19
This 40% is atypically high; during the prior year GPCB had conducted an air pollution control equipment
installation campaign that affected many sample plants.

16

In summary, treatment and control plants that submitted an audit had similar interactions
with the GPCB in the year prior to the experiment. Furthermore, it is evident the regulator has
a meaningful track record of action so the information reported by auditors had the potential
to change plant behavior.
Finally, both the midline sample (the subset of plants that were backchecked during the
midline) and the sample of plants audited by auditors working in both treatment and control
group (relevant for fixed effect specifications) remain well-balanced along the observables shown
in Table II.20

IV

Econometric Approach and Results

The results are divided into three parts. First, we use data on control plants to examine the
status quo audit market. Second, we estimate the effect of the treatment on auditor reporting
behavior as measured by pollution levels in audit reports and corresponding backchecks. Third,
we measure how two years of altered auditor incentives influenced plant polluting behavior.

A

Auditor Reporting in the Control Group

A unique feature of this paper’s setting is that we observe both auditor reports and an independent measure of the underlying pollution—backchecks of the same pollutants. This allows
us to assess whether the market was producing reliable information for the regulator.
Figure 1, Panel A plots the distributions of concentrations of Suspended Particulate Matter
(SPM), an important air pollutant, from audit reports and backchecks for the control group.
In each distribution a vertical line marks the SPM regulatory standard of 150 mg/m3 , and
gray shading shows the share of the probability mass that falls between 75% of the standard
and the standard, the zone where we might expect measurements to fall if auditors are trying
to show firms as compliant without being too conspicuous.
We observe several striking facts. The top half of Panel A shows that auditors report
the vast majority of plants (93%) as compliant with the SPM standard, and there is a high
concentration of readings just below the standard; 73% of plants have auditor-reported SPM
concentrations in the narrow range from 75% to 100% of the pollution standard. Such bunching
below the limit is consistent with targeted misreporting by auditors but also with two other
20

The one additional imbalance in both samples is that the treatment plants generate more wastewater.

17

explanations: plants may minimize abatement costs subject to the constraint of not exceeding
the standard, although emissions includes some randomness which makes it difficult to hit the
standard exactly, or regulatory capture may cause the standard to be deliberately set at a
level that allows plants to narrowly comply.
The second half of Figure 1, Panel A uses backcheck data to test these possibilities. Our
second finding is significant dispersion in the backcheck distribution for SPM. Only 19% of
the plants have readings in the range that covers 75% to 100% of the standard, which is 54
percentage points less than in the audit distribution. Further, substantial probability mass
exceeds the standard: 59% of backcheck readings exceed the standard compared to just 7%
in the audit distribution. There are also more very low backcheck readings. This increase
in the left tail of backchecks, relative to audits, may be explained by the cost of measuring
air pollution concentrations, making it cheaper for auditors to report narrow compliance by
default than to properly sample and document a very low reading. In summary, the audit
and backcheck distributions together provide striking evidence that, at least in the case of
SPM, auditors fabricate data in order to falsely report plants as narrowly comply with the
regulatory standard. Backchecks do not similarly cluster beneath the standard, belying the
two alternative explanations for the pattern of auditor reporting.
Next, we use regression analysis to check whether the difference in pollution readings
between audit reports and backchecks holds across the full range of pollutants, continuing to
use the control sample only. Table III reports results from OLS regressions on the stacked
data, including both backchecks and audit readings, of the form:

1{Compliant}ij = β1 1{AuditReport} + αr + ij .

(1)

In Panel A, 1{Compliant}ij equals 1 for readings of pollutant i from plant j that are between 75% and 100% of the regulatory standard, and in Panel B, 1{Compliant}ij equals 1 if the
reading is below the standard. The coefficient of interest is β1 on the dummy 1{AuditReport};
each plant appears twice, as the data is pooled across matched pairs of audits and backchecks,
so β1 indicates how likely a pollutant report is to be compliant in audits relative to the omitted category of backcheck readings. The specification includes fixed effects αr for the regions
r ∈ {Ahmedabad, Surat}, on which treatment assignment was stratified, and we cluster stan-

18

dard errors at the plant level to account for correlation in the errors for different pollution
samples taken at the same plant (on average we have seven pollutants per plant).
Table III, Panel A, column (1) shows that across all pollutants, pollution levels in audit
reports are 27 percentage points more likely to show narrow compliance than backchecks. This
large increase is against a baseline of just 10% of backcheck readings that fall in the 75%-100%
range. As to whether the reading is compliant, Panel B, column (1) shows that across all
pollutants 55.7% of backchecks are below the relevant regulatory standard. The coefficient for
audit reports indicates that an additional 28.8% of readings from audits are falsely reported
as below the standard. This finding is evident for both air and water pollutants.
Taken together, Figure 1 and Table III suggest that neither plant abatement behavior nor
regulatory capture underlies the clustering observed just beneath the standard. Rather, the
auditors frequently failed to truthfully report pollution readings that would provide regulators
with the information necessary to act against the more than 40% of the plants in violation of
the regulatory standard.

B

The Effect of the Treatment on Auditor Behavior

B.1

Truth-telling about Regulatory Compliance

Next, we examine the impact of the treatment on auditor reporting. Figure 1, Panel B shows
the distributions of SPM concentrations as reported by audits and backchecks for treatment
plants during the midline.
The top half of Panel B reveals that in the audit treatment group 39% of readings are
within 75% to 100% of the standard. This is far below the 73% that were in this range in the
control group audit reports. Further, the support of the audit and backcheck distributions is
much more similar among the treatment plants than it was among the control. The similarity
is especially evident for readings above the standard, which were very sparse among control
audits. While the treatment increased truth-telling by auditors, it did not end false reporting.
The 39% share of audit readings in the shaded area still exceeds the 14% share in the backcheck
distribution.
To examine the impact across pollutants we pool samples of all pollutant readings from
audits and backchecks for plant j, both collected in the final season of year two. We estimate

19

ordinary least-squares regressions of a difference-in-difference form:

1{Compliant}ij = β1 1{AuditReport} × Tj + β2 1{AuditReport} + β3 Tj + αr + ij ,

(2)

where 1{Compliant}ij and αr are defined as before, and standard errors are clustered at plant
level. β3 controls for any difference in true compliance, as measured by backchecks, across
treatment and control. There are two coefficients of interest. The first is β2 , which measures
how much more likely an audit report is than a backcheck to be compliant in the control group.
The second, β1 , measures how treatment changes this difference between pollution levels in
audit reports and backchecks or the frequency of false compliance reports.
The results are in Table IV. The treatment increased truth-telling about compliance with
the regulatory standard across the full set of pollutants. In Panel A, column (1), audit reports
are 19 percentage points less likely to falsely report a reading in the narrow range of 75-100%
of the standard in the treatment than in the control. This is a reduction of 69%, relative
to the control mean. Similarly Panel B, column (1) reveals that audits in the treatment are
81% (-0.234/0.288) less likely to falsely report compliance with the standard. These effects
are evident separately for both water pollutants, in column (2), and air pollutants, in column
(3), with the air effects larger in magnitude.21
The effect of the treatment on reporting of compliance and narrow compliance is basically
unchanged after applying the DFL reweighting for selection.22 This approach reweights observations in the sample of plants that submit by the odds ratio of non-submission, to approximate
the observable characteristics of all plants. As the results are qualitatively unchanged with
this reweighting, the difference in compliant pollution levels in audit reports across the treatment and control groups does not appear to reflect selection bias in audit reporting. It is
also possible that the backcheck compliance measure in these regressions already controls for
selection.
Figure 2 summarizes how the audit treatment changes the density of the audit report
pollutant distribution. To normalize pollution readings relative to the regulatory standard,
21

For comparability, we omit pH from all panels as both high and low readings can be harmful, unlike for
the other pollutants. In Panel A the results are unchanged if we include pH, for which the standard is a range
rather than a maximum limit.
22
For example, the coefficients of interest (standard error) on Audit report × Treatment corresponding to
the first row of Table IV Panel B, where compliance is the dependent variable, are -0.190 (0.041), -0.158 (0.049)
and -0.241 (0.067).

20

we subtract the standard for each pollutant, and divide by the pollutant standard deviation
in backchecks. The horizontal axis therefore marks the number of standard deviations above
or below the regulatory limit. We then fit 40 separate regressions for indicator variables for a
pollutant reading belonging to a particular 0.05-standard-deviation-width bin on an indicator
for an audit report being from the audit treatment. Weakly negative (positive) values indicate
that treatment auditors are less (more) likely to report readings in that bin. The treatment
dramatically reduces the amount of mass just beneath the standard. The treatment auditors
instead report significantly more readings in the bins more than 0.1 standard deviations below
the standard and especially in the bins stretching up to 0.5 standard deviations above the
standard. Note that for all pollutants together, unlike for SPM, we do not see systematic
increases in pollution reports at levels well below the standard.23
The treatment, then, succeeded in greatly increasing the frequency with which auditors
truthfully report pollution readings above the relevant standard. The problem in the status
quo was systematic distortion and the treatment created the conditions necessary for auditors
to choose to report true pollution readings with much greater frequency.

B.2

Truth-telling about Pollution Levels

Though the compliance threshold is discrete, the regulator and policy makers are also interested in the level of continuous pollution emissions, since this ultimately affects public health.
We therefore examine next the reported concentrations of pollutants in audit reports. We
standardize pollutants by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation of the
same pollutant reading among backcheck samples. Thus, a one-unit change in the pollution
measures can be interpreted as a change of one standard deviation. We estimate:

yijt = βTj + αr + αt + ijt ,

(3)

where yijt is the standardized audit report reading of pollutant i in plant j taken in year t.
The set-up is similar to equation 2, except the data are drawn only from audit reports and
cover multiple years. The sample includes all plants that submitted a report in at least one
23

Across all pollutants, a significant 4 percentage points more audit readings in the treatment than in the
control are below 75% of the regulatory standard. This difference shrinks to 2 percentage points, and is no
longer significant, after conditioning on backchecks below 75% of the standard.

21

year. (The advantage of using only audit data and not backchecks is data availability for both
years of experiment.) To account for annual variation in pollution, αt are fixed effects for the
year y ∈ {2009, 2010}. We cluster standard errors at plant level.
The parameter of interest, β, measures whether auditors’ reported concentrations differ in
treatment and control groups. In specifications with auditor fixed effects, αa , β is identified
from cases where the same auditor works under both treatment and control market structures.
This specification is noteworthy, because the resulting within-auditor estimates are freed from
concerns that the estimates are due to better auditors selecting into the treatment group.
Table V measures the effect of the treatment on auditor reporting, where odd-numbered
columns are the base specification and even-numbered columns include auditor fixed effects.
The three panels are for three different measures of auditor reporting. Panel A presents estimates from specifications where the outcome is a dummy for the audit report being below the
regulatory standard (compliance). The column (1) results show that treatment audit reports
were 15 percentage points less likely to report that a pollutant reading was in compliance. The
column (2) specification includes auditor fixed effects, so that the treatment effect is estimated
from variation in reporting across the treatment and control groups from audit firms working
in both groups; the point estimate is slightly more negative than before, with treatment audit
reports 18 percentage points less likely to report compliance. The remaining columns suggest
a greater decline in reported compliance for water relative to air pollution readings, although
the differences are not large in the context of the standard errors.
Panel B examines continuous measures of reporting. In column (1), the mean audit report
reading for all pollutants in treatment plants is a significant 0.103 standard deviations higher
than the mean report in the control. The addition of auditor fixed effects, as shown in column
(2), increases the point estimate of the audit treatment to 0.131 standard deviations, but the
estimates with and without auditor fixed effects remain statistically indistinguishable. It is
noteworthy that the effect of the treatment remains constant, even when the identification
comes from within-auditor variation, showing that the same audit firms report differently
under the two regimes. The coefficients on the audit treatment are similar for both water and
air pollutants considered separately, as shown in columns (3) through (6).
The magnitude of these effects is substantial. Consider the estimate in column (2) of
0.131 standard deviations for all pollutants, which is roughly of the same size as the effect

22

for Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) estimated alone (not shown). For plants where the
effluent did not go on for further treatment, the standard deviation of BOD in backchecks in
final-outlet samples was 203 mg/l and the mean 191 mg/l, as against a concentration standard
of 30 mg/l. An effect of size 0.131 standard deviations thus represents 26.7 mg/l for BOD,
or 89% of the standard. The mean and standard deviation of SO2 readings in backchecks
were 64 and 108 parts per million (ppm), respectively, as against a standard of 40 ppm. A
0.131 standard deviation movement is thus 35% of the standard. Consistent with our earlier
discussion of the distributions, these specifications show that the change in pollutant reports
shifts several plants from compliance to non-compliance and is economically significant, in
representing a meaningful increase in reported pollution.
One concern with using auditor reports of pollution concentrations as an outcome is that
they combine true pollutant emission, measurement error and potential auditor manipulation
of the results. If the treatment caused plants to reduce emissions, then auditor reports conflate
changes in auditor reporting and pollution emissions such that the estimate of β will understate
the effect of the treatment on auditor reporting. We investigate this possibility by returning
to the midline data, using the difference between audit and backcheck readings of the same
pollutant,
D
Audit
Backcheck
yij
= yij
− yij
,

as an outcome. This difference controls at the plant level for any possible effect of the intervention on actual pollution levels, but is only available on a comparable basis for the midline
sample. Readings are matched on pollutant i, plant j, sampling location (boiler stack or final
outlet) and date. When backchecks are treated as the truth, negative values indicate underreporting as they show auditors reporting lower readings than the true emissions concentrations.
The results are reported in Table V, Panel C. The difference between audit and backcheck
readings is -0.304 standard deviations in the control, reflecting the observed negative bias in
auditor reporting. The treatment coefficient of 0.210 standard deviations (standard error of
0.073 standard deviations) indicates that auditors working in treatment plants report substantially higher readings, after accounting for any changes in actual emissions across the treatment
and control plants. Indeed, this finding implies that the treatment erases nearly 70% of the
underreporting observed in the control group. The treatment coefficient in audit differences

23

is smaller in the column (2) specification with auditor fixed effects and has a larger standard
error; however, the null of zero can be rejected with a p-value of 0.12 and the point estimate
in column (2) is within one standard error of the column (1) estimate, from the specification
without fixed effects.
The Table V results are qualitatively unchanged by the application of the DFL correction
for the selection of plants into submitting audit reports. In Panel A, the DFL correction leaves
the point estimate for all pollutants basically unchanged. In the Panel B specifications for
pollutant levels, the DFL correction increases the point estimates for audit treatment for the
all and water pollutants specifications. The point estimates in the difference specification of
Panel C are about 20% smaller, which is within one standard error of the Table V estimates.
Further, the DFL correction increases the standard errors in panels B and C such that the 95%
confidence intervals of all of the Table V and corresponding DFL estimates easily overlap.24
Note that the changes in point estimates are larger in the levels specifications, where selection
may be a greater concern since backchecks are not used as a control for contemporaneous
pollution.25 We conclude that correcting for selection into audit submission on observables
does not change our findings with respect to auditor reporting.

B.3

Evidence on Possible Treatment Channels

Our treatment spanned two calendar years and included several components—random assignment of auditors to plants, fixed payments from a central pool, and backchecks—each
of which may have independently influenced auditor reporting. Additionally, the auditors
received bonus pay for accurate reporting in the second year.
All the channels described in Section II.D may have been at play. The sample size was too
small to randomly assign each component separately and obtain meaningful estimates of their
effects. Moreover, some of the features are not likely to be effective in isolation (e.g., fixed pay
from a central pool without random assignment would still leave plants with an incentive to
shop for favorable auditors).
24

With the DFL correction, the treatment coefficients (standard errors) corresponding to the specifications
in odd columns of Table V, Panel A are -0.150 (0.027), -0.202 (0.035) and -0.035 (0.026). The same coefficients
in the level regression of Panel B are 0.230 (0.114), 0.314 (0.168) and 0.064 (0.025), and in the difference
regression of Panel C are 0.165 (0.119), 0.117 (0.152) and 0.241 (0.165).
25
Heckman (1979) gives an alternative approach to selection correction. Using that approach, and the same
variables as used to predict submission in the DFL approach, all coefficients are nearly identical to the main
results in both Panels B and C. The Heckman selection correction approach cannot be applied to discrete
outcomes (e.g., compliance in Panel A), because it assumes a normally distributed error.

24

Since financial incentives were introduced only in year two, there is a possibility to evaluate
them. The key challenge is that this variation is non-experimental. Over time, arguably
because of our experiment, treatment plants were reducing their emissions, relative to control
plants (on this, see Section C below). The impact of the reform on reporting behavior may
also have had a time effect. Consequently, we need to accurately specify the time trends
and assume no other factors that influence audit reports changed discretely between the two
years in the treatment relative to the control. To measure changes in reporting over time,
our sample is the full sample of audit reports in both years, and our outcome variable, as we
lack backcheck reports for control plants except during the midline, is the reported pollution
reading from audits only.
Figure 3 reports the trends in audit reporting over time. The figure plots the mean standardized pollution reading in audit reports for all pollutants, by year and each of the three
audit seasons, separately for plants in the treatment and control groups. Pollution in audit
reports in the control group is roughly flat at -0.3 standard deviations across the two years.
In the treatment group, pollution reports are generally well above those in the control. Over
the course of the first year, pollution levels in treatment audits decline with each season, and
over the second year they also decline, somewhat less sharply. The most striking feature of
Figure 3 is the sharp increase in reported pollution readings in the treatment at the beginning
of year two when financial incentives were initiated. In other words, the figure is consistent
with the financial incentives having an independent effect on the accuracy of auditor reports.
This finding is documented in Table VI. Column (1) duplicates the base specification
of Panel B, Table V for reference, showing the coefficient on the year two (2010) indicator.
Column (2) includes as additional covariates a linear trend in fractional years since January
1, 2009, the interaction of the linear trend with a treatment indicator, and the interaction of
the year two dummy with the treatment indicator. The parameter of interest is associated
with this last variable, and it tests for a discrete relative change at the beginning of year two
in auditor-reported pollution readings among treatments.
Three findings in Table VI echo those of Figure 3. First, as already seen in Panel A of
Table V, the year-one treatment features cause higher auditor reported pollution levels (indeed,
the figure indicates that this effect is evident from the very beginning of the experiment).
Second, the interaction of the treatment indicator and the time trend, which is fractional

25

in the date of visits and therefore runs continuously from zero to two, shows a significant
downward trend in reported pollution among treatment plants. This finding foreshadows the
finding in the next section that the treatment caused plants to reduce their emissions. In
contrast, there is no declining trend in the control group.
Third and most importantly, there is a discrete increase in pollution levels in audit reports
in the treatment group, relative to the control, at the beginning of year two that interrupts
the relative decline of reports in the treatment. Specifically, treatment pollution levels in
audit reports are a statistically significant 0.257 standard deviations higher at the beginning
of year two and this exactly coincides with the introduction of the incentive pay scheme. This
discrete increase is robust to alternative functional form assumptions about the differential
time trends.26 These results suggest that the incentive pay component of the treatment led
auditors to report higher, more accurate audit readings.
Table 3 in the Online Appendix provides tentative additional evidence that the risk of
being backchecked also had an independent effect on auditor behavior. Specifically, we ask
whether an audit firm that had a client plant recently backchecked reports differently, using
data from the midline survey (conducted over the last season of audit visits in the experiment).
When this midline began, pollution readings for treatment plants under an auditor had been
regularly backchecked for nearly two years, but no backchecks had occurred in the control.
The table shows that having recently been backchecked during the midline increases the accuracy of reporting in control plants but not in treatment plants. We find this consistent with
auditors updating their beliefs to recognize that backchecks were possible in control plants,
and improving reporting in response.
Finally, our results allow us to rule out some channels. The auditor reporting results in
regressions with auditor fixed effects, showing that the same audit firms report differently in
the treatment and control groups of plants, suggest that higher pay did not directly improve
reporting through an income effect, as extra income would have given auditors more resources
in both groups. Selection of better auditors into treatment participation and Hawthorne effects
at the auditor level are also inconsistent with the within-auditor estimates of a significant
treatment effect.
26

The addition of quadratic and cubic trends and their interaction with the treatment indicators causes the
discrete jump in reporting in year two to increase to 0.284 standard deviations (standard error 0.116 standard
deviations).

26

C

The Effect of the Treatment on Plant Emissions

Given the increase in truth-telling, a natural next question is whether plant abatement behavior responded to more accurate auditor reporting. We expect plants to respond only if truthful
reports on high pollution will cost them more, through regulatory sanctions, than pollution
abatement.
Our analysis utilizes plant-level pollution emissions data from the endline survey. To avoid
sample selection issues, and because the audit treatment may have affected the emissions of all
plants, not just those that chose to submit audit reports (and the worst polluters may chose
not to submit), our sample is all plants that entered our sample, not just those which filed
audit reports.
To measure the effect of the treatment on pollution emissions, we report the results of
fitting OLS regressions for pollution outcomes on region fixed effects and a treatment indicator
with the cross-sectional endline survey data. The outcome variables are both the continuous
pollution outcome and a compliance dummy. Further, we also estimate quantile regressions
of the form
Qyij |Xj (τ ) = βTj + αr + ij ,
where Q(τ ) is the τ -quantile of the pollutant concentration conditional on treatment status
and regional indicator variables.
Table VII reports the results. In Panel A, the outcome variable is a standardized measure
of pollution emissions calculated in the same manner as in the auditor accuracy tables above.
On average, the treatment plants reduced pollution by a statistically significant 0.211 standard
deviations.27 This effect is driven by a large decrease of 0.300 standard deviations in water
pollutant concentrations, shown in column (2). The estimated effect on air pollution in column
(3) is smaller and insignificant. Since the volume of effluent emitted did not change in response
to the experimental treatments, these reductions in concentrations represent reductions in the
total emitted effluent load—i.e., less water pollution—among treatment plants.
27
The coefficient for all pollutants is due in part to several control plants with very high pollution readings.
It decreases in magnitude to -0.143 standard deviations (standard error 0.068 standard deviations) and -0.114
(standard error 0.058 standard deviations) when the readings are top-coded above the 99.5 and 99 percentiles of
the pollutant distribution, respectively. There are, however, several pieces of corroborating evidence that these
readings are genuine and should not be top-coded. The plants in question have track records of noncompliance,
and other pollutant samples collected at the same plants, both before the high endline pollutant readings and
at the endline, also show pollution levels far above average.

27

In Panel B, the outcome variable is whether the pollutant reading is compliant, that is
below the regulatory standard. In column (1), compliance is estimated to have increased by a
small and insignificant 2.68 percentage points. Columns (2) and (3) indicate that the effects
are similar for water and air pollution. The fact that reductions in pollution did not increase
compliance significantly suggests that these reductions were concentrated among plants with
pollution levels far from the regulatory threshold.
To explore the source of estimated mean pollution reductions, Figure 4 plots treatment
effects from quantile regressions of standardized endline pollutant levels on audit treatment
and region fixed effects. Quantile effects are estimated from the 0.05-quantile to the 0.95quantile at 0.05-quantile intervals. The shaded area is the 95% confidence interval. While no
individual quantile coefficient is significant at conventional levels, the point estimates show a
clear pattern wherein the treatment reduced pollution more at higher quantiles of the pollution
distribution. Up to the 0.75-quantile, the point estimates are very close to zero, but from the
0.80-quantile onwards the point estimates sharply decrease to less than -0.5 standard deviations
at the 0.95-quantile. It is evident that the mean reduction in pollution is largely a consequence
of reductions in the right tail of the pollutant distribution.
This pattern of pollution reductions appears to be related to the GPCB penalty structure.
Figure 5 investigates how GPCB’s regulatory actions correspond to the degree of observed
pollution violations. We consider GPCB’s regulatory follow-up to its own inspections, as
observed during the three years beginning the year before the study and running through its
end. The figure plots how often GPCB takes different types of regulatory actions in response
to observing pollution at different levels above the pollution standard, measured during GPCB
inspections of audit sample plants. We classify actions in four categories of increasing severity
from the bottom (dark grey bars) to the top (light grey bars).
The severity of GPCB’s actions increases monotonically in the amount by which the standard is exceeded and sharply only for very high violations, suggesting that GPCB does not
treat all exceedances of the standard equally. For example, plants polluting at above the standard but less than 1.5 times the standard receive the most severe actions (i.e., closure warning
and disconnection) in less than 10% of the cases, and even plants between two and five times
the standard less than 40% of the time. In contrast, plants with readings higher than ten
times the standard receive these actions more than 70% of the time.

28

Thus the most costly sanctions are, in practice, reserved for the right tail of the pollutant
distribution. This relationship between high pollution concentrations and likely penalties is
a logical explanation for why the treatment, which broadly improved the quality of auditor
reporting, induced only high-polluting plants to clean up. All else equal, these firms have a
much higher expected fine once the auditors’ reports are accurate.28

V

Conclusion

This paper reports on a large-scale reform to the third-party environmental audit system in the
Indian state of Gujarat, conducted in collaboration with the environmental regulator. The
goal was to change the structure of the audit market to incentivize accurate reporting and
ultimately pollution abatement. The treatment consisted of random assignment of auditors
to plants, payments to auditors at a fixed rate from a central pool (rather than the plant),
random backchecks of auditors and, in the second year, a bonus for accurate reporting.
There are three primary findings. First, the status quo audit system appears corrupted,
with auditors systematically underreporting the pollution emissions of control plants at levels
just below the regulatory standard. Second, the treatment greatly increased the accuracy
of auditor reporting, viewed in terms of compliance, levels, or differences with backchecks.
This finding is robust to the inclusion of auditor fixed effects which provides estimates based
on a comparison of the behavior of the same auditor working under both the treatment and
control/status quo market structures simultaneously. Third, treatment plants reduced their
pollution emissions. This decrease largely comes from water pollutants which were the original
spur for the development of the audit scheme and which remain regulatory priorities. The
reductions are concentrated entirely in highest polluting plants, which face the greatest risk
of regulatory sanction.
We attribute these results to the package of reforms that altered the market structure for
audits in the treatment group. Although we cannot separately identify the influence of each
treatment component, we make several observations on what underlies the treatment effects.
First, where we have some variation, the non-experimental evidence suggests that incentive
28

Compared to the results in Panel A of Table VII, the effect of the treatment on pollution emissions is smaller
and insignificant in the selected sample of plants that submitted audits. This reduction in the treatment effect
supports the idea, introduced in the audit reporting results above, that especially dirty plants do not submit
audit reports in the control group. Indeed, the GPCB’s penalty structure that reserves the harshest penalties
for plants that greatly exceed the regulatory standard sets incentives that induce this selective audit reporting.

29

pay increased the propensity of auditors to accurately report. Second, fixed effects estimates
show that the treatment causes within-auditor changes in reporting. These estimates suggest
that auditor-level effects, such as income or Hawthorne effects, do not drive the treatment
impact. Third, economic intuition and existing evidence from the corruption and monitoring
literature suggest that higher auditor pay without the other treatment components would
not have changed auditor behavior much, given the absence of monitoring in the status quo.
Without some monitoring, rational auditors would pocket any increase in payments or kick
it back to their clients rather than improve audit quality. In combination with backchecks,
however, efficiency-type wages may have contributed to strengthen auditors’ incentive to report
accurately if they expected inaccurate reporting would lead to disbarment from the treatment
or outright decertification, and hence a loss of future auditing income.
These results are encouraging in the context of environmental regulation in India. A critical
regulatory challenge is gathering accurate information in the face of agency problems either
in third-party reporting or within the regulator itself. Like the environmental audit system
in Gujarat, the national system for Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) has foundered
on this problem because, as put by a former Minister of Environment, “[T]he person who
is putting up the project will be preparing the report” (The Hindu, 2011). Our findings
demonstrate that judicious reforms can enable the regulator to collect accurate information
on pollution emissions. Further, at least in cases where the regulator is known to assign strict
penalties, the provision of this information to the regulator causes the plants most likely to be
penalized to reduce their emissions. Of course, we only measure the impact of these reforms
over two years. It is possible that, in the longer run, results may be more muted, for example
if the backcheckers began colluding with auditors.
Was the reform worth the extra cost? A determination of whether the reform package
brought about a net social gain requires estimates of the costs of increased monitoring through
backchecks, auditor effort and pollution abatement and of the benefits of lower pollution. The
Online Appendix makes a tentative effort at such an analysis and suggests net benefits. We
estimate gross costs to be around USD 1,300 per plant and, tentatively, gross benefits to
be USD 7,300 per plant, for a net social gain of USD 6,000 per treatment plant. That is,
reductions in pollution more than offset additional costs incurred by plants, auditors and
the regulator. These particular numbers are far from definitive and rely on several strong

30

assumptions; in particular the numbers for marginal damages may not be right in the context
of this experiment and our estimate of abatement costs is incomplete, including only abatement
capital.
We believe that the core problem—that auditors face a conflict of interest, or, at least, poor
incentives to tell the truth—exists in all third-party audit markets. Indeed, we are unaware of
a single market wherein the audited party does not directly hire the auditor, and while there
are often provisions for some monitoring, those often appear to be fairly weak. At least in the
case of the Gujarat environmental audit market, we have documented both that this market
structure produces very unreliable audit reports and that a politically and logistically feasible
reform can greatly improve market outcomes.
Our findings are likely of broader relevance, though the exact nature of any audit reform
will reflect a particular market’s status quo functioning and institutional details. For example,
in complex settings with a fixed cost of establishing an auditor-client relationship, such as
the cost of a financial auditor learning a client’s books, assignment or rotation of auditors to
firms for periods longer than one year may be preferable. The strength of reputation effects
is another salient difference, with concentrated market structures giving better incentives for
high-quality audits even when auditors are hired by the firms on which they report.29 That
said, recent history in the United States suggests that in the absence of regulatory oversight
even very concentrated markets do not suffice to keep the quality of reporting reliably high.
All of this underscores the value of designing third-party audit markets so the first-order
incentive is for auditors to tell the truth. Our study shows that, at least in one instance, it
was possible to do so.

References
ASI (2005). Annual Survey of Industries. Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Govt. of India.
Bazerman, M., Loewenstein, G., and Moore, D. (2002). Why good accountants do bad audits.
Harvard Business Review, 80(11):96–103.
29

Duflo et al. (2013) finds some evidence of a reputation for more accurate reporting yielding higher audit
prices even in the Gujarat environmental audit market studied here.

31

Bazerman, M. H., Morgan, K. P., and Loewenstein, G. (1997). The impossibility of auditor
independence. Sloan Management Review, 38(4):89–94.
Becker, G. S. and Stigler, G. J. (1974). Law enforcement, malfeasance, and compensation of
enforces. J. Legal Stud., 3:1.
Bhattacharyya, S. (2011). The clean development mechanism. Energy Economics, 5:623–645.
Bolton, P., Freixas, X., and Shapiro, J. (2012). The credit ratings game. The Journal of
Finance, 67(1):85–111.
Boyd, C. E. (2000). Water Quality: An Introduction. Klumer Academic Publishers.
Central

Pollution

Control

Board

(2007).

Annual

report.

Technical

report,

http://cpcb.nic.in/upload/AnnualReports/AnnualReport_34_Annual-Report-06-07.pdf.
Central Pollution Control Board (2009a).

Annual report.

Technical report,

http://cpcb.nic.in/upload/AnnualReports/AnnualReport_37_ANNUAL_REPORT08-09.pdf.
Central

Pollution

ronmental

Control

assessment

of

Board

(2009b).

industrial

clusters.

Comprehensive
Technical

envireport,

http://www.cpcb.nic.in/upload/NewItems/NewItem_152_Final-Book_2.pdf.
Chakravorty, S. (2003). Industrial location in post-reform India: patterns of inter-regional
divergence and intra-regional convergence. The Journal of Development Studies, 40(2):120–
152.
Chay, K. and Greenstone, M. (2003). The impact of air pollution on infant mortality: Evidence
from geographic variation in pollution shocks induced by a recession. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 118(3).
Chen, Y., Ebenstein, A., Greenstone, M., and Li, H. (2013). The long-run impact of air
pollution on life expectancy: Evidence from China’s Huai River policy. Mimeo.
Currie, J. and Walker, R. (2011). Traffic congestion and infant health: Evidence from E-ZPass.
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(1).

32

Di Tella, R. and Schargrodsky, E. (2003). The role of wages and auditing during a crackdown
on corruption in the city of Buenos Aires. Journal of Law and Economics, 46(1):269–292.
DiNardo, J., Fortin, N., and Lemieux, T. (1996). Labor market institutions and the distribution of wages, 1973-1992: A semiparametric approach. Econometrica, 64(5):1001–1044.
Dranove, D. and Jin, G. Z. (2010). Quality disclosure and certification: Theory and practice.
Journal of Economic Literature, 48(4).
Duflo, E., Greenstone, M., Pande, R., and Ryan, N. (2013). What does reputation buy?
differentiation in a market for third-party auditors. American Economic Review, Papers &
Proceedings, 103(3).
Graff-Zivin, J. and Neidell, M. (2012). The impact of pollution on worker productivity. American Economic Review, 102(7).
Greenstone, M. and Hanna, R. (2013). Environmental regulations, air and water pollution
and infant mortality in India. Mimeo, MIT.
Griffin, J. and Tang, D. (2011). Did credit rating agencies make unbiased assumptions on
CDOs? American Economic Review, Papers & Proceedings, 101(3):125–30.
Gujarat High Court (1996). Environmental Audit Scheme for Industries Manufacturing Specified Products. Special Civil Application, 770/1995.
Gujarat High Court (2010). Gujarat Dyestuff Manufacturers Association vs. State of Gujarat.
Special Civil Application, 22609/2005.
Hanna, R. and Oliva, P. (2011). The effect of pollution on labor supply: Evidence from a
natural experiment in Mexico City. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper,
(17302).
Hatanaka, M., Bain, C., and Busch, L. (2005). Third-party certification in the global agrifood
system. Food Policy, 30(3):354–369.
Heckman, J. (1979). Sample selection bias as a specification error. Econometrica, 47(1):153–
162.
IHD-WHO Working Group (1978). Water Quality Surveys. World Health Organization.
33

Kunreuther, H., McNulty, P., and Kang, Y. (2002). Third-party inspection as an alternative
to command and control regulation. Risk Analysis, 22(2):309–318.
Niehaus, P. and Sukhtankar, S. (2012). The marginal rate of corruption in public programs:
Evidence from India. Mimeo, Dartmouth.
Olken, B. and Pande, R. (2012). Corruption in developing countries. Annual Review of
Economics, 4.
Olken, B. A. (2007). Monitoring corruption: Evidence from a field experiment in Indonesia.
Journal of Political Economy, 115(2).
Paliwal, R. (2006). EIA practice in India and its evaluation using SWOT analysis. Environmental impact assessment review, 26(5):492–510.
Potoski, M. and Prakash, A. (2005). Green clubs and voluntary governance: ISO 14001 and
firms’ regulatory compliance. American Journal of Political Science, 49(2):235–248.
Rahman, D. (2012). But who will monitor the monitor?

American Economic Review,

102(6):2267–2297.
Rauch, J. E. and Evans, P. B. (2000). Bureaucratic structure and bureaucratic performance
in less developed countries. Journal of Public Economics, 75(1):49–71.
Raynolds, L., Murray, D., and Heller, A. (2007). Regulating sustainability in the coffee sector: A comparative analysis of third-party environmental and social certification initiatives.
Agriculture and Human Values, 24(2):147–163.
Ronen, J. (2010). Corporate audits and how to fix them. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(2):189–210.
Strobl, G. and Xia, H. (2011). The issuer-pays rating model and ratings inflation: Evidence
from corporate credit ratings. Mimeo, University of North Carolina.
The Hindu (2011). Present system of environmental impact assessment has flaws, says Ramesh.
March 19, 2011.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (2010). National ambient air quality standards.

34

Waite, T. D. (1984). Principles of Water Quality. Academic Press.
White, L. (2010). Markets: The credit rating agencies. The Journal of Economic Perspectives,
24(2):211–226.
World Health Organization (2006). WHO air quality guidelines for particulate matter, ozone,
nitrogen dioxide and sulfur dioxide. World Health Organization.

35

VI

Figures
Figure 1: Readings for Suspended Particulate Matter (SPM, mg/Nm3 ), Midline
A. Control Plants

B. Treatment Plants

The figure shows distributions of pollutant concentrations for Suspended Particulate Matter (SPM) in boilerstack samples taken during the midline survey. Panel A shows the distributions of readings at control plants
from audits and backchecks, respectively, and Panel B readings at treatment plants from the same two sources.
The regulatory maximum concentration limit of 150 mg/N m3 for SPM is marked with a vertical line and the
area between 75% and 100% of the limit is shaded in gray.

36

Figure 2: Audit Treatment Effect in Density Bins, All Pollutants

The figure reports point estimates and standard errors from 40 OLS regressions where the dependent variables
are indicators for a pollutant reading being within a given density bin and region fixed effects and the independent variable is audit treatment. All pollutants are included with W ater = {NH3 -N, BOD, COD, TDS,
TSS} and Air = {SO2 , NOx , SPM} and All = W ater ∪ Air. Pollutants are standardized by subtracting the
regulatory standard for each pollutant and dividing by the standard deviation in backchecks of that pollutant.
Density bins are 0.05 standard deviations wide.

37

Figure 3: Time Series of Audit Reports by Treatment Status, All Pollutants

The figure reports the mean standardized pollution level reported in audits by time and treatment status.
Time is divided into two years and the three seasons of the year in which auditors are required to monitor
pollution. All pollutants are included with W ater = {NH3 -N, BOD, COD, TDS, TSS} and Air = {SO2 , NOx ,
SPM} and All = W ater ∪ Air. Pollutants are standardized by subtracting the mean for each pollutant and
dividing by the standard deviation, where both statistics are calculated from backchecks of that pollutant. The
dotted lines around the mean reports in each group give 95% confidence intervals for the mean using standard
errors clustered at the plant level.

38

Figure 4: Quantile Treatment Effects of Audit on Endline Pollution

The figure reports estimates from quantile regressions of standardized endline pollution for all pollutants on a
dummy for audit treatment assignment and region fixed effects in the audit sample of plants not subject to the
cross-cut experimental treatment, analogous to the OLS specifications in Table VII. The quantiles are from
0.05-quantile to the 0.95-quantile at 0.05-quantile intervals. The gray area shows 95% confidence intervals for
the treatment coefficient at each quantile from a cluster-bootstrap with replacement at the plant level with
200 replications.

39

Figure 5: Regulatory Actions by Degree of Violation

The figure reports the regulatory responses to pollution readings measured at different levels of noncompliance
during regulatory inspections for audit sample plants over the three years beginning one year prior to the study.
Pollutant readings are shown in bins of readings at specified multiples above the regulatory standard. The
bars indicate the type of regulatory action taken in response to a given reading. Actions increase in severity
from bottom (dark bars) to top (light bars): a letter is official but not legal correspondence to the firm noting
the violation and possibly threatening action, a citation is a legal regulatory notice requiring a response from
the firm, a closure warning is a warning that the plant will be closed unless a violation is remedied, and a
disconnection is an order to the utility that a plant’s power be disconnected. All of these actions were coded
based on complete administrative records of plant interactions with the regulator. Going left to right across
the bars, the number of violating plants (actions) used to calculate the action shares at each degree of violation
are 153 (305), 102 (159), 141 (178), 70 (120) and 72 (126).

40

VII

Tables
TABLE I
Submission of Audit Reports
Treatment
(1)

Control
(2)

Difference
(3)

Panel A. 2009
Audit submitted
Total plants
Share submitted

163
233
0.70

177
240
0.74

-0.038
(0.041)

Panel B. 2010
Audit submitted
Total plants
Share submitted

164
233
0.70

153
240
0.64

0.066
(0.043)

The table reports on the number of audit reports submitted to the regulator
for plants in the audit sample over the two years of the experiment. Column
(3) shows differences between treatment and control group submission rates
with standard errors in parentheses.

∗

p < 0.10 ,

41

∗∗

p < 0.05 ,

∗∗∗

p < 0.01 .

TABLE II
Audit Treatment Covariate Balance
Treatment
(1)

Control
(2)

Difference
(3)

Panel A. Plant Characteristics
Capital investment INR 50m to 100m (=1)
0.092
0.14
[0.29]
[0.35]
Located in industrial estate (=1)
0.57
0.53
[0.50]
[0.50]
Textiles (=1)
0.88
0.93
[0.33]
[0.26]
Effluent to common treatment (=1)
0.41
0.35
[0.49]
[0.48]
Wastewater generated (kl/day)
420.5
394.6
[315.9]
[323.4]
Lignite used as fuel (=1)
0.71
0.77
[0.45]
[0.42]
Diesel used as fuel (=1)
0.29
0.25
[0.45]
[0.43]
Air emissions from flue gas (=1)
0.85
0.87
[0.35]
[0.33]
Air emissions from boiler (=1)
0.93
0.92
[0.26]
[0.27]
Bag filter installed (=1)
0.24
0.34
[0.43]
[0.47]
Cyclone installed (=1)
0.087
0.079
[0.28]
[0.27]
Scrubber installed (=1)
0.41
0.41
[0.49]
[0.49]
Panel B. Regulatory Interactions in Year Prior to Study
Whether audit submitted (=1)
0.82
0.81
[0.38]
[0.39]
Any equipment mandated (=1)
0.42
0.49
[0.50]
[0.50]
Any inspection conducted (=1)
0.79
0.78
[0.41]
[0.42]
Any citation issued (=1)
0.28
0.24
[0.45]
[0.43]
Any water citation issued (=1)
0.12
0.12
[0.33]
[0.33]
Any air citation issued (=1)
0.027
0.0052
[0.16]
[0.072]
Any utility disconnection (=1)
0.098
0.094
[0.30]
[0.29]
Any bank guarantee posted (=1)
0.033
0.026
[0.18]
[0.16]
Observations
184
191

-0.051
(0.033)
0.042
(0.051)
-0.030
(0.025)
0.078
(0.049)
35.4
(31.6)
-0.024
(0.029)
0.038
(0.046)
-0.0095
(0.016)
0.026
(0.027)
-0.10∗∗
(0.046)
0.0010
(0.027)
-0.018
(0.050)
0.022
(0.038)
-0.047
(0.047)
0.016
(0.042)
0.035
(0.045)
-0.0031
(0.034)
0.021∗
(0.013)
0.0029
(0.031)
0.0045
(0.017)

The sample includes firms in the audit sample that submitted an audit report in either year; the balance
for all audit sample firms, discussed in the text, is similar. Columns (1) and (2) show means with standard
deviations in brackets. Column (3) shows the coefficient on treatment from regressions of each characteristic
on treatment and region fixed effects. 50 INR ≈ 1 USD.

∗

p < 0.10 ,

∗∗

p < 0.05 ,

∗∗∗

p < 0.01 .

TABLE III
Compliance in Audits Relative to Backchecks, Control Group Only
All
pollutants
(1)

Water
pollutants
(2)

Air
pollutants
(3)

Panel A. Dependent variable: Narrow compliance
(Dummy for pollutant between 75% and 100% of regulatory standard)
Audit report (=1)

0.270∗∗∗
(0.025)

0.297∗∗∗
(0.034)

0.230∗∗∗
(0.033)

0.097

0.110

0.077

Control mean in backchecks

Panel B. Dependent variable: Compliance
(Dummy for pollutant at or below regulatory standard)
0.288∗∗∗
(0.023)

0.273∗∗∗
(0.033)

0.311∗∗∗
(0.032)

Control mean in backchecks

0.557

0.538

0.586

Observations

1132

688

444

Audit report (=1)

Regressions include region fixed effects. “Audit report” is a dummy for a pollutant reading
reported in an audit, as opposed to reported in a backcheck, which is the omitted category.
Sample of matched pollutant pairs from audit reports submitted to the regulator in the control
group only and corresponding backchecks from the midline survey. Pollution samples from
final-stage effluent outlet for water and boiler stack for air. Pollutants included are W ater =
{NH3 -N, BOD, COD, TDS, TSS} and Air = {SO2 , NOx , SPM} with All = W ater ∪ Air.
Standard errors clustered at the plant level in parentheses.
p < 0.01 .

43

∗

p < 0.10 ,

∗∗

p < 0.05 ,

∗∗∗

TABLE IV
Compliance in Audits Relative to Backchecks by Treatment Status
All
pollutants
(1)

Water
pollutants
(2)

Air
pollutants
(3)

Panel A. Dependent variable: Narrow compliance
(Dummy for pollutant between 75% and 100% of regulatory standard)
Audit report × Treatment group

-0.185∗∗∗
(0.034)

-0.212∗∗∗
(0.044)

-0.143∗∗∗
(0.046)

Audit report (=1)

0.270∗∗∗
(0.025)

0.297∗∗∗
(0.034)

0.230∗∗∗
(0.033)

Treatment group (=1)

-0.0034
(0.0176)

-0.013
(0.025)

0.011
(0.024)

0.097

0.110

0.077

Control mean in backchecks

Panel B. Dependent variable: Compliance
(Dummy for pollutant at or below regulatory standard)
Audit report × Treatment group

-0.234∗∗∗
(0.039)

-0.166∗∗∗
(0.050)

-0.345∗∗∗
(0.056)

Audit report (=1)

0.288∗∗∗
(0.023)

0.273∗∗∗
(0.033)

0.311∗∗∗
(0.032)

Treatment group (=1)

0.058∗
(0.034)

0.0075
(0.0477)

0.145∗∗∗
(0.041)

0.557
2236

0.538
1378

0.586
858

Control mean in backchecks
Observations

Regressions include region fixed effects. “Treatment group” is a dummy equal to one for plants
where auditors were randomly assigned, paid a fixed rate from a common pool and subject to
bakchecks. “Audit report” is a dummy for a pollutant reading reported in an audit, as opposed
to reported in a backcheck, which is the omitted category. Sample of matched pollutant pairs
from audit reports submitted to the regulator and corresponding backchecks from the midline
survey, in both the treatment and control groups. Pollution samples from final-stage effluent
outlet for water and boiler stack for air. Pollutants included are W ater = {NH3 -N, BOD, COD,
TDS, TSS} and Air = {SO2 , NOx , SPM} with All = W ater ∪ Air. Standard errors clustered
at the plant level in parentheses.

∗

p < 0.10 ,

∗∗

44

p < 0.05 ,

∗∗∗

p < 0.01 .

TABLE V
Audit Treatment Effects on Auditor Reporting
All
pollutants
(1)
(2)

Water
pollutants
(3)
(4)

Air
pollutants
(5)
(6)

Panel A. Dependent variable: Compliance
(Dummy for pollutant in audit report at or below regulatory standard)
Treatment group (=1)
Auditor fixed effects
Control mean
Observations

-0.151∗∗∗
(0.015)

-0.180∗∗∗
(0.022)

-0.172∗∗∗
(0.021)

-0.188∗∗∗
(0.030)

-0.108∗∗∗
(0.016)

-0.149∗∗∗
(0.021)

No
0.828
13170

Yes
0.828
13170

No
0.807
8373

Yes
0.807
8373

No
0.863
4797

Yes
0.863
4797

Panel B. Dependent variable: Level of pollutant in audit report
Treatment group (=1)
Auditor fixed effects
Control mean
Observations

0.103∗∗∗
(0.035)

0.131∗∗∗
(0.038)

0.117∗∗
(0.053)

0.131∗∗
(0.059)

0.0853∗∗∗
(0.0214)

0.132∗∗∗
(0.022)

No
-0.291
13170

Yes
-0.291
13170

No
-0.350
8373

Yes
-0.350
8373

No
-0.194
4797

Yes
-0.194
4797

Panel C. Dependent variable: Level of pollutant in audit report
minus level of pollution in backcheck
Treatment group (=1)
Auditor fixed effects
Control mean
Observations

0.210∗∗∗
(0.073)

0.153
(0.099)

0.152
(0.102)

0.156
(0.138)

0.312∗∗∗
(0.083)

0.166∗
(0.095)

No
-0.304
1118

Yes
-0.304
1118

No
-0.354
689

Yes
-0.354
689

No
-0.225
429

Yes
-0.225
429

Regressions include region fixed effects in all panels and year fixed effects in Panels A and B only. Pollution
samples are from the final-stage effluent outlet for water and boiler stack for air. Pollutants included are
W ater = {NH3 -N, BOD, COD, TDS, TSS} and Air = {SO2 , NOx , SPM} with All = W ater ∪ Air.
Panels A and B use the full sample of audit reports that reached the regulator over the two years of the
experiment. The outcome variable is a dummy for whether a pollutant was reported compliant in audit
reports, in Panel A, and the level of pollution reports, in Panel B. Panel C uses the midline survey sample
with pollution in audit reports less pollution in backchecks as the outcome. Standard errors clustered at
the plant level are in parentheses.

∗

p < 0.10 ,

∗∗

p < 0.05 ,

45

∗∗∗

p < 0.01 .

TABLE VI
Incentive Pay from Treatment Effect Over Time
Level of pollutant in audit
report, all pollutants
(1)
(2)
Treatment group (=1)

0.103∗∗∗
(0.035)

0.218∗∗∗
(0.063)

Incentive pay (year=2010)

0.051∗∗
(0.027)

0.002
(0.033)

Incentive pay × treatment

0.257∗∗∗
(0.092)

Years (fractional) from Jan 1, 2009

0.029
(0.023)
-0.220∗∗∗
(0.068)

Years (fractional) × treatment
Region fixed effects
Observations

Yes
13166

Yes
13166

Regressions include region fixed effects. Pollution samples from final-stage effluent outlet for water and boiler stack for air. Sample of all audit reports to
the regulator over the two years of the experiment. Pollutants included are
W ater = {NH3 -N, BOD, COD, TDS, TSS} and Air = {SO2 , NOx ,SPM} with
All = W ater ∪ Air. Standard errors clustered at the plant level in parentheses.
∗

p < 0.10 ,

∗∗

p < 0.05 ,

∗∗∗

p < 0.01 .

46

TABLE VII
Endline Pollutant Concentrations on Treatment Status
All
pollutants
(1)

Water
pollutants
(2)

Air
pollutants
(3)

Panel A. Dependent variable: Level of pollutant in endline survey
Audit treatment assigned (=1)
Control mean
Observations

-0.211∗∗
(0.099)

-0.300∗
(0.159)

-0.053
(0.057)

0.076
1439

0.114
860

0.022
579

Panel B. Dependent variable: Compliance
(Dummy for pollutant in endline survey at or below regulatory standard)
Audit treatment assigned (=1)
0.027
0.039
0.002
(0.027)
(0.039)
(0.028)
Control mean
Observations

0.573
1439

0.516
860

0.656
579

Regressions include region fixed effects. Pollution samples from final-stage effluent
outlet for water and boiler stack for air. Pollutants included are W ater = {NH3 N, BOD, COD, TDS, TSS} and Air = {SO2 , NOx ,SPM} with All = W ater ∪
Air. Endline survey data in the audit sample of plants not subject to the cross-cut
experimental treatment. Standard errors clustered at the plant level in parentheses.
∗

p < 0.10 ,

∗∗

p < 0.05 ,

∗∗∗

p < 0.01 .

47

A

Data Appendix
TABLE A1
Pollutant Descriptions

Pollutant
Biochemical
Oxygen Demand (BOD)

Chemical
Oxygen Demand (COD)
Total Dissolved Solids
(TDS)

Total Suspended
Solids (TSS)
Ammoniacal Nitrogen
(NH3 -N)

Sulfur Dioxide (SO2 )
Nitrogen Oxides (NOx )
Suspended
Particulate Matter
(SPM)

Description
Panel A: Water Pollutants
A measure of the amount of dissolved oxygen consumed by microscopic organisms in a confined sample of water. The BOD and volume of an effluent determine
the oxygen demand that will be imposed on receiving waters (Boyd, 2000). The
demand for oxygen from effluent may deplete available molecular oxygen, precluding other biological processes, such as marine plants or life, that require oxygen
(Waite, 1984).
A measure of the oxygen demand of the organic matter in a sample as determined
by oxidation of the organic matter with potassium dichromate and sulfuric acid.
Often used as a proxy for BOD in determining the oxygen demand of effluent.
Primarily inorganic substances dissolved in water, including calcium, magnesium,
sodium, potassium, iron, zinc, copper, manganese, etc. Water with high dissolved
solids is said to be mineralized and decreases the survival of plant and animal
life, degrades the taste of water, corrodes plumbing and limits use of water for
irrigation (Boyd, 2000; IHD-WHO Working Group, 1978). Depending on the
composition of solids TDS may have adverse health effects on people with cardiac
disease or high blood pressure.
Organic and inorganic or mineral particles too large to be dissolved but small
enough to remain suspended against gravity in an effluent (Boyd, 2000). Contribute to turbidity and color of water and proxy for adverse effects from individual
solid components.
The nitrogen contained in unionized ammonia and ammonium. Though nitrogen
is a vital nutrient, some forms of ammonia nitrogen are toxic to aquatic life (Boyd,
2000). The toxicity of ammonia nitrogen increases with decreasing dissolved oxygen concentrations.
Panel B: Air Pollutants
A reactive oxide of sulfur. Short-term exposure has been linked to adverse respiratory effects particularly damaging for asthmatics. SO2 also contributes to
formation of fine particles (World Health Organization, 2006).
A group of reactive gases including nitrous acid, nitric acid and N O2 . Nitrogen
oxides are toxic at high concentrations and contribute to formation of ozone and
fine particles, which are detrimental to health (World Health Organization, 2006).
A mixture of small particles and liquid droplets with a number of components,
including acids, organic chemicals, metals and soil or dust (U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, 2010). Particulate matter affects respiratory and cardiovascular health and has been shown to increase infant mortality and shorten lifespans
(World Health Organization, 2006; Currie and Walker, 2011; Chen et al., 2013).

The table describes the pollutants used throughout the analysis of both auditor reporting and plant pollution
emissions. Auditor incentive pay during year two of the experiment was based on these pollutants and the water
parameter pH. We omit pH from the analysis because environmental damages from pH are not monotonic in the
reading—both high (alkanine) and low (acidic) readings can be bad—which makes results for pH incomparable
to results for other pollutants. For this same reason, the standard for pH is a range, rather than a maximum.

48

