                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           COMPETITION IN THE AUDIT MARKET:
                                POLICY IMPLICATIONS

                                          Joseph J. Gerakos
                                           Chad Syverson

                                        Working Paper 19251
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19251


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2013




We thank Ray Ball, Mary Barth, J.P. Dubé, Ron Goettler, Bobby Gramacy, Guenter Hitsch, Ali Hortaçsu,
Bill Kinney, Dave Larcker, Christian Leuz, Doug Shackelford, Jesse Shapiro, Doug Skinner, Stephen
Taylor, Anne Vanstraelen, Mike Willenborg, and workshop participants at Maastricht University,
Ohio State University, Stanford University, University of Chicago, University of Connecticut, University
of Melbourne, University of North Carolina, University of Technology, Sydney, and the 2012 Illinois
Audit Symposium for their comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19251.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Joseph J. Gerakos and Chad Syverson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Competition in the Audit Market: Policy Implications
Joseph J. Gerakos and Chad Syverson
NBER Working Paper No. 19251
July 2013
JEL No. D43,G3,K22,L13,L84,M42

                                              ABSTRACT

The audit market's unique combination of features–its role in capital market transparency, mandated
demand, and concentrated supply–means it receives considerable attention from policymakers. We
explore the effects of two market scenarios that have been the focus of policy discussions: a) further
supply concentration due to one of the "Big 4" auditors exiting and b) mandatory audit firm rotation.
To do so, we first estimate publicly traded firms' demand for auditing services, treating services provided
by each of the Big 4 as differentiated products. We then use those estimates to calculate how each
scenario would affect client firms' consumer surplus. We estimate that, conservatively, exit by one
of the Big 4 would reduce client firms' surplus by $1.2-1.8 billion per year. These estimates reflect
only firms' lost options to hire the exiting auditor; they do not include the likely fee increases resulting
from less competition among auditors. We calculate that the latter could result in audit fee increases
between $0.3-0.5 billion per year. Such losses are substantial; by comparison, total audit fees for public
firms were $11 billion in 2010. We find similarly large impacts from mandatory audit firm rotation,
estimating consumer surplus losses at approximately $2.4-3.6 billion if rotation were required after
ten years and $4.3-5.5 billion if rotation were mandatory after only four years.


Joseph J. Gerakos
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
jgerakos@chicagobooth.edu

Chad Syverson
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
chad.syverson@chicagobooth.edu
1    Introduction


The market for financial audits exhibits a set of features that distinguish it from other markets for

business services (and for that matter, many other goods more broadly). First, it is seen by many

to play an important and in some ways unique role in preserving transparency and improving the

functioning of capital markets (e.g., Watts and Zimmerman (1983), Black (2001), and Ball (2001)).

Relatedly, failures of auditors to catch and report improprieties are often highly—and occasionally

spectacularly—visible.


    Second, a substantial portion of demand in the market is mandated. Publicly traded firms are

compelled to purchase audit services, and there are no services from outside the industry that can

legally serve as substitutes.


    Third, the market’s supply side is highly concentrated. Among publicly traded companies in

the U.S., for example, the majority of audit engagements and almost all audit fees involve just four

audit firms (the “Big 4”: Ernst & Young, Deloitte Touche, KPMG, and PricewaterhouseCoopers).

In 2010 the Big 4 handled 67% of audit engagements and collected over 94% of audit fees. (For

a breakdown of market shares over the recent decade, see Table 1.) As discussed by Velte and

Stiglbauer (2012), similar concentration is observed in the audit markets of many other developed

economies.


    The combination of these features has resulted in the audit industry being subject to frequent

policy debates. In this paper, we explore two oft-recurring discussions in this vein. The first regards

the effects of further concentration in supply due to one of the Big 4 audit firms exiting the market.

The second involves the consequences of imposing a mandatory audit firm rotation policy.


    Both of these scenarios have already colored policy toward the industry. There have been


                                                  1
several recent cases in which a Big 4 audit firm could arguably have been criminally indicted but

the Department of Justice decided to not file charges, probably because of concerns about further

increasing concentration.1 For example, in 2005 KPMG admitted criminal wrongdoing by creating

tax shelters that helped clients evade $2.5 billion in taxes. Nevertheless, the Department of Justice

did not indict KPMG and instead entered into a deferred prosecution agreement (Johnson (2010)).

Moreover, according to the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy examiner’s report (Valukas (2010)), Ernst

& Young assisted Lehman Brothers in implementing its Repo 105 transactions, which allowed

Lehman to temporarily reduce its leverage when preparing its financial statements. Nonetheless,

the Department of Justice did not pursue criminal charges against Ernst & Young.2


      With regard to mandatory auditor rotation, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board

(the “PCAOB”) is in active discussions about implementing such a policy for SEC registrants.

During the PCAOB’s hearings in March 2012 on mandatory audit firm rotation, panelists voiced

opposing views about the costs and benefits of mandatory audit firm rotation. For example, the

executive director of the AICPA’s Center for Audit Quality stated that mandatory audit firm ro-

tation would hinder audit committees in their oversight of external auditors, while former SEC

chairman Arthur Levitt supported mandatory rotation because “investors deserve the perspectives

of different professionals every so often, particularly when an auditor’s independence can be rea-

sonably called into question” (Tysiac (2012)). Moreover, in June 2013 the House Financial Services

Committee unanimously passed a bill to prohibit the PCAOB from mandating audit firm rotation

(Cohn (2013)).


      We seek to explore how the fruition of these two scenarios—the disappearance of one of the

Big 4 and the imposition of mandatory auditor rotation—would affect the audit market, and in
  1
    A criminal conviction prohibits an audit firm from carrying out audits of SEC registrants.
  2
    In contrast, the New York attorney general Andrew Cuomo sued Ernst & Young claiming that the audit firm
helped Lehman “engage in a massive accounting fraud” (Public Accounting Report (2011)).



                                                    2
particular the consequences for publicly traded firms, its primary customers. Addressing these

questions satisfactorily requires, at the very least, measurements of the willingness of firms to

substitute among individual auditors and the value firms place (if any) on extended relationships

with auditors. However, prior research on the structure of the audit market has focused primarily

on either correlations between audit fees and firm characteristics or substitutability between the

Big 4 and non-Big 4 auditor groups.3 While this work has offered insights to several questions, its

focus has left a gap that we seek to begin to fill with this study.


    Our empirical approach treats the audit market much like any other differentiated product

market (even the mandatory nature of demand can easily be handled within our framework).4 We

model firms seeking audit services as choosing from among several producers of those services (i.e.,

the audit firms), with each potential auditor offering varying aspects of service that are potentially

valued differentially by each client firm.5 Each publicly listed firm considers how well the attributes

of each auditor’s product match its needs (these attributes include price—the audit fees) and hires

the auditor offering the best net value.


    With this factor demand framework, we can use data on publicly listed firms’ choices of auditors

to measure via revealed preference how firms view the audit services provided by each of the

Big 4 auditors as well as by smaller audit service providers. Importantly, we can quantify a firm’s

willingness to substitute among auditors. That is, we can compute the dollar transfer that would

be necessary to make a client switch to a different auditor. In particular, we are able to calculate

the transfer necessary to compensate client firms who lose a potential auditor choice due to exit
   3
     For examples of studies that examine substitutability between the Big 4 and non-Big 4 groups, see Willenborg
(1999), Ettredge, Kwon, and Lim (2009), and Lennox, Francis, and Wang (2012)
   4
     Our empirical approach neither assumes nor imposes differentiation. It instead allows for differentiation among
the Big 4 audit firms and lets the data speak as to its existence. In this way, it contrasts with prior research that
assumes no differentiation among the Big 4 (e.g., Doogar and Easley (1998) and Sirois and Simunic (2013)).
   5
     Because audits are inputs into firms’ production activities, these are differentiated factor markets, but the eco-
nomics are essentially the same as in markets for differentiated outputs.




                                                          3
of a Big 4 auditor, as well as to quantify clients’ willingness to pay for longer-term relationships

with a particular auditor, and hence what value the client firms would lose if forced to break such

relationships because of mandatory auditor rotation. Thus we can address quantitatively some of

the key policy questions surrounding the issues of further auditor concentration and mandatory

auditor rotation.


   Our analyses indicate that the exit of any of the Big 4 auditors would result in substantial losses

in client firms’ expected consumer surplus (that is, the firms’ value of their purchased audit services

in excess of the fees they pay for them; the net benefit they derive from the audit services). We

estimate that, conservatively, client firms’ consumer surplus will fall by between $1.2–1.8 billion

per year. This loss in surplus can be interpreted as the total amount of cash transfers client firms

would require to compensate them for losing the ability to hire the exiting auditor. These figures

reflect only the direct effect of the loss of auditor choice; they do not account for the likely increases

in audit fees that would occur due to less competition among the remaining auditors. Using our

data to estimate the latter effect, we calculate moving from the Big 4 to the Big 3 could result in

audit fee increases between $0.3–0.5 billion per year. These higher fees correspond dollar-for-dollar

with lost consumer surplus among client firms, so this supply response effect exacerbates the pure

choice effect. Both of these losses are substantial; by comparison, total audit fees for public firms

were $11 billion in 2010.


   We find similarly large impacts from mandatory audit firm rotation, estimating consumer sur-

plus losses at approximately $2.4–3.6 billion if rotation were required after ten years (with the higher

estimated losses reflecting the anticipated fee setting responses of auditors to the new market rules)

and $4.3–5.5 billion if rotation were mandatory after only four years.


   These estimates carry several caveats. First, the Big 4 audit firms operate worldwide, while


                                                    4
our estimates are based only upon their U.S. public clients. Second, due to a lack of data we are

also unable to include in our analysis private firms, though they would also suffer losses in surplus.

Finally, our estimates are limited to audit fees and services and do not take into account non-audit

and audit-related fees and services. Nevertheless, these estimates are informative about the costs

that could arise from changes in the audit industry’s market structure and from the implementation

of mandatory rotation.6 In addition, they provide some of the first estimates of the value of audit

firm-client matches.


       The analyses in this paper are obviously relevant to those directly interested in the specific

policy-relevant counterfactuals in the audit industry that we examine in this paper. However, we

believe more general lessons can also be drawn from the analyses. They offer a framework for

investigating sets of demand, supply, and competitive issues in the audit market that extend well

beyond the two we investigate here. Indeed, there are entire literatures dedicated to examining

these issues, an attention reflecting in part the audit market’s special role in helping capital markets

function. Our framework, which has been applied in similar forms in other market settings but

(to our knowledge) is novel to research on the audit market, lets researchers quantify and isolate

demand- and supply-side fundamentals that allow fuller answers to questions about the nature and

effects of the market than the previous literature has been able to deliver. Further, the approach

here can be applied to address research questions about the markets for business services more

broadly, which are extensive in size and scope.


       Our analysis is structured as follows. We first discuss how we model client firms’ choices

of auditor. We then describe the estimation of our demand model, including our approaches for

dealing with price endogeneity. We also explain how we handle a more atypical situation in demand
   6
    There may be benefits from mandatory auditor rotation as well. Quantifying those benefits requires an analytical
approach that is beyond the scope of this paper, however. Our estimates here offer a measurement of the costs of
rotation that an optimal policy would balance any benefits against.



                                                         5
estimation, the fact that we do not observe prices (fees) for producers (auditors) that a firm does

not hire. Then, after reporting and discussing our demand estimates, we use these estimates to

calculate the expected effects of the two counterfactual scenarios described above: greater audit

industry concentration and mandated auditor rotation.




2     Demand Model


We model publicly listed firms’ demand for audit services as reflecting a choice among several

potential auditors: each of the Big 4 and an amalgam outside good that includes all other audit

firms. Every client firm makes its choice based on the expected benefit it would obtain from hiring

each of the auditors. This benefit includes the effects of both firm-, auditor-, and match-specific

attributes and is net of the fees the auditor charges the client firm for its service.


    While the discrete choice demand model we lay out below is in many ways standard in the

industrial organization literature, our approach differs from the substantial prior literature on

auditor choice in that this work has typically examined the determinants of the simple dichotomous

choice between using a Big 4 versus a non-Big 4 auditor. Our analytical structure allows us to

characterize much more fully the patterns of substitution among the individual auditors, and just

as importantly lets us tie client firms’ choices directly to parameters of their factor demands, which

is key to quantifying preferences in terms of dollar values.



2.1   Utility Specification


For firms’ choice of auditor, we specify the “inside” goods as the Big 4 auditors (Ernst & Young,

Deloitte Touche, KPMG, and PricewaterhouseCoopers) and the “outside” good as the aggregation



                                                   6
of all other auditors who provide audits to public firms (BDO Seidman, Grant Thornton, etc.).

Because we are identifying the preference parameters of publicly listed firms whose demand for

audit services is mandated, there is no true outside good in this setting. Thus we can simply

define the outside good as any auditor choice not in the Big 4. Mandated demand makes our task

easier, as we do not need to be concerned with defining the full breadth of potential demand for

the market, a necessary assumption in discrete choice settings where buyers might not purchase

any product in the market.


    We model each client firm i’s utility from choosing auditor j as



                                       Uij = δj − α ln(pij ) + βij xij + ij                                        (1)



in which δj is an auditor fixed effect that represents the mean utility that all potential clients obtain

from choosing auditor j (this variable subsumes brand effects and any other attributes of j’s services

that all potential clients value equally); pij is auditor j’s price for an audit of firm i (i.e., its audit

fees); α parameterizes the marginal willingness to pay for a log-dollar of audit fees; xij is a vector

of observable non-price characteristics of the client-auditor pair; βij are the utility loadings on

these characteristics, and ij represents an unobserved client-auditor specific component of utility

assumed to be independently and identically distributed.7 In our specification, audit fees enter

in logarithmic form. This implies that an additional dollar of audit fees matters less to a large

client than a small client. This specification is consistent with clients negotiating with auditors

over percentage changes in audit fees rather than absolute dollar changes.


    To model the interactions between non-price characteristics of the client firm and the auditor, we

expand βij xij as follows. First, we interact the auditor fixed effect, δj , with the natural logarithm of
   7
     While we have labeled equation (1) as describing a client firm’s utility, it can be interpreted more broadly as any
objective function of the client with respect to its audit firm choice.


                                                           7
the client’s size, ln(T otalAssetsi ). This interaction allows us to capture audit firm preferences that

vary with client firm scale. For example, smaller firms may prefer non-Big 4 auditors, and there

could be heterogeneous size-based preferences across each of the Big 4 auditors. Second, we interact

the auditor fixed effects with an additional set of client characteristics commonly used in the audit

literature: ln(Segmentsi ) is the natural logarithm of the number of industrial segments in which

the client operators; F oreign Salesi is the ratio of foreign to total sales; Debti is the ratio of short

plus long-term debt to total assets; ROAi is the client’s return on assets; Inventory + Receivablesi

is the ratio of inventory plus accounts receivables to total assets; P ayablesi is the ratio of accounts

payable to total assets. These interactions allow rich variation in preferences for auditors across

client firms with different operating and financial characteristics. Fourth, we further interact δj

with industry indicators (using the Fama-French ten-industry classification system) to control for

any systematic preference differences across clients’ industries.


   While firms in principle choose their auditor every year, the data reveal a strong tendency

to rehire the previous year’s auditor. This persistence can be seen in Table 2, which shows the

transition matrix for client firms’ auditor choices in consecutive years over the period 2008–2010.

The largest elements in the matrix by some distance are its diagonals; the probability of renewing an

existing auditor relationship is in the neighborhood of 95%. This persistence could reflect the effect

of match-specific capital formed during the course of an auditing relationship or reveal the strength

of some other match-specific unobservable utility component that makes retention more likely. To

parsimoniously incorporate any such effects, we add elements to equation (1) that allow for the

possibility that re-choosing the prior year’s auditor will deliver additional utility. Specifically, we

interact the auditor fixed effects with two additional variables: an indicator that equals one if the

client firm did not use the respective auditor in the prior year, 1(N ot clientij ), and the natural

logarithm of the number of consecutive years that the client firm has hired to its current auditor,


                                                   8
ln(Y earsClientij ).8


    Given this utility function, a client firm’s choice decision is straightforward. Client i calculates

Uij for each of its five options (the Big 4 firms and the outside good) and then chooses the audit

firm j that provides the maximum Uij .



2.2    Estimation


Equation (1) can be written as Uij = Vij + ij , in which Vij ≡ βij xij − α ln(pij ) + δj is the observable

portion of utility, and ij is the unobserved portion of utility. If we assume that ij is distributed

type 1 extreme value, the predicted probability that client i chooses audit firm j is


                                                             eVij
                                                    Pij =           .                                                (2)
                                                            Σj eVij



    This specification is the standard conditional logit commonly used in the industrial organization

and marketing literatures to estimate demand for discrete differentiated products.9 The conditional

logit is similar to a fixed effect regression in that any characteristic of client i that does not vary

across choices (here, auditors) drops out of equation (2). For example, firm size itself drops out of

equation (2); only interactions between firm size and the auditor fixed effects remain to influence

choice probabilities.


    If yij = 1 represents that client i chooses auditor j and zero otherwise, then the log likelihood
   8
     We define this latter variable as zero for Big 4 firms that are not the client firm’s current auditor; thus the “not
current auditor” indicator coefficient reflects the difference in demand between an auditor with which the client firm
does not have a current relationship and an auditor with which the client has been matched for one year.
   9
     For a discussion, see Train (2009). For an application, see Petrin (2002).




                                                            9
corresponding to (2) is:


                                                 XX                       XX                eVij
                                LL(α, β, δ) =              yij ln Pij =           yij ln             (3)
                                                  i    j                  i   j
                                                                                           Σj eVij


We maximize this log likelihood to obtain estimates of the utility/preference parameters α, β, and

δ.



2.3          Prices


The price/fee term of equation (1) raises a few estimation issues.



2.3.1          Missing Fees


One issue with equation (1) is that we only observe prices (audit fees) for actual matches between

clients and auditors. This is an unusual situation in demand estimation settings; the researcher

typically observes the prices of each item of the available choice set. We must therefore estimate

what fees a client would have expected to pay had it hired an audit firm other than the one it

ended up choosing.


          We implement these “what if” prices using a predictive model estimated from the relation-

ships between the fees in observed client-auditor matches and client-, auditor-, and match-specific

characteristics. We considered several prediction methods including ordinary least squares, lasso

regression, ridge regression, partial least squares, and two regression tree approaches (random parti-

tioning and random forest).10 Based on root mean squared error derived from cross-fold validation,

we found that regression trees (specifically, random forest) best predict dollar audit fees using the
     10
          For a discussion of these methods, see Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman (2009).




                                                              10
following set of predictor variables: total assets, the number of industrial segments the firm oper-

ates in, foreign sales, debt, return on assets, inventory & receivables, indicators to capture whether

and for how long the firm was a client of the auditor (all of the preceding are characteristics of the

client firm), and indicators for the Fama-French nine-industry classification. These are the same

variables included in our demand estimation and are commonly used in reduced form regressions

of audit fees (Hay, Knechel, and Wong (2006)).


   In our demand estimations, we use predicted fees in equation (1) for all auditors, including the

actual audit firm chosen by the client. We do so because it is likely that the prices associated

with actual choices include a negative price shock that would otherwise bias our estimated price

coefficients toward zero. For a discussion of this issue, see Erdem, Keane, and Sun (1999).



2.3.2   Price Endogeneity


A major concern in most demand estimation settings is the possibility of price endogeneity (i.e.,

cov(pij , ij ) 6= 0). For example, if price is positively correlated with unobserved audit quality—say

because client firms have a greater willingness to pay for higher quality audits and/or auditors have

higher costs of delivering them—then the coefficient on price will be positively biased (toward zero,

given that theory predicts the coefficient should be negative). The resulting demand estimates

would make it appear that firms are less sensitive to audit fees than they really are. A way to avoid

this bias is to identify firms’ price sensitivity using fee variation that is driven by supply-side factors

that are uncorrelated with demand shifts (ij ). We are fortunate to have in our market setting and

data two sets of supply shifters that we can use in our audit fee prediction regressions to aid in this

identification. One uses the change in supply structure induced by the sudden and unexpected exit

of Arthur Andersen from the market, and the second uses exogenous increases in auditor supply



                                                    11
created by client mergers and acquisitions. We describe each in further detail below.



Disappearance of Arthur Andersen              We use the collapse of Arthur Andersen in 2002 due

to its post-Enron conviction (later overturned, though too late to revive Arthur Andersen as an

auditing firm) as an exogenous shock to supply in the audit market. The collapse of Arthur

Andersen reduced competition among auditors, creating an opportunity for the remaining suppliers

to increase their audit fees. Prior research on auditor specialization (e.g., Craswell, Francis, and

Taylor (1995), Hogan and Jeter (1999), and Casterella, Francis, Lewis, and Walker (2004)) implies

this supply shock was industry specific: the supply shift was larger in industries where Andersen

had a greater share of the audit market before its collapse (in terms of Andersen’s client firms’ share

of industry assets). This across-industry variation is useful because while one might be concerned

that Andersen’s collapse might be intertemporally linked with changes in the demand for auditing

services (due to the passage of Sarbanes-Oxley, for example), it is unlikely that these demand shifts

would be systematically related to Andersen’s prior share of the industry market. Thus the cross-

industry variation in Andersen’s pre-collapse share offers a source of supply-driven price variation

that is likely orthogonal to shifts in the demand for auditing services.


   To empirically validate the disappearance of Arthur Andersen as relevant to observed changes

in audit fees, Table 3 shows the results of regressing the log difference in client firms’ audit fees on

Andersen’s 2001 market share in the firms’ respective three-digit SIC industries, Andersen0 sShare.

If our argument that Andersen’s collapse is an inward shift in audit supply is correct, the coefficient

on Andersen0 s Share will be positive. That is, publicly traded firms in industries where Andersen

was more dominant before its collapse will see a greater increase in fees afterwards, regardless of

whether they were Andersen clients themselves.




                                                  12
       We estimate these regressions separately for 2008, 2009, and 2010. We include as additional

controls indicator variables for the firm’s auditor in 2001 to account for any systematic differences

in fee growth tied to the client’s auditor. (For example, the fee growth for Andersen clients may

differ from the fee growth for firms that were Ernst & Young clients in 2001.) We also include

the change in the client’s logged total assets over each period, as the prior literature has found

that total assets are the most important predictor of audit fees. We cluster the standard errors

by three-digit SIC. Because we require that the data be available over each change interval, the

sample size drops monotonically from 2,806 clients for 2001–2008 to 2,399 clients for 2001–2010.


       The results, presented in Panel A of Table 3, indicate that the coefficient on the supply shifter

Andersen0 sShare is indeed positive at every horizon and statistically significant for all horizons. In

other words, industries in which Andersen had a larger market share before its collapse experienced

greater growth in audit fees afterwards, and this effect persisted at least through 2010.11


       An alternative explanation for these results is that Arthur Andersen charged lower prices and

provided lower quality audits, thereby leading to greater increases in audit fees for Andersen clients.

However, we do not believe that such an effect drives the results presented in Table 3 for two reasons.

First, Cahan, Zhang, and Veenman (2011) find that prior to the Enron scandal, Arthur Andersen

provided audits of similar quality to the audits provided by the other major audit firms. Second,

as seen in Panel B, we find similar effects if we limit the sample to firms that were not Andersen

clients.


       Given the results in Table 3, we include Andersen0 s Share in the annual audit fee prediction

regressions. This variable offers variation in audit fees due to supply shocks that should be uncorre-

lated with clients’ relative demand for surviving auditors, allowing us to obtain unbiased estimates
  11
       We find similar results for the years 2002 through 2007.




                                                           13
of the sensitivity to fee changes of client firms’ auditor choices.



Client Mergers and Acquisitions               Our second source of supply-driven audit fee variation ex-

ploits mergers and acquisitions among client firms. Because each firm only needs a single auditor,

a merger or acquisition involving firms with different auditors will result in one auditor being

dropped. The audit firm that loses a client will find itself with excess capacity that should put

downward pressure on audit fees. Supply can also shift even if both pre-merger client firms have

the same auditor, because even though the merged firm requires greater auditing, the elasticity of

audit fees to total assets is approximately 0.3–0.4; some of the auditor’s overhead is duplicative

and can be freed for other uses. This creates excess audit capacity for the merged firm’s auditor

and the resulting price effects. These supply shifts will be orthogonal to audit demand shocks

as long as client-level mergers and acquisitions are driven by neither auditor choice nor audit fee

considerations, which strike us as quite likely.


    To test whether mergers and acquisitions have the expected effects on audit fees, we regress

client firms’ logged fees on the prior year’s ratio of merged to total assets the firms’ respective

three-digit SIC industries, M erged Assets. We also control for the ratio of receivables to assets,

the ratio of inventories to assets, the return on assets, an indicator variable for whether the client

experienced a loss, the percent of foreign sales, the natural logarithm of the number of industrial

segments, an indicator for whether the firm is an accelerated filer,12 and firm, industry, and year

fixed effects. We cluster standard errors at the client level and estimate the regressions over the

sample period 2002–2011.


    Columns (1) and (2) of Table 4 present the main results. Consistent with the logic outlined
  12
     The Securities and Exchange Commission requires registrants with an aggregate worldwide market value of equity
greater than $75 million to file their financial statements earlier than smaller registrants.




                                                        14
above, the coefficient on M erged Assets is negative and statistically significant in both column (1),

which includes auditor fixed effects, and in column (2), which does not. Firms in industries that

saw more action in mergers and acquisitions paid lower audit fees, all else equal.


    As a further check on the validity of the merger measure as a supply shifter, we estimate

a specification that, rather than including M erged Assets computed for the prior year, instead

includes the ex post ratio of merged to total assets observed three years in the future. For these

tests, the coefficients on M erged Assets in columns (3) and (4) are positive and insignificant. Thus

merger activity leads price changes and not the reverse, increasing the likelihood that the results

reflect the supply-shift story outlined above rather than a spurious connection between fees and

merger activity due to other forces.



2.3.3    Fit of Predicted Audit Fees


Our random forest prediction specification yields fitted values that are highly correlated with ac-

tual audit fees within the sample. The Pearson product moment correlations between actual and

predicted fees are as follows: Ernst & Young, 0.977; Deloitte Touche, 0.959; KPMG, 0.971; Price-

waterhouseCoopers, 0.970; all other auditors, 0.961. Figure A.1 in the Appendix presents plots of

actual versus predicted log audit fees for our sample.




3     Demand Estimation


3.1     Sample


Our sample consists of SEC registrants with available data. We pull audit fee data from Audit

Analytics, which provides fee data starting with the mandatory disclosure of audit fees in 2000. We

                                                 15
use Compustat to obtain accounting-based financials and the histories of auditor-client matches

prior to 2000 (we need this earlier match information to construct our measure of the extent of an

existing auditor-client relationship). Finally, we identify client-level mergers and acquisitions using

SDC Thomson data.



3.2     Client Firms’ Preferences over Auditors


Panel A of Table 5 presents the results from estimating our benchmark demand model. These

preference parameters form the basis for our estimates of clients’ willingness to pay for audit services

and willingness to substitute among audit firms. We estimate the preference functions separately

by year over 2008–2010. To capture restrictions in the client’s choice set, we remove audit firms

that resigned from auditing the client in the prior three years. We identify such resignations from

the Audit Analytics database. Such resignations arise from disagreements over fees, accounting

practices, or issuances of going concern opinions.13


    Several patterns emerge across the annual estimates. First, client firms’ auditor choices are

sensitive to audit fees. The coefficient on ln(Audit f eesij ) is negative and significant for each year

in the sample. We calculate and discuss the elasticities implied by these estimates below.14


    Second, for each of the Big 4 audit firms, the interactions between the auditor fixed effects

and client size are positive and significant each year, implying that larger clients have a stronger
   13
      In addition, we estimated a separate set of demand parameters using firms in the top half of the distribution of
size to address the possibility that the Big 4 audit firms selectively choose small clients because of litigation risk. Our
demand estimates for this restricted sample are similar to those presented in Table 5. Moreover, the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act prohibits audit firms from providing certain consulting services to their clients. Unfortunately, we are unable to
observe restrictions on clients’ choice sets due to such consulting relations with audit firms.
   14
      While as noted we focus on the post-2001 period in order to exploit exogenous variation created by the implosion
of Arthur Andersen, we found negative and significant coefficients on ln(Audit f eesij ) in untabulated tests for 2000
and 2001. We also estimated the model using fees predicted without including the Andersen implosion and merger
supply-shifters. As theory predicts, the point estimates on predicted fees were on average more positive (that is,
smaller in magnitude) than those in Table 5. The size of the differences were modest, however: the 2008 coefficient
was essentially unchanged, while the 2009 and 2010 coefficients were -1.75 and -1.78, respectively. Thus any price
endogeneity due to unobservable demand shifts that existed in the market was relatively minor.


                                                            16
preference for the Big 4. Similarly, client firms having a larger share of sales in foreign markets also

have a preference for using a Big 4 auditor.


   Third, having hired an auditor the previous year greatly affects the probability that a client

firm hires them again, even after controlling for match-specific observables. The coefficients on the

interactions of Big 4 dummies with 1(N ot clientij ) are negative and significant in every case. Thus

the persistence in auditor choice discussed above reflects an unobserved match-specific attribute.

On the other hand, the interactions with ln(Y ears clientij ) are generally positive but not often

significant, implying that while having a current relationship is an important determinant of auditor

choice, the duration of the history of this relationship is less important.


   Panels B and C of Table 5 present annual mean estimates of client firms’ own-price elasticities—

the percentage change in the probability of choosing the auditor resulting from a one percent

increase in audit fees. In general, as reflected in Panel B, the average estimated elasticities are in

the neighborhood of −1.5 to −1.7. An interesting contrast is observed, however, when we look at

client firms’ elasticities for their auditor in the prior year, as shown in Panel C. These estimates,

which incorporate the effect on elasticities of our current-match variables (i.e., the interactions of

auditor fixed effects with an indicator for the firm not being a client of the auditor and the number

of years that the client firm has been working with its current auditor), reveal that client firms’

choices are much less sensitive to changes in the fees of their current auditors. Elasticity estimates

for the Big 4 are around −0.05 to −0.1, an order of magnitude smaller than the average elasticities in

Panel B. These differences reflect the powerful effect on choices of match-specific utility components

within existing client-auditor pairs. As we will see below, the forced destruction of those matches,

whether due to the exit of one of the Big 4 auditors or the imposition of mandatory auditor rotation,

can destroy a considerable amount of client firms’ consumer surplus.



                                                  17
3.3   Fit of the Model


Our demand model fits the data quite well. Table 6 shows the correspondence between the client

firms’ predicted auditor choices (i.e., the auditor with the largest estimated mean utility for the

client, Vij ) and their actual choices. Across each of the Big 4 audit firms, the model correctly

predicts auditor choice for at least 91% of the clients. Moreover, for clients that chose a non-Big 4

audit firm the model based predictions are correct for over 96% of the clients.


   We also have an interesting opportunity to test the model’s predictive abilities by seeing how well

it did in predicting which auditor former Andersen clients would choose in 2002, after Andersen’s

collapse forced them to choose a new auditor. Table 7 lays out the results. Panel A presents three

sets of demand estimates for 2002: the first column shows estimates obtained using only clients of

Arthur Andersen in 2001; the second column uses all client firms in 2002; the third column uses

a sample of all client firms that were not Andersen clients in 2001. We use these parameters to

generate predicted probabilities of auditor choice for Andersen clients in 2002. In general, these

demand parameters are similar to those presented in Table 5. Importantly, the price coefficient is

similar both in sign and magnitude to the baseline estimates. Panel B presents elasticity estimates

for Andersen clients based on parameter estimates from the three models. As can be seen, these

are similar to those presented in Panel B of Table 7.


   In Panels A, B, and C of Table 8 we compare the actual auditor choices of Andersen clients in

2002 to the auditor with the highest predicted choice probability according to the demand estimates

in Panel A of Table 7. In general, all three models provide better predictions than just chance.

With one exception (Arthur Andersen clients in 2001 who hired PricewaterhouseCoopers in 2002,

with estimates obtained using only the Andersen clients sample—i.e., the fourth row of Panel A),

the auditor that the model predicts as most likely to be hired was in fact the auditor that the client


                                                 18
firm actually hired. Importantly, even parameters estimated using only non-Andersen clients had

predictive abilities for former Andersen client firms’ choices.



3.4      Alternative Specifications


3.4.1      Nested Logit


An alternative model of audit firm choice is that clients first choose whether to use a non-Big 4 or

Big 4 auditor and then, conditional on choosing a Big 4 auditor, choose which of the Big 4 to engage.

To explore this possibility, we re-estimated our demand system using a nested logit specification,

which incorporates this sequential choice structure explicitly. For these estimates, the substitution

parameter between Big 4 and non-Big 4 is approximately 0.85–0.88 and significantly different than

the parameters that arise under the conditional logit model.15 However, the estimated marginal

willingness to pay, α, is similar to the baseline estimates presented in Panel A of Table 5. Further,

there is no generally accepted method for generating error terms from a nested logit model (for

discussions, see McFadden (1999), Herriges and Kling (1999), and Dagsvik and Karlstrom (2005)),

a necessary step for our welfare calculations below. Therefore for the sake of parsimony we use the

conditional logit model.



3.4.2      Dollar Fees


In our benchmark specification (1), client firms’ choices of auditor are influenced by the logarithm

of fees. We base this specification off of the observation that, institutionally, audit fee negotiations

typically involve percentage changes in audit fees rather than absolute dollar changes. It also strikes

as intuitive than an additional, say, $100,000 increment to audit fees would foster a much larger
 15
      The nested logit collapses to conditional logit if the substitution parameter equals one.


                                                           19
response from a small client firm than from a very large one. To examine the sensitivity of the

results to the log-linearity assumption, we also estimate a specification where fees enter in levels

rather than logs. This specification imposes that a dollar of audit fees is equally important to large

and small firms. The non-price preference parameter estimates from this dollar-price specification

are similar to those presented in Table 5. The elasticity estimates are, however, about an eighth the

magnitude of those based on the benchmark log price specification. This is what one would expect

if, in reality, large firms were less sensitive than smaller firms were to a given dollar change in fees,

as the model would attempt to explain this relative indifference by fitting a small coefficient to the

fee level. The log price specification therefore appears to be better able to handle the heterogeneity

in audit fees and client firms’ responses to them that are driven by firm size differences.



3.4.3      Competitor Overlap


Aobdia (2012) documents the empirical regularity that large firms in concentrated industries are

less likely to share auditors, presumably because of concerns about the transmission of proprietary

information through the auditor.16 We therefore created a measure coded as the product of an

indicator for whether firm i is within the top three firms in its industry as defined by four digit SIC,

an indicator for whether auditor j audited at least one other top three firm in the industry, and

a measure of the industry’s concentration (the percentage of industry sales controlled by the top

three firms). When we include this measure in our conditional logit specification, the coefficients

are negative and therefore consistent with the findings of Aobdia (2012). The coefficients are not,

however, statistically significant. This lack of significance appears to be driven by the fact that prior

history of the match between the audit firm and client soaks up variation related to competitive

overlaps. For example, when we estimate demand but exclude the history of firm-client match, the
 16
      Asker and Ljungqvist (2010) find a similar effect for firm-bank matches.



                                                          20
competitive overlap enters significantly for many of the years.




4    Counterfactuals


Having obtained estimates of client firms’ preference parameters, we use them to address the

two aforementioned policy-relevant issues: the effect of increased concentration among audit firms

resulting from the exit of one of the Big 4 and the implementation of mandatory audit firm rotation

at various tenures.


    To estimate these counterfactuals, we use the methodology outlined by McFadden (1999). This

involves calculating the expected change in consumer surplus for each audit client firm as the

expected dollar transfer required to make that client indifferent between the unrestricted choice

set of the status quo and the restricted choice set arising under the counterfactuals. We then

sum these estimates of lost surplus across individual clients to find the expected total change in

consumer surplus.


    For example, suppose that under the status quo client i chooses the auditor j that yields max-

imized utility maxj U (Audit f eesij , xij, ij ), and under the counterfactual firm i chooses auditor m

from a restricted choice set that leads to maximized utility maxm U (Audit f eesim , xim, im ). The

change in consumer surplus, Cijm , is the dollar transfer (or, equivalently, the reduction in audit

fees) that would be required to equate the client’s maximum utility under the restricted choice set

with what it obtained under the unrestricted choice set:



               max U (Audit f eesij , xij , ij ) = max U (Audit f eesim − Cijm , xim , im ).      (4)
                 j                                 m




The total change in consumer surplus for the counterfactual is the sum of Cijm across client firms.


                                                     21
   Mechanically, to estimate Cijm , for each firm i we draw a vector of type 1 extreme value error

terms—one for each of the Big 4 auditors and one for the outside good. We then compute the utility

client firm i would obtain from each auditor choice using equation (1) by combining the parameter

estimates from Panel A of Table 5, the client firm and auditor characteristics observed in the data,

and the error term draws. The auditor that delivers the largest utility of the five choices is then

client firm i’s simulated choice for that error draw. We next restrict the choice set for each client

(i.e., depending on the counterfactual being estimated, remove one of the Big 4 auditors or remove

the client’s prior auditor based on tenure) and calculate the maximum utility that the client would

receive under the restricted choice set. Then we solve for the Cijm that equates these two maximized

utilities; given that dollar fees enter into utility in log form, Cijm is simply the exponent of the

difference in maximized utilities between the unrestricted and restricted choice sets normalized by

the estimated marginal willingness to pay. We repeat this procedure 1,000 times for each client

firm, each time with new error vector, and then average the lost surplus values of Cijm from each

simulation to compute E[Cijm ]. These values in hand, we aggregate these estimates across client

firms to calculate the expected total change in consumer surplus in each counterfactual.


   Computing the expected changes in consumer surplus as above using the observed audit fees in

the data (or, more precisely, our estimates of audit fees given those observed in existing matches)

effectively assumes that there is no supply-side response in the counterfactual scenarios. That is,

it estimates the surplus lost by client firms if one of the Big 4 exits or if auditor rotation becomes

mandatory while holding the fees charged by the remaining auditors fixed. In this sense, it estimates

the pure demand-side effect of the counterfactuals. However, it seems likely that auditors might

respond in these counterfactual worlds by changing their fees. (E.g., if one of the Big 4 exits,

the resulting reduction in competition is likely to result in the remaining auditors charging higher

fees within any given match.) Therefore we estimate two changes in expected surplus for each


                                                 22
counterfactual scenario: a pure demand-side effect that holds auditors’ price responses fixed, and a

second that estimates and takes into account auditors’ strategic price responses in the counterfactual

scenario.



4.1    Exit of a Big 4 Audit Firm


The first counterfactual involves the exit of a Big 4 audit firm. We estimate the total expected

changes in consumer surplus that would be caused by exit of each of the Big 4 auditors (in isolation,

of course). We compute separate estimates using the demand parameters from each of the 2008,

2009, and 2010 samples to check the consistency of the results across subsamples.


   Table 9, Panel A presents the estimated changes in consumer surplus when audit fees are held

constant—that is, without allowing for any strategic price response from the remaining auditors.

The estimated total changes in consumer surplus range from an approximately $1.3 billion loss from

the exit of Deloitte Touche to up to a $1.8 billion loss for the disappearance of PricewaterhouseC-

oopers. These losses are substantial; for all of the Big 4, the estimated changes in consumer surplus

range from 49% to 63% of each firm’s total annual audit fees for our sample. The largest changes

relative to total fees are for KPMG, 53–66%, and the smallest are for PricewaterhouseCoopers,

49–57%.


   Panel B presents mean client-level changes in consumer surplus under the counterfactuals along

with their correlations with client characteristics. As expected, the expected changes in consumer

surplus are significantly larger for clients of an exiting audit firm than for non-clients. For clients the

mean expected decrease in consumer surplus ranges from $1.3 to $2.1 million, while for non-clients

the mean expected change in consumer surplus ranges from $14,000 to $30,000. With respect to

correlations with firm characteristics, for clients of an exiting audit firm the expected changes in


                                                    23
consumer surplus correlate with client size (correlation coefficients between 0.24 and 0.69), audit

fees (0.61–0.85), and tenure with the audit firm (0.17–0.31). For non-clients, the expected changes

in consumer surplus are basically uncorrelated with client characteristics; that is, they are primarily

driven by the error term, ij .


       These estimates are subject to several caveats. One factor that could mitigate the size of the

estimated losses is the possibility that audit teams from the exiting auditor move en masse with their

clients to the remaining auditors. Presumably, some of the match-specific utility would move with

the teams even if the audit firm disappears as a legal entity.17 On the other hand, there are multiple

reasons why these estimates might understate the true loss of client firms’ consumer surplus. For

one, the estimates do not include lost surplus tied to non-audit services (such as consulting and

tax services) audit firms might also provide to their clients. Additionally, the estimates exclude

any surplus lost by an exiting auditor’s domestic private or international clients. Finally, these

estimates are calculated based on the disappearance of a Big 4 audit firm from clients’ choice sets

for only one year. If the persistence of auditor-client matches is solely due to switching costs,

then our single-year estimates should capture most of the present value of the change in consumer

surplus, as once the switch is forced by the counterfactual Big 4 exit, no further losses of this

type would be induced. However, given any persistence in auditor-client matches due instead to

unobserved heterogeneity and match-specific capital, the estimates reflect only the first year’s loss

of the surplus created by these match-specific components; the permanent demise of a Big 4 audit

firm may impose similar losses for years into the future.
  17
     Consistent with this possibility, Blouin, Grein, and Rountree (2007) find that some Arthur Andersen clients
followed their Andersen audit teams to the remaining Big 4 auditors.




                                                      24
4.2   Introduction of Mandatory Audit Firm Rotation


The second counterfactual scenario involves the implementation of mandatory audit firm rotation.

To estimate the expected change in consumer surplus in this case, we calculate the dollar transfer

required to make clients indifferent to the removal of their current auditor from their choice set

once the client-auditor match has lasted beyond the statutory maximum allowed. We compute

separate estimates for different possible statutory maximum tenures, running from four through

ten years. We also again compute estimates using each of the sets of estimated demand parameters

from 2008, 2009, and 2010.


   Table 10, Panel A presents these expected total changes in consumer surplus. They are sig-

nificantly larger than expected changes that arise from the disappearance of one of the Big 4,

ranging from $2.4–2.8 billion if rotation is mandatory after ten years to $4.3–5.1 billion if rotation

is mandatory after four years. (The estimated lost surplus is larger for shorter horizons because a

greater number of matches are affected.) The observed persistence of auditor-client matches results

in mandatory audit firm rotation producing larger changes in consumer surplus because the former

affects a larger proportion of clients.


   Panel B contains mean client-level changes in consumer surplus under the mandatory audit

firm rotation counterfactuals and their correlations with client characteristics. Similarly to the

aggregate estimates presented in Panel A, the client-level means decrease as the horizon increases,

as more client firms are left unaffected by the mandate. If rotation is mandatory after four years,

the mean expected change in consumer surplus ranges from $800,000 to $1 million depending upon

the year the mandate would have been imposed. If rotation is mandatory after ten years, the

mean expected change in consumer surplus ranges from about $450,000 to $550,000. The expected

changes in surplus also correlate with client characteristics, with the highest correlations for audit


                                                 25
fees (0.50–0.75), followed by tenure with the audit firm (0.34–0.57), and then client size (0.14–0.47).


   Note that even though no auditors exit the market in this counterfactual scenario, mandatory

auditor rotation implies an increase in market concentration just as the Big 4 exit scenario does.

This is because the auditor that is forced out due to rotation is necessarily removed from its

formerly matched client firm’s choice set. If the remaining eligible auditors recognize they now face

less competition when negotiating over audit fees with the client firm, this may lead to higher fees.

The lost surplus estimates in Table 10 do not incorporate any such pricing response, focusing only

on the demand-side consequences of mandatory rotation. Below, however, as we also do with the

Big 4 exit counterfactual, we estimate the expected size of the supply-side audit fee (i.e., pricing)

responses of the remaining competing auditors and compute the consequences of this response for

client firms’ consumer surplus.


   An alternative interpretation of these estimates is that they represent what managers (as op-

posed to shareholders) are willing to pay in order to avoid switching auditors and the estimates

therefore represent agency costs. Under this interpretation, long tenures lead to a loss of auditor

independence that managers exploit for their private benefit. Prior literature, however, does not

provide support for the idea that auditor independence decreases over longer tenures. In fact, sev-

eral studies find that audit failures are more likely to occur during the early years of tenure (e.g.,

Carcello and Nagy (2004) and Geiger and Raghunandan (2002), and others find that audit quality

appears to increase over auditor tenure (e.g., Chen, Lin, and Lin (2008), Ghosh and Moon (2005),

and Myers, Myers, and Omer (2003)). We therefore interpret these estimates as representing a

change in consumer surplus. Nevertheless, as we noted above, there may also be social benefits

from imposing mandatory rotation. Our estimates serve to quantify the costs such mandates im-

pose on client firms—costs that any social benefits would have to be weighed against in evaluating



                                                  26
mandatory rotation policies.



4.3      Supply Side Price Response


As we have discussed, the counterfactual changes in surplus computed above hold audit fees fixed,

isolating the surplus changes due to demand-side effects only. In this section, we estimate what

the supply-side responses might be under the counterfactual scenarios and quantify their additional

impact on client firms’ expected surplus.


       To estimate the supply response, we first note that both counterfactual scenarios involve re-

ductions in competition. In standard oligopoly models, reductions in competition—resulting from

the actual exit of one of the market competitors in one counterfactual and the de facto exit of a

client firm’s former auditor (at least for that client firm) in the other—lead to higher prices. Our

estimate of the counterfactual audit fee changes due to the supply response works off this logic.

Specifically, we estimate in our sample how changes in auditor competition for clients within an

industry relates to average audit fee changes in that industry.


       A typical concern when estimating such relationships is that market structure and prices are

both endogenous outcomes, making causal inference difficult. However, we are fortunate in that we

have (and indeed have already used for demand estimation purposes above) an exogenous change

in competition at the industry level, the collapse of Arthur Andersen. Thus we can identify the

causal relationship between competition and fees by estimating the semi-elasticity of audit fees

in 2002 with respect to the percent share of industry total assets audited by Arthur Andersen in

2001 based on three-digit SIC. (This regression is presented in Table A.3.)18 We estimate this
  18
    We estimate this effect for the period prior to the implementation of mandatory internal control audits under
the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. Hence, variation in fees represents changes in industry concentration as opposed to changes
in demand due to increased regulatory requirements. For a discussion, see Feldman (2006) and Kohlbeck, Mayhew,
Murphy, and Wilkins (2008).



                                                        27
semi-elasticity using ordinary least squares and controlling for the standard audit fee determinants.

This semi-elasticity is that audit fees rise 0.15% for each one percentage point of total industry

assets that had been audited by Arthur Andersen before its collapse.


   Table 11 presents estimates of the annual increase in total audit fees that would occur if a

Big 4 audit firm were to disappear. These estimates range from $335 million for the disappearance

of KPMG in 2010 to $533 million for the disappearance of PricewaterhouseCoopers in 2008. Ta-

ble 12 presents estimates of annual increases in total audit fees that would occur under each of the

mandatory audit firm rotation horizons. These estimated annual increases range from $772 million

for the implementation of ten year rotation in 2010 to $1.34 billion for four year rotation in 2008.

The estimated annual increases in fees are over twice as large under this scenario as in the Big 4

exit case, which is to be expected given that mandatory audit firm rotation would affect a larger

number of client firms.


   When combined with the estimated demand-side losses in Table 9, and Table 10, the supply

response implies estimated initial surplus losses among client firms totalling in the neighborhood of

$1.6–2.3 billion in the case of exit of one of the Big 4 auditors and around $3.1–3.5 billion (ten-year

maximum tenure) or $5.6–6.4 billion (four-year maximum tenure) in the case of mandatory auditor

rotation.


   New entry into the market would determine the extent that such annual increases in total audit

fees persist into the future. Absent new entry, these increases in annual audit fees could persist

indefinitely. The limited entry response subsequent to the collapse of Arthur Andersen, not to

mention the revealed reluctance among policymakers to force any further consolidation through

legal action, suggests that such increases would likely be quite persistent.




                                                  28
5    Conclusion


The audit industry receives considerable policy attention for several reasons. Using estimates of

publicly listed firms’ demand for audit services, we have evaluated the consequences for client firms

of two important policy-related scenarios: further concentration of the audit industry due to exit

of one of the Big 4 audit firms, and the imposition of mandatory auditor rotation.


    The estimated parameters of our model, which fit the data quite well, imply that both scenarios

would impose substantial costs. The direct impacts on client firms’ choice sets along imply, surplus

losses of about $1.5 billion for exit of one of the Big 4 and $2.5–5.0 billion for mandatory auditor

rotation (shorter mandated maximum tenures create larger losses of surplus). Factoring in the

expected supply responses of the remaining auditors–increases in fees due to decreased competition–

raises these figure by another 25 percent. Moreover, there are several reasons why these estimated

losses are likely to be conservative, including that these figures are for initial one-year surplus losses,

while in reality both the loss of choice and increase in fees from less competition are likely to be

persistent.


    While we have used our framework to address two of the more salient policy questions in

the audit industry, we believe our empirical framework can be applied to other sets of economic

questions about the industry, and purchased business services more broadly. Furthermore, we

see potential gains from analyzing the audit industry in a more explicit economic framework that

separates demand from supply effects to better understand the sources and consequences of shifts

in the industry’s market conditions.




                                                    29
REFERENCES


 Aobdia, D. (2012). Proprietary information spillovers and auditor choice. Unpublished working

    paper, UCLA.

 Asker, J. and A. Ljungqvist (2010). Competition and the structure of vertical relationships in

    captial markets. Journal of Political Economy 118 (3), 599–647.

 Ball, R. (2001). Infrastructure Requirements for an Economicallly Efficient System of Public

    Financial Reporting and Disclsoure. Brookings-Wharton Papers on Financial Services 1, 127–

    169.

 Black, B. (2000–2001). The Legal and Institutional Preconditions for Strong Securities Markets.

    UCLA Law Review 48, 781–856.

 Blouin, J., B. Grein, and B. Rountree (2007). An analysis of forced auditor change: The case of

    former Arthur Andersen clients. The Accounting Review 82 (3), 621–650.

 Cahan, S., W. Zhang, and D. Veenman (2011). Did the Waste Management Audit Failures

    Signal Lower Firm-Wide Audit Quality at Arthur Andersen? Contemporary Accounting Re-

    search 28 (3), 859–891.

 Carcello, J. and A. Nagy (2004). Audit Firm Tenure and Fraudualent Financial Reporting.

    Auditing: A Journal of Practice and Theory 23 (2), 55–69.

 Casterella, J., J. Francis, B. Lewis, and P. Walker (2004). Auditor Industry Specialization, Client

    Bargaining Power, and Audit Pricing. Auditing: A Journal of Practice and Theory 23 (1),

    123–140.

 Chen, C., C. Lin, and Y. Lin (2008). Audit Partner Tenure, Audit Firm Tenure, and Discretionary

    Accruals: Does Long Auditor Tenure Impair Earnings Quality? Contemporary Accounting

    Research 25 (2), 415–445.

                                                30
Cohn, M. (2013, June 20). House Committee Passes Bill Preventing PCAOB from Imposing

   Audit Firm Rotation. Accounting Today 1.

Craswell, A., J. Francis, and S. Taylor (1995). Auditor brand name reputations and industry

   specializations. Journal of Accounting and Economics 20, 297–322.

Dagsvik, J. and A. Karlstrom (2005). Compensating variation and hicksian choice probabilities

   in random utility models that are nonlinear in income. Review of Economic Studies 72 (1),

   57–76.

Doogar, R. and R. Easley (1998). Concentration without differentiation: A new look at the

   determinants of audit market concentration. Journal of Accounting and Economics 25, 235–

   253.

Erdem, T., M. Keane, and B. Sun (1999). Missing price and coupon availability data in scanner

   panels: Correcting for self-selection bias in choice model parameters. Journal of Economet-

   rics 89, 177–196.

Ettredge, M., S. Kwon, and C. Lim (2009). Client, Industry, and Country Factors Affecting

   Choice of Big N Industry Expert Auditors. Journal of Accounting, Auditing, and Finance 24,

   433–476.

Feldman, E. (2006). A Basic Quantification of the Competitive Implications of the Demise of

   Arthur Andersen. Review of Industrial Organization 29, 193–212.

Geiger, M. and K. Raghunandan (2002). Auditor Tenure and Audit Report Failures. Auditing:

   A Journal of Practice and Theory 21 (1), 67–78.

Ghosh, A. and D. Moon (2005). Auditor tenure and perceptions of audit quality. The Accounting

   Review 80 (2), 585–612.

Hastie, T., R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman (2009). The Elements of Statistical Learning (2nd

                                            31
   ed.). New York, NY: Springer.

Hay, R., W. Knechel, and N. Wong (2006). Audit Fees: A Meta-analysis of the Effect of Supply

   and Demand Attributes. Contemporary Accounting Research 23 (1), 141–191.

Herriges, J. and C. Kling (1999). Nonlinear Income Effects in Random Utility Models. Review

   of Economics and Statistics 81 (1), 62–72.

Hogan, C. and D. Jeter (1999). Industry Specialization by Auditors. Auditing: A Journal of

   Practice and Theory 18 (1), 1–17.

Johnson, C. (2010, January 4). Charge Against KPMG Dropped. Washington Post.

Kohlbeck, M., B. Mayhew, P. Murphy, and M. Wilkins (2008). Competition for andersen’s clients.

   Contemporary Accounting Research 25 (4), 1099–1136.

Lennox, C., J. Francis, and Z. Wang (2012). Selection Models in Accounting Research. The

   Accounting Review 87 (2), 589–616.

McFadden, D. (1999). Computing willingess to pay in random utility models. Trade, Theory,

   and Econometrics: Essays in honour of John S. Chipman 15, 253–274.

Myers, J., L. Myers, and T. Omer (2003). Exploring the Term of the Auditor-Client Relationship

   and the Quality of Earnings: A Case for Mandatory Auditor Rotation. The Accounting

   Review 78 (3), 799–799.

Petrin, A. (2002). Quantifying the benefits of new products: The case of the minivan. Journal

   of Political Economy 119 (4), 705–729.

Public Accounting Report (2011, January 31). E&Y, Deloitte Face New Challenges in Lehman

   and Bear Stearns Cases.

Sirois, L.-P. and D. Simunic (2013). Auditor Size and Audit Quality Revisited: The Importance

   of Audit Technology. Unpublished working paper, University of British Columbia.

                                                32
Train, K. (2009). Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. New York, NY: Cambridge University

   Press.

Tysiac, K. (2012). PCAOB panelists say mandatory firm rotation could be harmful, helpful.

   Journal of Accountancy 213 (4).

Valukas, A. (2010). In re Lehman Bros. Holdings. Technical Report no. 08-13555, ECF No. 7530,

   Jenner & Block LLP, Bankr. SDNY.

Velte, P. and M. Stiglbauer (2012). Audit Market Concentration and Its Influence on Audit

   Quality. International Business Research 5 (11), 146–161.

Watts, R. and J. Zimmerman (1983). Agency Problems, Auditing, and the Theory of the Firm:

   Some Evidence. Journal of Law and Economics 26 (3), 613–633.

Willenborg, M. (1999). Empirical analysis of the economic demand for auditing in the initial

   public offerings market. Journal of Accounting Research 37 (1), 225–238.




                                            33
                                     Table 1: Market shares

This table presents annual market shares of SEC registrant audits for the Big 4 and non-Big 4
auditors as well as the mean Herfindahl Index of those shares within three-digit SIC industries.
Panel A calculates market shares and Herfindahl Indices based on audit fees and Panel B calculates
market shares and Herfindahl Indices based on number of clients. Audit fees and clients are taken
from the Audit Analytics database.

Panel A: Market shares based on audit fees


                      E&Y      Deloitte   KPMG      PwC       non-Big 4   HHI SIC3
              2002   22.50%    18.88%     23.92%    31.55%     3.15%       4,957
              2003   23.15%    19.78%     21.71%    32.11%     3.25%       4,955
              2004   22.40%    20.71%     21.41%    32.17%     3.31%       5,157
              2005   23.64%    21.44%     20.38%    29.93%     4.62%       5,111
              2006   24.22%    20.96%     20.19%    29.41%     5.22%       5,133
              2007   25.24%    22.17%     19.52%    27.04%     6.04%       4,979
              2008   24.21%    22.32%     19.44%    28.16%     5.85%       4,968
              2009   25.06%    21.74%     18.71%    28.89%     5.59%       5,070
              2010   25.21%    21.35%     18.93%    29.23%     5.28%       5,050


Panel B: Market shares based on number of clients


                      E&Y      Deloitte   KPMG      PwC       non-Big 4   HHI SIC3
              2002   23.86%    16.71%     19.93%    22.15%     17.35%      3,832
              2003   23.16%    16.39%     19.16%    21.65%     19.64%      3,785
              2004   21.45%    15.97%     18.32%    20.42%     23.84%      4,034
              2005   21.03%    15.59%     16.49%    18.04%     28.86%      4,096
              2006   20.85%    14.86%     15.61%    16.64%     32.04%      4,195
              2007   20.83%    14.53%     14.51%    15.75%     34.38%      4,114
              2008   20.78%    14.44%     14.37%    15.77%     34.63%      4,191
              2009   20.82%    14.65%     14.59%    15.58%     34.35%      4,260
              2010   20.95%    14.94%     15.16%    16.03%     32.93%      4,262




                                               34
                                          Table 2: Auditor switches

This table presents transition matrices of client switches between audit firms over the period 2008–
2010.

                                                        Year t+1
                                 E&Y       Deloitte   KPMG PwC              non-Big 4   Total
                     E&Y          2,986          18        24          20          36    3,084
                                 96.8%        0.6%      0.8%        0.6%        1.2%
                     Deloitte        25       2,076        12          22          42    2,177
                                  1.1%       95.4%      0.6%        1.0%        1.9%
            Year t




                     KPMG            25           9     2,086          16          34    2,170
                                  1.2%        0.4%     96.1%        0.7%        1.6%
                     PwC             17          21        13       2,277          23    2,351
                                  0.7%        0.9%      0.6%       96.9%        1.0%
                     non-Big 4       26          17        35          23       4,725    4,826
                                  0.5%        0.4%      0.7%        0.5%       97.9%

                     Total        3,079       2,141        2,170    2,358       4,860   14,608




                                                      35
                      Table 3: Validation of Arthur Andersen supply shifter

This table presents regressions that validate the use of the disappearance of Arthur Andersen as a
supply shifter. The dependent variable in all of the regressions is the log growth in audit fees from
2001 to the relevant year. The supply shifter is Arthur Andersen’s share of the industry in 2001,
with industries based on three-digit SIC codes. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered
at the three-digit SIC level. Panel A presents results for all firms and Panel B presents results for
firms that were not clients of Arthur Andersen in 2001.

Panel A: All firms


                                                       2008        2009       2010

               Andersen’s Industry Share in 2001       0.269*     0.255**    0.228**
                                                       (0.138)    (0.114)    (0.102)
               Andersen Client in 2001                0.346***   0.283***   0.260***
                                                       (0.034)    (0.035)    (0.042)
               E&Y Client in 2001                     0.334***   0.257***   0.234***
                                                       (0.034)    (0.034)    (0.036)
               Deloitte Client in 2001                0.288***   0.208***   0.197***
                                                       (0.037)    (0.036)    (0.041)
               KPMG Client in 2001                    0.293***   0.196***   0.218***
                                                       (0.043)    (0.047)    (0.054)
               PwC Client in 2001                     0.346***   0.271***   0.255***
                                                       (0.035)    (0.033)    (0.037)
               Change in Ln(Assets)                   0.386***   0.396***   0.409***
                                                       (0.026)    (0.021)    (0.018)
               Constant                               0.776***   0.792***   0.767***
                                                       (0.046)    (0.035)    (0.026)

               Observations                            2,806      2,612       2,399
               Adjusted R2                             0.249      0.273       0.298
               *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                 36
Panel B: Not an Arthur Andersen client in 2001


                                                     2008       2009       2010

              Andersen’s Industry Share in 2001      0.324**   0.309***   0.275***
                                                     (0.147)    (0.118)    (0.103)
              Deloitte Client in 2001               0.287***   0.207***   0.197***
                                                     (0.037)    (0.036)    (0.041)
              KPMG Client in 2001                   0.293***   0.196***   0.218***
                                                     (0.044)    (0.047)    (0.054)
              PwC Client in 2001                    0.345***   0.271***   0.254***
                                                     (0.034)    (0.033)    (0.037)
              Change in Ln(Assets)                  0.389***   0.403***   0.417***
                                                     (0.027)    (0.023)    (0.020)
              Constant                              0.767***   0.781***   0.756***
                                                     (0.045)    (0.033)    (0.027)

              Observations                           2,332      2,169      1,987
              Adjusted R2                            0.250      0.279      0.303
              *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                               37
                              Table 4: Client mergers as a supply shifter

This table presents regressions that validate the use of client mergers as a supply shifter. The
dependent variable in all of the regressions is the natural logarithm of audit fees. The supply
shifter is the ratio of merged to total assets in an industry based on the three-digit SIC codes for
the prior year. Columns (1) and (2) present regressions in which the shifter is for the prior year.
Columns (3) and (4) validate the shifter by setting it forward three years. Standard errors are in
parentheses and clustered at the firm-level.

                                                  (1)         (2)           (3)       (4)

        Merged to Total Assets                 -0.093**    -0.094**
                                                (0.039)     (0.039)
        Merged to Total Assets + 3 Years                                  -0.024      -0.019
                                                                         (0.039)     (0.040)
        Ln(Assets)                              0.405***   0.428***    0.400***    0.424***
                                                 (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.009)
        Receivables to Assets                  0.251***    0.241***    0.253***    0.242***
                                                 (0.050)     (0.051)     (0.055)     (0.057)
        Inventory to Assets                     0.344***    0.337***    0.326***    0.321***
                                                 (0.072)     (0.075)     (0.079)     (0.082)
        Return on Assets                       -0.263***   -0.283***   -0.271***   -0.292***
                                                 (0.019)     (0.019)     (0.020)     (0.021)
        Loss                                    0.036***    0.033***   0.036***    0.033***
                                                 (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.007)     (0.007)
        Percent Foreign Sales                   0.072***    0.075***    0.070***    0.071***
                                                 (0.016)     (0.017)     (0.018)     (0.019)
        Ln(Segments)                           0.023***     0.025***   0.020***    0.022***
                                                 (0.006)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)
        Accelerated Filer                      -0.049***   -0.054***   -0.057***   -0.064***
                                                 (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.009)     (0.009)
        Going Concern Opinion                  0.048***     0.057***   0.055***    0.064***
                                                 (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.014)     (0.014)
        Constant                                9.010***    8.919***   9.158***     9.054***
                                                 (0.429)     (0.439)     (0.328)     (0.332)

        Observations                            69,280      69,280      59,123      59,123
        Adjusted R2                             0.641       0.628       0.647       0.635
        Firm fixed effects                       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
        Auditor fixed effects                    Yes          No         Yes          No
        Year fixed effects                       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
        Industry fixed effects                   Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
        Number of clients                       10,525      10,525      10,162      10,162
        *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



                                                  38
                                    Table 5: Demand estimation

This table presents estimates of demand and price elasticity for SEC registrants over the period
2008–2010. Panel A presents annual estimates of the demand for the Big 4 audit firms. The
regressions are estimated using conditional logit with the outside good being the non-Big 4 audit
firms. Ln(Predicted Fees) is the natural logarithm of predicted fees for each of the Big 4 audit firms.
E&Y, Deloitte, KPMG, and PwC are brand fixed effects for each of the Big 4 audit firms. Ln(Assets)
is the natural logarithm of the client’s total assets, Ln(Segments) is the natural logarithm of the
client’s industrial segments, Foreign Sales is the percentage of the clients sales generated outside
of the US, Debt is the ratio of short- and long-term debt to total assets for the client, ROA is the
client’s return on assets, Inventory + Receivables is the client’s ratio of inventory and receivables
to total assets, and Payables is the ratio of the client’s account payables to total assets. Ln(Years
Client) is the number of years that the SEC registrant has been a client of the audit firm, and
Not Prior Client is an indicator variable for whether the SEC registrant was not a client of the
audit firm in the prior three years. Not tabulated are interactions between the brand fixed effects
and indicators for the Fama-French ten industries. Data on client characteristics are taken from
Compustat. Panel B presents annual mean price elasticity estimates by audit firm for all clients.
Panel C presents annual mean price elasticity estimates by audit firm conditional on being a client
of the audit firm in the prior year.




                                                  39
Panel A: Demand estimates
                                                    2008        2009        2010


 Ln(Predicted Fees)                               -2.052***   -1.935***   -1.941***
                                                    (0.138)     (0.147)     (0.152)
 E&Y                                               2.498***    1.738***    2.913***
                                                    (0.602)     (0.661)     (0.752)
 Deloitte                                          1.797***    2.894***    1.829***
                                                    (0.695)     (0.724)     (0.703)
 KPMG                                                1.163*    1.990***    2.478***
                                                    (0.689)     (0.704)     (0.777)
 PwC                                               2.084***       0.555    2.686***
                                                    (0.768)     (0.745)     (0.889)
 E&Y * Ln(Assets)                                  0.498***    0.570***    0.536***
                                                    (0.062)     (0.073)     (0.071)
 Deloitte * Ln(Assets)                             0.495***    0.428***    0.484***
                                                    (0.069)     (0.071)     (0.070)
 KPMG * Ln(Assets)                                 0.551***    0.392***    0.416***
                                                    (0.071)     (0.075)     (0.074)
 PwC * Ln(Assets)                                  0.504***    0.559***    0.572***
                                                    (0.076)     (0.078)     (0.076)
 E&Y * Ln(Segments)                                -0.259**      -0.179      -0.076
                                                    (0.128)     (0.149)     (0.159)
 Deloitte * Ln(Segments)                              0.132    -0.308**      -0.058
                                                    (0.144)     (0.149)     (0.161)
 KPMG * Ln(Segments)                                 -0.092      -0.184       0.261
                                                    (0.152)     (0.166)     (0.164)
 PwC * Ln(Segments)                                  -0.076       0.198      -0.259
                                                    (0.154)     (0.154)     (0.169)
 E&Y * Foreign Sales                                0.578**     0.538**     0.554**
                                                    (0.238)     (0.274)     (0.256)
 Deloitte * Foreign Sales                             0.035     0.637**   0.995***
                                                    (0.298)     (0.299)     (0.274)
 KPMG * Foreign Sales                               0.730**    0.801***    0.847***
                                                    (0.287)     (0.304)     (0.263)
 PwC * Foreign Sales                                0.697**       0.228     0.664**
                                                    (0.307)     (0.308)     (0.289)
 E&Y * Debt                                          -0.272      -0.264      -0.808
                                                    (0.343)     (0.455)     (0.503)
 Deloitte * Debt                                     -0.441       0.086      -0.667
                                                    (0.407)     (0.475)     (0.474)
 KPMG * Debt                                         -0.282      -0.195      -0.198
                                                    (0.473)     (0.538)     (0.507)
 PwC * Debt                                          0.218       -0.501      -0.827
                                                    (0.461)     (0.507)     (0.508)
 E&Y * ROA                                        -1.022***      0.739     -1.062**
                                                    (0.382)     (0.561)     (0.513)
 Deloitte * ROA                                      -0.092       0.838     -0.983*
                                                    (0.528)     (0.637)     (0.595)
 KPMG * ROA                                         -0.857*       0.251      -0.690
                                                    (0.501)     (0.663)     (0.637)
 PwC * ROA                                           -0.596      -0.859      -0.432
                                                    (0.543)     (0.605)     (0.713)
 E&Y * Inventory + Receivables                     -1.345**    -1.930**    -1.762**
                                                    (0.598)     (0.755)     (0.725)
 Deloitte * Inventory + Receivables                  -0.438     -1.373*      -0.958
                                                    (0.691)     (0.733)     (0.721)
 KPMG * Inventory + Receivables                      -0.846    -1.814**     -1.381*
                                                    (0.666)     (0.774)     (0.708)
 PwC * Inventory + Receivables                      -1.297*      -1.034   -2.403***
                                                    (0.779)     (0.808)     (0.822)
 E&Y * Payables                                     -1.559*       0.162      -0.810
                                                    (0.845)     (0.993)     (0.977)
 Deloitte * Payables                                -1.603*      -1.468    -1.942**
                                                    (0.964)     (0.910)     (0.837)
 KPMG * Payables                                   -1.787**      -1.115      -1.136
                                                    (0.820)     (0.848)     (0.794)
 PwC * Payables                                       0.142       0.107      -0.699
                                                    (1.144)     (1.064)     (1.098)
 E&Y * Ln(Years Client)                              -0.111      -0.025      -0.028
                                                    (0.197)     (0.209)     (0.264)
 Deloitte * Ln(Years Client)                          0.093       0.321   0.799***
                                                    (0.207)     (0.219)     (0.258)
 KPMG * Ln(Years Client)                            0.397*      0.483**       0.374
                                                    (0.219)     (0.202)     (0.297)
 PwC * Ln(Years Client)                              0.157       0.335        0.464
                                                    (0.241)     (0.233)     (0.320)
 E&Y * Not Prior Client                           -5.873***   -6.233***   -6.167***
                                                    (0.432)     (0.470)     (0.599)
 Deloitte * Not Prior Client                      -5.947***   -5.565***   -4.867***
                                                    (0.446)     (0.479)     (0.509)
 KPMG * Not Prior Client                          -5.292***   -5.495***   -5.884***
                                                    (0.444)     (0.422)     (0.608)
 PwC * Not Prior Client                           -6.191***   -5.496***   -5.849***
                                                    (0.551)     (0.526)     (0.695)

 Industry Interactions with Brand Fixed Effects     YES         YES         YES
 Observations                                      27,034      25,333      25,024
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                   40
Panel B: Mean price elasticities for all clients


                                              2008      2009     2010
                                  E&Y        -1.625     -1.532   -1.535
                                  Deloitte   -1.754     -1.651   -1.651
                                  KPMG       -1.757     -1.652   -1.647
                                  PwC        -1.728     -1.633   -1.630
                                  Other      -1.341     -1.270   -1.302


Panel C: Mean price elasticities conditional on being a client of the audit firm in the prior year


                                              2008      2009     2010
                                  E&Y        -0.074     -0.066   -0.038
                                  Deloitte   -0.101     -0.094   -0.060
                                  KPMG       -0.086     -0.089   -0.043
                                  PwC        -0.055     -0.066   -0.034
                                  Other      -0.201     -0.192   -0.250




                                                   41
                                         Table 6: Model fit

This table compares actual auditor choices with the predicted choices based on the models presented
in Table 5. The predicted choice is the auditor with the highest predicted probability for the client
and the matrix pools actual and predicted choices over 2008–2010.

                                       Highest Predicted Probability
            Acutal Choice     E&Y      Deloitte KPMG PwC non-Big 4                Total
            E&Y               2,983         28        23          22       174    3,230
                             92.4%       0.9%      0.7%        0.7%      5.4%
            Deloitte             22      2,077        14          23       136    2,272
                              1.0%      91.4%      0.6%        1.0%      6.0%
            KPMG                 26         19     2,073           9       150    2,277
                              1.1%       0.8%     91.0%        0.4%      6.6%
            PwC                  21         24        18       2,258       126    2,447
                              0.9%       1.0%      0.7%       92.3%      5.1%
            non-Big 4            56         48        36          38     5,088    5,266
                              1.1%       0.9%      0.7%        0.7%     96.6%

            Total              3,108     2,196        2,164    2,350     5,674   15,492




                                                 42
           Table 7: Demand and Price Elasticity Estimates for Arthur Andersen Clients

This table presents demand estimates and price elasticity estimates for former Arthur Andersen
clients in 2002. Panel A presents demand estimates: column (1) presents estimates of audit firm
choice in 2002 for firms that were clients of Arthur Andersen in 2001; column (2) presents estimates
of audit firm choice in 2001 for all firms; column 3 presents estimates of audit firm choice in 2002 for
firms that were not clients of Arthur Andersen in 2001. For all three regressions, the outside good
consists of the non-Big 4 audit firms. Ln(Predicted Fees) is the natural logarithm of predicted fees
for each of the Big 4 audit firms. E&Y, Deloitte, KPMG, and PwC are brand fixed effects for each of
the Big 4 audit firms. Ln(Assets) is the natural logarithm of the client’s total assets, Ln(Segments)
is the natural logarithm of the client’s industrial segments, Foreign Sales is the percentage of the
clients sales generated outside of the US, Debt is the ratio of short- and long-term debt to total
assets for the client, ROA is the client’s return on assets, Inventory + Receivables is the client’s ratio
of inventory and receivables to total assets, and Payables is the ratio of the client’s account payables
to total assets. Not tabulated are interactions between the brand fixed effects and indicators for the
Fama-French ten industries. Panel B presents price elasticity estimates for former Arthur Andersen
clients based on the parameter estimates from the three regressions presented in Panel A.




                                                   43
Panel A: Demand estimates for former Arthur Andersen clients in 2002
                                                     Andersen Clients   All Clients   No Andersen Clients

                Ln(Predicted Fees)                      -2.283***       -2.058***          -2.009***
                                                          (0.197)         (0.069)            (0.074)
                E&Y                                        -1.034       -1.053***          -1.088***
                                                          (0.961)         (0.257)            (0.271)
                Deloitte                                 -2.277**       -1.690***          -1.656***
                                                          (1.007)         (0.269)            (0.283)
                KPMG                                       -1.403       -1.426***          -1.456***
                                                          (0.965)         (0.256)            (0.269)
                PwC                                        -1.264       -1.661***          -1.677***
                                                          (1.015)         (0.263)            (0.274)
                E&Y * Ln(Assets)                         0.849***        0.662***           0.655***
                                                          (0.166)         (0.038)            (0.039)
                Deloitte * Ln(Assets)                    0.981***        0.650***           0.624***
                                                          (0.171)         (0.039)            (0.040)
                KPMG * Ln(Assets)                        0.858***        0.646***           0.631***
                                                          (0.167)         (0.038)            (0.040)
                PwC * Ln(Assets)                         0.871***        0.760***           0.752***
                                                          (0.171)         (0.039)            (0.040)
                E&Y * Ln(Segments)                         -0.079          -0.049             -0.097
                                                          (0.251)         (0.072)            (0.076)
                Deloitte * Ln(Segments)                    -0.158          -0.025             -0.048
                                                          (0.260)         (0.075)            (0.079)
                KPMG * Ln(Segments)                      -0.606**        -0.158**            -0.130*
                                                          (0.254)         (0.074)            (0.079)
                PwC * Ln(Segments)                       -0.567**       -0.215***          -0.207***
                                                          (0.267)         (0.074)            (0.077)
                E&Y * Foreign Sales                        -0.347        0.391***           0.437***
                                                          (0.551)         (0.148)            (0.155)
                Deloitte * Foreign Sales                   -0.284         0.340**            0.388**
                                                          (0.576)         (0.158)            (0.165)
                KPMG * Foreign Sales                        0.214        0.780***           0.839***
                                                          (0.548)         (0.154)            (0.163)
                PwC * Foreign Sales                         0.257        0.957***           0.974***
                                                          (0.575)         (0.151)            (0.157)
                E&Y * Debt                               -1.719**       -0.804***          -0.796***
                                                          (0.760)         (0.214)            (0.228)
                Deloitte * Debt                           -1.553*          -0.259             -0.215
                                                          (0.819)         (0.234)            (0.248)
                KPMG * Debt                                -0.854           0.123              0.187
                                                          (0.785)         (0.225)            (0.239)
                PwC * Debt                              -2.237***       -0.714***           -0.592**
                                                          (0.837)         (0.223)            (0.232)
                E&Y * ROA                                  0.725        -1.141***          -1.360***
                                                          (0.759)         (0.247)            (0.265)
                Deloitte * ROA                             1.466*          -0.127             -0.287
                                                          (0.865)         (0.282)            (0.301)
                KPMG * ROA                                  0.264       -0.920***          -1.002***
                                                          (0.757)         (0.259)            (0.281)
                PwC * ROA                                  1.290        -0.716***          -0.896***
                                                          (0.845)         (0.261)            (0.278)
                E&Y * Inventory + Receivables               0.900       -0.948***          -0.932***
                                                          (1.167)         (0.282)            (0.294)
                Deloitte * Inventory + Receivables          1.009          -0.496             -0.471
                                                          (1.246)         (0.304)            (0.317)
                KPMG * Inventory + Receivables              1.692         -0.553*           -0.643**
                                                          (1.166)         (0.286)            (0.301)
                PwC * Inventory + Receivables              2.325*       -0.761***          -0.897***
                                                          (1.237)         (0.294)            (0.305)
                E&Y * Payables                           -2.890**       -2.987***          -3.128***
                                                          (1.330)         (0.355)            (0.376)
                Deloitte * Payables                     -3.846***       -2.703***          -2.641***
                                                          (1.431)         (0.366)            (0.383)
                KPMG * Payables                          -2.956**       -2.577***          -2.544***
                                                          (1.261)         (0.328)            (0.347)
                PwC * Payables                          -3.994***       -3.656***          -3.730***
                                                          (1.396)         (0.372)            (0.392)

                Observations                              3,784           28,854            25,070
                Industry Interactions                      Yes             Yes               Yes
                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                           44
Panel B: Mean price elasticity estimates for former Arthur Andersen clients in 2002


                                  Demand Parameters Estimated Using
                           Andersen Clients All Clients non-Andersen Clients
                E&Y             -1.622          -1.567             -1.539
                Deloitte        -1.806          -1.714             -1.681
                KPMG            -1.649          -1.647             -1.628
                PwC             -1.918          -1.602             -1.541
                Other           -2.135          -1.701             -1.646




                                               45
       Table 8: Actual choices of Arthur Andersen clients compared to model predictions

This table compares predicted with actual auditor choices in 2002 for firms that were clients of
Arthur Andersen in 2001. Panel A uses the highest predicted probability from the model estimated
on all clients presented in column (1) of Table 7. Panel B uses the highest predicted probability
based on the model estimated only on Arthur Andersen clients presented in column (2) of Table 7.
Panel C uses the highest predicted probability from the model estimated on firms that were not
Arthur Andersen clients presented in column (3) of Table 7.

Panel A: Conditional logit estimated on Arthur Andersen clients


                                       Highest Predicted Probability
             Acutal Choice    E&Y      Deloitte KPMG PwC non-Big 4             Total
             E&Y                 138        24        48         3         6    219
                              63.0%     11.0%     21.9%      1.4%      2.7%
             Deloitte             39        75        31        11         2    158
                              24.7%     47.5%     19.6%      7.0%      1.3%
             KPMG                 53        19       127         7         4    210
                              25.2%      9.1%     60.5%      3.3%      1.9%
             PwC                  33        18        40        28         2    121
                              27.3%     14.9%     33.1%     23.1%      1.7%
             non-Big 4            17         5         9         1        17     49
                              34.7%     10.2%     18.4%      2.0%     34.7%

             Total               280       141        255      50         31    757


Panel B: Conditional logit estimated on all clients


                                       Highest Predicted Probability
             Acutal Choice    E&Y      Deloitte KPMG PwC non-Big 4             Total
             E&Y                 132        12        17        41        17    219
                              60.3%      5.5%      7.8%     18.7%      7.8%
             Deloitte             37        66        14        34         7    158
                              23.4%     41.8%      8.9%     21.5%      4.4%
             KPMG                 44        10        90        42        24    210
                              21.0%      4.8%     42.9%     20.0%     11.4%
             PwC                  26         9        22        58         6    121
                              21.5%      7.4%     18.2%     47.9%      5.0%
             non-Big 4            18         3         1         1        26     49
                              36.7%      6.1%      2.0%      2.0%     53.1%

             Total               257       100        144     176         80    757



                                                 46
Panel C: Conditional logit estimated on non-Arthur Andersen clients


                                     Highest Predicted Probability
            Acutal Choice    E&Y     Deloitte KPMG PwC non-Big 4               Total
            E&Y                119        10        17        53          20    219
                            54.3%      4.6%      7.8%     24.2%        9.1%
            Deloitte            34        63        12        42           7    158
                            21.5%     39.9%      7.6%     26.6%        4.4%
            KPMG                41         4        87        52          26    210
                            19.5%      1.9%     41.4%     24.8%       12.4%
            PwC                 27         9        16        62           7    121
                            22.3%      7.4%     13.2%     51.2%        5.8%
            non-Big 4           18         1         1         2          27     49
                            36.7%      2.0%      2.0%      4.1%       55.1%

            Total              239        87        133     211          87     757




                                               47
              Table 9: Disappearance of a Big 4 audit firm with no supply response

The table presents expected changes in consumer surplus if one of the Big 4 audit firms disappeared.
Estimates are based on Table 5 coefficient estimates for 2008, 2009, and 2010. For the disappearance
of each of the Big 4 audit firms, we estimate the expected change in consumer surplus, Cijm , for
each firm i. To do so, we draw vectors of type 1 extreme value error terms—one for each of the
Big 4 auditors and one for the outside good. For each vector draw, we combine in equation (1) the
parameter estimates from the demand estimation along with the the firm-auditor characteristics
and the error term draw to calculate the utility that client would receive from choosing each of the
Big 4 auditors and the outside good. We then pick the audit firm that leads to maximum utility
under this unrestricted choice set. We next restrict the choice set for each client (i.e., remove one
of the Big 4 auditors) and calculate the maximum utility that the client would have received under
the restricted choice set. Then, we solve for the change in consumer surplus Cijm that equates the
maximum utilities. For each client, we repeat this procedure 1,000 times and take the average of
the required dollar transfer to create E[Cijm ]. Panel A presents the estimates of the expected total
change in consumer surplus if each of the Big 4 disappears. Panel B presents the firm-level mean
change in consumer surplus and correlations of the firm-level change in consumer surplus with firm
size, audit fees, and tenure with auditor.


Panel A: Total expected changes in consumer surplus if one of the Big 4 audit firms disappears
(US$ in billions)


                                             2008     2009    2010
                                  E&Y        1.548    1.517   1.646
                                  Deloitte   1.334    1.247   1.386
                                  KPMG       1.234    1.192   1.278
                                  PwC        1.657    1.540   1.794




                                                 48
     Panel B: Firm-level expected changes in consumer surplus if one of the Big 4 audit firms disappears (US$ dollars)


                                              2008                                2009                                   2010
                                              Correlations with                  Correlations with                    Correlations with
                                   Mean      Size Fees Tenure         Mean      Size Fees Tenure           Mean      Size Fees Tenure
       E&Y        Client         1,297,902   0.47 0.77      0.22    1,378,301   0.52 0.78      0.19      1,507,432   0.69 0.85       0.17




49
                  Not a client      20,427   0.02 0.08      0.03       15,422   0.11 0.18      0.02         16,362   0.10 0.11      -0.02
       Deloitte   Client         1,601,992   0.24 0.61      0.22    1,592,570   0.32 0.69      0.29      1,762,295   0.40 0.74       0.28
                  Not a client      17,520   0.02 0.08      0.02       14,705   0.05 0.12      0.00         16,030   0.03 0.08      -0.02
       KPMG       Client         1,503,839   0.34 0.67      0.17    1,528,908   0.36 0.66      0.18      1,597,928   0.56 0.75       0.18
                  Not a client      13,780   0.06 0.15      0.02       14,018   0.03 0.16      0.01         15,326   0.03 0.05      -0.01
       PwC        Client         1,867,005   0.33 0.72      0.31    1,863,480   0.34 0.66      0.31      2,140,601   0.51 0.78       0.27
                  Not a client      13,687   0.02 0.08      0.05       15,850   0.04 0.12      0.00         17,945   0.05 0.14      -0.01
                Table 10: Mandatory audit firm rotation with no supply response

The table presents expected changes in consumer surplus if mandatory audit firm rotation were to
be implemented after four through ten years. Estimates are based on Table 5 coefficient estimates
for 2008, 209, and 2010, and are denominated in billions of US dollars. For the implementation of
mandatory audit firm rotation at various tenures, we remove an auditor from the client’s choice set
if the length of the auditor-client relationship was equal to or greater than the specified number of
years that require mandatory rotation and then estimate the expected change in consumer surplus,
Cijm , for each firm i. To do so, we draw vectors of type 1 extreme value error terms—one for each of
the Big 4 auditors and one for the outside good. For each vector draw, we combine in equation (1)
the parameter estimates from the demand estimation along with the the firm-auditor characteristics
and the error term draw to calculate the utility that client would receive from choosing each of
the Big 4 auditors and the outside good. We then pick the audit firm that leads to maximum
utility under this unrestricted choice set. We next restrict the choice set for each client based
on mandatory audit firm rotation and calculate the maximum utility that the client would have
received under the restricted choice set. Then, we solve for the change in consumer surplus Cijm
that equates the maximum utilities. For each client, we repeat this procedure 1,000 times and take
the average of the required dollar transfer to create E[Cijm ]. Panel A presents the estimates of the
expected total change in consumer surplus for mandatory audit firm rotation. Panel B presents the
firm-level mean change in consumer surplus and correlations of the firm-level change in consumer
surplus with firm size, audit fees, and tenure with auditor.


Panel A: Changes in consumer surplus if mandatory audit firm rotation is implemented (US$ in
billions)


                                               2008    2009    2010
                                Four years     4.298   4.260   5.039
                                Five years     4.067   4.018   4.425
                                Six years      3.156   3.828   4.191
                                Seven years    2.918   3.010   3.997
                                Eight years    2.733   2.776   3.191
                                Nine years     2.547   2.586   2.966
                                Ten years      2.363   2.419   2.761




                                                 50
     Panel B: Firm-level expected changes in consumer surplus if one of the Big 4 audit firms disappears (US$ dollars)


                                       2008                               2009                                2010
                                      Correlations with                 Correlations with                    Correlations with
                            Mean     Size Fees Tenure         Mean     Size Fees Tenure           Mean      Size Fees Tenure
                4 years    793,904   0.19 0.60      0.42     840,007   0.21 0.61      0.39      1,006,208   0.47 0.75      0.34




51
                5 years    751,262   0.19 0.60      0.43     792,313   0.21 0.60      0.41        883,578   0.25 0.64      0.39
                6 years    582,848   0.20 0.57      0.50     754,852   0.21 0.60      0.42        836,925   0.25 0.63      0.46
                7 years    538,920   0.20 0.56      0.52     593,655   0.21 0.57      0.48        798,163   0.25 0.63      0.41
                8 years    504,810   0.17 0.54      0.54     547,444   0.21 0.55      0.50        637,171   0.24 0.60      0.45
                9 years    470,465   0.15 0.51      0.56     509,884   0.18 0.52      0.52        592,267   0.24 0.58      0.47
                10 years   436,394   0.14 0.50      0.57     477,066   0.17 0.52      0.53        551,274   0.20 0.55      0.49
              Table 11: Supply response for the disappearance of a Big 4 audit firm

This table presents estimates of the increase in total annual audit fees if one of the Big 4 audit firms
disappears. To calculate this expected supply side response, we estimate the semi-elasticity of audit
fees in 2002 with respect to the percent share of industry total assets audited by Arthur Andersen
in 2001 based on three-digit SIC. This semi-elasticity is a 0.15% increase in audit fees for each one
percentage point of total industry assets audited by Arthur Andersen. For each counterfactual, we
calculate by three-digit SIC the percentage of total assets audited by the disappearing Big 4 audit
firm. For each client, we then calculate the expected increase in annual audit fees based on the
client’s actual audit fees times the semi-elasticity times the percentage of industry assets audited
by the disappearing firm. The columns present sums by year denominated in billions of US$.

                                              2008     2009    2010
                                   E&Y        0.456    0.426   0.415
                                   Deloitte   0.408    0.369   0.362
                                   KPMG       0.397    0.346   0.335
                                   PwC        0.533    0.486   0.497




                                                  52
         Table 12: Supply response for implementation of mandatory audit firm rotation

This table presents estimates of the increase in total annual audit fees if mandatory audit firm
rotation were to be implemented. To calculate this expected supply side response, we estimate the
semi-elasticity of audit fees in 2002 with respect to the percent share of industry total assets audited
by Arthur Andersen in 2001 based on three-digit SIC. This semi-elasticity is a 0.15% increase in
audit fees for each one percentage point of total industry assets audited by Arthur Andersen.
For each counterfactual, we calculate by three-digit SIC the percentage of total assets subject to
mandatory audit firm rotation. For each client, we then calculate the expected increase in annual
audit fees based on the client’s actual audit fees times the semi-elasticity times the percentage of
industry assets subject to mandatory audit firm rotation. The columns present sums by year of
the increases in audit fees denominated in billions of US$.

                                                2008     2009    2010
                                 Four years     1.337   1.227   1.336
                                 Five years     1.302   1.178   1.160
                                 Six years      1.065   1.145   1.119
                                 Seven years    1.004   0.931   1.090
                                 Eight years    0.915   0.878   0.893
                                 Nine years     0.839   0.801   0.848
                                 Ten years      0.786   0.755   0.772




                                                  53
APPENDIX




A       Predicting audit fees


To evaluate the best method to predict audit fees, we compared six regression methods that are

commonly used in forecasting applications: ordinary least squares ols, lasso regression lasso,

ridge regression ridge, partial least squares pls, recursive partitioning rpart, and randomForest

rfor.19 For each auditor-year pair, we used the six regression methods to generate RMSEs using

100 repetitions of five-fold cross-validations. As predictors of audit fees, we include the natural

logarithm of total assets, the natural logarithm of industrial segments, the percentage of foreign

sales, the ratio of debt to total assets, the ratio of inventory and receivables to total assets, the

ratios of payables to total assets, the number of years as client of the audit firm, indicator variables

for the Fama-French ten industry classification, the ratio of three-digit SIC industry assets audited

by Arthur Andersen in 2001, and the ratio of three-digit SIC industry assets merged in the prior

year. Table A.1 presents the distribution of the minimum RMSEs by regression method for each

auditor-year pair. As shown in the far right column, randomForest has the highest number of

minimum RMSEs for each auditor-year pair. We therefore use randomForest to predict the audit

fees that we use in our demand estimations.




 19
      For a description of these methods, see Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman (2009).


                                                          54
              Table A.1: Comparison of lowest RMSEs for the prediction methods

                      ols    lasso    ridge      pls    rpart     rfor
E&Y          2002    7,052   14,527    6,986   11,797   40,273   57,165
             2003    8,439   15,497    6,844   14,356   41,138   50,526
             2004    9,819   19,561    5,733   13,054   35,899   41,534
             2005    8,785   16,248    5,766   12,726   36,001   44,074
             2006    8,053   20,296    6,098   10,284   33,990   42,179
             2007    7,525   19,283    5,895   11,628   32,951   42,018
             2008    7,133   17,725    4,723    8,956   31,682   42,281
             2009    5,364   16,310    4,659    8,379   29,763   41,125
             2010    5,620   16,582    4,837    8,466   29,608   39,787
             2011    5,986   14,847    4,677    7,667   30,661   40,062
Deloitte     2002    6,448   13,228    4,644    7,153   27,114   37,913
             2003    6,064   11,441    5,405    8,383   26,016   39,491
             2004    6,281   10,826    5,672    9,955   23,609   37,157
             2005    6,414   11,459    5,414    8,955   24,945   34,413
             2006    6,492   11,634    5,152    8,499   24,782   29,641
             2007    7,438   13,177    4,864    8,485   23,531   25,705
             2008    6,151   11,671    4,153    8,301   22,443   25,481
             2009    6,306    9,718    4,811    6,628   22,717   24,120
             2010    5,426    9,626    4,266    6,427   24,143   24,912
             2011    5,258    9,598    3,815    6,643   22,371   23,915
KPMG         2002    6,051    8,683    5,648    9,230   26,324   59,164
             2003    5,213    9,793    4,996    8,888   31,960   52,350
             2004    6,199   12,808    5,421   10,076   28,522   44,274
             2005    7,230    9,934    6,851    9,198   25,141   38,546
             2006    5,735   12,113    5,149    9,802   21,771   35,930
             2007    5,345   10,803    4,945    7,757   20,623   33,627
             2008    5,442    8,875    4,365    6,579   20,114   32,425
             2009    4,872    7,573    4,619    6,475   20,160   30,301
             2010    4,972    8,627    3,853    6,203   22,286   29,959
             2011    5,367    7,961    3,879    6,536   20,795   32,462
PwC          2002    6,961   17,443    5,662    9,398   34,678   53,758
             2003    8,973   15,585    6,148   10,182   36,128   50,884
             2004    9,066   15,174    7,168   12,299   32,980   42,913
             2005    9,243   15,393    5,936   11,516   28,421   35,491
             2006    6,885   13,289    5,424    8,530   28,290   34,082
             2007    5,637   12,099    4,938    8,554   26,273   32,699
             2008    5,354   10,550    3,974    7,497   24,277   33,748
             2009    5,066    8,658    4,168    7,908   23,532   29,668
             2010    5,013    8,786    4,675    8,041   24,963   28,822
             2011    6,454   10,121    4,709    6,217   23,965   29,534
All others   2002    6,624   10,813    6,575   10,247   23,850   42,091
             2003    7,028   12,860    6,163   11,566   34,494   43,889
             2004   11,855   17,922    9,527   17,308   32,446   50,542
             2005   16,953   26,375   10,262   22,586   40,643   52,781
             2006   16,815   30,692   12,659   24,037   44,886   56,711
             2007   17,785   29,676   12,794   28,026   49,456   59,163
             2008   19,538   31,750   11,596   25,788   42,475   56,353
             2009   18,968   28,884   11,251   22,235   42,921   49,941
             2010   16,587   28,409   11,369   21,087   41,029   46,419
             2011   14,718   24,971   10,110   19,030   37,538   47,333


                                                  55
                              Table A.2: Distribution of Audit Fees

This table presents annual mean and median audit fees for our sample of SEC registrants. Panel A
reports the means and medians for all sample firms, while Panel B reports the annual mean and
median fees for a constant subsample of firms that appear in the sample every year. Audit fees are
taken from the Audit Analytics database.

Panel A: Full sample


                               Year   Firms      Mean      Median
                               2002    5,775     890,263   237,000
                               2003    5,907   1,076,897   296,900
                               2004    5,856   1,753,816   545,388
                               2005    5,877   1,893,852   640,000
                               2006    5,799   2,149,814   712,206
                               2007    5,727   2,134,638   740,659
                               2008    5,414   2,225,593   752,250
                               2009    5,071   2,148,250   735,000
                               2010    5,008   2,150,459   735,000


Panel B: Fixed Sample


                              Year    Firms     Mean       Median
                              2002    2,567    1,118,127     283,800
                              2003    2,567    1,406,201     363,000
                              2004    2,567    2,299,959     721,050
                              2005    2,567    2,532,946     837,066
                              2006    2,567    2,816,801     951,600
                              2007    2,567    2,871,367     996,000
                              2008    2,567    2,960,644   1,000,000
                              2009    2,567    2,869,934     964,960
                              2010    2,567    2,846,895     942,000




                                                56
Table A.3: Semi-elasticity of audit fees to changes in three-digit SIC audit firm market share

                      Andersen’s Industry Share in 2001       0.0015**
                                                               (0.001)
                      Ln(Assets)                            0.4733***
                                                               (0.006)
                      Receivables to Assets                 -0.4083***
                                                               (0.051)
                      Inventory to Assets                    0.7668***
                                                               (0.071)
                      Return on Assets                      -0.3357***
                                                               (0.053)
                      Loss                                   0.1780***
                                                               (0.025)
                      Percent Foreign Sales                  0.5504***
                                                               (0.022)
                      Ln(Segments)                           0.2156***
                                                               (0.011)
                      Accelerated Filer                     -0.1614***
                                                               (0.025)
                      Going Concern Opinion                  0.1978***
                                                               (0.048)

                      Constant                              9.3935***
                                                             (0.044)

                      Observations                             6,174
                      Adjusted R2                              0.707
                      Auditor fixed effects                     Yes
                      *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                              57
                                                                                                                                             ●
                              18




                                                                                                                                    ●




                                                                                                                                ●
                              16




                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                 ●          ●
                                                                                                                 ●●    ● ●●
                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                                    ●●● ●●
                                                                                                              ●        ●
                                                                                                                     ●●
         Ln(Predicted Fees)




                                                                                                                  ●●●
                                                                  ●                                       ●●       ●●     ●
                                                                                                         ●● ●● ●●  ●
                                                                                                           ●   ●● ●
                                                                                                        ●     ●
                                                                                                  ● ●●●●●●   ● ●●●
                                                                                      ●                 ● ●
                                                                                ● ●          ●● ● ●●●●       ●
                                                                                                           ● ●●
                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                ● ●
                                                                                                 ● ● ●
                                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                                      ●
                                                                    ●                         ●       ●  ●
                                                                            ● ●               ●     ●●●
                                                                                                    ●●●●●●
                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                        ● ●       ●●
                                                                                                   ●  ●●
                                                                                      ● ● ●●●
                              14




                                                                                                 ●●● ●●
                                                                                                     ●
                                                                  ●                    ● ●    ●●●●● ●
                                                                                ●● ●●●●      ●●
                                                                                             ●●●●●  ●●
                                                                                    ●●●● ●●●●
                                                                                            ●
                                                                                            ●● ●
                                                                                              ●●
                                                                                               ●●●● ●
                                                                                                ●
                                                                           ●              ●●
                                                                                          ●  ●●
                                                                          ●● ● ●    ●
                                                                                    ●●●● ●●
                                                                                         ●
                                                                                        ●●  ● ●●
                                                                                            ●●●
                                                                                           ●●  ●●●
                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                  ●
                                                                                   ●  ●  ●●●
                                                                                     ●●●●● ●
                                                                               ●● ●●
                                                                ● ●● ●●
                                                                        ●●●
                                                                               ●
                                                                             ●●●●●●●●●●●
                                                                                     ●● ●
                                                                                        ●●
                                                                           ●●  ●●●●●●●       ●
                                                               ●● ●    ●●
                                                                        ● ●
                                                                          ● ●●
                                                                             ●
                                                                             ●
                                                                              ●
                                                                              ●
                                                                              ●
                                                                               ●
                                                                               ●
                                                                               ●
                                                                               ●●
                                                                                ●
                                                                                 ●
                                                                                 ●
                                                                                 ●
                                                                                 ●
                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                  ●
                                                                                  ●
                                                                                  ●●
                                                                                   ●
                                                                                    ●●
                                                                                    ● ●
                                                                                      ●●●
                                                                                        ●
                                                            ●       ●●●●     ●●●
                                                                               ●●
                                                                                ●●
                                                                                 ●●
                                                                                  ●
                                                                                  ●  ●
                                                                                     ●
                                                                                     ●●
                                                                                      ●
                                                      ●
                                                      ●       ● ● ●●   ●
                                                                       ●
                                                                       ●●●
                                                                         ●●● ●  ●  ●
                                                                                   ●
                                                              ●● ●    ●● ● ●●●
                                                                             ●●●
                                                                               ●
                                                                               ●●
                                                                                ●●●
                                                      ●
                                                      ●● ●● ●●●   ●
                                                                  ●  ●
                                                                     ●●
                                                                      ●●
                                                                       ●●
                                                                        ●●
                                                                         ●
                                                                         ●
                                                                         ●
                                                                         ●
                                                                         ●
                                                                          ●●●●
                                                                             ●
                                                                              ●
                                                                              ●●
                                                                               ●
                                                                               ●●
                                                                                   ●
                                                        ●● ●   ●●
                                                                ● ●
                                                                  ●
                                                                  ●●●
                                                                    ●●●
                                                                      ●● ●
                                                                         ●
                                                                         ●●
                                                                          ●●●
                                                              ●●
                                                               ●●●●
                                                                  ●●●●●
                                                                      ●●
                                                                       ●●
                                                                        ●●
                                                                         ●      ●
                                                   ●     ●  ●●●● ●● ●
                                                                   ●●●
                                                                     ●●●
                                                                       ●●   ●
                                                    ●
                                                    ●● ●●  ●  ●●
                                                               ●●
                                                                ● ●
                                                                  ●●●●
                                                                     ●
                                                                     ●●
                                                                      ●●
                                                                       ●●●● ●
                                       ●        ● ●  ● ●●●●  ●
                                                              ●
                                                              ●
                                                              ●
                                                               ●
                                                               ●
                                                               ●
                                                               ●
                                                               ●
                                                                ●
                                                                ●
                                                                ●●
                                                                 ●
                                                                  ●
                                                                  ●●
                                                                    ●
                                                                    ● ●●
                                                                       ●
                                                                     ●●●●●
                                                    ●●●● ●●   ●●
                                                               ●●●●●●
                                                                    ●●●●
                              12




                                                         ●●
                                                          ●●●●
                                                             ●●●
                                                               ●●
                                                                ● ●
                                                    ●      ● ●●●
                                                               ●●
                                                                ● ●
                                                                  ●
                                                                  ● ●
                                                                    ●
                                                  ●     ●●
                                              ● ●●●● ●
                                                   ●●●
                                                     ●●●
                                                      ● ●●●
                                                       ●● ●
                                                          ●
                                                            ●
                                                            ●
                                                            ● ●
                                                             ●●
                                                              ●●● ●
                                                               ●
                                                               ●
                                                               ●
                                              ● ●  ●
                                                   ●●
                                                    ●●● ●●
                                                        ●
                                                           ●●●●●●●
                                              ●
                                              ●●●    ●● ● ●●●●
                                       ●      ●  ● ●●
                                             ● ● ●●●● ●
                                                ● ●        ●
                                               ●●
                                            ●    ●
                                   ●



                                       10                       12                        14                        16                  18

                                                                               Ln(Actual Fees)


Figure A.1: Actual versus predicted fees This figure plots predicted versus actual log audit
fees.




                                                                                     58
