NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BARRIERS TO HEALTH AND THE POVERTY TRAP
Yin-Chi Wang
Ping Wang
Working Paper 19263
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19263

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2013

We are grateful for valuable comments and suggestions from Jerome Adda, Costas Azariadis, Jim
Bullard, Ken Chay, Stacey Chen, Shin-Yi Chou, Eric French, Jang-Ting Guo, Seema Jayachandran,
Kamhon Kan, Rody Manuelli, Wung Lik Ng, Juan Pantano, B. Ravikumar, Yongseok Shin, Tom Vogl,
and Danyang Xie, as well as seminar and conference participants at Academia Sinica, the Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Washington University in St. Louis, the Summer Meetings of the Econometric
Society, the Society for Economic Dynamics Annual Meeting, the NBER Health Economics Program
Meeting, the Midwest Macroeconomic Meetings, the Society for the Advancement of Economic Theory
Conference, and the International Conference on Socioeconomic Causes and Consequences of Public
Health. Financial support from Academia Sinica, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, the Center
for Economic Dynamics (CEDEC), and the Center for Research in Economics and Strategy (CRES)
is gratefully acknowledged. Needless to say, the usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Yin-Chi Wang and Ping Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Barriers to Health and the Poverty Trap
Yin-Chi Wang and Ping Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 19263
July 2013
JEL No. I15,I25,O4
ABSTRACT
Why have some poor countries been able to take off while others are still stuck in the poverty trap?
To address this old question, we observe that (i) with similar or higher levels of educational attainment,
trapped countries tend to have much poorer health conditions compared to the initially poor countries
that later took off, and (ii) improving health conditions in poor countries usually involves large-scale
investment where such resources can be easily misallocated. We construct a dynamic general equilibrium
model with endogenous health and knowledge accumulation, allowing health-related institutional barriers
to affect individual incentives and equilibrium outcomes. We then calibrate the model to fit (i) the
U.S. economy (as a benchmark), (ii) a representative trapped economy based on the average economic
performance and economic conditions of 41 countries that are still in the poverty trap, (iii) a group
of trapped economies with richer institutional data (Bangladesh, Kenya and Nigeria), and (iv) two
initially poor countries that later took off (China and India). The results show that, although low among
all countries in this study, the U.S. economy still faced a health-related institutional barrier of 15%.
The trapped economies all suffered much large barriers ranging from 50% to 73% under which the
incentive to invest in health is severely hindered. For China and India, the magnitudes of such barriers
were large (about twice as much as for the U.S. and half that for the trapped economies on average)
but not enough to undermine the willingness to invest in health. This paper thereby advances our understanding
of the role played by barriers to health in the poverty trap.

Yin-Chi Wang
Department of Economics
Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, NT, Hong Kong
ycwang@cuhk.edu.hk
Ping Wang
Department of Economics
Washington University in St. Louis
Campus Box 1208
One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
and NBER
pingwang@wustl.edu

“We are ill because of poverty –poverty is like an illness.”(respondent from Moldova,
Voices of the Poor, Vol. I, p. 87)
“Poor people cannot improve their status because they live day by day.” (respondent
from Vietnam, Voices of the Poor, Vol. II, p. 98)
“For me, a good life is to be healthy.”(respondent from Ethiopia, Voices of the Poor,
Vol. II, p. 90)
“Today we pray to God that nobody gets sick. What could we do? ”(respondent from
Macedonia, Voices of the Poor, Vol. I, p. 35)

1

Introduction

Large di¤erences in income levels have persisted across countries for decades. Economists have
sought to identify the underlying causes of such noticeable disparities and, in particular, to understand why some countries are able to pull out of the poverty trap while other countries remain mired
in it. In addition to the accumulation of physical capital per worker advocated by Solow for the last
half a century, education and health conditions are generally regarded as crucial for the process of
economic development.1 Nonetheless, in this still-thin literature, there is no systematic, integrated
micro-founded framework to investigate how these two important factors may interact, leading to
drastically di¤erent development outcomes. Such an omission could harm the prediction power of
the model, especially when health and education may a¤ect the development process of di¤erent
developing economies very di¤erently. The chief purpose of the present paper is to rectify these
problems by establishing an integrated model with endogenous investments in health and education
so as to quantify how institutional barriers to health may interact with education decisions to serve
to explain the drastically divergent paths of economic development. In his now-classic work, Rostow
(1960) has emphasized: “the creation of the preconditions for take-o¤ required fundamental changes
in a well-established traditional society: changes which touched and substantially altered the social
structure and political system as well as techiques of production.” Our study can thus be viewed
as to echo Rostow, advocating the institutional barriers to health underlying each country’s social
structure and political system as keys to economic take-o¤.
Let us begin by displaying some key stylized facts related to the motivation of our study. We
focus on three key measures: economic performance (measured by the per capita GDP growth rate
and per capita GDP relative to the U.S.), health conditions (measured by life expectancy and under
5 mortality rates), and educational attainments (measured by years of schooling). In Figure 1(a),
we plot relative income (per capita GDP relative to the U.S.) in 1970 and 2000 for countries with
less than 20% of U.S. income per capita in the respective years, to illustrate the immobility of poor
1

Hereafter we will use education and knowledge interchangeably.

1

nations where those with less than 10% of U.S. income per capita in 1970 can hardly move out
to the 10-20% group in 2000. We then plot against initial relative income in 1960 (i) the years
of schooling (Panel (b)) and (ii) life expectancy at birth (Panel (c)) for the whole sample and for
trapped economies with 10% or less relative income in 1970 or with 2% or less average per capita
income growth over 1970-2007 (Panel (d)). While Panels (b) and (c) indicate that both cross-country
relationships are positive as expected, simple eye-balling leads us to detect a major di¤erence: the
relationship between educational attainments and economic performance is basically linear, but
that between health conditions and economic performance is concave.2 Thus, health conditions
appear to be much more important for low income countries to advance their economic status. To
facilitate a better understanding, we report in Table 1 these three key indicators over the period
from 1970 to 2007 for selected representative countries under di¤erent income groups: high income,
middle-income-high, middle-income-low and low income (or, trapped).3 It is noted that both high
income and middle-income-high countries have comparable lengths of life expectancy and years of
schooling since 1990,4 and the di¤erences in the life expectancy between middle-income-low and
middle-income-high countries are small.5 Most interestingly, trapped economies are characterized
by low income levels, low growth rates, fewer years of schooling and much shorter life expectancy.
The World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations (UN) have exerted strong e¤orts
to improve the health conditions and educational attainment in poor countries over the past 40
years in their attempt at reducing inequalities across nations. Their e¤ort together with individual
trapped countries’awareness have led to signi…cantly improved health conditions and educational
attainments since 1970, as shown in Table 1.6
We are particularly interested in understanding why some initially poor (now middle-income2

Because of a heavy clustering of poor nations toward the lower-left corner, we isolate those countries in a separate

scatter plot, Figure 1(d).
3
The categorizing criteria are: countries with relative incomes of 0.65 or higher in the year 2000 are grouped as high
income countries; countries with relative incomes of 0.2 - 0.65 in 2000 are classi…ed as middle-income-high countries;
countries with relative incomes of 0.1 - 0.2 in 2000, or with an average GDP per capita growth rate of 2% or higher
during 1970-2007 are classi…ed as middle-income-low countries; and …nally, countries with relative incomes of less
than 0.1, or with an average GDP per capita growth rate lower than 2% during 1970-2007 are classi…ed as trapped
countries.
4
Brazil was a bit behind in both measures compared to Argentina, Greece and Korea.
5
India is an exception. India is categorized as a middle-income-low country because of its slow but steady growth
of GDP per capita relative to the U.S.
6
In 1970, the life expectancy in Malawi was less than 40 years, while other trapped countries (Bangladesh, Cambodia, Ghana, Kenya and Zambia) also had a life expectancy of about 40-45 years. As time progressed to the years
2000-2008, life expectancy in the trapped countries (except for Zambia) increased to 53-65 years. The mortality rate
for those under 5 was also reduced by about half during 1970 to 2000. At the same time, years of schooling in these
trapped countries have also increased substantially since 1970.

2

low) countries could take o¤ (Egypt, China and India), while other poor countries remain trapped in
poverty. By examining Table 1 more carefully, we …nd that there is a notable di¤erence between the
initially poor countries that later took o¤ and the still-trapped economies: with comparable years
of schooling, the trapped economies tend to have signi…cantly lower life expectancy. For example,
in 1970, Egypt had 1:3 years of schooling and a life expectancy of 45:9 years. Bangladesh and
Malawi had similarly low but slightly longer years of schooling than Egypt, but both countries had
a much lower life expectancy compared to Egypt. Let us now compare China with the trapped
countries. China has performed very well in terms of health since 1970. With only 3% of the real
GDP per capita of the U.S., China reached a life expectancy of 62:0 years –a miracle with such a
low income level. In 1980, with only 4% of the real GDP per capita of the U.S., years of schooling
and life expectancy in China were 4:8 and 66:0 years, respectively. However, with comparable or
much longer years of schooling, up to the year 2008, none of the trapped countries had reached
a life expectancy of 66:0 years. A similar case is found when we compare India with Malawi or
Zambia: with comparable or shorter years of schooling, India tends to have longer life expectancy
than Malawi or Zambia.
Several questions naturally arise after observing the facts described above. Why does health
play a di¤erent role from education, and through what channel does health a¤ect the performance of
an economy? How does health interact with education to lead countries along di¤erent development
paths? Most importantly, why are some countries able to perform better in terms of health despite
the low income levels? In particular, do there exist country-speci…c factors leading to this outcome?
If such factors exist, are they quantitatively critical for leading to such drastically divergent development paths? These are the central questions our paper is designed to address. To attempt to answer
such questions and to further generate practically useful policy implications, we force ourselves to
apply the micro-founded model to a reality check: those “Voices of the Poor”quotes above that are
the cries of respondents from various poor nations not only link poverty with poor health (the …rst
quote) but also point to the poor’s high level of discounting against the future due to poor health
(the second quote) as well as their high valuation of health (the third quote) for which they are
unable to pay (the fourth quote). Such behavior-driven responses will be taken to heart when we
delineate the theoretical framework.
Bearing these important questions and reality considerations in mind, we begin by constructing
a basic organizational framework following the aggregate production function approach, capturing
how educational attainments and health conditions, in addition to physical capital accumulation
and demographic transition, may drive di¤erent economic development outcomes. Under this organizational framework, we perform simple cross-country and panel regression analyses using data
from 41 countries that are still in the poverty trap as of 2007. The cross-country regression results
indicate that, once regional dummies and total fertility rates are included, neither years of schooling

3

nor health spending measures are statistically signi…cant at conventional levels. The same conclusion remains in the panel regression analyses, but the country …xed e¤ects are mostly signi…cant
and sizable. This points to the possibility that country-speci…c institutions are crucial to the overall
economic performance of these trapped countries.
To enable us to better understand about how various economic factors inclusive of institutional
barriers may drive economic development outcomes, there is a need for a deep structure model.
Accordingly, we develop an analytically tractable three-period overlapping-generations model with
human capital decomposed into health and knowledge capital. Since parental investment in both
health and education are crucial for children to have a better position for a better life in their
later stages, we assume that all investments in health and knowledge are made by parents. As
in Glomm and Ravikumar (1992) and many other studies, parents are altruistic only in relation
to their o¤spring’s human capital. Health investment takes resources and determines the quality
of life and the level of health capital of children, while investment in education requires parental
time and a¤ects the level of knowledge capital. Health and knowledge capital together form the
children’s human capital, which subsequently determines the productivity of labor of children. To
capture country-speci…c factors determining the e¢ cacy of health investment, we assume that there
exist health-related institutional factors in the economy. These factors could be harsh to the health
environment, such as the prevalence of parasites and infectious diseases, or the corruption rooted in
the political system. These institutional factors are barriers in essence, diverting resources from the
intended purpose of use and depleting the already scarce resources in poor countries. When these
barriers waste too many resources, individuals cease investing in the health of their descendents.
The economy then ends up with poor health conditions and short life expectancies, which further
reduce the incentives for knowledge and physical capital accumulation and hence destroy the engine
of economic growth. The vicious cycle between poor health, low incentives to invest and bad
institutions thus trap the country in poverty for a long period of time.
We provide conditions to guarantee a unique nondegenerate equilibrium, and examine when it
is more likely for a poverty trap to emerge. We then calibrate the model to match the U.S. economy
and perform comparative statics numerically. We …nd that an improvement in the span or quality
of life when old encourages parents to shift their investment from the children’s education to health,
whereas an increase in the parents’genetic transmission to the children’s health yields the opposite
e¤ect. While both changes lead to relatively higher health to knowledge capital, better genetic
transmission is growth-enhancing but a longer life span can be growth-retarding. With the U.S.
serving as the benchmark, we next proceed to calibrate the model for a number of countries at
various development stages of interest, namely, (i) a representative trapped economy based on the
average economic performance and economic conditions of the 41 trapped countries, (ii) a group
of trapped economies with richer institutional data (Bangladesh, Kenya and Nigeria), and (iii) two

4

initially poor countries that later took o¤ (China and India). Our quantitative results show that
the trapped countries under investigation indeed experience much more severe institutional barriers
compared to the middle-income-low countries, in the order of 1:5 to 2:5 times. Our results show
that all the 41 trapped countries are swamped by their own institutional problems, prohibiting
them from pulling out of the poverty trap. For the two representative middle-income-low countries,
although the severity of their institutional barriers is much greater than that of the U.S. (being
twice as high), such barriers are low enough (half as much as those of trapped countries) for them
to take o¤ and to proceed along the right track of development.
Related literature
This paper is related to three strands of the literature, namely, (i) health and development, (ii)
institutional barriers, bureaucracy and corruption, and (iii) the development trap.
The line of research on health and development was pioneered by Grossman (1972) and since
then there has been a small, but growing, literature devoted to studying the demand for health
within an individual optimization framework in which better health promotes longevity (cf. Ehrlich
and Chuma 1990; Grossman 1998). The investigation on how the improvement in health (a mortality rate reduction and life expectancy increase) leads to a higher level of education is best shown by
Jayachandran and Lleras-Muney (2009) who show that increases in life expectancy resulting from
the decline in maternal mortality rates promote better education for girls in Sri Lanka. Our paper is
more related to Chakraborty (2004), and Manuelli and Seshadri (2009). While Chakraborty (2004)
considers health capital augmented by public investment, Manuelli and Seshadri (2009) focus on
investments in private health and education as well as their consequences for cross-country di¤erences in fertility. Empirical works investigating the contribution of health to economic development
include Acemoglu and Johnson (2007), Weil (2007), Lorentzen et al. (2008) and Wang (2012). However, researchers have not yet reached a consensus on the magnitude or the underlying channels of
the health improvement e¤ects on economic growth and development. We continue the e¤ort along
these lines by proposing a framework for health investments to interact with education investments,
and that will play a key role in identifying whether a developing country can take o¤ successfully.
Theoretical work on bureaucracy, corruption and development began with the contribution by
Shleifer and Vishny (1993) and Ehrlich and Lui (1999) and empirical work by Mauro (1995). Shleifer
and Vishny (1993) argue that weak government induces more corruption and the secrecy needed
for the corruption rent makes it more distortionary than standard taxation. Ehrlich and Lui (1999)
study the relationship between corruption, government and growth by constructing an endogenous
growth model with both human and political capital being accumulated over time. The interaction
between human capital and political capital generates multiple equilibria, which can serve to explain
the prevalence of corruption in countries mired in poverty, the unstable growth experience of some
poor countries, and the stable growth experience of rich countries. The central debate in the
5

empirical strand of the literature on corruption and growth is whether corruption leads to lower
economic growth: some …nd that corruption is always bad (e.g., Mauro 1995), while others hold the
view that corruption can be a price and incentive mechanism, being bene…cial for economic growth at
low levels of economic development. More related is the “barriers to rich” literature. In particular,
Parente and Prescott (1994) point out that barriers to technology adoption can harm long-run
growth, whereas Buera and Shin (2013) argue that barriers to …nance can lower and misallocate
capital investment thus retarding economic development. In his celebrated book, Easterly (2001)
presents many cases that show that bureaucracy and corruption have resulted in a big waste of
foreign aid and investment in countries at an early stage of development (see also the discussion in
Collier and Dollar 2001, 2002). We follow this strand of the literature, by measuring the social costs
associated with bureaucracy and corruption and relating such barriers to observed development
traps.
While the concept of the development trap goes all the way back to, the formal dynamic framework was not constructed until the pivotal work by Azariadis and Drazen (1990). More recently,
Galor and Weil (2000) have developed a fertility-based Malthusian trap model. However, due to
the complexity associated with self-ful…lling driven multiple equilibria, these two frameworks have
not been incorporated in empirical tests. Our paper complements the earlier papers by proposing
health barriers as a plausible mechanism for the development trap and by establishing a framework
that is readily calibrated for matching empirical facts and drawing policy prescriptions.

2

On Health and Development

Straightforward cross-country analysis suggests that while both educational attainments and health
conditions are essential for economic development, health conditions appear to be much more important for low income countries to take o¤. To understand this, let us begin by considering a basic
organizational framework following the aggregate production function approach without a deep
structure model. Using this framework, we can specify simple reduced form regressions. Although
our focus is to understand why some poor countries could not take o¤, to promote better understanding, we apply regressions to all countries as well as a set of trapped economies whose 2000 real
GDP per capita is less than 10% of that of the U.S. (relative income) or whose long-term average
growth rate of real GDP per capita (economic growth) is below 2% during 1970-2007, respectively.
For obvious reasons, when selecting the sample of trapped economies to conduct regression
analysis, we restrict our attention to only non-OPEC and non-former USSR countries. In this restricted sample, there are 41 countries classi…ed as trapped, including: (i) 29 sub-Saharan African
countries, (ii) 3 East Asian and Paci…c countries (Cambodia, Mongolia, and Papua New Guinea),
(iii) 3 South Asian poor countries (Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Nepal), (iv) 5 Latin American (inclu-

6

sive of the Caribbean) countries, and (v) 1 Southeastern European (Albania) country. From Table
2, we can see that the average growth rate of these trapped economies is only about 0:27% and
that their average initial relative income in 1970 is only about 8:75% of that of the U.S. While the
3 South Asian economies were the poorest in 1970 (6:32% of the U.S.), Latin American economies
were the richest (13:53%) at that time. Despite their relatively stronger initial performance, these
Latin American trapped economies su¤er the lowest growth (0:11%, compared to the related …gures
of 0:71% and 1:42% for the South Asian and East Asian and Paci…c trapped economies).
We can further plot in Figure 2 the economic growth rate over the 1970-2007 period against
initial relative income in 1970 for the 41 trapped economies. We …nd that there does not appear to
be a “convergent” pattern in the sense that initially relatively poor countries need not grow fast.
What, then, about the relationships between the economic performance and educational attainment,
public health spending and institutional barriers? It is commonly believed that countries with higher
income levels usually have better educational attainment, higher public health spending (hence the
health environment is better) and fewer barriers. However, within the 41 trapped countries under
study, are these key indicators crucial for within-the-group variations in economic performance?
To see this, we now plot years of schooling, the share of government health spending in GDP,
and an institutional barrier measure based on the Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI) compiled
by Transparency International, against relative income in 2000 or the economic growth rate over
1970-2007 for the 41 trapped countries. These are displayed, respectively, in Figures 3(a,b), Figures
4(a,b), and Figures 5(a,b). From Figures 3(a,b), although the years of schooling in 2000 are somehow
positively correlated with the income levels in the year 2000, the qualitative contributions of years
of schooling on the economic growth rate over 1970-2007 seem to be very weak. One may thus
conclude that human capital in the form of formal education is not the fuel for economic growth for
trapped countries at their development stage. From Figures 4(a,b), the qualitative contributions
of public health spending and economic performance are weak as well. Given how poor the health
conditions facing these trapped economies are, it is alarming that public health spending could
not alleviate such critical problems to induce better overall performance. In addition, contrary
to general beliefs, Figures 5 (a,b) show that the qualitative contributions of the CPI to economic
performance within this trapped group of countries are not evident. For this selected group of
countries in the poverty trap, it seems that having a better institution (with a higher CPI score)
does not necessarily guarantee better aggregate economic outcomes.

2.1

An Organizational Framework

Index time by t. The single good in the economy is produced with the beginning-of-period stock
of physical capital (Kt ) and e¤ective labor (Lt ). Denote N as the number of prime age workers,
which is constant over time. To a young adult who was born in t
7

1, her human capital (measured

at the beginning of the period) is given by Ht . Denote `dt as the labor demand for a young adult
with human capital Ht and hence the e¤ective labor is measured by Lt = Nt Ht `dt . The aggregate
production function takes the standard Cobb-Douglas form:
Yt = AKt L1t
where A > 0 is the technology scaling factor and

;

(1)

2 (0; 1) denotes the capital income share.

The …rst component of human capital –the key ingredient of our model economy –is health capital (denoted by ht ), which measures the general health condition of a person (therefore embodied),
both physically and psychologically. The second component of human capital – as conventionally
modeled – is knowledge capital (denoted by mt ). It measures all embodied skills related to the
ability to perform the job in producing the single good. In reality, either type of capital may be
enhanced by an agent’s own e¤ort or by her parent’s investment. Given that early childhood development is found essential in both health and skills as stressed by more recent studies pioneered by
Heckman (2007) and further elaborated by Cunha and Heckman (2007) and Manuelli and Seshadri
(2009), we highlight the role played by the parent in enhancing a child’s health and knowledge
capital. To avoid unnecessary modeling complexity, we shall abstract from the consideration of the
child’s own e¤ort devoted to accumulating health and knowledge capital.
For simplicity, we assume that the health and knowledge shares of human capital are constant.
Thus, the stock of human capital per worker in period t is given by:
Ht = Bht m1t

;

(2)

where B > 0 is the technology scaling factor in the human capital sector and

2 (0; 1) is the share

of health capital. Following the convention, let the knowledge capital be measured in accordance
with the Mincer formula depending on the years of schooling Et :
mt = M exp ( Et ) ;
where M > 0 is the knowledge scaling factor and

(3)

> 0 measures the education gradient. Substi-

tuting (3) into (2) and then (1) and assuming full employment with Nt `dt = Nt , we obtain:
n
o1
1
Yt = AKt Nt Bht [M exp ( Et )]

or, when expressed in log form,
ln

Yt
= [ln A + (1
Nt

) ln B + (1

) (1

) ln M ] + ln

Kt
+ (1
Nt

) (1

) Et + (1

) ln ht :
(4)

We …rst conduct a simple cross-country regression analysis of all economies i based on the
following reduced form (4):
ln Yi =Ni = a0 + a1 ln Ki =Ni + a2
8

Ei + a3 ln hi + b Xi + "i

where all measures are country-i’s …gures in 2005 and Xi summarizes all other covariates, including the total fertility rate, an institutional barrier measure based on the Corruption Perceptions
Index (CPI) compiled by Transparency International, and regional dummies (de…ned as Advanced
Economies, Sub-Saharan Africa, East Asia and the Paci…c, South Asia, Europe and Central Asia,
the Middle East and North Africa, relative to the benchmark for Latin America and the Caribbean)
according to the World Bank and the Barro and Lee 2010)7 . The dependent variable is logged real
GDP per capita (RGDP P C). In the absence of precise data on physical and health capital, we use
the investment to GDP ratio (IR) to proxy the former and the total or public health expenditure to
GDP ratio (HR) to proxy the latter. The knowledge capital is computed using the years of schooling of total population aged 15 and up from Barro and Lee (2010) with the Mincerian coe¢ cients
from Psacharopoulos (1994). The above cross-country regression therefore becomes:
ln (RGDP P Ci ) = a0 + a1 ln (IRi ) + a2

Ei + a3 ln (HRi ) + b Xi + "i

(5)

The results of the regressions on all countries are reported in Table 3(a). In speci…cation (1), we only
look at the basic regression with IRi and Ei without other explanatory variables or regional dummies. Speci…cation (2) adds regional dummies whereas speci…cation (3) adds total fertility rates. In
speci…cation (4), health capital proxies are added, where in (a) we use the public health expenditure
to GDP ratio and in (b) we use the total health expenditure to GDP ratio. In speci…cation (5),
the CPI is also included in addition to the speci…cations in 4(a) and 4(b). The results indicate that
both the positive e¤ect of knowledge capital and the negative e¤ect of the total fertility rate on
real GDP per capita are statistically signi…cant. While the e¤ect of public health expenditure is
not signi…cant, the e¤ect of total health expenditure is signi…cant but has the wrong sign. The CPI
has the correct sign in that countries with better institutions perform better economically, and it is
signi…cant at the 0:1% level.
Similarly, we conduct a simple cross-country regression analysis of the 41 trapped economies
(based on the same reduced form) and summarize the results in Table 3(b).8 Interestingly, the
results indicate that, with regional dummies, the total fertility rate is the only signi…cant explanatory
variable, with the expected sign. The public health expenditures now a¤ect real GDP per capita
positively but are not statistically signi…cant, while the e¤ects of total health expenditures are
still negative but are not signi…cant at conventional levels. The CPI has a mixed sign and is not
signi…cant.
To verify whether the empirical evidence is robust, we further perform panel regression analysis,
using a complete panel of all countries with available data and the 41 trapped economies over the
7

The World Bank classi…cation of countries by geographic region is for developing countries only and the classi…ca-

tion criteria are adjusted every year based on GNI per capita. For consistency, we thus adopt the country class…cation
used by Barro and Lee (2010).
8
After dropping countries without complete data, only 34 countries are left.

9

period 1970-2007 with Guyana as the benchmark.9;10 The regression is speci…ed as:
ln (RGDP P Ci;t ) = a0 +

i

+

t

+ a1 ln (IRi;t

1 ) + a2

Ei;t

1

+ a3 ln (HRi;t

1) + b

Xi + "it (6)

where robust standard error clustering (of countries) is adopted in the estimation and the three key
explanatory variables IR, E and HR, as well as the total fertility rate, are all lagged one period
to mitigate the possible endogeneity problem.11;12
As shown in Table 4, the results for all countries are mixed. Before introducing the time …xed
e¤ects or time trend, the e¤ects of the lagged investment rates and the lagged knowledge capital
on the real GDP per capita are positively signi…cant. Once time …xed e¤ects or a time trend are
introduced, the e¤ect of the lagged investment rate is only marginally signi…cant, and the e¤ect of
the lagged knowledge capital becomes insigni…cant. This is not surprising because both investment
and educational attainment are secular growth variables, which are essentially captured by the time
dummy and the time trend variables. The e¤ects of the lagged fertility rate and the lagged public
health expenditure are even less clear, with mixed signs and basically all insigni…cant.
We then turn to examine the results for the trapped economies. Since adding time dummy or
time trend variables washes out the growth components in the secular growth variables, we hence
perform regressions without time …xed e¤ects or a time trend. As shown in Table 4, the e¤ect
of the lagged investment rate on the real GDP per capita has the expected signs, while the e¤ect
of the lagged knowledge capital is insigni…cant and has the wrong sign. The e¤ect of the lagged
total fertility rate has the expected negative sign but is generally insigni…cant. Similarly, the lagged
public expenditure ratio has a positive e¤ect on the real GDP per capita, as expected, but is also
statistically insigni…cant.13 To sum up, from the results of the panel regressions, we …nd that the
9

From its economic performance, Guyana seems to be “representative” of the trapped economies. Thus, we pick

Guyana as our benchmark country in the panel regression for trapped economies. For comparison purposes, we use
Guyana as the benchmark country in the panel regression for all countries as well.
10
Countries with no information on educational attainment are dropped from the sample (which are Angola, Burkina
Faso, Chad, Ethiopia, Madagascar, and Somalia). Nigeria is also dropped from the sample because it only has an
estimate of years of schooling in 2005 conducted by the UN, and not by Barro and Lee (2010).
11
The public health expenditures and total health expenditures data are available only after 1995. Hence, we
extrapolate the available data based on the HP trend, then multiply the …gures by the government expenditure
shares as a percentage of GDP to obtain the …gures for public health expenditure as a percentage of GDP. For years of
schooling, since Barro-Lee (2010) provides estimated average years of schooling at 5-year intervals, we thus intrapolate
the available data to obtain annual data.
12
Since we do not have long time-series of the CPI data over the sample period, we drop it in the panel regression
analysis.
13
For trapped economies, when conducting panel regression analysis, we also consider 5-year intervals with the
average of 1970-72 as the initial period. The results are very similar to those of the panel regressions using annual
data. The only exception is that the e¤ect of the lagged public health expenditure as a percentage of GDP is negative
but not signi…cant at conventional levels.

10

knowledge capital may a¤ect the real GDP per capita quite di¤erently for countries with di¤erent
levels of income. However, the results of the cross-country regression and the panel regression are
not clear cut, and sometimes even contradictory to the theoretical predictions, and one can not
easily draw any conclusive inferences based on these regressions.
While the results based on the above-mentioned explanatory variables are not clear cut, an
interesting …nding can be obtained from the panel regressions by examining the country …xed
e¤ects of the trapped economies. More speci…cally, using the average performer, Guyana, as the
benchmark country (whose average growth rate is 0:29%), from Table 4, the country …xed e¤ects of
almost all the trapped countries are signi…cant under conventional levels. One may think that these
signi…cant country …xed e¤ects may re‡ect country-speci…c institutions inclusive of the institutional
barriers emphasized in this paper. Based on these country …xed e¤ect estimates, Bolivia and
the Republic of Congo, among these 41 poor countries, have the best institutions for economic
development, whereas Afghanistan, Burundi, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Liberia, Malawi
and Mali su¤er from the worst. We further plot these country …xed e¤ect estimates against the
initial performance of these trapped economies in 1970 as well as their performance in 2000. It is
evident from Figures 6(a) and 6(b) that the overall performances of these trapped economies are
positively related to the betterment of their development institutions measured by the country …xed
e¤ects. Such positive correlation is tighter in 2000 than in 1970, indicating a possible causation
from development institutions to economic performance. This latter …nding thereby motivates our
study and serves as a key channel to explain why poor countries with bad institutions remain in
poverty over a long duration.
So what is the main message learned from the above simple regression exercises? Overall, within
the 41 trapped economies over the period 1970-2007, there is no systematic evidence that education, health investment or institutional conditions matter for their macroeconomic performance. To
recon…rm this, let us examine the key indicators of selected countries from both the middle-incomelow and the trapped country groups: (i) relative income, (ii) years of schooling, (iii) life expectancy
at birth, and (iv) mortality rate under …ve. The time series of these four key indicators are plotted
in Figures 7 (a-d). It is evident that the major di¤erence between the two groups is either that the
middle-income-low countries were initially more developed (such as Turkey and Egypt) or experienced much faster growth (such as China starting in 1980 and speeding up after 1992 and India
over the last decade). Over the sample period, it is noted from Figure 7(b) that the performances
in education for the two groups of countries are quite similar. Some trapped countries actually do
well in education (e.g., Ghana). With regard to the overall health performances, there is a notable
di¤erence between the middle-income-low and the trapped country groups: trapped economies tend
to perform much worse in health, as shown in Figures 7(c,d). We thus go deeper to examine the
causes of the poor health performances in the 41 trapped countries by region. Recall that in our

11

selected trapped country group, 29 are sub-Saharan African countries, and 6 are Asian countries
(including East Asian and Paci…c and South Asian countries). From Figure 8(a), even in the very
recent year 2002, the major deaths in the trapped countries are still due to communicable diseases
and maternal, perinatal and nutritional conditions.14 In particular, sub-Saharan African countries
have su¤ered more deaths from communicable diseases and maternal, perinatal and nutritional conditions (73%) compared to Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean (49

52%). Figure 8(b)(i)

shows that most of the “important” selected communicable diseases, such as parasites, Malaria,
HIV/AIDS and childhood-clustered diseases, still occurred mainly in sub-Saharan Africa. South
Asia also experienced more deaths due to meningitis, childhood-cluster diseases, diarrhoea and tuberculosis than other regions. Figure 8(b)(ii) further plots the estimated death rates due to the
selected communicable diseases by region. It is stunning to …nd that the deaths due to HIV/AIDS
amounted to 17% of total deaths in sub-Saharan Africa! Deaths due to childhood-cluster diseases,
diarrhoeal diseases and malaria also accounted for 5% or more of total deaths. In trapped economies
in East Asia and the Paci…c, tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS and diarrhoeal diseases are the major killing
communicable diseases. In Latin America and the Caribbean trapped countries, HIV/AIDS is the
main killer and accounted for more than 10% of the total deaths.
These preliminary …ndings will be used to guide our modeling and calibration strategy, to which
we now turn.

3

The Model

Since intergenerational altruism and transmission are essential to the issues considered in the present
paper, the analysis is conducted within an overlapping-generations framework. In addition to modeling childhood, we study both young adulthood and old adulthood after retirement, where the
incorporation of the latter enables one to understand the implications of health investment for the
quality of life of the elderly. To abstract from marriage and fertility issues, we assume that there is
only a single sex (female) in an economy with a …xed population. Agents have perfect foresight, and
are completely identical, both ex ante and ex post. There are two sectors of economic activities:
a goods sector and a human capital sector. Human capital consists of two separate components:
health capital (related to an individual’s physical condition) and knowledge capital (related to an
individual’s mental capability). Aside from an institutional sunk cost (related to public health environments and investment barriers), goods produced can be used for consumption as well as physical
capital and health investments.
14

There is only one country, Albania, in the Europe and Central Asia group. Albania experienced more deaths from

noncommunicable diseases. It is thus safe to say that most of the trapped countries (40 out of 41) su¤ered more from
communicable diseases than noncommunicable diseases.

12

3.1

Production

The aggregate production function is given by (1) while the human capital function is speci…ed as in
(2). The representative woman born in period t

1 decides on the investment in her child’s health

(xt ) and the time devoted to educating her child (et ) in period t, which determines the health and
knowledge capital and henceforth the human capital for her child in period t + 1. In addition to
her investment in her child’s health, the representative woman’s own health may also have a direct
e¤ect on her child’s health capital due to genetic in‡uences. Thus, the accumulation of the health
capital of her child (born in period t) is speci…ed as follows:
ht+1 = xt h1t
where

+ ht ;

(7)

> 0 measures the productivity of parental investment in the child’s health with the share

of parental investment given by

2 (0; 1), and

2 (0; 1) denotes the strength of the direct parental

in‡uence on the child’s health capital. Similarly, besides the parental time investment in the child’s
education, a child’s knowledge capital can also be enhanced by her innate ability that is directly
related to her parent’s knowledge capital:
mt+1 = et mt + ~ mt ;
where

(8)

> 0 is a knowledge scaling factor and

> 0 measures the strength of intergenerational
transmission of the innate ability. For convenience, de…ne ~
. Equation (8) can be rewritten
as mt+1 =

3.2

(et + ) mt . In the following, we will look at this expression instead of (8).

Households

Each agent lives for three periods: childhood, young adulthood and retirement. A woman in her
childhood is entirely passive. In her young adulthood, she gives birth to one child at the beginning
of this period and forms health and knowledge capital based on her parent’s investment and time
e¤ort. As a young adult, she is endowed with one unit of time, which can be devoted to working
(`t ) or educating her child (et ). That is, her time constraint in her young adulthood is given by:
`t + et = 1:

(9)

In addition to health investment in her child (xt ), her wage earning (wt Ht `t ) can be used for
consumption during her young adulthood (cyt ) or for savings for her old age (st ):
cyt + st + xt = wt Ht `t :

(10)

As she steps into her old adulthood, she retires and consumes what she has saved by leaving no
pecuniary bequest to her child:
cot+1 = Rt+1 st ;
13

(11)

where Rt+1 = 1 + rt+1 measures the gross interest rate prevailing in period t + 1. That is, she
consumes the interest yielded plus her principal before she dies at the end of her old adulthood and
exits the market.
A representative woman born in period t
adulthood and retirement, denoted by

cyt

1 derives utility from consumption, both in young

and cot+1 , respectively. The utility derived from old

age consumption is discounted not only by the time preference rate

> 0, but also by a factor

(ht ) 2 (0; 1) which is based on her health capital level (determined in her childhood by her parent

and equipped with it when young):

(h) =
Thus,

8
<
:

H

if

h

hc

L

if

h < hc

;

H

>

L:

( ) captures the span/quality of life when old and hc > 0 is the threshold of the level of

health capital – when the level of health capital exceeds hc , the child will enjoy a better quality
of life in her old adulthood. In addition to her own consumption, the representative woman is
altruistic, valuing her child’s embodied human capital measured by Ht+1 with an intergenerational
discounting factor

2 (0; 1) (which will be referred to as the altruistic factor hereafter).

Assuming that the preferences take a log-linear form, we can now specify the representative
woman’s (born in period t
Vt

1

1) optimization problem as follows:

= maxcyt ;cot+1 ;xt ;et ;Ht+1 ln cyt +

(ht )
1+

ln cot+1 + ln Ht+1

(P)

s.t. (10), (11), (2), (7) and (8)
where, needless to say, both the e¤ective wage rate wt and the (gross) interest rate Rt are taken as
given. For better illustration, the timeline facing the representative woman is delineated as follows:

14

3.3

Institutional Barriers

As discussed above, even if people have the knowledge to take action to …ght against diseases,
they may fail to do so if the environment is adverse to their e¤orts. For example, washing hands
before preparing food for the family is the key to preventing children under 5 from having diarrhoea
(which is the most common source of morbidity in developing countries, and may result in death
if the patient is not treated well). Yet the unwillingness of the family members to accommodate
the “new measure” due to customs or beliefs, or the lack of clean water, frustrates the primary
caregivers. To overcome such a problem, large investments in the water and sanitation systems are
called for, as well as the comprehensive correct health measures to eradicate “incorrect”beliefs and
customs. All such “solutions” require large initial investments as well as sequential maintenance
costs. However, for poor countries, any amount of e¤ort and health investment, both private and
public, would simply not su¢ ce to overcome the unfavorable environment. To make matters worse,
resources intended to improve health conditions could be easily misallocated in poor countries due
to institutional barriers.
We use an institutional sunk cost to measure the investment barriers attributed to resources
required to ensure satisfactory public health environments as described above as well as corruption
or unstable political situations. The magnitude of this institutional sunk cost is assumed to be
proportional to the average health investment in the economy, x, where
of the institutional barriers (i.e., a higher

> 0 measures the severity

denotes a greater waste of resources). As resource waste

related to health barriers a¤ects capital accumulation, the physical capital law of motion becomes:
Kt+1 = max f0; N (st

x)g :

(12)

To simplify the analysis, N is normalized to one henceforth. Equation (12) is also the loanable
funds clearing condition in this economy. Institutional sunk costs “eat”the savings of the agents. If
there were no institutional sunk costs in the economy, the agents’saving st would turn into capital
Kt+1 in the next period, and they can enjoy a full return – the principal as well as the return on
capital from Kt+1 . With an institutional sunk cost, agents’savings are depleted. They now own a
smaller capital stock, although from the individual’s point of view, their saving is still st . This will
result in discrepancies between the return on capital an agent receives when old and the marginal
product of capital. We will discuss this in the next section. The labor market clearing condition is:
`dt = `t :

4

(13)

Optimization and Equilibrium

In this section, we will focus only on the benchmark case with positive investment and time devoted
to the child’s health and education, respectively. In the next section, the benchmark model will be
15

calibrated to …t the data for the U.S. economy. The discussions on the corner case, where parents
engage in zero health investment for their children, as well as the calibrations for other economies
inclusive of trapped ones, will be relegated to Section 6.

4.1

Optimization

By solving the generation-t representative woman’s optimization problem, we obtain several useful atemporal and intertemporal trade-o¤ relationships (all detailed mathematical derivations and
proofs are relegated to the Appendix). The …rst is a prototypical intertemporal consumption-saving
trade-o¤:
1
(ht ) Rt+1
;
y =
(1 + )cot+1
ct

(14)

which equates the marginal utility and the marginal cost of consumption when young: as the span
or quality of life when old improves (a higher ), agents adjust consumption by consuming less in
their young adulthood.
To ensure an optimizing level of health investment in children, it is required that its marginal
bene…ts (M Bx ) and marginal cost (M Cx ) be equal,
|

xt

1 1
ht

{z

M Px

}|

1
ht+11 m1t+1
= y:
H
c
{z
} t+1
t
| {z }
MP
h

(15)

M UH

The term in the …rst set of brackets in the above equation is the marginal product (MP) of health
investment in enhancing the children’s health capital, the second is the marginal product of health
capital in increasing the children’s human capital, and the last is the marginal utility (MU) derived
from the children’s human capital. This relationship is delineated in Figure 9(a). It is noted that,
an increase in the parents’ genetic transmission to the children’s health (a higher

) raises the

children’s health capital (ht+1 ), which, under diminishing returns, lowers the marginal product of
health capital and hence the marginal bene…t of health (the LHS of the expression). Since the
marginal cost of health investment in children (the RHS of the expression) is independent of , it is
expected that in response the optimizing level of health investment in children is lower, other things
being equal.
Similarly, to optimize parental time devoted to educating children, its marginal bene…ts (M Be )
must equal its marginal cost (M Ce ),
m (1
|{z}t |
M Pe

) ht+1 mt+1
=
{z
} Ht+1
|
{z
}
M Pm

wt Ht
;
cyt

(16)

M UH

where the marginal cost of devoting time to educating children is measured by the consumption
value of foregone earnings (see Figure 9(b)). Consider again an increase in the parents’ genetic

16

transmission to the children’s health: as it raises the children’s health capital, it, by complementarity, also enhances the children’s marginal product of knowledge capital, thus leading to a higher
marginal bene…t of education and more educational investment in children.
The two optimizing conditions discussed above can be further simpli…ed to derive the two atemporal trade-o¤s that guide parents’decisions on self-consuming versus investment in their children,
by means of improved health or education:
xt 1 h1t
ht+1
(1
)
e+

=
=

1
;
cyt
wt Ht
cyt

(17)
(18)

Agents leave no bequest, and hence old agents own the current capital stocks and will consume
what they hold entirely right before they exit the market. The existence of the institutional barriers
distorts the resource allocation in the markets, resulting in breakdowns of the standard factor
demand conditions. Since the institutional sunk costs distort the markets and impede capital
accumulation, we assume that capital lenders bear the full costs while wage earners still receive a
wage rate that is equal to the marginal product of labor, given by,
A (1

) (Kt =Lt ) = wt :

(19)

To see the above argument more clearly, for an old agent who saves st
consumption should be cot = st

1 Rt

= wt

1 Ht 1 `t 1

cyt

1

xt

1

1

when young, her current

Rt . However, a portion of her

saving is depleted because of the institutional sunk cost while she still believes that she gets full hold
of st

1.

Although physical capital is still employed and operated e¢ ciently by …rms, the interest

rate received by the capital lenders, or the old agents, is determined by the goods market clearing
condition:
cot + cyt + (1 + ) xt + Kt+1 = Kt + Yt ;
with cot =

4.2

(ht )Rt cyt
1+

1

(20)

.

Equilibrium

We are now ready to de…ne and characterize the equilibrium along the balanced growth path.
Speci…cally, a dynamic general equilibrium in this economy is a tuple of quantities fHt ; ht ; mt ;

1
cot ; cyt ; st ; xt ; Kt ; Yt g1
t=0 together with a pair of prices fwt ; Rt gt=0 such that: (i) each woman optimizes,

i.e., (2), (7), (8), (9), (10), (11), and (33) - (40), all hold; (ii) production e¢ ciency is met, i.e., (1),
and (19) hold; (iii) the physical capital rental rate is determined by (20); and, (iv) goods, loanable
funds and labor markets all clear. A balanced growth equilibrium (BGP) is a dynamic general
1

equilibrium along which all perpetually growing variables fHt ; ht ; mt ; cot ; cyt ; st ; xt ; Kt ; Yt gt=0 grow
at constant rates and all other endogenous variables are constant. A balanced growth equilibrium is
17

regarded as nondegenerate if these constant growth rates are strictly positive. It is straightforward
to show that along a nondegenerate BGP, all perpetually growing variables grow at the common
rate g > 0.
Along a nondegenerate BGP, ht grows at a positive rate g and hence ht > hc must hold 8t

where

(ht ) =

H.

We regard this nondegenerate BGP as the benchmark and transform all
cyt
Ht ,

perpetually growing quantities into stationary ratios by de…ning z
From (8), 1 + g =

tc

v=

xt
Ht

and k =

Kt
Lt

=

Kt
Ht ` t .

(e + ), which can then be substituted into (7) to derive:
1+g =

H
v
h

+

(21)

That is, both a higher human-health capital ratio and a higher health investment-human capital
ratio enhance the long-run economic growth. The above expression, together with (2), yields the
health-to-knowledge capital ratio:
h
=
m

(

1

(e + )

1
Bv

)1

1

;

(22)

which depends only on e and v. The e¤ective wage rate is given by w(k) = (1

)Ak , a function

of the e¤ective capital-labor ratio k alone, and the interest rate is determined by (12) and should
be a function of parenting time e, the health-human capital ratio v, and the e¤ective capital-labor
ratio k.
In the following, we will show that the system can be reduced to 3

3 in (e; v; k) where e can be

determined in a recursive manner. This enables the BGP to be characterized simply in the (v; k)
space. More speci…cally, de…ning for convenience DH

1+

and manipulating the optimizing

H

1+

condition on a mother’s time devoted to educating her child yields:
(1
e+
| {z

N M Be

)

=

}

[ (e+ )
(e+ )

DH +

]

(23)

1 {z e

|

}

N M Ce

The LHS of the above equation gives the “net”marginal bene…ts of spending time on the children’s
education (N M Be ) on the BGP, and the RHS stands for the net marginal costs of parental education
investment (N M Ce ) – the sum of the foregone marginal utilities derived from consumption in
both adulthoods and investing in the children’s health. Essentially, this expression captures the
parent’s trade-o¤ between two forms of investment in the child. It can be observed that the N M Be
locus is downward sloping, starting from
vertical intercept at DH +
(1

)

> DH +

(

)

(

)

(1

)

and the N M Ce locus is upward sloping with a

. Therefore, the equilibrium e must be unique provided that

. Figure 10 provides a graphical illustration of the determination of e.

Next, the transformed e¤ective consumption measure can be derived as:
z (e; k) =

w (k) (1
DH +
18

e)

[ (e+ )
(e+ )

]

:

(24)

Moreover, a mother’s e¤ective investment in her child’s health (v =
v (e; k) =

x
H)

is given by,

[ (e + )
] z (e; k)
:
(e + )

(25)

We then turn to derive the equations governing the equilibrium (v; k). By substituting (42) into
(41) and the physical capital law of motion (12), the two equations governing the equilibrium (v; k)
are:
v =
v =

[ (e + )
]
w (k) ;
(1
)
e+
1
w (k) 1 e
1+
(1

(26)

)

k (e + ) (1

e) :

(27)

For illustrative purposes, we refer to (26) as the intergenerational trade-o¤ (IT) locus and (27) as
the capital evolution (KE) locus. Figure 11 depicts the IT and KE loci.
The IT locus, derived from the FOCs with respect to cyt , xt , et , ht+1 , mt+1 , and Ht+1 , captures
the intergenerational trade-o¤ between the parent’s own consumption and her investments in health
and education on children. In response to a higher physical capital (and hence higher k), saving
rises and hence the marginal utility of consumption when old decreases. This in turn reduces the
marginal cost of health investment in children. To restore equilibrium, it is thus required that the
marginal bene…t of health investment be lower and the equilibrium level of health investment be
higher. That is, the IT locus is upward sloping.15 The KE locus, on the other hand, is derived from
the capital evolution equation, or the loanable funds market clearing condition. This relationship
resembles the sustainable consumption locus in any optimal growth models. It illustrates that, as
physical capital grows larger, its user cost eventually outweighs its marginal product as a result of
diminishing returns. Thus, the KE locus is hump-shaped where the peak indicates the golden rule
level of physical capital accumulation. Together with the property of (23) and proper conditions
(see the Appendix), we can establish a unique nondegenerate BGP equilibrium.
More importantly, we shall establish, in the following proposition, a su¢ cient condition for the
poverty trap to arise. Speci…cally, let us de…ne:
[

where

(1

)
DH +

+ (1

DH +
+ (1

)

) ]

f (1 +
)
[ ( + )

[1 + (1
]

(1

))]g

is independent of the severity of institutional barriers to health

( ). We then have:
Proposition 1 (Su¢ cient condition for poverty trap) Under

>

, the economy is stuck in

the poverty trap where no health investment occurs.
15

Given that e is determined by (23), the IT locus can be shown to be strictly concave in k.

19

Proposition 1 provides a su¢ cient condition for the poverty trap. Of particular note,

is

actually the analytical solution of the equilibrium e derived from (23). Although Proposition 1 only
provides a su¢ cient condition for the poverty trap, its implication is quite useful. It suggests that
too much investment in education (a high

) could do more harm than good for an economy, since

the time (the valuable resource) directed to educational investment crowds out production and leads
to an inability to engage in other investments. Therefore, for an economy to be on the right track
of development, there is a need for a balanced investment in both health and education. One can
further examine the likelihood of the emergence of a poverty trap using Proposition 1. In particular,
it is easily seen that a poverty trap will more easily emerge when the severity of institutional barriers
( ) is larger, the span or the quality of life when old (

H)

is worse, or the parental transmission of

good health ( ) becomes more important.
Figure 11 plots the IT and the KE loci when the BGP equilibrium is nondegenerate; it also
illustrates the case of the poverty trap when the condition in Proposition 1 is met. Since the
current study focuses on the role of health and health-related institutional barriers, we shall focus
on the poverty trap caused by the institutional barriers: if the institutional sunk cost
(when

>

c ),

is too severe

the economy will end up staying in the equilibrium E0 . We relegate the discussion

of economies mired in poverty traps to Section 5. In what follows, we perform comparative statics
upon the nondegenerate equilibrium.

4.3

Comparative Statics

In order to characterize the unique BGP equilibrium, we analytically examine the comparativestatic properties concerning changes in the institutional barriers ( ), structural preference (most
interestingly,

H)

and technology (most interestingly,

and ) parameters on three key endogenous

variables (e, v and k). As discussed in the previous subsection, the equilibrium parental time
investment in the children’s education (e) can be determined recursively, enabling the BGP to be
characterized in the (v; k) plane. Therefore, we can elaborate on the responses of parental time
investment in the child’s education (e) recursively and then illustrate the responses of the healthhuman capital and e¤ective capital-labor ratios (v and k) diagrammatically.
Before examining the comparative-static properties of changes in ;

H;

and , let us begin

by characterizing the BGP value of parental time devoted to educating a child (e) using Figure
10. Consider the case when the parent becomes more altruistic (a higher ). In response, both
the marginal bene…ts and marginal costs of investing in the child’s education (N M Be and N M Ce ,
respectively) must go up, implying upward shifts in both the N M Be and N M Ce loci, and the
BGP value of e is ambiguous as a result. To ensure realistic outcomes, we shall impose a normality
assumption in the sense that a more altruistic mother will devote more parental time to educating
a child, or, formally:
20

DH
+ (1

(1 )
DH +

Condition N (Altruism Normality)

)

<

1
1

.

We then investigate what happens in response to an increase in the parents’span or quality of life
when old (a higher

H ).

An increase in

H

raises the marginal utility of a parent’s own consumption

when old and thus reduces her incentive to invest in her child’s education. Hence, the N M Ce locus
shifts upward while the N M Be locus remains unchanged, leading to a lower BGP value of e. We
now turn to a strengthened intergenerational transmission of health (a higher ), which lowers the
marginal cost of investing in the child’s education and hence shifts the N M Ce locus downward,
without changing the N M Be locus. Thus, in response, the BGP value of e increases. Because
changes in neither the severity of institutional barriers nor the health productivity scaling factor
a¤ect the N M Ce or the N M Be locus, the BGP value of parental time devoted to child education is
irresponsive to such changes. The responses of e to these structural parameter shifts are summarized
in Table 5.
We next proceed to perform comparative-static analysis with respect to the two great ratios, v
and k, using the IT and the KE loci depicted in Figure 12. The structural parameters may a¤ect
the IT and the KE loci directly as well as indirectly through e. We …rst discuss how the change in
e a¤ects the IT and the KE loci.
It is easy to see that e enters the IT locus positively through the health-knowledge investment
balancing e¤ ect (via e +

in the numerator). Recall that the IT locus equates the marginal

utility of consumption and the two forms of investment in children. Therefore, a higher educational
investment should be associated with a higher health investment to restore the balance in marginal
utilities. On the contrary, e generates several opposing e¤ects on the KE locus through di¤erent
channels. The …rst channel is through the trade-o¤ between producing and accumulating knowledge
(the …rst 1

e in the KE locus). As e increases, labor hours decrease, and resources available for

health investment decline. Increases in e also result in a smaller marginal utility from educating
children. Agents thus increase their consumption when young and accumulate more capital, and
hence generate negative forces toward health investment (through e +

in the second and third

terms in the KE locus). Finally, an increase in e transmits bene…ts of knowledge accumulation from
more e¤ective labor in the future, thereby relaxing the current resource constraint and bringing
positive e¤ects to current health investment. The e¤ect of an increase in e on the KE locus is thus
ambiguous and we will rely on numerical analysis to determine the relative size of these opposing
e¤ects as well as net e¤ects of e on the KE locus.
To sum up, an increase in e always shifts the IT locus up, while the direction of the shift in
the KE locus depends on the magnitude of the positive feedback from the accumulated knowledge
capital. When the positive feedback dominates other opposing e¤ects and shifts the KE locus
upward, the BGP value of v will rise, and whether the BGP value of k will rise or fall depends on
the relative magnitudes of the shifts in the two loci. If the upward shift in the KE locus is relatively
21

moderate compared to the shift in the IT locus, the BGP value of k is expected to fall. On the
contrary, if the positive feedback from more e¤ective labor is dominated, one would expect that an
increase in e will shift the KE locus downward, and the BGP value of k is expected to fall. Yet
the BGP value of v depends on the relative shifts in both loci: when the shift in the KE locus is
relatively moderate, the BGP values of v will rise, and vice versa.
We are now ready to examine how the structural parameters a¤ect the IT and the KE loci. Figure
12 plots how the IT and the KE loci shift in response to changes in the parameters. Consider …rst
the changes in the severity of the institutional barriers . Changes in

have no in‡uence on the

BGP value of e, and only a¤ect the KE locus in a negative way by shifting the KE locus downward.
Hence, both the BGP values of v and k decrease.
Next consider the parameters on the preference side. The span or the quality of life when old
H

a¤ects both loci indirectly through e. An increase in

H

decreases the BGP equilibrium e and

shifts the IT locus down. If the e¤ects from more e¤ective labor in the future are dominated, the
KE locus will shift upward as e decreases. If the magnitude of the shift in the KE locus is larger
than the IT locus, both of the BGP values of v and k will rise. Now look at the changes in the
health capital technology. While

has no direct or indirect e¤ect on either the IT or the KE locus,

directly and indirectly in‡uences the IT locus and has an indirect in‡uence on the KE locus through
e. An increase in

directly shifts the IT locus downward, and indirectly shifts the IT locus upward

through e. As it comes to the KE locus, an increase in

shifts the KE locus downward provided

that the e¤ect from knowledge capital accumulation and thus more e¤ective labor in the future is
dominated. Hence, when the direct e¤ect of

on the IT locus dominates the indirect e¤ect, and

when the bene…ts from more e¤ective labor are dominated, one would expect that both loci will
shift downward, and the BGP value of v will decrease. The BGP value of k will increase with a
relatively moderate shift in the KE locus.
The discussion above can be readily summarized in Table 5 and in the following proposition:
Proposition 2 (Comparative Statics) Under Condition N, the BGP equilibrium possesses the
following properties:
(i) a more severe institutional barrier to health (a higher ) does not a¤ect the parental time devoted
to educating a child, but suppresses both the health-human capital and e¤ective capital-labor
ratios;
(ii) an increase in the parents’span or quality of life when old (a higher

H)

reduces the parental

time devoted to educating a child, but raises the health-human capital and e¤ective capitallabor ratios;
(iii) a greater intergenerational transmission of basic health (a higher

) increases the parental

time devoted to educating a child and the e¤ective capital-labor ratio, but decreases the
22

health-human capital ratio;
(iv) a rise in health productivity (a higher ) does not a¤ect the parental time devoted to educating
a child or the health-human capital and e¤ective capital-labor ratios.
The comparative statics will be performed numerically in the next section in the calibrated benchmark economy, not only to verify the discussions above, but also to generate unambiguous comparativestatic outcomes quantitatively.

5

Numerical Analysis

In this section, we calibrate the benchmark model to match the U.S. economy. Numerical comparative statics as well as sensitivity analysis to check the robustness of the benchmark parameterization
are then performed. We illustrate how an increase in the institutional sunk cost could cause an economy to fall into the poverty trap, even if the economy is endowed with the same preferences and
technologies as the U.S. In the next section, we calibrate the model to match countries with di¤erent income levels, namely, middle-income-low countries and trapped economies. We then show that
having too severe health-related institutional barriers is the major reason why trapped countries
remain mired in poverty.

5.1

Calibration

We intend to calibrate the model such that the BGP implications of the parameters match the
observations for the U.S. economy. The model has 12 parameters: (i) preference parameters – the
time preference rate ( ), the span or the quality of life when old (

H)

and an altruistic factor

( ); (ii) goods production technology parameters – a goods technology scaling factor (A) and an
income share of physical capital ( ); (iii) human capital technology parameters – the share of
health capital ( ); (iv) health capital technology parameters –the health capital technology scaling
factor ( ), the share of parental health investment ( ) and innate health ( ); (v) knowledge capital
technology parameters –a knowledge capital scaling factor ( ) and innate knowledge ( ); and (vi)
the institution parameter –the severity of the institutional barriers ( ).
To begin with the calibration, we …rst set one model period equal to 25 years. Therefore, the
representative woman lives for 3 periods or 75 years in total.16 Since there are two sectors, it
is possible to normalize one of the technology scaling parameters, say, the human capital scaling
factor to one, i.e., B = 1 without loss of generality. We choose
16

H

= 0:9, implying a 10% discount

The life expectancy at birth in the US reached 75 years in 1989, 76 years in 1996 and 77 years in 2000. Source:

U.S. Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2003.

23

over the old age consumption which seems reasonable. The 25-year time preference rate is set at
= 1:0938, which corresponds to an annual time preference rate of 3%, as is commonly chosen
in the macroeconomics literature. Based on the NIPA data over the period 1960-2005, we set the
physical capital share of income as

= 0:32 and the 25-year economic growth rate (of per capita

real GDP) as g = 69:37% (corresponding to a 2:13% annual economic growth rate of the average
economic growth rate of the U.S.).
To calibrate the e¤ective capital-labor ratio (k =

K
H` ),

we need to know the physical-to-human

capital ratio ( K
H ) as well as the fraction of time people devote to work (`). Based on the estimates
by Kendrick (1976), the stock of human capital is at about the same level as physical capital for the
U.S., and hence we set the physical capital-to-human capital ratio equal to one, i.e.,

K
H

= 1. Since

parental time investment in the child’s education is crucial in this paper, we cannot simply compute
` from labor-market work hours data. Instead, we use the 2003-2008 American Time Use Survey:
the average hours per day for people engaged in activities related to the children’s education and
health were 2:1766 hours, and the average sleeping hours were 8:59 hours per day. Therefore, the
fraction of time parents devoted to their children’s education is e = 14:0% and the fraction of time
devoted to work is ` = 86:0%. This together with

K
H

= 1 yields an e¤ective capital-labor ratio of

k = 1:1628.
We now turn to pinning down the technology parameters of health and knowledge capital accuh
mulation. Without loss of generality, we set the health-to-knowledge capital ratio to one ( m
= 1).

In the benchmark case, we assume that health and knowledge contribute equally to the formation
of human capital, and

is set to be 0:5. From (2), we obtain

growth property of the BGP, v =

x
H

=

x
h.

H
h

= 1 and hence, by the common

In spite of lacking a precise measurement, it is rea-

sonable to assume that both the innate ability in knowledge and the direct parental in‡uence on
the child’s health capital account for 20% of the total formation of the child’s knowledge capital
and health capital, respectively. That is,

e+

= 0:2 and

conjunction with the value of e, immediately yields
the value of g to obtain

=

1+g
e+

v +

= 0:2. The …rst expression, in

= 0:035, which can then be used with (8) and

= 9:6782. Using the second expression and (21), we can calculate:

= 0:2 ( v + ) = 0:2 (1 + g) = 0:3387. Later on, we will perform sensitivity tests on the preset
variables and assumptions.
Next, notice that

z
v

=

cy
x,

which is equal to the parent’s consumption-to-children’s health invest-

ment ratio. From the NIPA data on consumer expenditure over 1990-2008, the ratio of the average
health expenditure to household consumption other than health was around 20%. It is reasonable
to assume that more than half of the health expenditure is allocated to children and hence we set
cy
x

= 9. Hence, by using (41) and rewriting it as

able to obtain the values

= 0:6271 and

z
v

=

cy
x

=

1+g
(1+g

),

together with (23), we are

= 0:4429. Now we turn to calibrate the technology

scaling factor in goods production A and the severity of the institutional barriers . In equilibrium,

24

(26) must equal (27). By using this relation, the goods market clearing condition (20), which determines the equilibrium real rate of return on physical capital, and by setting an annual real rate
of return on capital of 5:5% (roughly equal to the real interest rate of the U.S. over 1970-2000), we
obtain A = 10:3475 and

= 0:1698. Finally,

is calibrated using (21) and is equal to

= 1:9151:

The calibration results for the U.S. economy are summarized in Table 6.

5.2

Comparative Statics

In Section 4.3, we have examined analytically the responses of the endogenous variables, (e; v; k), to
changes in the three parameters of particular interest: the parents’span or quality of life when old
(

H ),

the intergenerational transmission of basic health ( ), and institutional barriers to health ( ).

In this section, we now evaluate numerically the magnitudes of these reponses. For completeness,
we also report the responses of other endogeous variables, including the economic growth rate (g),
the consumption-human capital ratio (z), and four important “great ratios” – the consumptiony

h
), the health-human capital ratio
health spending ratio ( cx ), the health-knowledge capital ratio ( m
h
m
(H
), and the knowledge-human capital ratio ( H
). Moreover, we compute the responses to other

exogneous shifts, such as the altruistic factor ( ), the knowledge capital scaling factor ( ), the
innate knowledge factor ( ), the share of health capital ( ), the share of parental health investment
( ), and the goods technology scaling factor (A). The results are summarized in Table 7, where the
numbers reported are in elasticities.
Recall that in the benchmark U.S. economy, in response to an increase in parental investment
in the child’s education (e), the IT locus always shifts up, while the direction of the KE locus
depends on the relative magnitudes of several opposing e¤ects. That is, if the positive feedback
from more e¤ective labor in the future is dominated by other e¤ects, the KE locus is expected to
shift downward. Thus, the BGP values of v and k increase and decrease, respectively, if the shift
in the KE locus is relatively moderate. The numerical results suggest that this is usually the case
under the parameterization of the U.S. economy.
With the above quali…cation, we proceed to examine the e¤ects of changes in the three key
parameters. First, a longer lifespan when old raises a parent’s marginal utility of consumption
when old, encouraging a shift in her resources from investing in her child to her own enjoyment. As
a result, in response to a 1% increase in

H,

parents curtail their time investment in their children’s

education by 0:28%, leading to a relaxation of their budget constraint and enabling v and k to rise
by 0:18% and 1:49%, respectively. Since the parents’negative response in education investment is
greater than that in their health investment in children, the BGP value of the health-knowledge
capital ratio turns out to rise by 1:70% and the health-human capital ratio to increase by 0:83%.
Next, an increase in
1% increase in

cuts down the marginal cost of investing in the child’s education, so a

boosts e and g by 0:02% and 0:04%, respectively. However, the direct e¤ect of the
25

increase in

suppresses the IT locus more, leading to a 0:22% decrease and 0:02% increase in the

BGP values of v and k, respectively. Moreover, better transmission of the parents’health capital
causes the BGP value of the health-knowledge capital ratio to rise by 0:61%, the health-human
capital ratio to increase by 0:30%, and the knowledge-human capital ratio to decrease by 0:3%.
We then examine the e¤ects of a 1% increase in

that results in more resources wasted. This

brings health investment and savings down, leading to a 0:02% and a 0:07% decrease in v and k,
respectively. With the parental time devoted to educating child remaining constant, the increase in
surpresses the health-knowledge capital ratio by 0:04% and health-human capital ratio by 0:02%.
While for the sake of brevity, we shall not discuss the elasticities of other endogenous variables
in response to other parameter shifts reported in Table 7. Nonetheless, it is important to check the
validity of the key assumption imposed by our theory. We …nd that the parameterization of the
U.S. economy satis…es the altruism normality (Condition N), and hence parents always invest more
time in their children as they become more altruistic.
To sum up, the numerical results recon…rm the theoretical predictions outlined in Proposition
2 and establish additional …ndings. The results suggest that changes in the structural parameters
a¤ect the BGP equilibrium in the following way: the IT locus and the KE locus always shift upward
and downward in response to a higher e. The …nal changes in the BGP values of v and k depend
on the relative magnitudes of the direct and the indirect e¤ects associated with the changes in
the parameters, as well as the relative shifts in the IT and KE loci. In the next subsection, we
shall conduct sensitivity analysis to verify that the numerical comparative-static …ndings reported
in Table 7 are robust within plausible ranges around the benchmark parametrization.

5.3

Sensitivity Analysis

There are neither estimates of the stock of health capital, knowledge capital, or the share of health
capital in human capital formation, nor good measures of the contribution of innate ability to
knowledge capital formation or of parental health transmission to the children’s health. Although
the benchmark U.S. calibration is based on reasonably chosen assumptions, one may still cast doubt
on the calibration criteria and the robustness of the calibration results. Therefore, a sensitivity
analysis is performed to examine the qualitative and the quantitative implications under alternative
calibration criteria. The alternative calibration criteria include the assumptions of a lack of empirical
knowledge as well as the chosen calibration targets. In particular, the following assumptions and
calibration alternatives are considered:
The parental education time investment e: f0:07; 0:21g.
y

The consumption-health spending ratio ( cx ): f7; 11g.
The share of health capital in the human capital ( ): f0:4; 0:6g.
26

h
The health-knowledge capital ratio ( m
): f2; 0:5g.

The inborn health-to-health capital ratio: f0:3; 0:1g.
The innate ability-to-knowledge capital ratio: f0:3; 0:1g.
The physical capital-to-human capital ratio ( K
H ): f2; 0:5g.
Generally speaking, the sensitivity analysis suggests that most of the changes in the equilibrium
outcomes are nonessential and the model is quite robust. For the parameters under interest ( ,
H,

,

and ), the changes in the equilibrium outcomes are negligible under di¤erent calibration

targets and assumptions.
In the next section, we will calibrate the model to the data for di¤erent economies, and discuss how institutional barriers a¤ect countries di¤erently, and thus lead countries onto di¤erent
development paths.

6

Institutional Barriers and the Poverty Trap

In Proposition 1, we show that an economy will be trapped in poverty if the condition speci…ed is
satis…ed. Based on the parameters calibrated for the U.S. economy, if the severity of the institutional
barriers exceeds 3:8686, an economy endowed with the same technologies and preferences as the U.S.
will be absorbed into the state of poverty. This magnitude indicates that for every unit of health
investment reaching the intended target successfully, there are more than four units of resources
exhausted in the procedure of delivery due to the problems rooted in the institution: bureaucracy,
corruption, or simply the adverse natural environment among others. This magnitude also indicates
that roughly 80 percent of the resources allocated to health fail to accomplish the mission. Thus,
one may infer that a rich economy like the U.S. is too healthy to fall into a poverty trap.
Since countries at very di¤erent development stages di¤er in terms of their technologies and the
preferences of their citizens, the measure of severity of the institutional barriers also varies across
nations –as does the condition of falling into the trap. In the following, we proceed with calibrating
the model to the data for di¤erent income groups: (i) trapped economies: using both a representative
trapped economy based on the average performance and conditions of the 41 trapped countries and
three selected trapped economies –Bangladesh, Kenya and Nigeria –where rich institutional data
are available, thus enabling a deeper analysis of the economic relationship between institutional
barriers and the poverty trap; and (ii) middle-income-low countries: China and India. We then
compare the results with the results for the U.S. economy, and examine how they perform di¤erently
in regard to the problems of institutional barriers.

27

6.1

Trapped economies

In the model, a poverty trap is the corner solution where the representative woman makes no
health investment for her child. The …rst-order conditions with respect to xt and ht+1 do not hold
anymore, and hence the IT locus has to be set aside. What calls for attention is that, in the model,
the institutional sunk cost comes with the health investment. With zero health investment, the
institutional barriers might have been viewed as not a¤ecting the model at all. However, the truth
is that it is the huge and unobserved severity of the institutional barriers

that prevents individuals

from engaging in private health investment. To solve this problem, we thus change the notion of
health investment from private investment to public investment. We then focus on public health
expenditures and collect data and cases that can re‡ect the leakages in public health expenditure
to compute
6.1.1

because

is essentially unobservable.17

Calibration for trapped economies

To introduce public health investment into the system, we bring a government into the model. The
task of the government is to collect a lump-sum tax Tt from its young citizens, and to engage in
public health investment for the youngest generation. With the lump-sum tax, the budget constraint
of the representative woman when young becomes:
cyt + st = wt Ht `t

Tt :

(28)

Denote Ght as government total health spending. The government runs a balanced budget in every
period and hence the total government health expenditure must equal total collected taxes, Tt . To
permit balanced growth, we assume that the lump-sum tax grows with aggregate output:
Ght = Tt = Yt ;
where 0 <

(29)

< 1. The goods market clearing condition and the loanable funds market clearing

condition become
cot + cyt + Ght + Kt+1 = Yt + Kt ;
Kt+1 = st :

(30)
(31)

The procedure for solving the corner case is the same as that for solving the interior case, and the
…rst-order conditions give equations (14) and (18). In the following, we elaborate on the method of
calibration for the corner case and dismiss discussions on the equilibrium behavior of the model since
the current focus is to calibrate for the representative trapped economy and the selected trapped
countries.
17

Cases of leakages in other sectors or in public investments are used when cases of leakages in public health

expenditures are unavailable.

28

There are 14 parameters to be calibrated – ,
preference rate

L,

, A, , B, , , , , , , , and . The time

is set at 1.0938 to match an annual time preference rate of 0.03. Similar to the

benchmark calibration, we make plausible assumptions on the inborn health share and the innate
knowledge share from the intergenerational transmission of parental health and knowledge as well
as the health capital share . The importance of parental transmission can di¤er across countries.
Parental health transmission is more important for children when the environment is adverse to
health. For example, babies with stronger and healthier mothers survive more easily, and children
that inherited good resilience from their parents more easily get over a disease and recover soon.
Akin to health, innate knowledge is more important when the average education level is low. When a
society remains still, children usually inherit the business and occupation of their parents, and hence
the knowledge parents own and how parents pass their knowledge to their children is crucial to the
children. The phenomena described above provide a justi…cation for the view that the importance
of parental transmission can vary across countries depending on the stage of development. We thus
adjust the assumptions for the inborn health share and innate knowledge share according to the
overall health conditions (life expectancy at birth) and education levels (average years of schooling).
If the health conditions are bad, we upwardly adjust the inborn health share, and the same rule
applies to adjusting the innate knowledge share. From Table 2, since our representative trapped
economy “performs”poorly in both health and education, we set the inborn health share at 0:5 and
the innate knowledge share at 0:6.18 Then, with the chosen inborn health and innate knowledge
shares, together with the data on economic growth rates calculated from PWT 6.3 using data on
real GDP per capita, the parameters ,

and

are obtained. In the benchmark U.S. calibration,

is assumed to be 0:5, meaning that health and knowledge are equally important in forming human
capital. In a similar manner when adjusting the inborn health and innate knowledge shares, we
adjust

according to the health performances and the educational attainment of the representative

trapped economy. Thus, we set

at 0:8 to re‡ect that health plays a more important role forming

human capital for the representative trapped economy where physical strength is arguably much
more essential than mental quality in generating the production-use human capital stock. In a
similar manner, when calibrating the selected trapped economies, we adjust

up to re‡ect the

signi…cant role played by health in human capital if the country has relatively poor health but high
educational attainment, and vice versa.
In the benchmark U.S. calibration, we choose
age consumption. Note that

H

H

= 0:9 to re‡ect a 10% discount over the old

captures not only how good a person’s health condition is, but how

long a person can enjoy consumption. Hence, we take data on life expectancy at age 25 from the
18

In the calibration for the selected trapped countries, we compare the performances of health and education across

the selected trapped countries and the representative trapped economy, and apply the same rule to adjust their inborn
health and innate knowledge shares.

29

World Bank and adjust

L

for the trapped country by the formula
L

= 0:9

Life expectancy at age 25
25

25

:

Since there are no estimates of the capital-to-human capital ratio ( K
H ) for the representative trapped
economy as well as the selected trapped countries under examination, we assume it to be 0:5 to
re‡ect the belief that although trapped economies have poor funding resources, the inborn and
innate human capital are important, and thus the human capital formed shall be larger than the
physical capital.
There is no time use survey for the trapped countries, and hence we calculate parental time on
the educational investment by adjusting the parental time on the educational investment of the U.S.
using fertility rates of the U.S. and those of the trapped countries. The total fertility rates in the U.S.
have been very stable and have remained close to 2 since 1970. Unlike the U.S. where demographic
transition had been completed a century ago, most of the trapped countries have experienced a
rapid decrease in fertility over the past several decades, although some trapped countries still have
a total fertility rate of around 5. We thus choose to use the average total fertility rates of the
41 trapped countries during 1960-2007 to calibrate for the representative trapped economy.19 As
for the calibration of the selected trapped countries, since we focus more on the performances of
the countries around 2000, we choose to use the numbers around the year 2000. All fertility rate
data are obtained from the World Bank. The data on real interest rates, the consumption-tototal output ratio and the earmarking tax-output ratio

are also needed. Data on real interest

rates are obtained from the World Bank and are downwardly adjusted by 20-40 percent to re‡ect
the more reasonable measure of real rate of returns on (physical) capital.20 National Account
o¢ cial country data on household …nal consumption expenditure, government …nal consumption
expenditure, gross capital formation, exports and imports are obtained from the Penn World Table
(PWT) 6.3 National Account Data and United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD), and data on
the total expenditure on health, general government expenditure on health and private expenditure
on health as a percentage of total GDP are obtained from the World Bank. Having all the data
on hand, we …rst calculate total output in the model by deducting private health expenditure,
net exports, and government expenditures other than health from total GDP.21 Private health
19
20

The average total fertility rates of the 41 trapped countries during 1960-2007 and 1970-2007 are similar.
The real interest rate reported by the World Bank is the lending rate adjusted by the GDP de‡ator. This is a

good measure of the real rate of return on physical capital in developed economies. It is noted that, with this measure,
some trapped countries have extremely high real interest rates, due obviously to severe credit market frictions. Thus,
appropriate adjustment in the raw data is unavoidable. We hence adjust the average real interest rates of the 41
countries down by 40 percent, while we adjust the real interest rates in the selected trapped countries down by
roughly 20 percent so that the “true” annual real interest rate measures are roughly 5-6 percent.
21
The model features a closed economy, and in the model there is no government expenditure other than health.

30

expenditure also has to be deducted from household …nal consumption to match the notion of
the poverty trap in the model. Then we divide the adjusted household consumption, government
expenditures on health, and gross capital formation by the adjusted total output. After all these
steps, the total consumption to output ratio and the earmarking output tax rate

are ready for

the calibration procedure, and we now turn to calibrate the capital income share . It is convenient
to de…ne: DL

1+

L

1+

and

1+

L

(28), (11), (14) and (29), we can derive

LR
(1+ )(1+g) , both greater than one.
T
cy = wH`
= (1 DL )Y . Denote
DL

Then, manipulating
C = cy + co as the

aggregate consumption of young and old cohorts. By using (11), aggregate consumption can be
y
Lc

written as C =

L (1

=

)Y
DL

. We further divide C by aggregate output Y to obtain

the total consumption-to-output ratio

C
Y

=

L (1

)

RL

. By plugging data on the consumption-

to-output ratio, interest rate, and the earmarking tax rate
calculated as
is

C(1+DL )
Y L ,

= 1

y
calculated as cY = 1 DL
DL (e+ )
1
wH
= e+
1
cy = (1 )(1 e) 1

, the capital income share can be

and the consumption of young cohorts-to-total output ratio

. Now, from (18), the altruistic factor

can be pinned down as

. Similarly, the technology scaling factor A can be solved from the

loanable funds clearing condition (31) and is given by A =

(

DL Rk1
L 1)(1

).

The parameters left uncalibrated are the technology scaling factor in the human capital sector
B, the technology in producing health , the health investment share
institutional barriers . As mentioned before,

, and the measure for

is unobservable in the data and is hidden in the

amount of government spending. Only through surveys can one know the severity of the institutional
barriers and the associated problems stemming from these barriers. We relegate the discussion of
unearthing

to the next subsection. To take an equal stand for health investment and parental

health transmission, we assume

to be 0:5 for both the representative trapped economy and the

selected trapped countries. Then we turn to calibrate B using (1), (2) and the property that all the
ratios of stocks and the stocks-to-output ratio are constant along the BGP. Speci…cally, we write total
output as Y = Ak B

h
m

m (1

e) using (1) and (2), and derive A as A = k B

h
m

m
Y

(1

e).

Let subscript i denote country i and the representative trapped economy. Then the technology
scaling factor in the human capital sector Bi for country i can be calibrated according to the
following formula:
AU S
Bi =
Ai

kUUSS
ki i

BU S

hU S
mU S
hi
mi

US

i

mU S Yi 1 eU S
YU S mi 1 ei

(32)

h
provided that one knows the health-knowledge capital ratio ( m
) of country i. We choose to use

the mortality rate for those under …ve and years of schooling to approximate h and m. Data on
the mortality rate under …ve in 2000 are obtained from the World Bank, and average years of
Hence, net exports and government expenditure other than health have to be deducted from total GDP to match the
notion of total output in the model.

31

schooling in 2000 are obtained from the Barro-Lee (2010) dataset.22 We denote q as the mortality
rate under …ve and E as the years of schooling. A higher mortality rate means a smaller stock of
health capital, and hence the approximation of health capital should be the inverse of the mortality
rate. Notice that the health-knowledge capital ratio of the U.S. is assumed to be one, meaning that
the “transformation factor” transforming the mortality rates and years of schooling of the U.S. to
a health-human capital ratio of one is qU S EU S . Therefore,

hi
mi

is calculated as

hi
mi

=

qU S EU S
qi Ei

and Bi

can be readily computed from (32). Finally, by using government health expenditure as an input in
(7), together with the BGP condition that health and knowledge capital grow at the same rate,
computed.23

i

is

Table 8 and Table 9 summarize the calibration results for the representative trapped

economy as well as the calibration results for the selected three trapped countries of interest, namely,
Bangladesh, Kenya and Nigeria.
Based on the calibration results of the representative trapped economy and the selected trapped
countries, we now proceed to compute the “threshold” severity of the institutional barriers for the
representative trapped economy as well as the selected trapped countries, Bangladesh, Kenya and
Nigeria. As discussed in the benchmark calibration for the U.S., with di¤erent technologies and
dissimilar tastes, the severity of the institutional barriers can di¤er across countries. Denote the
critical threshold severity of the institutional barriers as
c,

c.

If the magnitude of

is greater than

the waste and ine¢ ciencies caused by the institutional barriers within an economy are too big

for an economy to stand, and private incentives to make investments are completely suppressed.
When this happens, an economy ends up mired in poverty. Recall that Proposition 1 provides the
su¢ cient condition for a trap to emerge, but such a strong condition is not needed numerically for
computing the threshold

c.

The necessary and su¢ cient condition for a trap to emerge is that

the slope of the KE locus is smaller than that of the IT locus when k goes to zero. Based on the
structural parameters, one can compute the

such that the slopes of the two loci are equal. Then,

one can proceed to examine whether there are interior solutions under the computed . A simple
way to verify whether the computed

is the critical threshold

c

is to plot the IT and the KE loci

and see whether they have multiple equilibria under the computed . If there is no interior solution,
22

The data of average years of schooling are not available for Angola, Burkina Faso, Chad, Ethiopia, Madagascar,

Nigeria and Somalia in Barro-Lee (2010). For Nigeria, the estimates of average years of schooling in 2005 and 2010
are available from Human Development Indicators (HDI) compiled by the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and are equal to 5. Since estimates of years of schooling usually do not change much within 5 years, we thus
set the year 2000 average years of schooling in Nigeria equal to 5. The years of schooling of the representative trapped
economy is thus the simple average of the years of schooling in 2000 for countries with data in Barro-Lee (2010) and
Nigeria.
23
The interpretation of

i

should be the health technology of the government, and is di¤erent from the

interior case. Since the value of

i

in the

does not a¤ect the critical severity of institutional barriers calculated below, the

government health expenditure is plugged into (7) when calibrating

32

i.

c

is found and the analysis ends.
Following the method described above, we compute the threshold

c

for the representative

trapped economy based upon the calibrated structural parameters summarized in Table 8, which
turns out to be 0:9501. Similarly, we can compute the threshold values of

c

for Bangladesh, Kenya

and Nigeria based on the calibrated results in Table 9, which are reported in the last row of Table
9. We also compute the threshold
than the

c

c

for the U.S. economy, which is equal to 3:8686, and is greater

for the three trapped economies. The interpretation for this result is that an economy

like the U.S. can “bear” more institutional problems and can still grow without being caught in
a poverty trap. Yet, this result does not imply that a rich country can keep on thriving without
paying close attention to its institutional problems.
6.1.2

Institutional barriers

We now turn to studying the magnitude of institutional barriers
have mentioned,

in the trapped economies. As we

is hidden under government expenditures, and one can never learn

from …les

and data o¤ered o¢ cially by governments. A handful of countries do have information regarding the
leakages of government spending, such as a public expenditure tracking system, or some estimates
and reports on e¢ ciencies of public investment schemes. Such information can serve as a proxy for
the institutional barriers. However, most of the trapped economies do not have such information.
Nevertheless, one may learn or at least sense the problems associated with

and the size of

from the survey data. In abiding by this notion, we …rst attempt to estimate the magnitudes of
for the 41 trapped countries based on the available cross-country survey data. Upon obtaining
the ’s of the 41 trapped countries, we can then compare the imputed measures of the magnitude
of institutional barriers both within these trapped economies and with the U.S. to gain insight
on how severe such barriers are relative to the benchmark U.S. economy. As for the selected
trapped countries, Bangladesh, Kenya and Nigeria, since they have richer information about their
institutional problems, we can further impute their

based on the existing cross-country surveys as

well as the available country-speci…c data. More speci…cally, we collect country-speci…c measures for
based on evaluating the true arrival of resources directed at the intended targets. We then apply
a weighted average to the imputed measures under the existing survey data and the true arrival of
resources to obtain the severity of the institutional barriers
Once all these imputed institutional barriers measures
with the respective threshold values

c

of Bangladesh, Kenya and Nigeria.

are obtained, we are able to compare them

to conclude whether these economies are in the poverty trap.

Of particular note, it is said that an economy is trapped if

>

c.

We now turn to elaborate on the procedure of computing the magnitudes of the institutional
barriers

in the representative trapped economy and the three selected trapped countries.

6.1.2.1 Calibrate by using existing measures
33

The imputing of the

using existing measures goes as follows: since the severity of the insti-

tutional barriers of the U.S. economy has been calibrated, we can adopt available cross-country
measures that evaluate the e¢ ciency of an economy to compute ’s for all the trapped economies
using the U.S. calibrated

as a benchmark. To do this, we choose the Corruption Perceptions Index

(CPI) compiled by Transparency International (TI) as our cross-country indicator of institutional
problems. The CPI is the most widely-used measure for detecting corruption problems. It measures the degree to which public sector corruption is perceived to be within the countries around the
world, and is a composite indicator aggregating surveys from di¤erent sources to produce a single
measure of corruption.24 The CPI is calculated based upon surveys, using subjective opinions to
gather data on levels of corruption in a nation, and has a scale between 0 (the most corrupt) and
10 (the least corrupt).25
To incorporate the CPI into the current study, we …rst take the CPI for the U.S. Recall that
measures the severity of the institutional barriers. Thus, a higher

means a more severe waste

arising from institutional barriers rooted in the economy and hence a higher
lower CPI. Therefore, the CPI is assumed to be a function of
CP Ii ( i ) =

corresponds to a

given by:

10
;
1+a i

where a > 0; which is pinned down using the calibrated U.S. . In this way, we connect the CPI
to the model, and the magnitudes of the institutional barriers of the 41 trapped counties can thus
be computed from this function with the use of the CPI. With the chosen functional form, when
there is no waste arising from institutional barriers, the corresponding CPI is equal to 10, and when
the institutional barriers are immense, the corresponding CPI is equal to zero. The parameter a
is solved by plugging the CPI of the U.S. in 2005 (7:6) together with the calibrated
(0:1698), and is equal to 1:86. The …tting of the

of the U.S.

measure for the 41 trapped countries based on

the CPI is plotted in Figure 13 and is reported in the second to the last column in Table 2. The
imputed

for the representative trapped economy is thus 1:7054. Furthermore, the imputed

for

Bangladesh, Kenya and Nigeria are then 2:6249, 2:0225 and 2:292, respectively.
From Table 2, by comparing the imputed severity of the institutional barriers with the threshold
c,

we can conclude that all 41 countries are trapped because their institutional barriers all exceed

the corresponding threshold. To better understand and interpret the role of , we compute the
“social waste” measured by

1+

(i.e., the ratio of total waste arising from institutional barriers

to total health expenditures) for the 41 trapped economies and the counterpart at the threshold
c

1+

c

for the representative trapped economy. The imputed social waste and its counterpart at the

threshold for the representative trapped economy are reported at the bottom of Table 8, while the
24

The surveys used by TI di¤er from year to year, depending on the surveys available in that year. At least three

surveys are used for a country to be included in the sample of the CPI in a particular year.
25
The scale has been changed to 0-100 since 2012.

34

computed social waste for the 41 trapped economies are reported in the last column of Table 2.
For comparison purposes, we also compute these …gures for the U.S.: even as the most advanced
economy, its social waste associated with the institutional barriers to health still amounts to 14:5%
of the national average investment in health. For the trapped economies, the average social waste
is 63:0%, far exceeding the threshold social waste measure of 48:7%. Thus, the trapped economies,
on average, have incurred more than four times as much social waste as the U.S., a …gure that is of
no doubt alarming: they point to more than three …fths of the health investment in these countries
being wasted. Among these trapped economies, there is not much regional variation in social waste
(ranging from 61:8 to 66:1%). For individual countries, social waste ranges from as low as 50%
(Ghana) to over 70% (Bangladesh, Chad and Haiti). In Figure 14, we illustrate, based on the
relative scales of

and

c,

the likelihood for each of the sample countries to pull out. Interestingly,

while Ghana and Burkina Faso are most likely (with more than a 90% chance) to escape from the
poverty trap, the chance for Bangladesh, Chad or Haiti to pull out is below 40%.
A remaining question is whether one may add more quali…cation to measuring in greater depth
such institutional barriers using the three selected trapped economies which we now pursue.
6.1.2.2 Calibrate by using both existing and imputed true arrival rate measures for
Bangladesh, Kenya and Nigeria
International organizations, such as the World Bank, the UN, the WHO, the IMF and other
non-pro…t private organizations, have provided help in the form of agriculture, health, education
and …nance, among other things, to developing countries for more than 50 years. Aid from the
governments of rich countries is often channeled to developing countries through these organizations.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has kept records of foreign
aid, including amounts committed and the amounts disbursed, by donor and by the sector donated
to. The data on disbursement and commitment are perfect for our purpose here. Aid from other
countries is like a gift from heaven. If a country is bad at allocating and distributing resources,
there are reasons to believe that the barriers in the economic system are large.26
Thus, data on foreign aid disbursement and commitment are collected from the OECD. In
particular, we focus on foreign aid in the health and the water sectors. Water resources are crucial for
good health, as not having sources of clean water is one of the main reasons why people easily get sick
in developing countries. Among all the aid related to health and water, we exclude aid designated
26

Aid sometimes comes in the form of a bundle with conditions, and may not match the demand needed so as

to result in a low disbursement-to-commitment ratio. Since the problems with foreign aid faced by all recipients
are the same, comparing the disbursement-to-commitment ratios still serves as a good way of gauging the extent of
institutional barriers rooted in the countries. The e¤ectiveness of foreign aid is not the focus of this paper, and hence
we shall dismiss the discussion on it. Readers interested in the e¤ectiveness of foreign aid are referred to Collier and
Dollar (2001, 2002).

35

for administration and management purposes, water resources protection and river development
to focus on aid that is actually designated for helping and promoting good health for people.
Table 10 reports the computed disbursement-to-commitment rates (utilization) of foreign aid for
Bangladesh, Kenya and Nigeria for the period 2006-2008. Aid is fungible within sectors, and hence
the disbursement-to-commitment ratio could be larger than one.
From Table 10, Bangladesh performs better in disbursing aid designated for improving health,
while Nigeria performs better when it comes to improving water supply and sanitation. Kenya
performs the worst among the three countries. The disbursement-to-commitment ratios for aid
designated to be used for primary health, family planning, and water supply and sanitation for
Bangladesh, Kenya and Nigeria are 0:6802, 0:5821 and 0:7844, respectively. The interpretation of
these numbers is that, for a dollar thrown into these economic systems, only about 0:7, 0:6 and 0:8
dollars are actually being delivered to their designated destinations, respectively. However, being
delivered does not guarantee arrival. What is the percentage of these outgoing resources actually
reaching the destination?
Below we provide a brief summary of cases regarding the leakages and corruption problems in
Bangladesh, Kenya and Nigeria. We excerpt cases of in‡ated investments and leakages in drugrelated issues. Corruption in the provision of medical services such as absenteeism among doctors
and illegal payments for services are also important problems in these countries. However, our
purpose is to calculate the “true arrivals” –resources distributed that eventually reach patients or
meet the goal, and hence we only focus on cases of excess costs of investments and leakages in the
system and do not consider other corruption cases here.
(i) Bangladesh: Hossain and Osman (2007) provide a very detailed summary of cases of corruption
in the health sector in Bangladesh. For example, massive corruption in accepting tender
bids for purchasing medical equipment for government hospitals was detected according to a
newspaper report. In one case, the lowest bid price was about 50% higher than the estimated
cost, while in another, the bid price had been 100% higher than the estimated cost. Although
there was no detection of large scale drugs leakage in the records of transactions between the
district and upazila (subdistrict) facilities, there is some evidence that union facilities received
less (around 93%) of the supplies that were recorded as having been sent (FMRP 2006). A
comparison of the average drugs issued to patients as recorded by facilities compared against
that reported by patients, however, suggests that it may be through in‡ated patient numbers
that the leakage is adjusted. The Social Sector Performance Survey of primary health found
that facilities were recording drug issues equivalent to two to three times the amount the
patients reported receiving (FMRP 2006) – representing a 50% to 66% leakage in issuing
drugs.
(ii) Kenya: Nafula et al. (2004) conducted a public expenditure tracking survey on the education,
36

health and agricultural sectors to identify constraints in service delivery and leakages of public
resources at various levels. The main …ndings in the health sector are summarized as follows.
In the health sector, about 85% of the health facilities had inadequate medical supplies,
and only 69:7% of the drugs released by the districts reached the health facilities. In a
survey conducted by the Kenya Anti-Corruption Commission in 2010 on a sample of facility
managers, health care sta¤ and patients, 24:8% of the health providers cited procurement of
sub-standard/poor quality drugs, 34:2% cited manipulation of tender documents, and 31:7%
mentioned misappropriation of supplies.
(iii) Nigeria: Project costs in Nigeria are some 25% higher than the norm for sub-Saharan Africa
(or a 20% leakage) and infrastructure projects are generally more than twice the size needed
to meet foreseeable demand. Many public sector investment projects are not viable from the
start, with actual capacity utilization rates estimated to be about 30% against planned rates of
80%. The overcharging and oversizing of public investment projects has led to excessive costs
in the range of 50% of total investment. During 1973-1990, the Nigerian government spent an
estimated US$115 billion on public investment projects, while an e¢ cient and e¤ective public
investment program could have yielded the same output results for about US $58 billion
(Husain and Faruqee 1994, excerpted from Moser, Rogers and Til 1997, p.37). Based on a
public expenditure tracking survey conducted during April –June 2002 on a sample of 30 local
governments, 252 health facilities and more than 700 health workers in the states of Lagos
and Kogi in Nigeria, Das Gupta et al. (2004) found evidence of a large-scale leakage of public
resources away from original allocations in Kogi.
Based on the cases listed above, we determine that Bangladesh has a leakage of roughly 50%
66% in both health facility investments and drugs issuing, so that the average leakage is around
58%. For Kenya, we take the number of cases of drug leakage to be 1
the cases reveal roughly a 25%

69:7% = 30:3%. For Nigeria,

50% leakage in investment projects, and we determine that the

average leakage for Nigeria is around 37:5%. Together with the disbursement to commitment ratio
calculated above, the true arrival rates of resources are 0:2827, 0:4057 and 0:4903 for Bangladesh,
Kenya and Nigeria respectively, which are measured by,
True arrival rate rate =
Finally, the implied

disbursement
commitment

(1-leakage rate)

under this method for the three trapped countries are computed using the

ratio:
Imputed

=

1-true arrival rate
.
true arrival rate

which are 2:5004, 1:4647 and 1:0398, respectively, as summarized in Panel (2) of Table 11.

37

Now, by taking the simple average of the

obtained using the two methods, we compute the

for Bangladesh, Kenya and Nigeria as 2:5626, 1:7436 and 1:6659 (see the second of the last row in
Table 11). The severity of these barrier measures can then be compared with the country-speci…c

c

obtained for the three countries in Section 6.1.1, which are conveniently reported in the last row of
Table 11. The results indicate that these three trapped economies all experience severe institutional
problems, and the severity of the institutional barriers far outweighs the extent of the problems
that these countries can bear. With the presentation of such severe institutional problems, there is
no doubt that the e¤ectiveness of aid is low, and incentives to invest in a better future are greatly
reduced.
To address this quantitatively, we again resort to the social waste measures for these countries.
The results are reported in Table 12. Recall that the social waste associated with institutional
barriers to health for the U.S. is about 15% of the national average investment in health. The
comparable social waste …gures rise all the way to 62

72:4% in the three trapped economies under

this study, about 4 to 5 times as much as for the U.S. in comparison. These latter …gures are also
striking: about two thirds of the health investment in these countries has been wasted.
In conclusion, “how to rectify the institution” must be regarded as a priority for the countries
that lag behind if they are to manage to step onto the right track toward a better future. One
question that naturally arises after seeing the results presented here is: Why can some initially poor
countries grow at a miraculous speed and move out of poverty? Do they really perform better in
terms of their institutions? This is the question to which we now turn.

6.2

Middle-income-low countries

After reviewing the cases of three trapped countries, now we switch our attention to middle-incomelow countries. In particular, we choose to study China and India since both have large populations
and were poor initially, but both of them have exhibited rapid economic growth for over a decade.
We proceed to calibrate for both nations. Since they are not “trapped”, the calibration procedure
is the same as the benchmark calibration for the U.S. What is worth mentioning is that China and
India are still at the stage of transition and have not reached the BGP yet. Hence, when calibrating
for China and India, we adjust the economic growth rates down to 3% so as to match the notion
of the BGP. While the procedure is the same as in the benchmark calibration, the assumptions
regarding the health capital share, the inborn health share and the innate knowledge share still
need to be adjusted. Similar to what we have done in the calibration for the trapped economies,
based on the assumptions for the U.S. economy, we adjust the health capital share according to the
relative health conditions and educational attainment in China and India. Inborn health and innate
ability are also adjusted according to health conditions and the educational attainment, respectively.
Again, parental education time investment is adjusted according to fertility rates since there are no
38

available time use surveys in China and India. For China, we take a capital income share of 0:4 and
a real return of (physical) capital at 7:5%.27 For India, we set the capital income share to be

1
3

and

the real return of (physical) capital at 6:8% as this is the average interest rate during 1981-2000
obtained from the World Bank. We use the same method to calibrate for the technology scaling
factor in the human capital sector with data on mortality rates and years of schooling.
Table 9 reports the results of calibration for China and India, and Table 12 compares the
severity of the institutional barriers and the thresholds of the severity for the countries studied in
this paper. The message is clear: although they still have low income levels at the current stage,
middle-income-low countries experience fewer problems with institutional barriers. The wastage
shares of middle-income-low countries fall in the range of 30%

35%, a little more than twice the

comparable measure for the U.S. and about half those for the trapped economies. Most importantly,
such barriers are low enough for them to take o¤ and to proceed along the right track of development.

7

Conclusion

Why are some poor countries trapped in poverty while others have successfully stepped out of the
trap and have moved forward toward prosperity? This paper delivers a simple message: it is because
the health-related institutional barriers in trapped economies are too large that individuals have
fewer opportunities to invest in their o¤spring and this results in a vicious cycle of poor health, low
investments and bad institutions. How, then, can these countries be rescued from the poverty trap?
Straightening the institutions to ensure correct incentives is therefore the …rst priority. Pulling a
country out of poverty does not call for an eradication of the institutional barriers either completely
or substantially: as long as the country overcomes the threshold institutional barriers, the country
is on the right track to development and a better future.
Along these lines, there are at least two major extensions that are worth considering. The …rst
has to do with the provision of policy prescriptions as to how to correct the institutional problems
laid out in this study. Although exogenously set in our model for analytic convenience, in reality,
institutional barriers are often an endogenous outcome of the natural environment, the perceptions
and beliefs of people, and the di¤erent political economy forces. Hence, institutions would evolve
as time goes by and endogenizing institutions may generate rich feedback to economic performance.
Should such channels be built in, one may then perform counterfactual analysis to evaluate various
27

Bai, Hsieh and Qian (2006) estimate the return on capital in China and …nd that the return on capital after 1998

has been stable at roughly 20%, and the implied capital share is 0.58. The average real interest rate obtained from
the World Bank during 1980-2009 is about 2%. In a discussion note written by Blanchard (2006), using individual
…rm data from the OECD, the return on capital obtained is lower than that reported by Bai et al. (2006), and ranges
between 4.8% - 15%, varying across ownership types. Hence, our choice of a 7.5% return on capital and 0.4 capital
income share are acceptable.

39

policy tools in the interest of pulling an economy out of the poverty trap in the shortest possible
time span under a given level of resources. Another important issue is: while health institutions are
crucial for the pulling out of trapped economies at their current development stage, are educational
factors going to step in to play a more signi…cant role at a later stage to speed up the process of
the pulling out? That is, might the priority shift from health institutions to educational factors as
time goes by? This is highly likely because, as health conditions improve, the incentive to invest
in education and the e¤ectiveness of such investments must rise. One may thus expect the role of
educational factors to increase along the path toward economic takeo¤. These avenues of studies,
while beyond the scope of the present paper, are important and interesting directions for future
research.

40

References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron and Simon Johnson (2007) “Disease and Development: The E¤ect of Life
Expectancy on Economic Growth,” Journal of Political Economy 115, 925–984.
[2] Azariadis, Costas and Allan Drazen (1990) “Threshold Externalities in Economic Development,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 105(2), 501-526.
[3] Bai, Chong-En, Chang-Tai Hsieh and Yingyi Qian (2006) “The Return to Capital in China,”
NBER Working Paper No. 12755.
[4] Barro, Robert and Jong-Wha Lee (2012), “A New Data Set of
Attainment in the World,
1950-2010,” Journal of Development
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jdeveco.2012.10.001.

Educational
Economics,

[5] Blanchard, Olivier (2006) “Discussion of “The return to capital in China” by Chong-En Bai,
Chang-Tai Hsieh,” http://economics.mit.edu/…les/679.
[6] Buera, Francisco J. and Yongseok Shin (2013), “Financial Frictions and the Persistence of
History: A Quantitative Exploration,” Journal of Political Economy 121(2), 221-272.
[7] Chakraborty, Shankha (2004) “Endogenous Lifetime and Economic Growth,” Journal of Economic Theory 116, 119–137.
[8] Collier, Paul and David Dollar (2001) “Can the World Cut Poverty in Half? How Policy
Reform and E¤ective Aid Can Meet International Development Goals,” World Development
29, 1787-1802.
[9] Collier, Paul and David Dollar (2002) “Aid Allocation and Poverty Reduction,” European
Economic Review 46(8), 1475-1500.
[10] Cunha, F. and James Heckman (2007) “The Technology of Skill Formation,” The American
Economic Review 97(2), 31-47.
[11] Das Gupta, Monica, Varun Gauri and Stuti Khemani (2004) “Decentralized Delivery of Primary Health Services in Nigeria: Survey Evidence from the States of Lagos and Kogi,” Africa
Region Human Development Working Paper 70. Human Development Sector, Africa Region,
The World Bank.
[12] Easterly, William (2001). The Elusive Quest for Growth: Economists’ Adventures and Misadventures in the Tropics. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
[13] Ehrlich, Isaac and Francis T. Lui (1999) “Bureaucratic Corruption and Endogenous Economic
Growth,” Journal of Political Economy 107(S6), S270-S293.
[14] Ehrlich, Issac and Hiroyuki Chuma (1990) “A Model of The Demand for Longevity and the
Value of Life Extension,” Journal of Political Economy 98, 761-782.
[15] FMRP (2006). Social Sector Performance Surveys: Primary Health and Family Planning in
Bangladesh: Assessing Service Delivery, OPM, Oxford and Financial Management Reform
Programme, Dhaka.
[16] Galor, Oded and David N. Weil (2000) “Population, Technology, and Growth: From Malthusian
Stagnation to the Demographic Transition and Beyond,” The American Economic Review
90(4), 806-828.
41

[17] Glomm, Gerhard and B. Ravikumar (1992) “Public versus Private Investment in Human Capital: Endogenous Growth and Income Inequality,”Journal of Political Economy 100(4), 818-834.
[18] Grossman, Michael (1972) “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health,”
Journal of Political Economy 80, 223-255.
[19] Grossman, Michael (1998) “On Optimal Length of Life,” Journal of Health Economics 17,
499-509.
[20] Grossman, Michael (2004) “The Demand for Health, 30 Years Later: A Very Personal Retrospective and Prospective Re‡ection,” Journal of Health Economics 23, 629-636.
[21] Heckman, James (2007) “The Economics, Technology and Neuroscience of Human Capability
Formation,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104(33), 13250-13255.
[22] Heston, Alan, Robert Summers and Bettina Aten (2009) Penn World Table Version 6.3, Center
for International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of Pennsylvania.
[23] Jayachandran, Seema and Adriana Lleras-Muney (2009) “Life Expectancy and Human Capital
Investments: Evidence from Maternal Mortality Declines,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (1), 349-397.
[24] Hossain, Naomi and Ferdous Osman (2007) “Politics and Governance in the Social Sectors in
Bangladesh, 1991-2006,” Research Monograph Series No. 34.
[25] Husain, Ishrat and Rashid Faruqee (Eds.) (1994) Adjustment in Africa: Lessons from Country
Case Studies. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
[26] Kendrick, John W. (1976) The Formation and Stocks of Total Capital. New York: Columbia
University Press.
[27] Lorentzen, P., J. McMillan and R. Wacziarg (2008) “Death and Development,” Journal of
Economic Growth 13, 81-124.
[28] Mauro, Paolo (1995) “Corruption and Growth,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(3): 681712.
[29] Manuelli, Rodolfo E. and Ananth Seshadri (2009) “Explaining International Fertility Di¤erences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(2), 771–807.
[30] Moser, Gary, Scott Rogers and Reinold van Til (1997). Nigeria: Experience With Structural
Adjustment, Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
[31] Nafula, Nancy N., Paul K. Kimalu, Jane Kiringai, Raphael Owino, Damiano K. Manda and
Stephen Karingi (2004) “Budget Mechanisms and Public Expenditure Tracking in Kenya,”
KIPPRA Discussion Paper No. 37.
[32] Narayan, Deepa, Raj Patel, Kai Scha¤t, Anne Rademacher, and Sarah Koch-Schulte (2000).
Voices of the Poor: Volume 1: Can Anyone Hear Us? New York: Oxford University Press.
[33] Narayan, Deepa, Robert Chambers, Meera Kaul Shah, and Patti Petesch (2000). Voices of the
Poor: Volume 2: Crying Out for Change. New York: Oxford University Press.
[34] Parente, Stephen L. and Edward C. Prescott (1994) “Barriers to Technology Adoption and
Development,” Journal of Political Economy 102(2), 298-321.
42

[35] Psacharopoulos, George (1994) “Returns to Investment in Education: A Global Update,”World
Development 22(9), 1325–1343.
[36] Rostow, Walt W. (1960) The Stages of Economic Growth. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
[37] Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny (1993) “Corruption,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
108(3), 599-617.
[38] Wang, Yin-Chi (2012) “Does Health Matter? A Quantitative Analysis of Cross Country Income Di¤erences,”chap. 1 in Altruistic Parenting, Intergenerational Transmission, and Human
Capital Accumulation, Ph.D. dissertation, Washington University in St. Louis: ProQuest/UMI.
(Publication No. AAT 3505934.)
[39] Weil, David N. (2007) “Accounting for the E¤ect of Health on Economic Growth,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 122(3), 1265–1306.

43

Appendix
In the Appendix, the proofs of Propositions 1 and 2, detailed mathematical derivations of the
comparative statics, and data details are provided.

A Mathematical appendix
This appendix provides detailed derivations for individual optimization and equilibrium outcomes
and characterization, as well as proofs for Propositions 1 and 2.
Individual Optimization
We solve the generation-t representative woman’s problem by deriving the …rst-order conditions
(FOCs). By substituting the time constraint (9) into the budget constraint when young (10), and
denoting 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , and 5 as the Lagrangian multipliers associated with (10), (11), (2), (7)
and (8), the FOCs with respect to cyt , cot+1 , st , Ht+1 , et , xt , ht+1 , and mt+1 are:
1
cyt

=

1;

(33)

(ht )
(1 + )cot+1

=

2;

(34)

1

=

2 Rt+1 ;

(35)

=

3;

(36)

=

1;

(37)

=

1 wt Ht ;

(38)

=

4;

(39)

) ht+1 mt+1 =

5:

(40)

Ht+1
4

xt

1 1
ht

5 mt
1 1
3 ht+1 mt+1
3 (1

We then combine (33)-(35) to derive (14). Substituting (33), (36) and (39) into (37) we derive (15).
Similarly, substituting (33), (36) and (40) into (38) yields (16). By using (2) and (8), (15) and (16)
can be further simpli…ed as (17) and (18).
Key Equilibrium Relationships
By imposing the BGP conditions and with the use of (21), (17) and (18) can be expressed in
stationary ratios as:
v =
z =

[ (e + )
(e + )
w(k) (e + )
:
(1
)

]

z;

(41)
(42)

By making use of budget constraints both when young and when old, substituting (14) into (11) to
y
Hc
obtain s = 1+
, and then plugging s and (41) into (10), another expression can be derived for z
and is given by (24). Equating (42) and (24) yields (23).

44

Existence and Uniqueness of the BGP Equilibrium
Theorem A (Nondegenerate and unique) Assume that
(1

(i)

(1

(ii)

)

DH +

)
DH +

(iii)

(1

(

> DH +

)
DH +

+ (1

)

(1 )
1+ (1

<

)

DH +
+ (1

,

)

>

1

(1+ )
(
)+(1+ )

)

,

.

Then there exists a unique nondegenerate BGP equilibrium.
Proof: First, ensure that the solution of e exists. To check whether the solution of e exists, di¤erentiate N M Ce with respect to e as follows:
@N M C (e)
@e

1

=

1

(e + )
e

+

1
(1
1

=

[ (e + )
2 (e + )2
[ (e + )
]
(e + )

1

e

DH +

e)2
2
4

(e + )2

+

[ (e+ )
(e+ )

DH +
1

e

]

]

3

5 > 0:

That is, N M Ce (e) is monotonically increasing in e. Since N M Be (e) is monotonically decreasing
(
)
in e, when N M Be (0) = (1 ) > N M Ce (0) = DH +
, N M Be (e) and N M Ce (e) must
have a unique intersection and hence the solution to e exists and is unique. This gives condition
(i). Then, from (23), e can be solved as:
(1
e =
For the economy not to degenerate,
e into the inequality yields
(1

)

DH +

DH +

+ (1

:

)

(e + ) > 1 must be satis…ed and hence e >

)
DH +

DH +
+ (1

)

>

1

1

. Substituting

;

which is condition (iii). Now, we turn to …nd the condition to ensure that the interior solution of
(v; k) exists and is unique. It can be observed that the IT locus is monotonically increasing in k,
@IT
while the KE locus is strictly concave in k. Thus, @KE
@k jk=0 > @k jk=0 guarantees that the IT and
the KE loci only intersect once. Di¤erentiating the KE and the IT loci with respect to k yields:
@KE
@k
k!0+ @IT
@k

lim

=

1
k!0+ 1+

=

1
1+

lim

2 (e+ ) (1- ) (1-e)
e+
[ (e+ ) - ] (1- ) Ak -1 [ (e+ ) - ]

(1- ) (1-e)
[ (e+ ) - ]
(1
) (1 e)
[ (e + )
]

e+
[ (e + )

45

]

> 1:

Rearranging the above inequality leads to:
(1
)
1+
(1

e<

(1 + )
(
) + (1 + )

)

:

Plugging e into the above equation yields:
(1

)

DH +

DH +

+ (1

(1
)
1+
(1

<

)

(1 + )
(
) + (1 + )

)

,

which gives condition (ii). In short, condition (i) ensures that a unique solution for e exists, while
condition (ii) ensures that with the equilibrium e given by (23), the solution for (v; k) is unique.
Hence, conditions (i) and (ii) guarantee that the BGP equilibrium is unique. Condition (iii) further
guarantees that the BGP equilibrium is nondegenerate.
Proof of Proposition 1
The su¢ cient conditions for the corner solution are:
(a) limk!0
(b)

@IT
@k

>

@KE
@k
@IT
@k

@KE
@k

< 1;
for all k:

That is, the su¢ cient conditions are that (i) the slope of the KE locus is smaller than the IT
locus as k approaches zero, and (ii) the slope of the KE locus is always smaller than the slope of
the IT locus. If (b) is violated, the KE locus may intercept the IT locus twice. From the proof of
Theorem A:
@KE
@k
@IT
@k

=
=

1
1+
(1
(1 + )

(1- ) (1-e)
[ (e+ ) - ]
"
e+
1 e
)
(1
[ (e + )

(1
)
(1 + ) [ (e + )
< 1 for all k.
=

]

)

2 (e + ) (1- ) (1-e)
e+
[ (e+ ) - ] (1- ) Ak -1 [ (e+ ) - ]
#
(e + ) (1 e)
]
[ (e + )
] (1
) Ak 1

1

e

e+
(1

(e + ) (1 e)
(1
) Ak 1

)

That is,
1
1
(1- ) A
(e+ ) (1-e)

e

e+
(1
)
(1 + )

e
e+
(1

)

e+
(1+ )
1-e(1- )

(e + ) (1 e)
(1
) Ak 1
[ (e + )
]
(1
)

[ (e+ ) - ]
(1- )

46

<
<

(1 + )

[ (e + )
]
;
(1
)
(e + ) (1 e) 1
k
;
(1
)A

1
1

< k; for all k 2 R+ :

Hence, (b) is satis…ed if
(1
)A
(e + ) (1 e)

1

e+
(1

e
1

(1

) (1

(1 + )
)
e+
(1
)
(e + )
(1
)
[ (1

e
e)

[ (e + )
]
(1
)
(1 + ) [ (e + )
(1
)
(1 + ) [ (e + )
(1 + )
[
) + 1 + (1 + )
]

1
1

< 0
]

< 0

] < 0
]
< e

Substituting the equilibrium e into the above inequality implies:
(1

)
1+

1+
H

1+

+

H

1+

+

+ (1

>

)

(1

)
[ (1

(1 + )
[
) + 1 + (1 + )

]
]

( )

where ( ) is decreasing in the severity of institutional barriers to health ( ) but is independent
of it. By straightforward manipulation, this inequality can be further simpli…ed to,
[

>

+ (1

) ]

f (1 +
)
[ ( + )

[1 + (1
]

(1

))]g

which yields the condition in the proposition.
Proof of Proposition 2
Take the total di¤erentiation of (23) with respect to :
1
e+
1
e+

1
1

e

(1
)
[ (e + )
1
2 de = f+g de + 1
e
(e + )
(e + )
[ (e + )
]
(1
)
d =
f+g +
de:
2
(e + )
(e + )

]

d

d ;

The term before d can be rearranged as:
1
e+

1
1

e

[ (e + )
(e + )

]

=

1
e+

1

1

1

[ (e + )
e

]

:

This term > 0 i¤
1
e<

:

1

By substituting e into the above inequality, we have:
(1

)
DH +

DH +
+ (1

1
)

<

1

;

which gives the condition in the Proposition. Once this condition is imposed, all the comparative
statics follow in a straightforward manner.

47

B Data
B.1 Data
All data series were retrieved from the Penn World Table (PWT) 6.3, the United Nations Data
Retrieval System (UNdata, data.un.org/Default.aspx), the World Bank, the Barro-Lee educational
attainment dataset (2010), and the OECD online database.
Penn World Table 6.3: Real GDP per capita (rgdpl)
UNdata –National Account o¢ cial country data
Table 4.1:
I. Production account –Uses: Consumption of Fixed Capital (D) (SNA93 item code K.1)
II.1.1. Generation of income accounts: Resources Gross Domestic Product, Uses Compensation
of Employees (CE) (SNA93 item code B.1*g and D.1)
III.1 Capital account –Changes in Assets: Gross Fixed Capital Formation (I) (SNA93 item code
P.51)
World Bank
World Bank indicators –Real Interest Rate (data.worldbank.org/indicator)
World Development Indicators (WDI) and Global Development Finance (GDF) database: Life
expectancy at birth, Mortality rate under 5, Fertility rate, Health Expenditure per Capita (% of
GDP, private, public, and total)
Barro-Lee educational attainment dataset (2010)
Average Years of Total Schooling, age 15 and over
Transparency International
Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI), year 2005
OECD
International Development Statistics (IDS) online databases, http://www.oecd.org/dac/stats/idsonline.htm

B.2 List of countries and details of panel regression analysis
Below we list the countries with complete data and hence being examined under the regression
analysis in Section 2. The results of the country …xed e¤ects in the panel regression analysis are
provided as well.
All countries (134 countries)
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Democratic Republic of Congo, Republic of Congo, Costa Rica,
Cote d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Korea, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Latvia,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,

48

Moldova, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovak
Republic, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria,
Tajikistan, Tanzania, Thailand, Trinidad & Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Trapped economies (34 countries)
Afghanistan, Albania, Bangladesh, Benin, Bolivia, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Democratic
Republic of Congo, Republic of Congo, Cote d’Ivoire, Gambia, Ghana, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Kenya, Liberia, Malawi, Mali, Mongolia, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Papua New Guinea,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Panel regression analysis
Most countries have country …xed e¤ects statistically signi…cant at 5% or below. For brevity, we
only list countries with country …xed e¤ects that are NOT statistically signi…cant at the 5% level.
Panel regression - all countries
Regression (1): Benin, Burundi, Cambodia, China, Democratic Republic of Congo, Gambia,
Ghana, Laos, Malawi, Mali, Mongolia, Nepal, Niger, Rwanda, Sudan, Tajikistan, Uganda,
Vietnam, Yemen, Zambia.
Regression (2): Benin, Burundi, Cambodia, China, Ghana, Kenya, Laos, Lesotho, Malawi,
Mali, Mongolia, Niger, Rwanda, Sudan, Tajikistan, Uganda, Vietnam, Yemen, Zambia.
Regression (3): Cameroon, Cote d’Ivoire, Haiti, India, Kenya, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Papua
New Guinea, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Syria, Tajikistan, Zimbabwe.
Regression (4): Cameroon, China, Cote d’Ivoire, Haiti, India, Iraq, Nicaragua, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Sierra Leone, Syria, Tajikistan, Zimbabwe.
Regression (5): Cameroon, Cote d’Ivoire, India, Kenya, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Papua New
Guinea, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Syria, Tajikistan, Zimbabwe.
Regression (6): Cameroon, China, Cote d’Ivoire, Haiti, India, Iraq, Kenya, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Syria, Tajikistan, Zimbabwe.
Panel regression - trapped economies
The information for the country …xed e¤ects of trapped economies is provided in Note 2 in
Table 4.

49

Table 1. Performances: Comparison across countries
High Income
USA
Growth rate per
capita,
2.13
1970-2007
Per capita GDP/GDPUS
1970
1.00
1980
1.00
1990
1.00
2000
1.00
2005
1.00
2007
1.00

UK

Japan

Middle Income High
Germany

Greece Korea

Argentina

Middle Income Low

Brazil

Colombia

Trap

Egypt

Turkey

China

India

Bangladesh Cambodia

Ghana Kenya Nigeria

Malawi

Zambia

2.27

2.14

1.92

2.26

5.74

0.92

1.93

1.87

3.19

2.24

7.62

3.11

1.12

1.10

0.76

0.42

0.01

1.92

-0.89

0.70
0.69
0.69
0.69
0.72
0.75

0.70
0.76
0.86
0.73
0.71
0.70

0.76
0.80
0.79
0.74
0.71
0.73

0.57
0.65
0.52
0.51
0.61
0.65

0.14
0.22
0.40
0.49
0.53
0.55

0.57
0.51
0.29
0.32
0.32
0.36

0.24
0.35
0.26
0.22
0.21
0.22

0.19
0.22
0.19
0.17
0.17
0.18

0.11
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.13

0.17
0.17
0.17
0.16
0.17
0.18

0.03
0.04
0.06
0.11
0.15
0.20

0.06
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.08
0.09

0.09
0.06
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05

0.09
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07

0.10
0.07
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.04

0.10
0.08
0.06
0.05
0.05
0.05

0.07
0.07
0.04
0.03
0.04
0.06

0.04
0.05
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03

0.19
0.08
0.05
0.02
0.04
0.05

Years of schooling
1970

10.77

7.29

8.20

5.02

6.52

6.34

6.30

2.81

3.92

1.31

2.43

3.43

1.57

1.38

5.06

3.58

2.17

NA

1.57

2.98

1980

12.03

7.71

9.25

5.61

7.10

8.29

7.30

2.77

4.90

2.65

3.55

4.75

2.34

2.25

5.31

5.05

3.79

NA

2.33

4.13

1990

12.15

8.13

9.97

8.04

8.58

9.35

8.34

4.46

5.99

4.38

5.01

5.62

3.45

3.16

5.54

6.17

5.60

NA

2.89

4.89

2000

12.71

8.81

10.92

9.95

8.89

11.06

8.73

6.41

6.91

5.91

6.08

7.11

4.20

4.48

5.79

7.12

6.62

NA

3.48

6.13

2005

12.09

9.21

11.26

11.85

9.89

11.47

9.13

7.17

7.05

6.59

6.47

7.62

4.68

5.20

5.90

7.50

7.10

5.00

4.38

6.33

Life expectancy at birth
1960

69.77

71.13

67.67

69.54

68.85

54.15

65.22

54.50

56.72

45.93

50.26

46.60

42.43

40.26

42.40

45.86

46.33

38.00

37.77

45.08

1970

70.81

71.97

71.95

70.46

71.84

61.25

66.59

58.56

60.88

50.43

55.69

61.97

48.83

44.10

43.63

48.93

52.19

42.00

40.52

48.97

1980

73.66

73.68

76.09

72.63

74.36

65.80

69.51

62.49

65.48

56.56

60.33

65.97

55.12

47.74

39.97

53.09

57.69

45.00

44.77

51.90

1990

71.80

75.88

79.10

75.40

77.00

71.80

72.50

66.70

68.30

62.89

64.70

68.40

57.60

54.40

54.85

58.40

59.80

46.00

46.70

52.00

2000

76.90

77.86

81.30

78.30

78.20

76.00

74.60

70.30

70.99

68.23

69.90

71.20

60.90

61.20

56.88

58.30

51.30

46.00

47.30

43.10

2005

77.74

79.07

81.93

79.31

79.17

78.43

74.77

71.65

72.27

69.54

71.39

72.58

62.78

64.59

59.26

56.53

52.41

49.00

51.03

42.82

2008
78.30 79.90
Mortality under 5 (per 1000)
1960
30.00 26.10

82.80

80.20

80.10

79.80

75.50

73.30

72.98

70.14

74.30

73.80

64.30

64.70

60.97

61.90

54.30

50.00

52.90

48.20

40.90

40.00

46.00

137.50

71.70

177.70

143.60

303.60

217.50

NA

240.10

243.20

NA

212.30 201.40

NA

360.40

212.70

1970

23.20

20.80

17.40

26.00

31.80

52.00

69.40

135.00

104.00

236.30

200.40

116.60 186.40

236.40

NA

183.00 151.80

251.00

323.30

177.90

1980

14.90

14.20

9.90

15.30

19.80

19.60

43.40

90.40

51.90

176.30

136.50

59.10

148.90

203.50

153.40

149.20 110.20

216.00

253.50

159.80

1990

11.20

9.50

6.20

8.60

10.50

8.70

27.90

55.70

35.00

89.50

84.20

45.50

118.20

147.50

116.70

120.10

99.10

213.00

218.10

178.60

2000

8.40

6.60

4.40

5.30

6.50

6.40

20.70

34.00

26.10

46.60

41.60

36.00

92.70

89.60

106.40

105.80 104.70

186.00

164.40

165.70

Notes: 1. The growth rate refers to the geometric average growth rate of GDP per capita for the years from 1970 to 2007.
2. Source: Data for GDP per capita, Penn World Table 6.3; years of schooling, Barro-Lee (2010), and the UN for Nigeria; life expectancy, fertility and others, the World Bank.

Table 2. Performances: Comparison across the 41 trapped countries

Country
Afghanistan

Per
capita
GDP
growth
rate (%)

Per capita
real GDP
relative to
US, 1970
(%)

Per capita
real GDP
relative to
US, 2000
(%)

Investment
share, % of
real GDP
per capita

Public
health
exp., %
of GDP

Life
Life
Health
expectancy expectancy
exp.,%
at 25,
at birth,
of GDP
1960-2011 2000-2005

Mortality Fertility
rate,
rate,
1960-20
under-5
(per 1,000) 11

Implied
Years of
2005 Implied
social
schooling
CPI δ from
waste
15+,
Score CPI
(%)
2000

-0.37

4.31

0.85

13.96

1.43

6.29

40.3

36.5

226.4

7.63

2.82

2.5

1.6129

61.7

Albania

1.69

12.09

7.98

38.70

2.35

5.97

70.7

52.7

31.5

3.58

9.91

2.4

1.7025

63.0

Angola

1.45

17.47

7.74

18.54

2.18

2.68

41.3

38.6

222.2

6.96

No data

2

2.1505

68.3

Bangladesh

1.12

8.80

4.72

9.72

1.17

3.16

56.2

45.1

155.8

5.04

4.48

1.7

2.6249

72.4

Benin

0.96

5.49

3.60

10.84

2.15

4.52

46.5

45.5

198.3

6.44

3.11

2.9

1.3163

56.8

Bolivia

0.73

14.97

8.16

10.91

3.38

5.31

55.0

46.2

150.5

5.20

8.29

2.5

1.6129

61.7

Burkina Faso

1.49

4.32

2.95

10.76

2.67

5.53

46.4

40.3

232.0

6.56

No data

3.4

1.0436

51.1

Burundi

-0.62

4.36

1.83

4.35

3.15

8.82

45.7

38.3

193.6

6.23

2.53

2.3

1.7999

64.3

Cambodia

1.10

9.03

4.51

5.05

1.72

6.26

49.8

42.1

105.1

5.10

5.79

2.3

1.7999

64.3

Cameroon

0.89

8.61

6.44

7.78

1.07

4.72

49.3

38.6

168.8

5.72

5.43

2.2

1.9062

65.6

Chad

0.79

8.04

2.92

8.47

1.87

5.38

47.1

40.5

211.6

6.53

No data

1.7

2.6249

72.4

Congo, Dem. Rep.

-4.03

7.40

1.02

5.30

1.37

5.14

45.4

39.6

194.2

6.53

3.36

2.1

2.0225

66.9

Congo, Rep.

1.33

7.26

6.55

7.87

1.49

2.68

54.6

39.2

128.8

5.57

5.86

2.3

1.7999

64.3

Cote d`Ivoire

-0.27

12.30

5.65

7.42

1.16

5.04

49.1

40.5

181.1

6.54

3.86

1.9

2.2920

69.6

Ethiopia

0.43

5.01

2.39

4.74

2.41

4.39

47.1

40.7

183.1

6.43

No data

2.2

1.9062

65.6

Gambia

0.07

6.63

3.24

9.03

2.49

5.77

48.1

40.3

204.5

5.87

2.64

2.7

1.4536

59.2

Ghana

0.76

10.38

3.66

7.40

2.87

6.36

54.6

42.6

140.3

5.82

6.57

3.5

0.9985

50.0

Guyana

0.29

11.35

5.91

52.16

4.48

5.51

60.7

45.2

64.0

3.68

8.09

2.5

1.6129

61.7

Haiti

-0.11

8.03

4.41

12.34

1.59

5.70

52.9

42.9

165.3

5.24

4.46

1.8

2.4492

71.0

Honduras

1.18

12.81

8.17

24.32

3.47

5.94

61.9

50.5

89.4

5.56

6.20

2.6

1.5302

60.5

Kenya

0.42

9.64

5.10

10.16

1.79

4.33

54.6

36.2

120.9

6.56

6.62

2.1

2.0225

66.9

Liberia

-4.18

11.52

1.27

12.40

2.13

8.10

44.3

43.9

221.8

6.35

3.43

2.2

1.9062

65.6

Madagascar

-0.70

7.23

2.43

4.27

2.35

3.66

51.5

43.9

143.2

6.29

No data

2.8

1.3825

58.0

Malawi

1.92

4.28

2.63

13.47

3.52

6.26

44.8

35.6

240.7

6.79

3.48

2.8

1.3825

58.0

Mali

1.86

3.50

2.93

7.63

2.60

6.11

41.4

37.8

290.9

6.86

1.21

2.9

1.3163

56.8

Mongolia

1.87

6.54

4.60

36.29

3.55

4.88

59.3

44.2

90.0

4.96

7.82

3

1.2545

55.6

Mozambique

1.51

7.51

3.27

4.00

3.61

5.13

43.1

37.4

218.9

6.13

1.05

2.8

1.3825

58.0

Nepal

1.38

5.87

4.56

15.83

1.56

5.44

52.3

45.4

164.8

5.07

2.93

2.5

1.6129

61.7

Nicaragua

-1.52

20.47

5.48

27.83

4.36

8.01

61.5

49.6

95.7

5.14

5.42

2.6

1.5302

60.5

Niger

-1.25

6.28

2.09

9.62

2.21

4.35

43.0

39.6

269.9

7.49

1.37

2.4

1.7025

63.0

Nigeria

1.46

7.33

3.45

9.90

1.69

5.50

45.1

38.4

215.3

6.28

5.00

1.9

2.2920

69.6

Papua New Guinea

1.31

6.50

5.70

19.84

3.02

3.74

53.0

41.0

109.3

5.24

3.47

2.3

1.7999

64.3

Rwanda

-0.11

7.47

2.54

3.59

3.21

6.67

44.4

36.1

187.5

7.16

3.18

3.1

1.1967

54.5

Senegal

-0.24

10.92

4.65

4.87

2.23

4.98

49.4

40.4

187.8

6.52

4.22

3.2

1.1425

53.3

Sierra Leone

-0.97

13.57

3.03

5.89

1.41

13.41

39.4

33.2

278.9

5.67

2.98

2.4

1.7025

63.0

Somalia

-1.85

4.59

1.22

21.11

No data

No data

44.0

40.6

180.0

6.78

No data

2.1

2.0225

66.9

Sudan

1.68

5.74

3.61

18.79

1.28

4.54

51.3

42.9

127.7

5.94

2.82

2.1

2.0225

66.9

Tanzania

1.12

3.00

1.89

10.29

2.33

4.49

49.8

37.7

163.2

6.28

4.73

2.9

1.3163

56.8

Uganda

0.16

5.74

2.78

3.46

1.80

7.19

48.6

34.4

169.1

6.94

4.32

2.5

1.6129

61.7

Zambia

-0.89

18.68

2.38

17.63

3.64

6.18

47.4

29.4

166.3

6.76

6.20

2.6

1.5302

60.5

Zimbabwe

-0.88

13.67

8.18

15.59

0.00

0.01

53.7

23.6

103.3

5.72

7.00

2.6

Average

0.27

8.75

4.06

13.22

2.26

5.32

49.9

40.4

170.5

6.03

4.59

2.5

1.5302
1.7054

60.5
63.0

Sub-Saharan Africa

0.08

8.20

3.50

9.49

2.09

5.24

47.3

38.5

191.2

6.40

4.09

2.5

1.6820

62.7

East Asia and the Pacific

1.42

7.36

4.94

20.39

2.76

4.96

54.0

42.4

101.5

5.10

5.69

2.5

1.6181

61.8

South Asia

0.71

6.32

3.38

13.17

1.39

4.96

49.6

42.31

182.36

5.91

3.41

2.23

1.9503

66.1

Latin America & the Caribbean

0.11

13.53

6.43

25.51

3.46

6.09

58.4

46.9

112.99

4.96

6.49

2.4

1.75

63.6

Europe & Central Asia

0.66

8.20

4.42

26.33

1.89

6.13

55.5

44.6

129.0

5.61

6.36

2.5

1.6577

62.4

Notes: 1. The per capita growth rate refers to the geometric average growth rate of GDP per capita for the years from 1970 to 2007;investment share (% of real
GDP per capita) is the average for the period 1970-2007; health expenditure (public and total,% of GDP) is the average of the available data from
1995-2010.
2. Source: Data for GDP per capita and investment share, Penn World Table 6.3; years of schooling, Barro-Lee (2010), and the UN for Nigeria; life
expectancy, fertility and mortality,the World Bank and the UN; 2005 CPI score, Transparency International.

Table 3(a). Cross-country regressions: All countries.

(1)
Log of investment share,% of GDP

0.478

****

[0.123]

Knowledge capital, 15+

3.197

****

[0.287]

(2)
0.269

(3)
**

[0.115]
2.798

****

[0.315]

Log of Fertility rate

(4)

(5)

(a)

(b)

(a)

(b)

0.146

0.136

0.148

0.0609

0.0558

[0.103]

[0.104]

[0.101]

[0.0946]

[0.0885]

***

0.926***

[0.330]

[0.309]

1.551

****

[0.345]
-0.395

****

[0.0647]

Log of public health expenditure, %
of GDP

1.610

****

[0.350]
-0.403

****

[0.0648]

1.589

****

[0.336]
-0.400

****

[0.0629]

-0.0219

-0.368

****

[0.0586]

**

-0.573****

[0.151]

CPI2005
Advanced economies

0.827

Sub-Saharan Africa
East Asia &the Pacific
South Asia
Europe &Central Asia

[0.325]

[0.0341]

0.148

0.213

[0.169]

[0.193]

[0.180]

-0.257

0.198

0.252

0.228

0.0592

-0.00809

[0.196]

[0.187]

[0.190]

[0.185]

[0.174]

[0.165]

*

*

-0.321

-0.461***

-0.0387

-0.175

-0.184

-0.321

[0.208]

[0.185]

[0.197]

[0.188]

[0.179]

[0.165]

*

-0.392

-0.489**

-0.366

-0.292

-0.293

-0.428

[0.286]

[0.252]

[0.271]

[0.252]

[0.245]

[0.219]

**

**

**

*

-0.275*

[0.167]

[0.156]

[0.147]

***

***

0.655

4.669

[0.0363]

[0.176]

***

[0.187]

Constant

0.881

****

0.219****

[0.164]

[0.192]

****

0.746

****

[0.135]
0.198****

[0.186]

-0.26

Middle East&North Africa

0.743

****

[0.0551]

[0.107]
-0.389

****

-0.356****

-0.146

[0.116]

Log of health expenditure, % of GDP

1.078

5.511

****

[0.417]

-0.417

[0.171]
0.656

****

[0.165]
8.048

****

[0.554]

-0.431

[0.171]
0.655

****

[0.166]
8.067

****

[0.555]

-0.434

0.526

[0.168]
8.734

****

[0.599]

-0.289

0.423

[0.155]
8.128

****

[0.499]

0.236
[0.153]
9.060****
[0.522]

Notes:
1. Sample size after dropping countries without observations: (1)-(3)=134, (4)(a,b)-(5)(a,b)=133.
2. Knowledge capital is computed using years of schooling of total population (age 15 and up) and Mincerian coefficients (Psacharopoulos (1994)).
3. Zimbabwe does not have health expenditure data in 2005 and hence is not included in the sample in (4) and (5).
4. Standard errors are in brackets. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01, **** p<0.001.

Table 3(b). Cross-country regressions: Trapped countries.

Variable

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
(a)

Log of investment share,% of GDP
Knowledge capital, 15+

(5)
(b)

(a)

(b)

0.0324

-0.0835

-0.0798

-0.0906

-0.08

-0.0909

-0.0852

[0.137]

[0.168]

[0.156]

[0.161]

[0.158]

[0.165]

[0.160]

***

**

1.400

[0.411]

1.078

[0.496]

Fertility rate

0.447

0.499

0.386

0.52

0.309

[0.532]

[0.561]

[0.557]

[0.593]

[0.578]

-0.243**

-0.245**

-0.232**

-0.241**

-0.237**

[0.103]

[0.110]

[0.108]

[0.115]

[0.110]

Log of public health expenditure, % of
GDP

0.0971

0.12

[0.174]

Log of total health expenditure, % of
GDP

[0.242]
-0.282

-0.331

[0.253]

[0.268]

CPI, 2005
Sub-Saharan Africa
East Asia &the Pacific
South Asia
Europe &Central Asia
Constant

-0.0435

0.149

[0.318]

[0.238]

-0.343

0.00897

0.0511

-0.0344

0.0617

-0.0782

[0.324]

[0.335]

[0.362]

[0.362]

[0.378]

[0.373]

0.118

0.00417

0.0363

-0.0436

0.0518

-0.0842

[0.387]

[0.362]

[0.377]

[0.370]

[0.401]

[0.380]

-0.219

-0.162

-0.0447

-0.247

-0.0262

-0.251

[0.409]

[0.379]

[0.433]

[0.400]

[0.462]

[0.405]

0.323

0.126

0.126

0.167

0.128

0.184

[0.587]

[0.549]

[0.571]

[0.562]

[0.583]

[0.570]

6.446****

7.155****

8.460****

8.348****

8.985****

8.399****

8.812****

[0.358]

[0.679]

[0.837]

[0.887]

[0.969]

[0.980]

[1.020]

Note:
Sample size after dropping countries with incomplete data: (1)-(3)=34, (4)(a,b)-(5)(a,b)=33. Standard errors are in brackets. *p<0.1, **p<0.05,
***
p<0.01, **** p<0.001.

Table 4. Panel regressions

(1)

Variable
Log of lagged investment share,% of GDP
Lagged knowledge capital, 15+

(2)

Trapped economies
(1)
(2)

(5)

(6)

0.105**

0.108**

0.078

0.079*

0.098

0.097**

0.126*

0.114**

[0.049]

[0.044]

[0.049]

[0.041]

[0.048]**

[0.040]

[0.068]

[0.046]

-0.330

-0.224

-0.387

-0.291

-0.789

-0.017

0.853

Lagged fertility rate

All countries
(3)
(4)

***

1.179

****

[0.316]

[0.294]

[0.394]

[0.348]

[0.382]

[0.336]

[0.513]

[0.349]

-0.009

0.030

0.022

0.067*

0.023

0.067*

-0.106*

-0.032

[0.040]

[0.040]

[0.040]

[0.036]

[0.040]

[0.035]

[0.060]

[0.052]

Log of lagged public health expenditure, % of

0.023

-0.019

-0.024

0.015

GDP
[0.029]
****

Constant

6.583

6.184

****

[0.029]
7.558

****

6.939

[0.029]

****

7.223

****

6.913

****

[0.027]
8.201

****

7.363****

[0.384]

[0.331]

[0.420]

[0.323]

[0.393]

[0.319]

[0.581]

[0.394]

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Time fixed effects

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

Time trend4

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

Country fixed effects2
3

Notes:
1. Total observations: 134 countries for all countries and 34 countries for trapped economies. Guyana is the benchmark. Standard errors are in parentheses. *p<0.1,
**
p<0.05, ***p<0.01, **** p<0.001.
2. Country fixed effects significant at 5% level: All countries: Regression (1): 114 out of 134 countries. Regression (2): 115 out of 134 countries. Regression (3):
121 out of 134 countries. Regression (4): 121 out of 134 countries. Regression (5): 122 out of 134 countries. Regression (6): 119 out of 134 countries. A detailed
list of countries with significant country fixed effects is provided in the Appendix. Trapped economies: Regression (1): 23 countries out of 34 countries have
country fixed effects significant at 5% level or below. The countries are Afghanistan, Albania, Benin, Bolivia, Burundi, Cameroon, Chad, Democratic Republic of
Congo, Republic of Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, Gambia, Honduras, Liberia, Malawi, Mali, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Rwanda, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, and
Zimbabwe. Regression (2): 22 countries out of 34 countries have country fixed effects significant at 5% level or below. The countries are Afghanistan, Albania,
Benin, Bolivia, Burundi, Cameroon, Democratic Republic of Congo, Republic of Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, Honduras, Liberia, Malawi, Mali, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Niger, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, Zimbabwe
3. All countries: Regression (3): Time fixed effects statistically significant at 5% or below for year 1971-1990 and 1996-2007. Regression (4): Time fixed effects
significant at 5% or below for all years. Trapped economies:
4. Time trend: t= year-1970. Coefficients for t are 0.017 and 0.022 for Regression (5) and Regression (6), respectively. Both are statistically significant at
conventional levels.

Table 5. Effects of changes in parameters on the equilibrium parental time devoted to educating a child
δ

πH

ϕ

ξ

0

-

+

0

Effects on health-human capital v

-

+

-

0

Effects on effective capital-labor ratio k

-

+

+

0

Increases in parameter
Effects on parental time devoted to
educating child e

Table 6. Parameters and targets for the U.S. calibration

Parameters

Value

Source/Target

Data
Annual economic growth rate

0.0213

Annual interest rate

0.055

Parental time devoted to educating child

e

Physical capital-to-human capital ratio

K/H

Physical capital share

α

Consumption-to-health expenditure ratio

0.14

y

c /x

1
0.32
9

PWT 6.3
1980-2005 average, the World Bank
American Time Use Survey, 2003-2008
Kendrick (1976)
Capital income share for the U.S.
Consumer health expenditure share ≒0.2
and 1/2 goes for children

Preset Variables
Time preference rate

ρ

Quality of life when old

πH

1.0938
0.9

Annual time preference rate 0.03
10% discount over the old age
consumption

Human capital technology scaling factor

B

1

Normalization

Health capital share

β

0.5

Assumed

Health capital-to-knowledge capital ratio

h/m

1

Assumed

Inborn health share

0.2

Assumed

Innate knowledge share

0.2

Assumed

Calibrated Parameters
Capital per effective labor

k

1.1628

Calculated from k=K/(H(1-e))

Altruistic factor

γ

0.6271

Calibrated

Good production scaling factor

A

10.3475

Calibrated

Health investment share

η

0.429

Calibrated

Health technology scaling factor

ξ

1.9151

Calibrated

Knowledge technology scaling factor

μ

9.6782

Match annual economic growth rate

Parental health transmission

ϕ

0.3387

Match inborn health share

Parental knowledge transmission

ψ

0.035

Severity of institutional barriers

δ

0.1698

Real rate of return on physical capital

R

3.813

Match innate knowledge share
Calibrated
Match annual interest rate 5.5%

Table 7. Comparative Statics– benchmark calibration

v

k

e

g

cy/x

z

h/m

h/H

m/H

BV

0.4579

1.1628

0.1400

1.6937

9.0000

4.1211

1.0000

1.0000

1.0000

γ

0.5106

-1.2490

0.9382

1.8326

-1.1231

-0.6412

-2.8988

-1.5061

1.6288

πH

0.1757

1.4878

-0.2823

-0.5513

0.0573

0.2335

1.7028

0.8337

-0.8033

ϕ

-0.2249

0.0212

0.0184

0.0360

0.2492

0.0215

0.6086

0.3020

-0.2953

ψ

0.0255

-0.0502

-0.2084

0.0813

-0.0083

0.0172

-0.1362

-0.0682

0.0684

μ

-0.2448

-1.4032

-0.0176

2.4055

-0.2320

-0.4739

-5.1010

-2.7379

3.1722

δ

-0.0216

-0.0673

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

-0.0216

-0.0430

-0.0215

0.0215

Note: BV=benchmark values of the variables.

Table 8. Calibration of the representative trapped economy
Data and Parameters
Data of the representative trapped economy
Relative real GDP per capita to the US
Ave. Model C/Model Y
Ave.I/Model Y
Ave τ (computed public health spending share)
2005 CPI Score (0 to 10)
Total fertility rate
Life expectancy at birth
Life expectancy at 25, 2000-2005
Mortality rate, under-5 (per 1,000)
Real interest rate
1970 - 2007 average real GDP per capita growth rate
Years of schooling, 15+, year 2000
Effective discounting:
Time preference rate
Quality of life when old
Parental time devoted to educating child
Parental time investment
Shares and great ratios:
Physical capital share
Aggregate consumption to output ratio
Investment-to-output ratio
Earmarking health tax

Source/Target
y
yEKS

g

US=100, year 2000, PWT 6.3
US=100, year 2000, PWT 6.3
PennWorld NIA data
PennWorld NIA data
PennWorld NIA data
Transparency International
WHO/World Bank
WHO/World Bank
WHO/World Bank
WHO/World Bank
IFS/World Bank
PennWorld NIA data, relative to US
Barro-Lee (2010)

ρ
πL

1.0938
0.555

Adjusted

e

0.0478

Adjusted according to fertility rate

α
C/Y
I/Y
τ

0.4659
0.7636
0.2125
0.0239

Calibrated
Data

K/H
k

0.5
0.5251

Adjust down by 0.6 (similar to
Kenya/Nigeria)
Assumed
Calibrated

h/m
YUS/Yi
β
B

0.1461
24.626
0.8
0.9782

Calibrated
Data
Same as Kenya/Nigeria
Calibrated

Real rate of return on physical capital
Physical capital-to-human capital ratio
Capital per effective labor
Human Capital Production Technology:
Health capital-to-knowledge capital ratio
Relative output ratio
Health capital share in human capital
Human capital technology factor
Intergenerational health and knowledge transmission:
Health investment share
Inborn health share
Innate knowledge share
Other Calibrated Parameters:
Altruistic factor
Goods production scaling factor
Knowledge technology scaling factor
Parental knowledge transmission
Health technology
Parental health transmission

4.0607
3.8546
76.36%
21.25%
2.4%
2.4707
6.0285
49.8701
40.4170
170.5291
8.77%
0.27%
4.5894

0.0526

η
hb
mb
γ
A
μ
ψ
ξ
ϕ

Institutional barriers and the corresponding social waste
US's δ
0.1698
a of the fitting function
1.8599
0.9501
δc of the representative trapped economy

0.5
0.5
0.6
0.8318
7.0890
8.9388
0.0718
1.2891
0.5345

Assumed
Assumed
Assumed
Calibrated
Calibrated
Match annual economic growth rate
Match innate knowledge share
Calibrated
Match inborn health share

US’s social waste

14.51%

Average social waste

48.72%

Table 9. Calibration results for Bangladesh, Kenya, Nigeria, China, India and the US

Parameters description
Effective discounting
Time preference rate

Trapped Economies
Bangladesh
Kenya
Nigeria

Middle-income-low
China
India

Developed
US

Source/Target

ρ

1.0938

1.0938

1.0938

1.0938

1.0938

1.0938

π

0.72

0.4018

0.4838

0.8253

0.72

0.9

45.07

36.16

38.44

50

45

54.38

0.096

0.058

0.048

0.1629

0.096

0.14

3

5

6

1.77

3

2.06

0.5227

0.3880

0.2460

0.4

0.3333

0.32

cy/x

-

-

-

15

17

9

Trapped economies:
calibrated; others:
imputed (based on
other research)
Data, adjusted

C/Y

0.733

0.79

0.85

-

-

-

Data, adjusted

I/Y

0.255

0.192

0.129

-

-

-

Data, adjusted

τ

0.012
0.06

0.018
0.05

0.021
0.05

0.075

0.068

0.055

Annual economic
g
0.0112
0.0042
growth rate
Physical
K/H
0.5
0.5
capital-to-human
capital ratio
Capital per effective
k
0.5532
0.5297
labor
Human Capital Production Technology:
Years of schooling,
E
4.477
6.624
15+, year 2000
Mortality rate under 5,
q
86
111
per 1000
h/m
0.297
0.1555
Health
capital-to-knowledge
capital ratio
21.186
19.61
Relative output ratio
YUS/
Yi
Health capital share
β
0.65
0.8
Human capital
B
0.4964
0.6973
technology factor
Intergenerational health and knowledge transmission:
Health investment
η
0.5
0.5

0.0146

0.03

0.03

0.0213

0.5

0.5

0.5

1

0.5253

0.5973

0.5532

1.1628

k=K/(H(1-e))

5

7.106

4.201

12.706

Barro and Lee (2010)

186

33

86

9

2000 data, World Bank

0.1230

0.4877

0.2603

1

Calibrated (US=1)

28.97

9.4607

14.0845

1

0.8
0.7347

0.5
0.3616

0.6
0.6385

0.5
1

PWT 6.3, year 2000
data
Imputed
Calibrated (US=1)

0.5

0.2345

0.1752

0.429

Quality of life when old
Life expectancy at 25

Parental time devoted to educating child
Parental time
e
investment

Fertility rate
Shares and great ratios:
Physical capital share

Consumption to health
investment ratio
Aggregate consumption
to output ratio
Investment-to-output
ratio
Earmarking health tax

Real rate of return on
physical capital

α

Annual time
preference rate 0.03
See text.
1995-2005 average,
UN
US: American Time
Use Survey,
2003-2008; others:
imputed based on US
number and fertility
circa 2000
World Bank, circa
2000

Data (Gh/Y)
World Bank, available
period, adjusted
PWT 6.3 (adjusted for
China and India)
US: Kendrick (1976);
others: imputed

Imputed. Middle

share
Inborn health share
hb
0.4
0.55
Innate knowledge share mb
Other Calibrated Parameters
Altruistic factor
γ
0.9309
Good production
A
8.3648
scaling factor
Knowledge technology
μ
6.1839
scaling factor
Parental knowledge
ψ
0.1175
transmission
Health technology
ξ
3.5257
Parental health
ϕ
0.5284
transmission
Health Barriers Threshold Implied from the Model
1.0853
Threshold of the
δc
severity of institutional
barriers

income: calibrated
Imputed
Imputed

0.6
0.5

0.6
0.6

0.3
0.3

0.4
0.6

0.2
0.2

0.7285
7.8704

0.8509
4.4009

0.8125
10.2617

0.9324
9.4965

0.6271
10.3475

9.9149

10.3369

8.9951

8.712

9.6782

0.056

0.0721

0.0698

0.1442

0.035

1.3660
0.6663

1.7154
0.7453

2.5199
0.6281

1.6439
0.8375

1.9151
0.3387

Calibrated
Calibrated

0.9561

1.5569

5.9125

5.8459

3.8686

Calibrated

Calibrated
Calibrated
Match annual
economic growth
Calibrated

Table 10. Aid to the Health and Water Sectors:

2006-2008 Average

Bangladesh
Commitment

Primary Health Care

Disbursement

Kenya
Utilization Commitment

Disbursement

Nigeria
Utilization Commitment Disbursement Utilization

146.3437

171.7559

1.1736

521.8655

342.1186

0.6556

580.4078

448.3996

0.7726

Basic health infrastructure

1.9160

11.1595

5.8244

5.9379

3.0473

0.5132

1.4067

1.3723

0.9756

Medical services, training & research

5.8102

3.2111

0.5527

12.5509

8.9924

0.7165

0.4265

7.9111

18.5482

Reproductive health care

47.1568

27.4084

0.5812

21.0394

12.7005

0.6036

25.2682

19.2662

0.7625

Infectious disease control

35.3479

23.8532

0.6748

44.5070

63.5729

1.4284

138.5042

102.9075

0.7430

Basic health care

39.6482

92.4866

2.3327

25.3352

21.5505

0.8506

55.5346

62.8895

1.1324

STD control including HIV/AIDS

16.4646

13.6371

0.8283

412.4951

232.2551

0.5630

359.2677

254.0531

0.7071

7.9873

12.5222

1.5678

8.1762

2.3501

0.2874

11.3681

4.1248

0.3628

168.8475

35.5385

0.2105

135.9223

43.1901

0.3178

56.3095

55.8264

0.9914

141.8091

7.4140

0.0523

87.0683

23.1588

0.2660

27.3482

37.7021

1.3786

26.1358

24.4393

0.9351

40.6423

19.6737

0.4841

2.1954

14.3696

6.5452

Waste management/disposal

0.8921

2.0295

2.2751

7.9644

0.0345

0.0043

26.6521

3.6408

0.1366

Educ./training:water supply & sanitation

0.0105

1.6557 157.5410

0.2473

0.3232

1.3065

0.1138

0.1138

1.0000

665.9640

387.6588

0.5821

648.0854

508.3508

0.7844

Family Planning
Water Supply and Sanitation
Water supply & sanit. - large syst.
Basic drinking water supply and basic sanitation

All–Primary Health Care, Family Planning, Water

323.1785

219.8167

0.6802

Supply and Sanitation
Note: Numbers shown for commitments and disbursements are 2006-2008 averages, in USD million, at constant 2007 prices.
Sources: CRS statistics/OECD, www.oecd.org/dac/stats/idsonline

Table 11. Computation of institutional barriers for trapped countries

Bangladesh

Kenya

Nigeria

1.7

2.1

1.9

2.6249

2.0225

2.2920

Disbursement to commitment ratio

0.6802

0.5821

0.7844

Leakage

0.5800

0.3030

0.3750

True arrival rate

0.2857

0.4057

0.4903

Imputed δ from true arrival

2.5004

1.4647

1.0398

Weighted average δ from (1) and (2)

2.5626

1.7436

1.6659

Calibrated threshold δc

1.0853

0.9561

1.5569

(1)

The CPI measure
CPI in 2005
Imputed δ from CPI

(2) True arrival

Table 12. Summary of institutional barriers across countries

Bangladesh

Kenya

Nigeria

China

India

US

δ

2.5626

1.7436

1.6659

0.4426

0.5315

0.1698

δc

1.0853

0.9561

1.5569

5.9125

5.8459

3.8686

Waste share–δ/(1+δ)

0.7193

0.6355

0.6249

0.3068

0.3471

0.1451

Threshold waste share – δc /(1+δc)

0.5205

0.4888

0.6089

0.8553

0.8539

0.7946

Figure 1. Life expectancy, years of schooling and relative real GDP per capita

(a) Immobility of trapped economies

(c) Life expectancy vs. relative real GDP per capita, 1960.

(b) Years of schooling vs. relative real GDP per capita, 1960

(d) The poor nations’ life expectancy vs. relative real
GDP per capita, 1960

Source: Barro-Lee (2010),the PWT 6.3 and the World Bank.

Figure 2. Non-convergence of the 41 trapped countries

Source: The PWT 6.3. The data range is from 1970 to 2007.

Figure 3. Educational attainment and economic performance of the trapped countries
(a) Years of schooling vs. relative real GDP per

(b) Years of schooling vs. growth of real GDP per capita,

capita

1970-2007

Source: Barro-Lee (2010) and the PWT 6.3. The real GDP per capita growth rate is the average growth rate during 1970 to 2007.

Figure 4. Public health expenditure share and economic performance of the 41 trapped countries
(a) Public health expenditure vs. relative real GDP
per capita in 2000

(b) Public health expenditure vs. growth of real GDP
per capita, 1970-2007

Source: The PWT 6.3 and the World Bank. The real GDP per capita growth rate is the average growth rate during 1970 to 2007;
the average government health expenditure refers to the average of the available data during 1995-2010.

Figure 5. The Corruption Perception Index and economic performance
(a) The Corruption Perception Index vs. relative real
GDP per capita in 2000

(b) The Corruption Perception Index vs. growth of real
GDP per capita, 1970-2007

Source: Transparency International and the PWT 6.3. The real GDP per capita growth rate is the average growth rate during
1970 to 2007.

Figure 6. Country fixed effects and relative income levels
(a) Country fixed effects and relative real GDP per capita in 1970 (US=100)

(b) Country fixed effects and relative real GDP per capita in 2000 (US=100)

Figure 7. The economic performance, educational attainment and health performances for
selected middle-income-low and trapped countries
(a) Relative output per capita

(b) Years of schooling

(c) Life expectancy at birth

(d) Mortality rate under 5

Source: The PWT 6.3 and the World Bank/UN dataset.

Figure 8. Causes of death in the trapped countries by region
(a) Causes of death by major category

Source: Computed using Table 1: Estimated total deaths ('000), by cause and WHO Member State, 2002 (a), the
World Health Organization. The region Asia includes East Asia and the Pacific and South Asia.

(b) Infectious and parasitic diseases in trapped countries in 2002.
(i) Distribution of deaths from selected communicable diseases in trapped countries by region
Parasites
Meningitis
Childhood-cluster diseases
Diarrhoeal diseases
Malaria
HIV/AIDS
Tuberculosis
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Sub-Saharan Africa
South Asia
Europe and Central Asia

0.8

1

East Asia and the Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean

(ii) Causes of death from selected communicable diseases within regions
Parasites
Meningitis
Childhood-cluster diseases
Diarrhoeal diseases
Malaria
HIV/AIDS
Tuberculosis
0

0.05
Sub-Saharan Africa
South Asia
Europe and Central Asia

Source:

0.1

0.15

0.2

East Asia and the Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean

Upper panel: Table 1: Estimated total deaths ('000), by cause and WHO Member State, 2002 (a), the World Health Organization. Lower

panel: Table 1: Estimated total deaths ('000), by cause and WHO Member State, 2002 (a), the World Health Organization. Parasites include
tropical-cluster diseases (Trypanosomiasis, Chagas disease, Schistosomiasis, Leishmaniasis, lymphatic filariasis, and Onchocerciasis) and
intestinal nematode infections (Ascariasis, Trichuriasis, and Hookworm disease). Childhood-cluster diseases include Pertussis, Poliomyelitis,
Diphtheria, Measles, and Tetanus.

Figure 9. Parents’ genetic transmission to children’s health and the optimizing level of health investment
and education investment
(a) The optimizing level of health investment:

(b) The optimizing level of parental time devoted

MBx and MCx

to educating children: MBe and MCe
MBe, MCe

MBx, MCx

MCe

MCx

MB'e: ↑

MBx
MB'x: ↑

MBe
x

←

e

→

Figure10. Equilibrium determination of parental time devoted to educating a child

MCe

MBe
0

e*

1

e

Figure 11. Equilibrium child health investment and capital accumulation, institutional changes, and traps
v

E

v*
v’

IT

E0

KE:δ=0

0

k’

k*

k

KE': 0 <δ<δc
KE'':δ=δc

Figure 12. Comparative statics with respect to preferences and health technology changes

v

v
IT

IT'
IT'
IT

KE

KE'

KE'
KE

k
(a) H increases

k
(b) increases

Figure 13. The Corruption Perception Index and the institutional barriers of the trapped economies

Source: 2005 Corruption Perception Index is obtained from Transparency International and the institutional barriers are
computed by the authors. The range of the CPI is between 0 and 10.

Figure 14. Chance of pull-out

Zimbabwe
Zambia
Uganda
Tanzania
Sudan
Somalia
Sierra Leone
Senegal
Rwanda
Papua New Guinea
Nigeria
Niger
Nicaragua
Nepal
Mozambique
Mongolia
Mali
Malawi
Madagascar
Liberia
Kenya
Honduras
Haiti
Guyana
Ghana
Gambia, The
Ethiopia
Cote d`Ivoire
Congo, Rep.
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Chad
Cameroon
Cambodia
Burundi
Burkina Faso
Bolivia
Benin
Bangladesh
Angola
Albania
Afghanistan
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Note: Gray: African countries; red: Asian countries; blue: Latin American countries; pink: East European country;
green: Middle East countries.

