NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DAILY NEEDS, INCOME TARGETS AND LABOR SUPPLY:
EVIDENCE FROM KENYA
Pascaline Dupas
Jonathan Robinson
Working Paper 19264
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19264

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2013

The study protocol for this research was approved by the IRBs of UCLA, UCSC, and IPA Kenya.
We thank Sandro Ambuehl, Christine Exley, Tim Halliday, Supreet Kaur, Sendhil Mullainathan, Muriel
Niederle, Alan Spearot, Eric Verhoogen, Andrew Zeitlin and participants at various seminars for helpful
comments. We are grateful to IPA Kenya for administrative assistance coordinating the project, to
Moses Barasa and Sarah Walker for coordinating field activities, and to Sindy Li for research assistance.
All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Pascaline Dupas and Jonathan Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Daily Needs, Income Targets and Labor Supply: Evidence from Kenya
Pascaline Dupas and Jonathan Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 19264
July 2013
JEL No. C93,D12,J22
ABSTRACT
Many studies suggest that daily income earners behave as if they have daily income targets. Less work
has examined the determinants of the targets themselves. Using data on labor supply, shocks, and selfreported cash needs from 257 bicycle taxi drivers in Western Kenya, we provide evidence that many
individuals treat their daily cash need as the day's target. We conjecture that in a physically demanding
job, workers may have an incentive to quit early and so set a personal rule of “earning enough for
the day's need” as an internal commitment device to provide effort. This heuristic is more common
among less educated workers and has substantial welfare costs: greater variance in hours worked is
associated with worse health, and we estimate that workers would earn 5% more by working a set
number of hours each day (more if their wage elasticity were positive).

Pascaline Dupas
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
pdupas@stanford.edu
Jonathan Robinson
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Cruz
457 Engineering 2
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jmrtwo@ucsc.edu

1

Introduction

The majority of people in developing countries are self-employed and so can set their own
work hours. While such flexibility has obvious advantages, it also has the fundamental disadvantage of being susceptible to self-control issues: without a fixed hours schedule, it may
be tempting for a worker to quit earlier in the day than he had planned (especially in a
physically demanding occupation). As shown in recent work with Indian data processors
(Kaur, Kremer and Mullainathan, 2010, 2013) and Berkeley undergraduates (Augenblick,
Niederle and Sprenger, 2013), individuals with such time-inconsistent preferences over effort
will demand external constraints to help them meet work targets.1 However, such external
commitment devices are not typically available outside of formal work arrangements or a laboratory setting. How do self-employed workers in low-skill, repetitive occupations motivate
themselves to work hard day after day?
This paper studies the labor supply decisions of one specific group of workers in a physically challenging occupation: Kenyan bicycle taxi drivers. These workers (all of whom
are men) carry passengers or goods on the back of their bicycles, and many report being
in poor health, so quitting early may be tempting. Using a novel dataset collected from
daily passenger-level logbooks kept by 257 drivers over approximately 2 months on average,
combined with experimentally created non-labor income shocks, we establish four empirical
facts about their daily labor supply decisions, and discuss what behavioral models can jointly
explain all four facts.
First, while the within-driver variance in daily hours worked is large (the within-driver
standard deviation of hours is 2, compared to mean hours of 9), the variation does not
appear to be consistent with intertemporal optimization: conditional on working, we find a
negative wage elasticity of hours worked, a result which is consistent with Camerer et al.
(1997) and others. However, we find that hours are positively correlated with the individual’s
reported “cash need” for the day. These reported cash needs include funds needed to deal
with unexpected shocks (e.g. a sick family member needing medical treatment, or a request
to help with funeral expenses), but also expected events (e.g. school fees or a weekly savings
club payment coming due).
Second, within a given day, individuals are more likely to quit immediately after earning
enough to deal with their need: our within-day, within-driver passenger-level data shows
that the quitting hazard increases discontinuously once workers earn enough to meet their
need. Since cash needs are largely uncorrelated with the wage rate, this behavior explains
1

In particular, Kaur et al. (2010, 2013) shows that data entry operators voluntarily enter into employment
contracts which penalize them for not meeting daily work targets.

2

the negative wage elasticity.
Third, labor supply in the days leading to a high cash need, even if expected, does not
respond to the upcoming need. This result is supportive of the quitting behavior: since
people procrastinate until the cash is needed, the need becomes binding.
Fourth, the experiment provided respondents with random, unexpected cash payments
on random days. We use this experimental variation to estimate the responsiveness of labor
supply to positive non-labor income shocks. We find no effect of the payments on daily
labor supply, and in particular, no effect on the likelihood of quitting once labor income has
reached the stated cash need amount.
Why can’t Kenyan bicycle taxi drivers better smooth their labor supply, working past
their cash needs on low-need days and dissaving on high-need days? A likely explanation is
that they are “target earners”, as first proposed by Camerer et al. (1997) with respect to
New York City cab drivers and investigated in a number of subsequent studies with various
types of daily income earners.2 Target earners anchor around a daily income target; once
this target is set, workers are loss averse over it and are therefore more likely to quit after
reaching the target. Our evidence is consistent with bicycle-taxi drivers in Kenya having a
target that varies daily with their cash needs. The fact that unexpected unearned income
shocks (such as the random cash payouts during our study) do not affect their labor supply
strongly suggests that this daily target is over labor income, however, and not total income.
Why would workers have labor income targets? Camerer et al. (1997) discuss how income
targets could be an internal commitment device to provide effort: setting a target before
starting work in the morning may be a way to avoid succumbing to the temptation of quitting
early. How though are the targets set? This is a fundamental issue when thinking about
the potential for income-targeting to mitigate the tendency to put off effort. If workers can
endogenously choose a high target for themselves every day, then self-control problems can
easily be overcome. But if, as formalized by Köszegi and Rabin (2006), targets need to be
based on rational expectations of effort and earnings to be binding, then self-control issues
may remain important.
Our evidence suggests that targets are based in part on exogenous cash needs, and in
part on rational forecasts of expected earnings (in accord with the discussion in Köszegi and
Rabin 2006 and empirical work by Crawford and Meng 2011 and Abeler et al. 2011). We
also find that bike-taxi drivers are not able to set and commit to a high target in expectation
of a large cash need coming up in the future – they do not work more even on the day before
an expectedly high cash need. Instead, only the current day’s needs affect the target.
2

See Chou 2002, Farber 2005, 2008, Crawford and Meng 2011 and Doran 2012 on taxi drivers; Fehr and
Goette 2007 on bicycle messengers; and Chang and Gross 2012 on fruit packers.

3

Overall, our conjecture is that workers in our sample procrastinate on earning enough to
cope with cash needs until they can no longer put the need off. To overcome the temptation
to put off work forever, they treat earning enough for the immediate needs as a kind of
personal rule – an internal commitment device. Their success in following this rule may
come from reference-dependent preferences, as in Köszegi and Rabin (2006), or because
deviating from the rule would create a precedent for future days, as in Ainslie (1992) and
Benabou and Tirole (2004). We also conjecture that this rule is over labor income, rather
than labor hours, for two possible reasons. First, working a set number of hours does not
prevent shirking on the job – e.g. not making enough effort to find customers or taking long
breaks. Second, cash targets are more easily enforceable by someone else, for example the
spouse. Bike drivers that leave their house in the morning and tell their wife: “I won’t come
home until I have the 100 Ksh we need to pay the school fees” are committing more strongly
than those who say “I will work for 8 hours,” since some of the 8 hours could be spent idling.
What are the welfare consequences of this heuristic? Since the workers in our sample
display a negative wage elasticity, they could earn more by reallocating labor supply intertemporally from low wage days to high wage days. Estimating the lost income is difficult,
however, since we do not know what the counterfactual elasticity should be. We therefore
conservatively estimate how much extra income workers would make under (1) a fixed hours
rule and (2) assuming a 0.15 elasticity as in Chetty (2012). Similar to other studies, we
estimate modest, though not insubstantial, mean increases in income of 5-8% (this amount
would of course be larger if wage elasticities were larger).3 Another implication of income
targeting is that workers work some very long days and some very short days. If work effort
has a negative impact on health and daily effort costs are convex, then workers will be in
worse health by working long days. We find some speculative evidence consistent with this:
workers with greater variance in hours worked over our study period are in worse health at
endline (conditional on baseline health status).
While our explanation for the labor supply patterns we observe is ultimately a conjecture,
we provide evidence against some alternatives. The main set of alternatives are models of
labor supply under subsistence constraints; i.e. that people use bike taxiing to generate cash
to meet immediate subsistence needs, but then quit immediately after reaching the need.
This could be because (1) the returns to another occupation have higher returns but delayed
payouts; (2) people are unable to save money past their immediate consumption needs; or (3)
effort costs are so high that it is optimal to quit immediately at the need. The main evidence
3

For example, Camerer et al. (1997) estimate that a fixed hours rule would increase income by 5% among
New York City cabdrivers. Kaur et al. (2013) estimate a treatment on the treated effect of a 6% increase in
productivity from providing workers with commitment devices.

4

against any of these possibilities are the random cash payouts: each of these models would
predict quitting on those days. We also provide further evidence by performing subgroup
analyses and find little support for heterogeneity along these dimensions.
Our paper contributes to the literature in several ways. First, we contribute to the
literature on income targeting, and provide the first empirical evidence that income targeting
among daily income workers outside of the lab is over earned income and not total income,
suggesting that income targeting may indeed be, as suggested by Camerer et al. (1997), a
form of mental accounting that acts as an internal commitment device. Second, we contribute
to the literature on self-control at work, which as highlighted by Kaur et al. (2013), is a much
different problem than self-control over consumption or income. Third, our paper contributes
to the literature on simple heuristics, personal rules or rules of thumb that people may use
to deal with certain biases (Ainslie 1992; Bénabou and Tirole, 2004; Benartzi and Thaler,
2007; Thaler and Sunstein, 2008). Finally, since we have data on labor supply both within
and across days, our results are also related to studies which focus on the extensive margin
of labor supply, including Oettinger (1999) on stadium vendors in the US, Goldberg (2012)
on day laborers in Malawi, and Giné et al. (2009) on fishermen in India.4 Lastly, while this
study focuses specifically on one sample of workers in one part of Kenya, the general patten
of results may generalize to a relatively broad subset of workers in the developing world
because many people in developing countries are self-employed in low-skilled but physically
demanding occupations.
The layout of the paper is as follows. Section 2 lays out a motivating framework and
Section 3 discusses the data. Section 4 presents our main results, while Section 5 discuss
interpretations of the pattern of results. Section 6 discusses welfare implications, and Section
7 concludes.

2

Conceptual Framework

The basic framework has two components. First, workers set targets. Second, conditional
on the target, workers apply effort. In principle, the targets could be set in any number of
ways. However, as we will show in the empirical section, the targets appear to be driven
largely by cash needs, both expected and unexpected.
The fact that workers set daily targets at all, even though one day’s income is a trivial
fraction of lifetime income, is likely due to the phenomenon of “narrow bracketing.” The
4

Our results are also related to Hossain and List (2012), who conduct an experiment with a Chinese
high-tech manufacturing firm and find that conditional incentives framed as losses have bigger effect than if
they are framed as gains.

5

targets can be interpreted in two ways. First, as developed by Camerer et al. (1997), Köszegi
and Rabin (2006) and Crawford and Meng (2011), workers may have reference-dependent
preferences, and the income target may be a reference point over which workers are loss
averse. Such preferences imply that the likelihood of quitting for the day will increase just
after the target threshold has been crossed.
A second possible interpretation of the targets is that they are an internal commitment
device akin to a “personal rule” (i.e. Ainslie 1992; Bénabou and Tirole 2004). Once set,
workers may not want to renege on this commitment because they fear it will create a
precedent for future days. Such a rule would also result in an increase in quitting behavior
after the target has been reached.
How, then, are the daily targets themselves determined, or what rule do they follow?
As discussed in Köszegi and Rabin (2006), under rational expectations, targets will be forecasts of the day’s expected earnings. We will further test whether cash needs, expected or
unexpected, affect targets. Furthermore, if workers are present-biased in effort, putting off
dealing with needs until they can no longer do so, targets will be affected by the current
day’s needs, but not later ones, because workers then know that they “must” earn the money
that day.
Such preferences generate several predictions which we take to the data:
1. Workers will put off dealing with needs until they can no longer do so.
2. Workers will work more on days in which their needs are larger.
3. The hazard of quitting will increase after reaching the day’s cash need.
4. As in Camerer et al. (1997), workers will display a negative wage elasticity with respect
to hours worked.

3
3.1

Sample and Data
Sampling Frame

The project took place in the Busia district of Western Kenya in Summer and Fall 2009. The
sample was drawn in August, and the logs were collected between September and December.
To draw the sample, enumerators conducted a census of all bicycle-taxi drivers (locally known
as “bodas”) in 14 market places scattered around the district. Individuals were included in
the sample only if their primary occupation was as a bicycle taxi driver.

6

The only sample restriction was that the respondent had to be able to read and fill out the
logs. We therefore excluded individuals who could neither read nor write or who had fewer
than three years of schooling (24% of those in the census), leaving 303 eligible individuals.
We were able to successfully enroll 257 (85%) of these in the study. The remainder could not
be enrolled for one of three reasons: they had moved out of the area, had quit boda work,
or did not consent to the relatively heavy data collection requirements.

3.2

Data

The data collection took place over a 3 month interval, from September to December 2009.
Individuals were enrolled on a rolling basis (the last round of individuals were enrolled in
late November).5 There are two primary data sources we use for the analysis.
3.2.1

Baseline Survey

Each individual who was enrolled in the study was administered a baseline survey.6 In addition to basic household demographic information, the survey included a number of measures
to inform the subgroup analysis. These include a financial module, a health module, and a
module to construct measures of time preferences, risk preferences, and loss aversion.7
3.2.2

Logs

Building on the successful use of logs in previous studies in the same area of Kenya (see
Robinson and Yeh 2011 and Dupas and Robinson 2013a for data from self-filled daily logs
collected among sex workers and market vendors / bicycle-taxi drivers, respectively), we
asked each study participant to keep a daily labor supply log for up to three months. The
logs were pre-printed in a two-page questionnaire form with 7 rows per page (corresponding
to 7 days, with pre-printed dates) with blanks for study participants to fill in the relevant
information. To incentivize participants to fill the logs well, respondents were given in-kind
gifts (e.g. soap, cooking fat, sugar) worth around 75 Kenyan shillings ($1) for each week in
which they filled the log competently.8
Respondents were instructed to fill in the log throughout the day, indicating the precise
time at which they started working, the timing of each client pickup and dropoff, the fare,
5

The sample was drawn on a rolling basis because the fixed cost of training a respondent to keep the log
was large so it took some time to train respondents.
6
This survey, as well as the daily and weekly logs described below, can be found on the authors’ websites.
7
The baseline was conducted in parallel with the beginning of the data collection process. Baseline data
is missing for 12 of the 257 workers in our sample.
8
The exchange rate was approximately 75 Kenyan shillings (Ksh) to $1 US during this time period.

7

and the time they stopped working.9 Crucially, the logs also included questions on daily
needs. The first question on the log was: “Is there something in particular that you need
money for today?” and included codes for a variety of common options such as bicycle
repairs, medical expenditures, ROSCA contributions, food, and school fees. There was also
a code for “nothing special.”10 If the respondent reported a need, the next question asked
the respondent to record the amount necessary to meet this need. The logs also included
a few questions on health shocks experienced that day by the individual and other family
members.
While the daily logs contain rich information on labor supply, needs, and health shocks, it
was not possible to include other questions without making the logs too onerous to complete.
Thus, to supplement the daily logs and to regularly check data quality, enumerators visited
study participants on a weekly basis. During this visit, the enumerator checked that the logs
were filled correctly and collected the completed pages. The enumerator then administered
a recall survey to the respondent. For each day in the given week, the enumerator asked
about a variety of other outcomes, including labor supply in other jobs (e.g., farming, casual
work, selling produce, etc.). The weekly survey also includes more details on health shocks
(including symptoms), making it possible to cross-validate the health shock information
recorded in the daily logs.11
As mentioned above, bodas were enrolled into the study on a rolling basis. There is
therefore variation in how long bodas were asked to keep logs. Of the bodas in the final
sample, logs were kept for between 1 week and 3 months. The median boda kept the log for
49 days (the mean is 52 days). We have an accompanying 1-week recall survey for 72% of
the days.12 The median boda has full data for 35 days (the mean is 38 days).

3.3

Experimental Income Shocks

To introduce random variation in non-labor income across days for a given individual, we
invited respondents to participate in a free lottery a few times over the course of the study.
These lotteries were not announced in advance. Study participants were randomly selected
to be invited to come to their local market center on that same day and pick a prize from
a bag. Lottery participants had a 50% chance to win only 20 Ksh (the small prize), and a
9

Respondents were given watches to record the time.
This code was reported on 8.4% of days. Results look very similar when these days are removed from
analysis.
11
In the interest of time, expenditures were not recorded.
12
The reason why the 1-week recall survey is missing for some days is that enumerators sometimes were
not able to find the respondent to collect the daily log (e.g., if the respondent had traveled). In that case,
the enumerator would attempt to find the respondent the following week, but then only administered the
1-week recall survey for that week.
10

8

50% change to win a large prize (namely, a 25% chance to win 200 Ksh, a 12.5% chance to
win 250 Ksh, and a 12.5% to win 300 Ksh). The odds and prize sizes were not disclosed
to participants. Given that average daily income (conditional on working) is approximately
150 Ksh, the lottery prizes were substantial. The prizes are also large relative to daily cash
needs, which (conditional on having a need) average around 200 Ksh (see Table 2).
Each boda was sampled to participate in at least one and up to four lotteries over the
course of two months.13 If a participant could not be located on a given lottery day, he was
never told about the lottery he missed.14

3.4

Sample Characteristics

Table 1 presents baseline characteristics for our study sample. All study participants are
male, since bicycle-taxi driving is an exclusively male occupation. 75% of respondents participate in Rotating Savings and Credit Associations (ROSCAs). While 32% have bank
accounts, few use them regularly (see Table 2), possibly owing to the fact that banks in this
area tend to have substantial withdrawal fees, limited opening hours, and few rural branches.
As a way to estimate levels of current savings, the baseline asked respondents the following
open-ended question: “If you absolutely needed 1,000 Ksh, how would you get the money?”
(answers were coded after the respondent has answered). While 1,000 Ksh is a substantial
sum (equivalent to about a week’s worth of income), it is not very large relative to lifetime
income and is the type of shock that people do encounter in reality (for example, for a serious
medical problem which requires hospitalization). Although respondents could list as many
responses as they wanted, only 10% of people reported being able to use savings for even
part of the amount. Most people reported that they would have to rely on friends or family
for help (47%) or would have to resort to selling assets (34%).
Health status appears relatively poor among bodas in the sample. Even though the
average boda is only 32 years old, 39% missed at least 1 day of work in the month prior to
the baseline due to sickness. The baseline also collected information on a number of physical
symptoms, coded as 1 for none, 2 for mild, 3 for moderate, 4 for severe, and 5 for extreme.
We then aggregate these into a “health problems” index. The average of this is just 1.97,
corresponding to mild on average. However, a substantial fraction of people report worse
health (see Appendix Table A1).
Reference-dependence requires that individuals be loss averse around a target. Consistent
13
Overall, 2% of study participants participated in four lotteries, 47% participated in three lotteries, 38%
participated in two lotteries, 6% participated in only one lottery, and 7% did not participate in any lotteries.
14
Almost all bodas who were invited played the lottery that day – in only 4% of cases did a boda not show
up to play the lottery after being invited.

9

with this, Fehr and Goette (2007) find that lab experimental measures of loss aversion predict
behavior in their experiment among bicycle messengers in Switzerland. Following them, we
collected measures both of loss aversion and of small-stakes risk aversion. We measure loss
aversion by asking respondents whether they would accept a gamble in which there is a
50% chance that they would win some amount and a 50% chance they would lose a smaller
amount. Overall, 28% refuse a 50/50 chance of winning 30 Ksh or losing 10 Ksh, while
58% refuse a 50/50 chance of winning 120 Ksh or losing 50 Ksh. To measure small-stakes
risk aversion, respondents were asked to divide 100 Ksh between a safe asset in which they
kept the amount invested for certain and a risky asset in which the amount invested would
be multiplied by 2.5 with 50% probability and would be lost with 50% probability. Note
that because the stakes are so low, an expected utility maximizer should be close to risk
averse over this sort of gamble and so should invest close to the full amount (Rabin 2000).
Loss averse respondents, by contrast, may invest less. Indeed, the average respondent in our
sample invested just over half (56.2 Ksh) in the asset, further suggesting that a significant
fraction of respondents may be loss averse.

3.5

Summary Statistics from Logs

Table 2 presents summary statistics from the logs. From Panel A, respondents work on
74% of the days in our sample. Conditional on working, average income is around $2 per
day. Consistent with Table 1, bike taxiing is the primary source of income – respondents
received other income on only 24% of days. Panel B shows that needs are very common:
respondents report daily needs on 88% of days. Conditional on having a need, the average
amount needed is quite substantial: at around 200 Ksh, it exceeds average income. There is
also substantial variation in needs: needs range from a minimum of 5 Ksh to over 1,500 Ksh,
and the standard deviation is 340 Ksh. Much of this variation is within individual across
days: the within-individual standard deviation (296 Ksh) is larger than the inter-individual
standard deviation (168 Ksh).
As can be seen from Panel C, shocks are quite common. For example, respondents report
that they are sick on 18% of days and report that another family member is sick on 10%
of days. Respondents also commonly need money for other expenses. Individuals report
needing cash to pay school fees on 2% of days, needing to contribute to a funeral on 5% of
days, and needing to make bicycle repairs on 21% of days. Finally, Panel E shows two other
individual-level variables of interest: 24% of respondents receive lumpy, irregular payments
from regular customers (typically payment for taking a child to and from school) and 17%
of respondents rent their bikes from someone else.

10

4
4.1

Results
Determinants of Daily Cash Needs

In Table 3, we examine how time-varying factors affect needs and labor supply. In particular,
we run the following regressions:
Nit = βwit + Situ γ u + Site γ e + ηit + µi + it

(1)

where Nit is a measure of the daily need, Situ represent unexpected shocks (such as sickness
or funeral expenses), and Site represent expected events which require cash (such as ROSCA
payments or school fees coming due). We also include a measure of the realized wage rate
(wit ). Since an individual’s wage is, of course, endogenous, we follow Camerer et al. (1997)
and construct a realized wage that is exogenous to the individual by taking the average wage
of all of the other bodas in that market center. Finally, we include fixed effects for the day
of the week and the week of the year (ηit ) in the specification, since these are predictable
determinants of the wage. The regressions include individual fixed effects, and errors are
clustered at the individual level.
We consider three measures of the daily need. First, we examine need amounts across
all days by imputing a need value of 0 for days in which no need is reported (column 1).
Second, we consider a dummy for whether a cash need is reported that day (the extensive
margin, column 2). Third, we consider the amount needed, conditional on reporting a need
(the intensive margin, column 3).
We find that several of the shock measures (whether expected or unexpected) are correlated with needs. Funerals and the illness of another household member are robustly correlated with all the need measures. School fees and ROSCA contributions are also correlated
with reporting a need.
In contrast, needs are not strongly correlated with the local wage rate (if anything, the
correlation is negative). This result, coupled with the result that the needs are highly correlated with the exogenous shocks, helps to rule out the concern that workers may endogenously
“choose” to consider a need (e.g., choose to pay pending school fees) on days when they know
they can earn more. Needs are also largely uncorrelated with the day of the week, with one
exception: people are less likely to report needs on Sundays and are more likely to report
them on Monday. There are two potential explanations for this. First, people may actually
have less needs on Sundays (for example, school fees and other bills are unlikely to be due
on a Sunday). Second, people may choose to “put off” some needs on Sunday. We lack the
ability to parse these out. In any case, the evidence on the whole suggests that the needs

11

are largely exogenous to labor market conditions.
In Table A2, we cross-check the needs reported on the daily logs with the actual expenditures for that day as reported in the weekly recall survey. Specifically, we regress whether a
specific type of need was recorded on the daily log (e.g. for ROSCAs, school fees, funeral expenses, bike repairs, and loan repayment) on whether the respondent reported expenditures
of that same type on that same day, as per the weekly survey. There are several comforting
results. First, reported needs and actual expenditures are strongly correlated for all types
of spending, providing some assurance of data quality. Second, since ROSCA payments and
school fees are due on specific days outside of individuals’ control, this helps to rule out
endogenous reporting of needs (an issue to which we return to in section 5.2.2).
Another important result comes from the even-numbered columns, which include controls
for whether the respondent will have that expenditure in the next few days. For example,
Column 2 shows whether the respondent reports needing money for a ROSCA in the 2 days
before the ROSCA payment is actually due. Interestingly, the coefficients are negative and
significant, suggesting that people delay considering these pending expenses as things they
need to raise cash for until the last possible moment. The other categories show no evidence
of anticipating needs in advance. While this is not surprising for unexpected shocks like a
funeral or bike repairs, it is more surprising for school fees, and potentially for loan repayment
as well (since these events are anticipated). These results suggest that people procrastinate
on their needs until they actually need the cash.

4.2
4.2.1

Cash Needs and Daily Labor Supply
Cross-sectional evidence

We start by showing simple correlations between the cash need and labor supply intensity
(at the day level). We pool all individuals together for this exercise, so that comparisons are
both across days and across individuals. Results are shown in Figure 1 for average hours
(top panel) and average income earned (bottom panel). We limit the sample to cash need
amounts with at least 50 observations (that is, 50 individual-days), and observations are
weighted by the frequency of that need amount (represented by the size of the circle). The
figure shows a very clear positive relationship between the cash need for the day and the
labor supply that day.
4.2.2

Within-Driver Variation Across Days

The simple correlations in Figure 1 could of course reflect differences across individuals,
rather than within-individual variation across days. We turn next to regression analysis

12

with individual fixed effects, and exploit within-driver variation in cash needs across days.
In particular, in Table 4 we estimate the following
Lit = βwit + γNit + Xit δ + ηit + µi + it

(2)

where the dependent variable is a measure of daily labor supply for individual i at date t,
and as above, Nit is a measure of the need for that individual on that date. We present
specifications with two measures of the need: the odd numbered columns include a dummy
for having a need, while the even numbered columns include the log of the cash need for
those that have one. The vector of control regressors Xit include the measure of the realized
wage rate that day as described above, and (though the coefficients are not reported) the
day of the week and the week of the year, whether it rained, and whether the driver was sick
that day.15 As before, the standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
On the whole, the results are consistent with Figure 1. On days in which they have needs,
individuals are more likely to work (and therefore earn more money). And conditional on
having a need, individuals with a higher need have more passengers, work longer hours, and
spend more of the work day carrying passengers. 16 The effect sizes are substantial: individuals are 18.9 percentage points more likely to work when they have a need and, conditional
on having a need, a 100% increase in the need amount translates into approximately a 10%
increase in earned income.
Another interesting result is that as in Camerer et al. (2007) and subsequent papers, we
observe what appears to be a negative wage-elasticity – bicycle-taxi drivers appear to work
fewer hours on higher-wage days. On the other hand, on the extensive margin, people are
more likely to work when the wage is higher, as in for example Oettinger (1999).
4.2.3

Within-Driver, Within-Day Hazard Analysis

In this section, we estimate the hazard of quitting around the daily need amount. Note
that under income targeting, since the cash need is potentially only one component of the
(unmeasured) target, the estimated effect of reaching the target will be downwardly biased.
15

As some of the variation in wages is across days of the week (for example, wages are higher on market
days when people buy and sell items in the town), this regression could be run without day of the week
controls. However, the overall pattern of results is similar with or without day controls (in part because
market days vary across locations).
16
Potentially there could be adjustment on the fare as well (i.e. the driver gives a discount) – see Keniston
2011 for evidence of significant bargaining between rickshaw drivers and passengers in India. This is unlikely
for short rides (since the norm is of a minimum fare of 10 or 20 Kenyan shilling), but could be relevant for
longer rides. While it is difficult for us to check this (since we do not know how long a particular ride is, in
distance), we can provide some evidence by looking at the average fare per minute of a given ride. We do
not observe any relationship between this measure and needs.

13

We estimate the hazard with the following non-parametric regression
qipt =

10
X

2
+ ηNit + µi + ηt + ipt
γb Dibt + δHipt + ψHipt

(3)

b=−10

where qipt is a dummy for quitting after passenger p on date t, Hipt is hours worked up to
that passenger, and Nit is the need amount for that date.17 The key parameters of interest
are the γb coefficients, which are dummies for being in income bin b, relative to the need
amount (these bins are of width 20 Ksh).18
If people are reference-dependent or if the marginal utility gain drops as soon as the daily
need is taken care of, we would expect the coefficients γb to be larger after the threshold has
been reached (i.e. for b ≥ 0), compared to those before the threshold (i.e. for b < 0).
We plot these coefficients, and associated 95% confidence intervals, in Figure 2. As can
be seen, there is a dramatic increase in the probability of quitting at the need amount.19
The probability of quitting continues to rise after that point, as well (note that this graph
is the conditional probability of quitting, so that the cumulative probability is larger).20
Lastly, we run a parametric regression to formally test whether reaching the target affects
quitting behavior:
2
qipt = α + γ1 Oipt + β1 Dipt + θ1 Dipt ∗ Oipt + δHipt + ψHipt
+ ηNit + µi + ηt + ipt

(4)

where Dipt is the difference between the daily need and income earned until passenger
p and Oipt is a dummy equal to 1 if total income has exceeded the daily need. From the
figures, we anticipate that both γ1 and θ1 should be positive. This analysis is presented in
17

Results look identical when controlling for hours spent riding rather than total hours spent working
(which includes waiting time).
18
The overall pattern looks similar with other bin sizes (results available on request). Using a smaller bin
is problematic in that very few fares are less than 20 Ksh, while using a larger bin attenuates effects.
19
Note that while the graph appears to show a flat hazard below the threshold, the hazard is conditional
on total hours worked (and the square of total hours). Without a control for hours worked, there is a small
increase in the hazard below the threshold. We present the results with the hours controls because inference
is crisper when controlling for a smooth function of hours.
20
A potential complication in estimating the hazard is that need amounts vary across day so there is
a (mechanical) potential sample composition issue in comparing coefficients (for example, observations in
bins far over the threshold mostly involve days in which the need amount is very low). Note, however,
that this issue is much less severe right around the threshold than at points further away (since on average
sample composition shouldn’t change discontinuously at that point). To further confirm that this sample
composition is not affecting our results, we perform two sets of tests. First, we run regressions restricting
the need size to a fairly narrow range. This, of course, greatly reduces power but yields a qualitatively
similar overall pattern (see the bottom panel of Figure 2). Second, we run specifications with fixed effects at
the individual-day level. These regressions, which by definition control for the need amount, yield a similar
pattern. However, since they greatly restrict variation and consequently reduce power, we do not include
them in the main tables.

14

column 1 of Table 4. The coefficient on the dummy for exceeding the target is positive and
significant at the 1% level.

4.3

Unexpected Cash Windfalls and Labor Supply

As discussed previously, we invited bodas to participate in a free (unannounced) lottery a
few times over the course of the study. Individuals were invited to come to their local market
center on that same day and pick a prize from a bag. Lottery participants had a 50% chance
to win only 20 Ksh (the small prize), and a 50% chance to win a large prize (namely, a
25% chance to win 200 Ksh, a 12.5% chance to win 250 Ksh, and a 12.5% to win 300 Ksh).
These are substantial sums relative to average daily income from bike taxiing of 145 Ksh
(conditional on working).21
To examine the effect of these unexpected cash windfalls, we regress total hours on
whether the respondent won one of the large amounts (an amount greater than 200 Ksh) in
Table 6 (the regressions include boda fixed effects).22 Interestingly, we find no effect of the
lottery on any measure of labor supply.23 A hazard analysis (not shown) finds no evidence
whatsoever of a change in the quitting hazard right after the payment. Thus, the labor
supply response to the shocks is consistent with a standard lifetime neoclassical labor supply
model.
How can this be reconciled with our previous results which provide strong evidence for
reference dependence? We conjecture that the explanation is that daily income targets are
labor (earned) income targets that are set early in the day (most likely before they start
work) – not total income targets. Once workers have set these targets in the morning, they
follow through on their plan whether or not they receive unexpected income shocks. In
the next section, we conjecture that workers may be using such labor income targets as a
self-control device, i.e. a way to motivate themselves to work despite the unpleasant nature
of their job.
21

The timing of payouts in the day was random – some people were selected to receive payments in the
morning and others in the afternoon, though typically the payments were made after respondents had started
work for the day. We do not observe any heterogeneity in behavior based on the timing of the payment.
22
The regressions include all days, including those in which no lottery was played. This is because the
disruption of the lottery was minimal, taking only a few minutes, and because results look very similar even
when restricting to lottery days alone (results on request).
23
We also find no effect of the lottery payment and needs in subsequent days.

15

4.4
4.4.1

Discussion
Mental targets as commitment devices

As discussed in Camerer et al. (1997), mental income targets could be a way for daily income
earners to solve self-control problems: present-biased workers who can set their own hours
may be tempted to quit too early, and setting a target before starting work in the morning
may be a way to avoid succumbing to that temptation. This explanation is plausible for
workers in our sample: bike-taxiing in the hot sun is strenuous and unpleasant, and given
the relatively poor health of drivers in our sample, possibly painful as well.24
But how can a mental target be strong enough to work as a commitment device? If all
one needs to motivate oneself is to set a target, then everyone should pick an optimal target
which maximizes intertemporal utility (i.e. behave exactly as in a neoclassical labor supply
model).
Clearly that is asking too much from mental targets, and that is not what we observe
in the data, whether in our Kenya sample or in other parts of the world. Instead, it seems
that people need some external device to help make the target binding. For example, recent
work by Kaur et al. (2010, 2013) shows that data entry clerks in India willingly accept
wage contracts which penalize them, in terms of pay, if they fail to reach a self-chosen
target, suggesting demand for an external commitment to help them overcome present-bias.
Among US undergraduates, Augenblick et al. (2013) find a strong demand for commitment
devices to not put off tedious effort tasks.
Absent such external devices, our data suggests that workers use a heuristic to set a
binding mental target: the amount they need to meet their cash needs that day. On days
affected by particularly bad income shocks, workers are motivated to work harder than usual.
Even if they receive a positive windfall in the middle of the day (such as an experimental
lottery payment), they keep working hard since they had mentally prepared themselves to
work hard that day. That the target cannot be undone by an unexpected income shock is
important: if it were, then mental income targeting would be a very weak internal commitment device to provide effort.25 The flip side of the simple heuristic used to set the target is
that people quit earlier on days in which they do not have a pressing need.
24

Those in worse health at baseline appear no more likely to respond to reaching the target, but individuals
in worse health are more likely to quit at all income levels, and work less overall.
25
We also find no effect of a “real world” cash payout – receiving the cash pot – on labor supply. Note
however that the ROSCA payout is expected in advance.

16

4.4.2

Targets and Expected Earnings

If the effect of the need on labor supply indeed takes effect through a mental income targeting
mechanism, then as discussed in Köszegi and Rabin (2006) and Crawford and Meng (2011),
the income target would likely be determined by expectations over earnings, and not only the
exogenous need. To examine both together, we integrate our results with those of Crawford
and Meng (2011). In that study, the authors use average daily income or hours (by driver
and day of the week) in previous days as a proxy for the target. We replicate that analysis in
Table 7. The odd numbered columns replicate Crawford and Meng, while the even numbered
columns include a dummy for being over the need amount. As can be seen, we replicate the
finding that reaching either the income or hours target increases the likelihood of quitting
in all specifications. When we add in our need measure, we find that all three coefficients
are significant, suggesting that both earning expectations and the daily need matter and
affect the target. If income expectations matter, then why do we observe such a stark
discontinuity at the need? Table A3 appears to offer an explanation: earning expectations
based on previous earning history are uncorrelated with the need amounts.
One final point of comparison can be seen when we graph the Crawford and Meng results
in Appendix Figure A1. As would be expected if wage rates or targets vary across days,
the discontinuity at the target proxy is less sharp using this approach (especially for hours).
This underscores the value of having an explicit measure of the daily need in our dataset.

5

Heterogeneity, Robustness, and Alternative Explanations

5.1

Heterogeneity

One important question is whether certain workers are better able to take advantage of
neoclassical intertemporal substitution. One such group might be more educated workers, for
example because recent evidence suggests that cognitive ability is correlated with preferences
over risk and time.26 Indeed, a Mincer equation yields a coefficient on years of education of
3.7-4% in our sample (Appendix Table A4, columns 1 and 2), even conditional on a host of
covariates. A decomposition of this effect in the other columns of Table A4 and Figure A2
shows that more educated workers do not work longer or take on more passengers, nor do
26

See, for example, Frederick (2005); Dohmen, Falk, Huffman, and Sunde (2010); Burks, Carpenter,
Goette, and Rustichini (2009); and Benjamin, Brown, and Shapiro (2013). Similarly, Kremer et al. (2013a)
show that small-stakes risk aversion is correlated with inventory and profit levels among Kenyan retail shops.

17

they better optimize on the extensive margin, but their effective wage rate is higher. Is it
possible that such workers are less prone to income targeting?
We examine this in Panel A of Figure 3, in which we examine quitting behavior for more
and less educated workers. Education varies from 0 to 12 years, and is bunched around 7 (the
25th percentile is 6, the median is 7, and the 75th percentile is 8). For this analysis, we split
the sample at 6 years of education (the 25th percentile of the education distribution). From
the figure, it indeed does appear that more educated workers are less sensitive to reaching
the daily need (even though the patterns of daily needs does not systematically vary by
education level). In contrast to other papers, we find little correlation between education
and measures of preferences, however (educated workers are slightly more patient, but do
not differ in terms of loss aversion, small-stakes risk aversion, of time consistency – results
available upon request). What’s more, we do not observe significant heterogeneity in quitting
at the daily need amount by our measure of loss aversion (Panel B of Figure 3).27
The right-hand columns in Table 4 formally tests for heterogeneity. Each row repeats
the parametric regression above, but also includes interactions with the background characteristic of interest. We focus on several measures of education (being in the top 75% of the
education distribution, being in the top 50%, and years of education), as well as a measure
of loss aversion (refusing a 50/50 gamble to win 30 Ksh or lose 10 Ksh). The interaction
between these variables and the dummy for reaching the target is significant for 2 of our 3
education measures, but not for our measure of loss aversion.
Overall, our findings suggest that more educated workers are better able to adjust behavior at the margin, i.e. stay on for an extra passenger or two after reaching their daily
need. Table 8 shows the effect of this in a regression framework. In this table, we regress
labor supply on an indicator for having a “big day” (i.e. the local wage is higher than the
median), and an interaction between this and being in the top 75% of the education distribution. Though many coefficients are of borderline significance, more educated workers
make more money on such days and have a higher own wage rate, suggesting that when the
stakes are high they are better able to continue working past the daily need threshold. A
back of the envelope calculation suggests that 37% of the education wage premium is on
income earned above the daily need. While speculative, these results suggest a potential role
for education, even in a setting which otherwise would seem to require little human capital.
27

One possible reason we do not find a correlation whereas Fehr and Goette (2007) do is that the stakes in
our gambles were relatively larger (around 2/3 daily income, compared to less than 5% in Fehr and Goette
2007). They are still an insignificant fraction of lifetime income, however.

18

5.2

Robustness

This section discusses two potential threats to the analysis above. First, there may exist
experimenter effects, given the high frequency and nature of the data collected. Second, it
might be possible that the timing of cash needs is endogenous.
5.2.1

Experimenter effects

The log asked individuals to record their cash need at the beginning of every day. One may
worry that simply asking this question made that specific amount salient in respondents’
minds, especially those with a lower level of education. It is also possible that respondents
felt an experimenter demand effect, i.e. that respondents believed that the researchers
expected them to work up to the need, and then quit thereafter. In this section we argue
that these two types of experimenter effects are unlikely to be driving our results.
The most convincing test of the presence of such experimenter effects would be if we had
a comparable group of bicycle taxi drivers who were asked to fill logs similar to those we
used, except for the question on the daily cash need. We could then check whether workers
who were asked to state their cash need exhibit more variance in hours than workers who
were not. Though we cannot test this directly since all of the workers in our study were asked
about the need, we can compare the variance in hours we observe in our sample to that of
bicycle taxi drivers followed in Dupas and Robinson (2013a). While that data was collected
between 2006 and 2008 (i.e. 1 to 3 years earlier than the present study), it was collected using
almost identical logbooks except that they did not include the question on the day’s needs.
Interestingly, we find comparable (and if anything, larger) within-worker variance in hours
worked across days in that earlier sample: 2.74 compared to 2.16 in the sample considered
in the present paper. This at least suggests that the large within-individual variance in daily
labor supply is not an artefact of our data collection protocol.
A second way to test whether the data collection made needs particularly salient and
therefore accentuated income-targeting is to check how persistent the effects are. If people
were not income targeting at all before the study, but then began to do so after keeping
the logs since the cash needs became salient, then such respondents should eventually have
switched back to their previous behavior after some time, since income targeting reduces
total income on average. Thus, if this were the explanation, then one would expect the
evidence of targeting to fade over time. When we run the hazard analysis separately for the
first and last month during which individuals were keeping the logs, however, we find the
exact same pattern of results, with the same magnitude, for both time periods. This further
suggests that experimenter effects are unlikely explanations for our results.

19

5.2.2

Endogenous timing of needs

While many of the determinants of the cash needs reported by our study participants are
almost certainly exogenous and unexpected (e.g. health shocks, funerals), some can be
anticipated (e.g. food for the household). For such anticipated needs, workers may choose
the days in which they decide to “deal” with those – for example, they may decide to purchase
food on the day they expect to make more money, or they may decide to pay school fees
on the day they wake up feeling in particularly good health. If that is the case, workers
would mechanically report higher needs on days in which they expect to make more money,
explaining the positive correlation we observe between needs and labor supply. While this
may be the case on the extensive margin – on Sundays, which is much less likely to be a
work day than other days, respondents typically report smaller cash needs – this does not
appear to be the case on the intensive margin, which is the focus of our paper. Indeed, as
was mentioned earlier and shown in column 2 of Table 3, reported needs in our data are
not positively correlated with the wage rate. What’s more, as shown in Table A2, people
report needs such as savings club payments exactly on the days in which these are paid (and
these savings club payments are on fixed schedule that workers cannot unilaterally decide
on). Finally, if we restrict the sample to individual-days with only unexpected needs, we see
the exact same pattern of results. Overall, endogeneity of the timing of daily needs seem an
unlikely explanation for our results.

5.3
5.3.1

Ruling out alternative explanations
Subsistence Constraints

Our preferred explanation for these results is that workers in our sample have income targets which serve either as reference points or personal rules. One could however think of
alternative explanations, notably that observed behavior can be explained by a model of
labor supply under subsistence constraints (for a recent example, see Halliday 2012). In
our context, the daily need may represent the subsistence constraint, after which workers
quit for various reasons. A first alternative could be that workers switch to an activity with
higher returns but delayed payoffs after reaching the subsistence constraint, such as cash crop
farming. This is unlikely to be the sole explanation for our results, however, since only 15%
of respondents have another source of regular income and only 20% have seasonal income
(Table 1). In any case, as can be seen in Figure A3, which show the results of heterogeneity
analyses identical to those performed in Figure 3 and Table 7, we do not observe statistically
significant differences between people who have other sources of income and people who
don’t.

20

A second alternative could be that people are almost completely unable to save, such
that any money beyond the immediate cash need is close to valueless. While people in
the study area lack access to reliable cash savings instruments and have been shown to have
trouble saving money (Dupas et al., 2012; Dupas and Robinson, 2013b), it is hard to imagine
that savings difficulties could be so extreme as to prevent people from transferring resources
across a single day – in Dupas and Robinson (2013b) we find that people in the study area
are able to accumulate money over at least a few days before depositing money into bank
accounts.
A third possibility is that effort costs are so high that it is optimal to stop work immediately after reaching the need. Note, however, that this is unlikely to be an explanation
unless it interacts with savings problems or present-bias in effort, since over the course of
even a few days a worker will end up working more by quitting at the need than if he worked
similar hours every day. A final possibility is that people have a limited attention constraint
and so don’t pay attention to their needs until the day that they are due. This, however,
seems somewhat unlikely in that people do report wanting to save for non-immediate goals.
While all these alternative explanations appear unlikely to start with, we can reject them
formally by using the experimental variation in unearned income from the lotteries. Each
of these alternative theories predict that as soon as the subsistence need is taken care of,
workers should quit bike taxiing for the day – but that prediction is strongly rejected by our
experimental finding that workers’ labor supply is unaffected by large lottery wins.
5.3.2

Risk Sharing

Another potential explanation is related to the fact that the bicycle taxi drivers in our
sample work in a specified area (or “stage”). In that context, it’s possible that workers have
developed a risk-sharing institution in which customers are funneled towards those workers
who most need the money. If a particular worker has a need, he is more likely to get a
customer until he reaches that need, after which competition goes back to normal. While
such a situation would produce a pattern of results similar to what we find here, we view is
at unlikely for several reasons. First, this type of cooperation seems to be fairly rare in these
sorts of labor markets. For example, Kremer et al. (2013b) find that shops often fail to buy
enough to qualify for bulk discounts, yet shopkeepers almost never report splitting orders
with another shop. Second, needs are so common that there would be relatively few days
in which people could insure each other (from Table 2, respondents report needs on 88% of
days and the average need amount exceeds total daily income). Third, to the extent that
working very long hours on some days reduces health capital (see Section 6 for some evidence
that it does), such a scheme is dominated by simply providing cash payments to each other.

21

Fourth, such a scheme is only sustainable if both income and needs are observable to other
people, yet the specific value of various needs seems hard to value, and it might be hard to
monitor income given that some fares are taken away from the stage (for example, a return
trip from town).
Nevertheless, we can check this more formally by constructing measures of the proportion
of other workers in that stage with a need on that day, and the average need amount (this
is the same approach used to construct the realized market wage rate), and then checking
whether the total income of a worker on particular day is lower when more of the other
workers in the area have needs. We find no evidence for this – the coefficients on either the
share of workers with a need or the total need value of other workers are insignificant in
nearly all specifications, suggesting that the form of risk sharing we describe above is not
the explanation.

6

Dynamic Impacts and Welfare Implications

The overall pattern of our results suggests that income targets serve as a sort of internal
commitment device to meet daily cash needs. What are the ultimate welfare consequences of
setting labor supply in this way, relative to fully optimizing intertemporally? In this section,
we present some speculative evidence on this issue, focusing both on income and on health.
The basic implication of income targeting is that a worker will, for a given effort target,
work less on days in which the wage is higher. Consequently, a worker will work more hours
for the same level of income than he would have if he substituted intertemporally. How much
income are workers in our sample giving up?
It is difficult to quantify this empirically, since a perfectly optimizing worker would want
to work more on days in which the wage is high but it is difficult for us to predict wage
fluctuations with the data we have. We therefore estimate lost income in two ways: (1)
a lower bound in which the worker supplies equal hours every day; (2) and an estimate
based on a labor supply elasticity of 0.15 (the mean micro labor supply elasticity reported
by Chetty 2012).28 We present a CDF of the percentage increase in income that adopting
such rules would yield in Figure 4.
The fixed hour rules yields mean and median increase in income of 5.0% and 2.5%, while
the estimate based on a 0.15 elasticity gives mean and median estimates of 8.0% and 5.0%.29
This estimate of lost income is of comparable magnitude to Camerer et al. (1997), who
28

Note that this calculation is equivalent to calculating the percentage reduction in hours that a worker
could realize while earning the same income.
29
Lost income is large for at least a minority of workers. It is also interesting that only about 10% of
people in our sample would reduce income if they worked a fixed number of hours per day.

22

estimate approximately a 5% increase in wages from a fixed hours rule, and Kaur et al.
(2013) who estimate a treatment on the treated productivity effect of 6% to giving external
commitment devices to data workers.
Thus the heuristic adopted by workers (especially those with lower education levels) is
not costless. For very poor households such as those in our sample, 5% of yearly income is
more than what it takes to invest in life-saving products that many struggle to find money
for, such as antimalarial bednets or water filters. Another benchmark might be the increase
in profits due to a random injection of capital among small businesses. For example, de
Mel et al. (2008) give random cash grants to Sri Lankan businesses and estimate returns
to capital of 4.6-5.3% per month. Given baseline profits and inventories in their sample,
and assuming the grant is not reinvested, increasing profits by 5% would require a 14-16%
increase in the capital stock.30
There may also be health costs of failing to smooth hours. If strenuous effort has convex
health costs, such that health capital gets depleted by working long hours, expending great
effort on days in which needs are high may have deleterious effects on long-term health. To
provide some evidence on this, we can look at health towards the end of our study period
and test whether workers who work more very-long-hours-days are in worse health towards
the end of the study period (even conditional on total hours). In Table 9, we perform a
descriptive cross-sectional regression, in which we regress endline health on the (log of) total
hours worked and the (log of) the standard deviation of hours worked across days. There is
thus one observation per worker. The results in Columns 1 and 3 show that workers with
higher variance in hours worked across days over the study period are in worse health at the
end of the period, though interestingly total hours is not predictive. Since people in poor
health may be the ones to experience the most shocks (particularly health shocks), we control
for baseline health measures as well, in Columns 2 and 4. The results hold even with these
controls. While these regressions are all cross-sectional and ultimately descriptive, they are
suggestive.

7

Conclusion

We have presented evidence that bicycle-taxi drivers in rural Kenya tend to behave as target
earners, quitting soon after making enough money to meet their daily cash need. At the
same time, when they receive unexpected and large cash payouts, they do not adjust labor
supply. To explain these patterns, we conjecture that, likely owing to the strenuous and
30

Baseline profits in their sample are 3,841 Sri Lankan rupees (LKR) while baseline inventories are 26,530
LKR. Thus, increasing profits by 5% would require an increase in capital of 3,600-4,200 LKR.

23

tedious nature of their job, bike-taxi drivers procrastinate on earning enough to cope with
cash needs until they can no longer put them off. To overcome the temptation to put off
work forever, they treat earning enough for the immediate need as a kind of personal rule
– an internal commitment device. Their success in following this rule may come from the
fact that they are loss averse over an income target, or that the costs of deviating from the
rule are too large, because it would create a precedent for future days. While such a rule is
useful for motivating workers, it comes at the cost of reduced income and frailer health for
a given number of hours worked.
That people work harder on days when they need money for an expected expense like a
ROSCA payment or a school fees bill suggests that workers may be able to smooth labor supply by taking on outlay commitments, for example by taking out loans with high-frequency
repayment schedules or joining ROSCAs that meet daily.
An alternative way of increasing productivity could be the introduction of more formal
employer-employee work arrangements (as discussed in Kaur et al. 2010, 2013). The finding
that a movement to wage work could be beneficial relates to recent work suggesting that many
self-employed individuals in poor countries are much more similar (in terms of preferences,
attitudes, cognitive ability, motivation, etc.) to wage workers than to large firm owners (i.e.
de Mel et al. 2010).
Finally, we find evidence that having more years of education reduces the tendency for
income targeting and therefore improves intertemporal arbitrage, another pathway through
which education may matter for productivity.

24

References
[1] Abeler, Johannes, Armin Falk, Lorenz Götte and David Huffman (2011). “Reference
Points and Effort Provision.” American Economic Review 101 (2): 470-492.
[2] Ainslie, George (1992). Picoeconomics: The Interaction of Successive Motivational
States within the Individual. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
[3] Augenblick, Ned, Muriel Niederle and Charlie Sprenger (2013). “Working Over Time:
Dynamic Inconsistency in Real Effort Tasks”. Unpublished manuscript, Haas School
of Business.
[4] Bénabou, Roland and Jean Tirole (2004). “Willpower and Personal Rules.” Journal of
Political Economy 112 (4): 848-886.
[5] Benjamin, Daniel J., Sebastian A. Brown, and Jesse M. Shapiro (2013). “Who is Behavioral? Cognitive Ability and Anomalous Preferences.” Journal of the European
Economic Association. Forthcoming.
[6] Bernartzi, Shlomo and Richard H. Thaler. “Heuristics and Biases in Retirement Savings
Behavior.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 21(3), (2007): 81-104.
[7] Burks, Stephen V., Jeffrey P. Carpenter, Lorenz Goette, and Aldo Rustichini (2009).
“Cognitive skills affect economic preferences, strategic behavior, and job attachment.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106 (19): 7745-7750.
[8] Camerer, Colin, Linda Babcock, George Loewenstein, and Richard Thaler (1997). “Labor Supply of New York City Cabdrivers: One Day At A Time.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 112 (2): 407-41.
[9] Chetty, Raj (2012). “Bounds on Elasticities with Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis
of Micro and Macro Evidence on Labor Supply.” Econometrica 80 (3): 969–1018.
[10] Crawford, Vincent and Juanjuan Meng (2011). “New York City Cab Drivers’ Labor Supply Revisited: Reference-Dependent Preferences with Rational-Expectations Targets
for Hours and Income.” American Economic Review 101 (5): 1912-1932.
[11] Chang, Tom and Tal Gross (2012). “How Many Pears Would a Pear Packer Pack if a
Pear Packer Could Pack Pears at Quasi-Exogenously Varying Piece Rates?” Mimeo,
Columbia University.Chou, Yuan K (2002). “Testing Alternative Models of Labour
Supply: Evidence from Taxi Drivers in Singapore.” Singapore Economic Review 47
(1): 17–47.
[12] de Mel, Suresh, Christopher Woodruff and David McKenzie (2008). “Returns to Capital in Microenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of

25

Economics 123(4): 1329-1372.
[13] de Mel, Suresh, Christopher Woodruff and David McKenzie (2010). “Who are the Microenterprise Owners?: Evidence from Sri Lanka on Tokman v. de Soto. In International Differences in Entrepreneurship, J. Lerner and A. Schoar (eds.), pp. 63-87.
[14] Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman and Uwe Sunde. (2010). “Are risk aversion and impatience related to cognitive ability?” American Economic Review 100
(3): 1238-1260.
[15] Doran, Kirk (2012). “Are Long-term Wage Elasticities of Labor Supply More Negative
than Short-term Ones?” Mimeo, University of Notre Dame.
[16] Dupas, Pascaline and Jonathan Robinson (2012). “The (Hidden) Costs of Political Instability: Evidence from Kenya’s 2007 Election Crisis”. Journal of Development Economics 99 (2): 314-329.
[17] Dupas, Pascaline and Jonathan Robinson (2013a). “Savings Constraints and Microenterprise Development: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (1): 163-92.
[18] Dupas, Pascaline and Jonathan Robinson (2013b). “Why Don’t the Poor Save More?
Evidence from Health Savings Experiments.” American Economic Review 103 (4):
1138-1171.
[19] Dupas, Pascaline, Sarah Green, Anthony Keats and Jonathan Robinson (2012). “Challenges in Banking the Rural Poor: Evidence from Kenya’s Western Province”. Forthcoming, NBER Africa Project Conference Volume.
[20] Farber, Henry (2005). “Is Tomorrow Another Day? The Labor Supply of New York
City Cabdrivers.” Journal of Political Economy 113 (1): 46-82.
[21] Farber, Henry (2008). “Reference-Dependent Preferences and Labor Supply: The Case
of New York City Taxi Drivers.” American Economic Review 98 (3): 1069-82.
[22] Fehr, Ernst and Lorenz Goette (2007). “Do Workers Work More if Wages Are High?
Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment.” American Economic Review 97 (1):
298-317.
[23] Frederick, Shane (2005). “On the ball: Cognitive reflection and decision-making.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 19 (4):25-42.
[24] Giné, Xavier, Monica Martinez Bravo, and Marian Vidal-Fernandez (2009). “Intertemporal substitution, weekly target earnings or both? Evidence from daily labor supply
of Southern Indian Fishermen,” Mimeo, World Bank.

26

[25] Goldberg, Jessica (2012). “Kwacha Gonna Do? Experimental Evidence about Labor
Supply in Rural Malawi.” Mimeo, University of Maryland.
[26] Halliday, Timothy (2012). “Intra-Household Labor Supply, Migration, and Subsistence
Constraints in a Risky Environment: Evidence from El Salvador.” European Economic Review 56 (6): 1001-1019.
[27] Hossin, Tanjim and John A. List (2012). “The Behavioralist Visits the Factory: Increasing Productivity Using Simple Framing Manipulations.” Management Science
58 (12): 2151–2167.
[28] Kaur, Supreet, Michael Kremer and Sendhil Mullainathan (2010). “Self-Control and
the Development of Work Arrangements.” American Economic Review 100(2): pp.
624-628.
[29] Kaur, Supreet, Michael Kremer and Sendhil Mullainathan (2013). “Self-Control at
Work”. Unpublished manuscript, Columbia University.
[30] Keniston, Daniel (2011). “Bargaining and Welfare: A Dynamic Structural Analysis of
the Autorickshaw Market.” Unpublished manuscript, Yale University.
[31] Kremer, Michael, Jean Lee, Jonathan Robinson and Olga Rostapshova (2013b). “The
Return to Capital for Small Retailers in Kenya: Evidence from Inventories.” Unpublished.
[32] Köszegi, Botond and Matthew Rabin (2006). “A Model of Reference-Dependent Preference.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (4): 1133-1165.
[33] Oettinger, Gerald (1999) “An Empirical Analysis of the Daily Labor Supply of Stadium
Vendors.” Journal of Political Economy 107 (2): 360-92.
[34] Rabin, Matthew (2000) “Risk Aversion and Expected-Utility Theory: A Calibration
Theorem.” Econometrica 68 (5): 1281-1292.
[35] Robinson, Jonathan and Ethan Yeh (2011). “Transactional Sex as a Response to Risk
in Western Kenya.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (1): 35-64.
[36] Thaler, Richard H., Sunstein, Cass R, (2008). Nudge: Improving Decisions on Health,
Wealth, and Happiness. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

27

7.5

# of hours worked
8
8.5
9

9.5

Figure 1. Cross-sectional Correlation beetween Cash Need for the Day and Labor Supply that Day

0

300

200

100

400

Cash need for the day (Ksh)
Quadratic fit

100

120

Daily Income
140
160

180

Mean

0

100

200

300

400

Cash need for the day (Ksh)

Notes: Each circle corresponds to an average across at least
50 man-days. Size of circle indicates number of man-days.

28

Figure 2. Coefficients from Hazard Regressions
Panel A. All Cash Need Amounts

0

.04

Pr(quitting)
.08
.12
.16

.2

All Cash Need Amounts

-200

-160

-120

-80

0
40
-40
Ksh from need

80

120

160

Coefficient
95% CI

Panel B. By Need Size
Cash need is at most 100 Ksh

Pr(quitting)
-.2-.1 0 .1 .2 .3

Pr(quitting)
-.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3

Cash need is at most 50 Ksh

-200-160-120 -80 -40 0 40 80 120 160
Ksh from need

-200-160-120 -80 -40 0 40 80 120 160
Ksh from need
Coefficient

Coefficient

95% CI

95% CI

Cash need is greater than 200 Ksh

Pr(quitting)
-.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3

Pr(quitting)
-.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3

Cash need is between 100 and 200 Ksh

-200-160-120 -80 -40 0 40 80 120 160
Ksh from need

-200-160-120 -80 -40 0 40 80 120 160
Ksh from need
Coefficient

Coefficient

95% CI

95% CI

29

Figure 3. Hazard Regressions: Heterogeneity

0

.1

Pr(quitting)
.2

.3

.4

Hazard by years of education

-200

-160

-120

-80

40
0
-40
Ksh from need

80

Top 75% years education
Bottom 25% years education

120

160

95% CI
95% CI

0

.1

Pr(quitting)
.2

.3

.4

Hazard by loss aversion level

-200

-160

-120

-80

0
40
-40
Ksh from need

More loss averse
Less loss averse

30

80

120

95% CI
95% CI

160

Figure 4. Potential Income Gain from Alternative Labor Supply Behaviors
Panel A. Fixed Hours

0

.1

.2

.3

% at or below
.4 .5 .6 .7

.8

.9

1

Potential Percentage Income Gain to Constant Fixed Daily Hours

-.1

0

-.05

.05

.1

.35
.3
.25
.2
.15
Potential % Income Gain

.4

.45

.5

Panel B. Wage Elasticity of 0.15

0

.1

.2

.3

% at or below
.4 .5 .6 .7

.8

.9

1

Potential Percentage Income Gain with a 0.15 Wage Elasticity

-.1 -.05

0

.05

.1

.15 .2 .25 .3 .35
Potential % Income Gain

.4

.45

.5

This graph shows the cumulative distribution function, across all 256 individuals in our sample, of the variable "potential %
income gain", which was constructed as follows. For each individual, we divided their total hours worked over the study period by
the number of days worked and call this the "fixed hours target". We then compute how much they would have earned on each
day worked, if they had worked exactly as many hours as the fixed hours target, at the average wage rate observed that day among
other individuals working in the same market. We then sum up the total earnings under that fixed hours target rule, and compare
it to the total actually earned.

31

Table 1. Sample Characteristics: Summary Statistics from Background Survey
Panel A. Demographic Information
Age
Married
Number of Children
Education
Value of Durable Goods Owned (in Ksh)
Value of Animals Owned (in Ksh)
Acres of land owned
Total Bike-Taxi Income in Week Prior to Survey (in Ksh)
Has another regular source of income
If yes, income in average week from other income
Has seasonal income
If yes, income in normal season
Panel B. Financial Access
Participates in ROSCA
If yes, number of ROSCAs
If yes, ROSCA contributions in last year (in Ksh)
Owns Bank Account
Received gift/loan in past 3 months
If yes, amount
Gave gift/loan in past 3 months
If yes, amount
If needed 1,000 Ksh right away, would:
Use savings
Sell asset(s)
Work more
Get gift/loan from friends/ relatives
Get loan from ROSCA
Panel C. Health
Health Problems Index (scale 1-5)1
Average Score on Activities of Daily Living (scale 1-5)2
Overall, how would you rate your health (scale 1-5)?3
Missed work due to illness in past month
If yes, number of days missed
Early Bird: Starts work before 8am on median work day

(1)
Mean

(2)
Std. Dev.

33.06
0.96
3.40
6.78
11097.76
6933.44
1.42
573.52
0.15
576.43
0.20
6631.84

8.11
0.19
2.27
2.22
8381.72
9858.87
1.44
340.41
0.36
524.80
0.40
10702.20

0.75
1.06
5972.35
0.32
0.24
0.29
2204.22
1195.88

0.43
0.84
7880.52
0.47
0.43
0.45
2348.50
1877.05

0.10
0.34
0.12
0.47
0.21

0.30
0.48
0.32
0.50
0.41

1.97
1.51
2.59
0.39
2.20
0.51

0.68
0.39
0.73
0.49
1.80
0.50

Panel D. Small-Stakes Risk Aversion and Loss Aversion
56.19
26.02
Amount invested (out of 100 Ksh) in Risky Asset4
More loss averse: Refuses the 50-50 gamble (win 30 or lose 10)
0.28
0.45
More loss averse: Refuses the 50-50 gamble (win 120 or lose 50)
0.58
0.50
Notes: All variables but "early bird" are from the baseline. There are 245 observations in the baseline.
Exchange rate was roughly 70 Ksh to US $1 during the study period.
1
The index refers to severity of pain and difficulty in performing activities of daily living. The index ranges between 1 and 5, where
1=none, 2=mild, 3=moderate, 4=severe and 5=extreme. It is composed of 4 self-assessed measures shown in Table A1.
2
Average score across all activities shown in Table A1. Codes are the same as above.
3
Codes: 1-excellent, 2-good, 3-OK, 4-poor, 5-very poor.
4
The risky asset paid off 4 times the amount invested with probability 0.5, and 0 with probability 0.5.

32

Table 2. Day-Level Summary Statistics from Diaries

A. Labor Supply
Worked today
If yes, total income (Ksh)
If yes, total hours
Received income from some other source
If yes, amount earned (Ksh)
If yes, hours

(1)

(2)

Mean

Std. Dev.

0.74
144.70
8.95
0.24
79.59
3.32

0.44
93.72
2.77
0.43
485.39
2.26

B. Is there something in particular that you need money for today?

(3)

(4)

# of
Observations # of Individuals
(Individual-days)
12466
9192
8583
8159
1971
1990

257
257
256
248
217
217

Yes
If yes, amount (Ksh)

0.88
203.74

0.32
340.44

12466
10560

257
257

C. Cash outflows
Respondent Sick
Somebody in household sick
School fees due
Funeral
Had to make repairs to bike
If yes, amount spent on repairs (Ksh)
Made a ROSCA contribution

0.18
0.10
0.02
0.05
0.21
77.63
0.15

0.38
0.29
0.13
0.21
0.41
92.65
0.36

12461
12466
9732
9783
9658
2012
10674

257
257
256
256
255
253
257

D. Other Cash Flows
Somebody asked for money
If yes, respondent gave money
Got money from somebody
Got money from spouse
Gave money to spouse
Made withdrawal from home savings
Made withdrawal from bank savings
Received lump sum payment from regular customer
Received a ROSCA payout

0.02
1.00
0.02
0.01
0.12
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.01

0.14
0.07
0.14
0.10
0.32
0.20
0.09
0.11
0.11

9765
201
9779
9726
9721
8469
3141
9751
9759

256
109
256
256
256
249
77
256
256

E. Individual-level variables
Ever rented bike
Ever got lump sum payment from regular customer

0.18
0.27

0.38
0.45

13417
13443

255
256

Notes: Exchange rate was roughly 75 Ksh to $1 US during the sample period.

33

Table 3. Determinants of Cash Need for the Day
(1)
(2)
Amount of cash
Reports cash need
need in Ksh (0 if
for the day
none reported)

Wage

Realized log local wage rate1

Cash Needs

Daily cash need of previous day
Has cash need previous day

Cash Needs

School fees due
ROSCA contribution due
Somebody asked respondent for money
Funeral to attend
Somebody in household is sick
Respondent sick

Day of Week

-33.901
(19.700)*

0.037
(0.021)*

0.116
(0.057)**

0.095
(0.026)***

36.206
(25.159)
11.079
(12.504)
22.922
(39.967)
102.380
(49.014)**
58.823
(14.328)***
18.784
(12.437)

0.107
(0.023)***
0.089
(0.015)***
0.017
(0.024)
0.060
(0.015)***
0.036
(0.010)***
0.013
(0.011)

Monday

(3)

(4)

If reports need:
Cash amount

Worked

-45.391
(23.139)*

0.136
(0.027)***

0.126
(0.066)*

15.238
(26.861)
-5.309
(13.875)
21.797
(43.832)
97.756
(51.173)*
57.785
(15.392)***
19.291
(13.756)

0.018
(0.016)
0.041
(0.031)
0.050
(0.016)***
0.063
(0.028)**
-0.107
(0.027)***
-0.018
(0.013)
-0.359
(0.025)***

18.318
0.070
10.570
0.041
(12.604)
(0.010)***
(14.148)
(0.014)***
Tuesday
-4.363
0.010
-7.587
0.018
(12.283)
(0.012)
(13.588)
(0.013)
Thursday
-17.797
0.014
-22.444
0.003
(12.970)
(0.011)
(14.846)
(0.013)
Friday
-3.013
0.018
-6.945
-0.002
(13.136)
(0.009)*
(14.937)
(0.013)
Saturday
0.002
0.000
2.578
-0.004
(12.005)
(0.012)
(13.416)
(0.015)
Sunday
-20.783
-0.100
-3.816
-0.417
(13.799)
(0.017)***
(16.449)
(0.024)***
Observations (individual-days)
10834
10834
9493
10834
Number of IDs
257
257
257
257
R-squared
0.03
0.06
0.03
0.20
Mean of Dep. Var.
177.397
0.876
202.456
0.737
Std. Dev. of Dep. Var
331.313
0.329
346.701
0.440
Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses, clustered at the individual level. Regressions include individual fixed effects,
and controls for the week and the day of the week. ***, **, * indicates significance at 1, 5 and 10%. All monetary values
in 1,000 Ksh.
1
The wage rate is the realized average wage across all the other respondents in the same market on that day.
34

Table 4. Effect of Daily Cash Need on Labor Supply
(1)

(2)

Worked Today
Has a need
If has a need: log (cash need)

0.189
(0.022)***

(3)

(4)

Total Income
22.784
(4.144)***

(5)

(6)

Total income
-5.796
(4.318)

(7)
(8)
If worked:
Number of passengers
0.011
(0.092)

(9)

(10)

Total hours
-0.097
(0.113)

(11)

(12)

Passengers per hour
0.008
(0.011)

-0.009
11.670
17.031
0.232
0.274
0.000
(0.008)
(1.977)***
(1.990)***
(0.039)***
(0.054)***
(0.005)
Realized log (local wage rate)
0.111
0.107
57.780
59.614
57.302
57.070
0.907
0.973
-0.595
-0.536
0.153
0.154
(0.026)*** (0.029)*** (6.469)*** (7.293)*** (6.899)*** (7.015)*** (0.145)*** (0.140)*** (0.248)** (0.212)** (0.024)*** (0.026)***
Observations (individual-days)
12429
10531
12429
10531
9163
8134
9163
8134
8563
7635
8563
7635
Number of IDs
257
257
257
257
257
257
257
257
256
256
256
256
R-squared
0.21
0.17
0.12
0.11
0.03
0.06
0.04
0.05
0.03
0.04
0.03
0.03
Mean of Dep. Var.
0.737
0.772
106.680
111.184
144.705
143.949
4.410
4.414
8.952
8.935
0.538
0.538
Std. Dev. of Dep. Var
0.440
0.419
102.646
100.702
93.750
91.721
2.153
2.146
2.769
2.763
0.310
0.311
Notes: Regressions are at the individual-day level. All regressions include individual fixed effects and controls for the week the day of week. Regressions also control for whether it
rained that day and whether the respondent reports being sick that day. We have fewer observations for the hour variables since the data was misrecorded in some casesStandard
errors are in parentheses, clustered at the individual level. ***, **, * indicates significance at 1, 5 and 10%.

35

Table 5. Parametric Hazard Regressions
(1)

Level Effects
Cumulative Hours Worked
Cumulative Hours Worked Squared
Distance from need
Over need
Distance from need * over need
Interaction Effects
Distance from need
* Interacted Variable
Over need
* Interacted Variable
Distance from need * over need
* Interacted Variable

(2)
(3)
(4)
Dependent variable: quit after dropping off passenger
Including interactions with:

(5)

Baseline
Specification

Top 75%
years of
education

Top 50%
years of
education

Years of
Education

Loss Averse

-0.08
(0.04)**
0.36
(0.04)***
0.11
(0.090)
0.04
(0.01)***
0.02
(0.120)

-0.083
(0.040)**
0.362
(0.039)***
0.109
(0.088)
0.066
(0.018)***
-0.026
(0.267)

-0.084
(0.040)**
0.363
(0.039)***
0.109
(0.088)
0.054
(0.012)***
-0.019
(0.186)

-0.161
(0.117)
0.496
(0.122)***
0.123
(0.089)
0.078
(0.035)**
-0.087
(0.560)

-0.084
(0.040)**
0.363
(0.039)***
0.118
(0.088)
0.086
(0.037)**
0.054
(0.587)

-0.01
(0.014)
-0.035
(0.021)*
0.072
(0.330)

-0.01
(0.016)
-0.032
(0.019)*
0.092
(0.281)

-0.001
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.005)
0.017
(0.072)

-0.001
(0.003)
-0.006
(0.005)
-0.004
(0.076)

Observations (individual-days)
34984
34311
34311
34311
34311
Number of IDs
257
244
244
244
244
R-squared
0.15
0.16
0.16
0.16
0.16
Mean of Dep. Var.
0.09
0.089
0.089
0.089
0.089
Notes: All regressions include individual fixed effects and controls for the week the day of week. Standard errors in
parentheses. We do not include interactions between hours worked and education because when we do so we cannot
reject equality. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.

36

Table 6. Effect of Unexpected Cash Windfall on Labor Supply
(1)

(2)

Worked
Today

Total
income

Total hours

Time ended
work

0.011
(0.024)
0.025
(0.024)

5.457
(4.975)
2.057
(3.394)

0.092
(0.153)
0.043
(0.148)

-0.06
(0.105)
0.111
(0.102)

10703

7924

7485

7538

Number of IDs
R-squared
Mean of Dep. Var.

256
0.24
0.74

256
0.21
145.718

256
0.04
8.921

256
0.01
17.433

Std. Dev. of Dep. Var

0.438

95.313

2.76

1.882

Won big lottery prize today
Won big lottery prize yesterday
Observations (individual-days)

(3)
If worked:

(4)

Notes: Regressions are at the individual-day level. Standard errors are in parentheses,
clustered at the individual level. Regressions include individual fixed effects, all the
variables shown in Table 3, and controls for the week the day of week.. ***, **, *
indicates significance at 1, 5 and 10%.

37

Table 7. Daily Needs, Income Targets, and Hours Targets
(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.03
(0.04)

-0.07
(0.04)*

-0.10
(0.04)***
0.32
(0.04)***
0.63
(0.11)***
-0.78
(0.19)***
0.08
(0.01)***
0.02
(0.01)***

(4)

Dependent variable = 1 if quit work for the day
Cumulative Hours Worked (Units = Hours / 10)

-0.12
(0.04)***
Cumulative Hours Worked Squared
0.35
(0.04)***
Cumulative Income Earned (Units = Ksh / 1000)
0.16
0.06
0.46
(0.10)
(0.10)
(0.11)***
Cumulative Income Earned Squared
-0.65
(0.19)***
Cumulative Hours > Estimated Target
0.08
0.07
0.07
(0.01)***
(0.01)***
(0.01)***
Cumulative Income > Estimated Target
0.03
0.03
0.02
(0.01)***
(0.01)***
(0.01)***
Over need
0.04
0.03
(0.01)***
(0.01)***
Observations
40670
36070
40670
36070
Number of bodas
257
257
257
257
R-squared
0.15
0.16
0.15
0.16
Mean of dependent variable
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09
Notes: These estimates follow Table 3 Crawford and Meng (2011). Targets are estimated as average daily
income or hours on days up to but not including the day in question. Targets are estimated by day of the
week. All regressions include individual fixed effects and controls for the week the day of week. Standard
errors clustered at the individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%
respectively.

38

Table 8. Education and Capitalizing on High Wage Days
(1)

(2)

(3)

Worked
Today

Total
Income

Total
income

(4)
If worked:

(5)

(6)

(7)

Number of
Log own Passengers
Total hours
passengers
wage rate per hour

0.175
19.943
-5.269
0.01
-0.176
0.006
0.012
(0.026)*** (6.110)***
(7.553)
(0.148)
(0.180)
(0.040)
(0.014)
Has a need * top 75% of education distribution
0.025
5.059
-1.826
-0.036
0.132
-0.026
-0.007
(0.041)
(8.377)
(8.826)
(0.183)
(0.222)
(0.049)
(0.022)
Big day (wage is over median)
0.023
7.785
5.132
-0.026
-0.11
0.028
0.007
(0.015)
(4.146)*
(4.463)
(0.092)
(0.128)
(0.022)
(0.011)
Big day * top 75% of education distribution
0.022
11.504
8.653
0.133
0.023
0.062
0.024
(0.020)
(5.881)*
(6.251)
(0.117)
(0.155)
(0.031)*
(0.015)*
Observations (individual-days)
11982
11982
8916
8916
8380
8378
8380
Number of IDs
243
243
243
243
243
243
243
ID fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
R-squared
0.20
0.11
0.02
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.02
Mean of Dep. Var.
0.744
108.246
145.469
4.422
8.953
2.691
0.537
Std. Dev. of Dep. Var
0.436
103.329
94.517
2.162
2.767
0.581
0.310
Notes: Regressions are at the individual-day level. All regressions include individual fixed effects and controls for the week the day of
week. Regressions also control for whether it rained that day and whether the respondent reports being sick that day. Standard errors are
in parentheses, clustered at the individual level. ***, **, * indicates significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
Has a need

39

Table 9. Relationship between hours worked and endline health
(1)

(3)
(4)
Missed work due to sickness in last
Sick in last week of logs
week of logs
0.03
0.03
0.01
0.01
Log (total hours over sample period)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.02)
0.18
0.14
0.12
0.08
Log (std. deviation daily hours over sample period)
(0.083)**
(0.084)*
(0.069)*
(0.07)
Health is worse than average at baseline
0.06
0.12
(0.06)
(0.049)**
Missed work at least once due to sickness
0.09
0.02
in month prior to baseline
(0.06)
(0.05)
Observations (one per individual)
252
252
252
252
R-squared
0.03
0.06
0.02
0.05
Mean of Dep. Var.
0.25
0.25
0.15
0.15
Std. Dev. of Dep. Var
0.43
0.43
0.36
0.36
Notes: Regressions include controls for the total number of days covered in the logbooks. Standard errors are in parentheses,
clustered at the individual level. ***, **, * indicates significance at 1, 5 and 10%.

40

(2)

Appendix Table A1. Baseline Health Level: Activities of Daily Living

* In the past 30 days, how much of bodily aches or pains did you have?
* How much difficulty do you have in your daily life because of your pain
* In the past 30 days, how much discomfort did you have?
How much difficulty have you experienced in the past 30 days with…?
Concentrating or remembering things
Learning a new task
Sleeping
Feeling tired and / or not having enercy during the day
Seeing or recognizing someone you know from across the road
Seeing or recognizing someone you know from your arm's length
Sitting for long periods of time
Standing up from sitting down
Stooping, Kneeling or crouching
Picking things up with your fingers
Extending arms above shoulder level
Concentratin on something for more than 10 minutes
* Overall, how much did these difficulties interfere with your life?
Data source: background survey.
* Items included in the Health Problems Index shown in Table 1.

(1)
None

(2)
Mild

(3)
Moderate

(4)
Severe

(5)
Extreme

(6)
N

0.32
0.16
0.14

0.43
0.55
0.55

0.20
0.25
0.27

0.04
0.04
0.03

0.02
0.01
0.03

243
182
180

0.55
0.64
0.74
0.45
0.82
0.88
0.80
0.80
0.75
0.93
0.85
0.71
0.31

0.20
0.22
0.15
0.33
0.07
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.16
0.05
0.10
0.20
0.45

0.18
0.12
0.10
0.19
0.10
0.05
0.10
0.08
0.08
0.02
0.03
0.09
0.22

0.05
0.02
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01

0.02
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.00

244
245
242
244
239
244
244
242
245
245
241
245
245

41

Appendix Table A2. Relationship Between Reported Cash Needs and Actual Expenditures
(1)

(2)

ROSCA payment
Made ROSCA deposit
Will make ROSCA deposit tomorrow
Will make ROSCA deposit in 2 days
Paid school fees
Will pay school fees tomorrow
Will pay school fees in 2 days

0.55
0.55
(0.026)*** (0.027)***
-0.04
(0.018)**
-0.05
(0.014)***

(3)

(4)

School Fees

(5)
(6)
Reported need of:

(7)

(8)

Funeral Expenses

Repaired bike

(9)

(10)

Repaid a Loan

0.56
0.59
(0.044)*** (0.043)***
0.03
(0.03)
0.02
(0.02)

Contributed to funeral

0.49
0.50
(0.033)*** (0.034)***
0.02
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)

Will contribute to funeral tomorrow
Will contribute to funeral in 2 days
Made repairs to bicycle

0.70
0.70
(0.014)*** (0.016)***
-0.01
(0.01)
0.00
(0.01)

Will make repairs to bicycle tomorrow
Will make repairs to bicycle in 2 days
Repaid loan

0.26
0.25
(0.072)*** (0.068)***
Will repay loan tomorrow
0.07
(0.05)
Will repay loan in 2 days
0.04
(0.04)
Observations
8773
7473
8802
7504
8839
7549
8739
7394
7821
6692
Number of IDs
253
252
253
252
253
252
253
252
243
242
R-squared
0.26
0.25
0.19
0.21
0.20
0.21
0.47
0.47
0.07
0.07
Mean of dependent variable
0.19
0.19
0.03
0.03
0.06
0.06
0.25
0.25
0.01
0.01
Notes: Regressions include individual fixed effects, as well as controls for the day of the week and the week of the year. Standard errors, clustered at the individual
leave, in in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.
42

Appendix Table A3. Relationship between Proxy Income / Hours Targets and Need Amounts
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Proxy Income Target
Proxy Hours Target
Need amount (conditional on need)
0.003
0.000
(0.003)
(0.009)
Need amount (imputing as 0 days without a need)
0.003
0.003
(0.003)
(0.009)
Observations
31266
34556
30650
33879
Number of bodas
257
257
256
256
R-squared
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.03
Mean of dependent variable
0.15
0.15
0.92
0.92
Notes: These estimates follow Table 3 Crawford and Meng (2011). Targets are estimated as average daily income or hours on days up to but not
including the day in question. Targets are estimated by day of the week. All regressions include individual fixed effects and controls for the week
the day of week. Standard errors clustered at the individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%
respectively.

43

Appendix Table A4. Cross-Sectional Returns to Education
(1)

(2)

Log average daily
income
Years of Education
Age
Years of Experience
Married
Number of children
Log value of durable goods and
animals owned
Acres of land owned
Self-reported health
Missed work at least once in month
prior to baseline
Has a bank account
Observations (individual-days)
R-squared
Mean of Dep. Var.
Std. Dev. of Dep. Var

(3)

(4)

Probability of
Working

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Average Total Average Number
of Passengers
Hours

(9)

(10)

Average Fare

(11)

(12)

Average own wage rate

(13)

(14)

Average local
wage rate

0.037
0.04
0.011 0.007 -0.001 -0.076 0.063 0.048 0.761
1.012
0.451
0.603
0.018 -0.008
(0.010)*** (0.013)*** (0.009) (0.012) (0.053) (0.068) (0.034)* (0.039) (0.400)* (0.462)** (0.159)*** (0.201)*** (0.049) (0.017)
-0.006
0.002
-0.020
-0.009
0.052
-0.113
-0.004
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.027)
(0.015)
(0.180)
(0.078)
(0.006)
0.009
-0.003
-0.014
-0.035
0.734
0.139
-0.004
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.037)
(0.022)
(0.253)***
(0.109)
(0.009)
0.140
-0.068
0.171
0.387
-8.545
0.717
-0.031
(0.161)
(0.139)
(0.857)
(0.494)
(5.821)
(2.510)
(0.210)
0.001
-0.005
0.116
0.054
-0.579
-0.082
0.001
(0.017)
(0.015)
(0.089)
(0.052)
(0.607)
(0.262)
(0.022)
0.036
-0.009
-0.192
-0.067
2.236
1.242
-0.011
(0.043)
(0.039)
(0.231)
(0.133)
(1.567)
(0.681)*
(0.056)
0.005
0.007
0.050
0.083
-1.065
0.075
0.050
(0.024)
(0.022)
(0.129)
(0.074)
(0.876)
(0.378)
(0.032)
-0.029
0.047
-0.056
0.012
-0.891
-0.184
-0.025
(0.040)
(0.035)
(0.213)
(0.123)
(1.446)
(0.623)
(0.052)
-0.169
-0.019
-0.254
-0.147
-5.121
-2.161
-0.081
(0.063)***
(0.058)
(0.338)
(0.195)
(2.297)**
(0.991)**
(0.083)
0.004
-0.024
-0.226
-0.223
5.119
0.806
0.127
(0.064)
(0.059)
(0.341)
(0.197)
(2.317)**
(1.001)
(0.083)
257
256
232
231
257
256
257
256
257
256
256
255
257
256
0.05
0.21
0.01
0.23
0.00
0.20
0.01
0.37
0.01
0.36
0.03
0.25
0.00
0.94
-2.33
-2.33
0.85
0.85
6.55
6.55
3.27
3.26
35.63
35.64
17.34
17.33
17.20 17.19
0.42
0.42
0.36
0.36
2.22
2.23
1.44
1.44
16.87
16.90
6.70
6.71
2.04
2.03

44

Appendix Figure A1. Proxying Target with Average Past Realized Income/Hours on same
Week Day
Panel A. Income

0

.05

Pr(quitting)
.1
.15

.2

.25

Proxying target with history of realized income on that week day

-200

-160

-120

-80
-40
0
40
Ksh from Proxied Target

80

120

160

Coefficient
95% CI

Panel B. Hours

0

.2

Pr(quitting)
.4

.6

Proxying target with history of realized hours on that week day

-5

-4

-3

-2
-1
0
1
Hours from Proxied Target

2

3

4

Coefficient
95% CI

Notes: These estimates follow Crawford and Meng (2011). Proxy targets are estimated as average daily income
or hours on days up to but not including the day in question. Proxy targets are estimated by day of the week.

45

Appendix Figure A2. Education, Income, and Work Intensity
Education and Average Hours

Education and Average Income
10

240
220

8

180
160

Average hours

Average Daily Income

200

140
120
100
80
60

6

4

2

40
20

0

0
0

2

4

6
Years Education

8

Average Daily Income

10

0

12

2

4

Average hours

Fitted Values

10

12

10

12

10

12

Fitted Values

50

5

40

4

Average fare

Average number of passengers

8

Education and Average Fare

Education and Average Total Passengers
6

3
2

30

20

10

1

0

0
0

2

4

6
Years Education

8

Average number of passengers

10

0

12

2

4

6
Years Education

Average fare

Fitted Values

Education and Average Local Wage Rate

8

Fitted Values

Education and Average Own Wage Rate

25

25

20

20

Average own wage rate

Average local wage rate

6
Years Education

15

10

5

0

15

10

5

0
0

2

4

6
Years Education

Average local wage rate

8

10

12

0

Fitted Values

2

4

6
Years Education

Average own wage rate

46

8

Fitted Values

Appendix Figure A3. Hazard Regressions: Further Heterogeneity Analyses
Hazard by having other regular income

-.1

-.1

0

0

Pr(quitting)
.1

Pr(quitting)
.1
.2

.2

.3

.4

.3

Hazard by Renting/Owning Bike

-120

-80

-40
0
40
Ksh from need

80

Has other regular income
Does not have other regular income

160

120

-200

-160

-120

-80

95% CI
95% CI

-40
0
40
Ksh from need
Rents Bike
Owns bike

Pr(quitting)
.2

.3

Hazard by average health symptoms

.1

-160

0

-200

-200

-160

-120

-80

-40
0
40
Ksh from need

Symptoms worse than ave.
Symptoms better than ave.

47

80

120
95% CI
95% CI

160

80
95% CI
95% CI

120

160

