NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE NATURAL RATE HYPOTHESIS:
AN IDEA PAST ITS SELL-BY DATE
Roger E.A. Farmer
Working Paper 19267
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19267
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2013

This paper was written while visiting the Bank of England for the year as a 2013 Senior Houblon Norman
Fellow. I wish to thank Spencer Dale and the Trustees of the Houblon Norman Fund for providing
me with this opportunity. I am also grateful to everyone at the Bank for making me feel so welcome
and for their support and encouragement during my stay. Finally, I would like to thank Dan Nixon,
Mark Cornelius and the entire editorial team at the Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, as well as
C. Roxanne Farmer, for their invaluable editorial suggestions and assistance. The views expressed
in this article are those of the author and they do not represent those of the Bank or the Monetary Policy
Committee. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Roger E.A. Farmer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Natural Rate Hypothesis: An idea past its sell-by date
Roger E.A. Farmer
NBER Working Paper No. 19267
July 2013
JEL No. E0,E24,E52
ABSTRACT
Central banks throughout the world predict inflation with new-Keynesian models where, after a shock,
the unemployment rate returns to its so called "natural rate". That assumption is called the Natural
Rate Hypothesis (NRH). This paper reviews a body of work, published over the last decade, which
is critical of the NRH. I argue that the NRH does not hold in the data and I provide an alternative paradigm
that explains why it does not hold. I replace the NRH with the assumption that the animal spirits of
investors are a fundamental of the economy and I show how to operationalize that idea by constructing
an empirical model that outperforms the new-Keynesian Phillips curve. I model animal spirits with
a new fundamental that I call the belief function.
Roger E.A. Farmer
UCLA
Department of Economics
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
rfarmer@econ.ucla.edu

2

Six years after the onset of the Great Recession,
Western economies are still underperforming by
historical standards. There have been calls from
prominent academics, politicians and policy
makers for a rethink of the foundations of
macroeconomics. But what would that mean? This
article explains how a radical restructuring of
macroeconomic theory, based on models of
multiple equilibria, can help us to understand the
crisis.
To make my case, I summarize and synthesize
results from my recent books and academic
articles. This body of work (Farmer 2002, 2006,
2008, 2010a,b 2012a, 2013a, 2014) reconciles
Keynesian and classical ideas in a new way.
Instead of assuming prices are sticky, I develop a
new paradigm to explain why high unemployment
persists.
In my work, I use search theory to provide a new
foundation to Keynesian economics. Unlike
theories based on Samuelson’s neo-classical
synthesis, I explain why the data do not display a
natural rate of unemployment.
I replace the Natural Rate Hypothesis with the
assumption that the animal spirits of investors are
a fundamental of the economy and I show how to
operationalize that idea by constructing an
empirical model that outperforms the newKeynesian Phillips curve. I model animal spirits
with a new fundamental that I call the belief
function.

A brief history of macroeconomic
thought
From Hume to Phillips
Classical economists from David Hume, through
Adam Smith, David Ricardo and John Maynard
Keynes’ contemporary, Arthur Pigou, viewed the
1
economy as a self-regulating mechanism. In
modern parlance the classical vision was of an
economy with a unique, stable, steady-state
equilibrium.
Smith’s idea of the ‘invisible hand’ was formalized
in the nineteenth century by Léon Walras (1874)
and Vilfredo Pareto (1896). They envisaged an
economic system that today we would describe as
2
Pareto Efficient.

1

Hume (1742), Smith (1776), Ricardo (1817), Pigou (1928).
In the language of modern general equilibrium theory, an
equilibrium is Pareto Efficient if an omniscient social planner could
not rearrange the allocation of goods, including the allocation of

2

Writing in 1936, following a U.S. stock market
collapse and an unemployment rate in excess of
20%, Keynes provided a different vision. He saw
high persistent unemployment as a different kind
of steady state equilibrium.
Keynes’ view was rejected by his followers,
notably Paul Samuelson (1955). In the third
edition of his undergraduate textbook, Samuelson
replaced Keynes’ notion, of high unemployment
as an equilibrium, with a new idea: the neo3
classical synthesis. According to that idea, the
Keynesian high unemployment equilibrium is only
temporary. It applies in the short run, when prices
and wages are sticky, but in the long run, when all
wages and prices have had time to adjust, the
economy reverts to a classical equilibrium with full
employment.
Soon after Samuelson introduced the neoclassical synthesis, the theory was provided with
empirical support. In an important 1958 article, A.
William Phillips demonstrated that there had been
a structurally stable relationship between
unemployment and the rate of change of money
wages in a century of U.K. data. His article was
influential because it filled a theoretical hole in
Keynesian theory. Box 1 shows the original
Phillips curve and the methodology used to
construct it.
Keynesians and monetarists
Milton Friedman is a central figure in the
development of macroeconomics in the latter part
of the twentieth century. In his1948 article, “A
Monetary and Fiscal Framework for Economic
Stability”, he developed the thesis that policy
makers should provide a stable framework in
which private agents can operate.
Active monetary and fiscal policy has no role in
Friedman’s analysis since he assumed that
markets work well to allocate resources efficiently
4
to competing ends. Because of the central role of
the money supply in Friedman’s thought, his ideas
are known as monetarism.
In 1970, Friedman explained the theoretical
framework that guided his policy advice. By that
time, the Phillips curve had appeared in print and

time spent in paid employment, to make any single person better
off without making some other person worse off.
3
For a discussion of the influence of Samuelson’s textbook on
economic thought, see the enlightening piece by Pearce and
Hoover (1995).
4

For a competing view of why markets do not work well, see the
recent piece by Farmer, Nourry and Venditti (2012), which won
the inaugural 2013 Maurice Allais Prize in Economic Science.

3

Box 1: Estimating the first Phillips curve
Phillips estimated the first Phillips curve using
U.K. data on wage inflation and unemployment
from 1861 through 1957.
When unemployment was high, he argued that
there was an excess supply of labour that put
downward pressure on money wages. When
unemployment was low, he argued that there was
an excess demand for labour, leading to upward
pressure on money wages.
To substantiate these claims, he separated his
data into three sub-periods and demonstrated
that the same relationship held in all three of
them. Phillips’ first sub-period began in 1861 and
ended in 1913 with the onset of WWI. The
second contained data for the interwar period and
the third began in 1948 and ended in 1957. The
Phillips curve was estimated on data from the first
sub-sample using an averaging method to
remove the influence of changing unemployment
on the steady state relationship that he hoped to
uncover.

For each of the six and half cycles, the data for
unemployment and wage inflation for each region
were averaged. That procedure led to six values for
average wage inflation and average unemployment
to which Phillips fit a nonlinear equation. By
grouping data in this way, he hoped to remove the
effects of changing inflation and unemployment on
the steady state relationship.
The resulting curve connecting unemployment and
wage inflation proved to be remarkably resilient.
Phillips showed that raw data for each of the six
and half cycles in the pre-WWI period lay closely
around a curve that had been fit to cycle averaged
data.
Chart 2, reproduced from Phillips’ original article,
illustrates the data for 1948 to 1957. Notice how
closely the 1950s data conforms to the pre WWI
curve.
Chart 2: Fitting post-WWII data to the pre
WWI Phillips curve

Phillips divided the raw data into six groups
based on where an observation occurred over the
business cycle. He grouped the pre-WWI data
into six and a half cycles and he assigned the
unemployment data for each cycle to one of six
regions; the peak, the trough and four
intermediate regions (see Chart 1).
Chart 1: How Phillips grouped the preWWI Data

2
3
4
5

0%
2%
3%
4%
5%
7%

6 (trough)
11%
Source: Author

Unemployment rate

1 (peak)

Source: Phillips (1958) Used by permission.

Phillips’ contemporaries saw the conformity of data
from the 1950s, with a curve estimated from
nineteenth century data, as evidence that the
Phillips curve was a fundamental structural
relationship that characterizes the wage adjustment
process. The stability of the Phillips curve in a
hundred years of data made them sit up and pay
attention.

4

Friedman was able to adopt it as the ‘missing
equation’ that connects the Keynesian short run
with the classical long run.
When Friedman explained his framework in 1970,
the gap between classical and Keynesian
economics was as small as it had ever been:
Keynesians and monetarists had adopted a
common theoretical framework and Samuelson’s
neoclassical synthesis had become part of the
economic lexicon. For both schools of thought,
Keynes’ idea of unemployment as a steady state
equilibrium had been relegated to the dustbin of
history and Friedman could assert without fear of
contradiction from Keynesians like Paul
Samuelson or Robert Solow that:
‘Keynes's error consisted in neglecting
the role of wealth in the consumption
function…’ (Friedman 1970, p 206, my
emphasis)
As a consequence of this alleged error, Friedman
argued that Keynes was incorrect to model
persistent unemployment as one of many possible
long run equilibria since
‘…there is no fundamental "flaw in the
price system" that makes unemployment
the natural outcome of a fully operative
market mechanism.’ Friedman (1970, p
207)
Keynesians and monetarists alike adopted the
Phillips curve as the missing equation that
explains the transition from the short run to the
long run. By accepting that point of view,
macroeconomists abandoned one of the most
important insights of Keynes’ General Theory: the
existence of high unemployment as a persistent
long run steady-state equilibrium.

Unemployment and inflation
The inception of the Natural Rate Hypothesis
In the 1970s we entered an era of stagflation,
characterized by simultaneously high
unemployment and high inflation. These new facts
were inconsistent with the Phillips curve, which
predicted that high unemployment should be
accompanied by low inflation.
Edmund Phelps (1967) and Friedman (1968)
argued independently that stagflation was not
inconsistent with the neo-classical synthesis,
since we should not have expected to observe a
stable trade-off between money wage inflation and
unemployment. They asserted, instead, that the
true relationship is between real wage inflation
and unemployment. Their work explained why the
Phillips curve had disappeared.

To understand the disappearance of the Phillips
curve, Friedman introduced the concept of the
natural rate of unemployment, which is:
‘… the level that would be ground out by
the Walrasian system of general
equilibrium equations, provided there is
imbedded in them the actual structural
characteristics of the labor and commodity
markets, including market imperfections,
stochastic variability in demands and
supplies, the cost of gathering information
about job vacancies and labor
availabilities, the costs of mobility, and so
on.’
According to Friedman,
‘A lower level of unemployment [than the
natural rate] is an indication that there is an
excess demand for labor that will produce
upward pressure on real wage rates. A
higher level of unemployment is an
indication that there is an excess supply of
labor that will produce downward pressure
on real wage rates.’ (Friedman 1968)
The NRH provided a tidy explanation both for the
existence of the Phillips curve in nineteenth and
early twentieth century data, and for its
disappearance in the 1960s and 1970s. According
to this explanation, in the period before WWII,
inflation expectations were anchored by the gold
standard. Price inflation would never be too high
or too low because the price level is determined,
in the long run, by the stock of money. That, in
turn, was linked to gold production.
A new concept: the expectations-augmented
Phillips curve
When the U.S. left the gold standard in 1971, the
quantity of money could expand without limit and
price expectations lost their natural anchor.
Phelps and Friedman argued that the Phillips
curve shifted because households and firms
began to expect higher price inflation.
Phelps and Friedman believed that firms and
workers care about real wages, not money wages,
and they claimed that the expected rate of price
inflation becomes written into wage contracts. If
price inflation is forecast correctly, unemployment
will equal its natural rate. Since forecasts of price
inflation will often be wrong, unemployment, in the
short run, will differ from its natural rate. The work
of Phelps and Friedman led to the development of
a new concept, the expectations-augmented
Phillips curve.
According to this theory, realized price inflation
replaces wage inflation on the vertical axis of the
Phillips curve graph and there is a different
Phillips curve for every value of expected price

5
inflation: expected price inflation shifts the curve.
Importantly, unemployment can only differ from its
natural rate when expected inflation is different
from actual inflation.
Chart 3 illustrates this idea. The chart plots the
realized rate of price inflation, in any given month,
against the realized value of the unemployment
rate. Each of the three Phillips curves on this
graph is associated with a different rate of
e
expected price inflation, denoted by Δp on the
chart. The vertical dashed red line represents the
natural rate of unemployment. For each of the
points A, B and C that lie on the NR line in Chart
3, inflation expectations (shown for each curve)
are equal to realised price inflation (shown on the
y axis). For example, actual and expected
inflation are both equal to 5% at point A.

Price inflation

Chart 3: The expectations augmented Phillips
curve
e

Δp = -5%
e

Δp = 0%
e

Δp = +5%

Δp = +5%

A

Δp = 0

B

Δp = -5%

C

Unemployment

The natural rate
of unemployment
Source: Author

How do agents form expectations about economic
variables such as inflation? Early theoretical
papers that used the NRH assumed a theory of
adaptive expectations. According to that theory,
next period’s expected inflation rate is formed by
taking a weighted average of this period’s actual
inflation rate and last period’s expected inflation
rate.
The combination of NRH and adaptive
expectations implied that, if the unemployment
rate were held below its natural rate by
expansionary fiscal or monetary policy, the
outcome would be an inflationary spiral. Similarly,
if policy makers were to keep unemployment
above its natural rate, there would be a
deflationary spiral. For that reason, the natural
rate of unemployment is sometimes called the
non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment
(NAIRU).

The fact that inflationary expectations can
influence actual inflation implies that managing
expectations is critical. The NRH implies that,
once high inflation becomes expected, it will
persist, even when unemployment is at its natural
rate. That is why inflation targeting is thought to
be such an important tool for anchoring
expectations. It provides an anchor to inflationary
expectations; a role that was previously played by
the gold standard.
The rise of rational expectations
When Phelps and Friedman wrote their seminal
articles on the NRH, they were simply
acknowledging the logical implications of the
neoclassical synthesis. If the neoclassical
synthesis is correct then the economy will always
return to full employment as wages and prices
adjust to clear markets. Unemployment cannot
differ permanently from its natural rate and
Keynes’ original vision of high unemployment, as
a persistent steady state, must be fatally flawed.
Keynes had argued that most unemployment is
‘involuntary,’ in the sense that households are not
‘on their labour supply curves.’ He meant that, at
the prevailing wages and prices of the 1930s,
most unemployed people would have preferred to
be working. Franco Modigliani famously described
the counterfactual: If unemployment were indeed
voluntary, the Great Depression must have been
caused by a ‘sudden attack of contagious
laziness’.
The orthodox view in the 1960s was that Keynes
was right about this point but that involuntary
unemployment is a temporary situation that occurs
because there is a friction that prevents wages
and prices from adjusting to clear all markets.
Writing in 1968, Phelps and Friedman both
accepted this orthodox view.
In 1972, Robert E. Lucas Jr. published an
influential piece that shaped the course of
macroeconomics for the next forty years. He
argued that labour markets are always in
equilibrium and that the concept of involuntary
unemployment, introduced by Keynes in the
General Theory, is not a useful one. The idea that
the demand and supply of labour are always equal
is called continuous market clearing.
In the same paper, Lucas introduced the concept
of rational expectations, the idea that peoples’
expectations about the future paths of key
economic variables are subject to random errors
but are correct on average. The introduction of
continuous market clearing and rational
expectations had important implications for
monetary economics.

6

What’s wrong with the NRH?
The data rejects the NRH when combined with
rational expectations
When the NRH was first proposed, Friedman
assumed that expectations are adaptive. The
combination of adaptive expectations and the
NRH led to a theory where variations in the
unemployment rate are caused, primarily, by
incorrect expectations. In this theory, households
and firms forecast price inflation and their forecast
determines which Phillips curve prevails in the
period. Expected price inflation feeds into wages,
and, through mark-ups, into realized inflation.
According to the NRH, unemployment differs from
its natural rate only if expected inflation differs
from actual inflation. If expectations are rational,
we should see as many quarters when inflation is
above expected inflation as quarters when it is
below expected inflation. That suggests the
following test of the NRH.
Because a decade contains forty quarters, the
probability that average expected inflation over a
decade will be different from average actual
inflation should be small. If the NRH and rational
expectations are both true simultaneously, a plot
of decade averages of inflation against
unemployment should reveal a vertical line at the
natural rate of unemployment. In Chart 4, I show
that this prediction fails dramatically.
Chart 4: Average inflation and unemployment
by decade

Average inflation by decade

10

8

6

1970s
1980s

4
1950s
2

2000s

1960s

1990s

0
3.5

4.0

4.5

5.0

5.5

6.0

6.5

7.0

7.5

Average unemployment by decade
Source: Author’s calculations

There is no tendency for the points to lie around a
vertical line and, if anything, the long run Phillips
curve revealed by this chart is upward sloping,
and closer to being horizontal than vertical. Since
it is unlikely that expectations are

systematically biased over decades, I
conclude that the NRH hypothesis is false.
Defenders of the natural rate hypothesis might
choose to respond to these empirical findings by
arguing that the natural rate of unemployment is
time varying. But they have not provided us, in
advance, with a theory of how the natural rate of
unemployment varies over time. In the absence of
such a theory the NRH has no predictive content.
A theory like this, which cannot be falsified by
any set of observations, is closer to religion
than science.

The development of new-Keynesian
economics
Real Business Cycle theory and the birth of
DSGE models
Soon after Lucas developed the theory of rational
expectations, Edward Prescott (1980) and John B.
Long Jr. and Charles Plosser (1983) introduced
the – then radical – idea that business cycles can
be explained by shocks to productivity. That
theory of real business cycles began with simple
equilibrium models where ‘random shocks’ to the
level of technological innovation are the sources
of swings in growth and employment. It soon
developed into a much more ambitious
programme.
In real business cycle theory there is no
unemployment since RBC theorists assume that
the demand and supply of labour are always equal
to each other. There is continuous market
clearing. They argue that unemployment is not a
useful concept and that instead, we should
represent labour market activity by the number of
hours spent in paid employment by a
representative household.
If there is no unemployment, how can there be a
natural rate of unemployment? There too, RBC
theory has a response. According to RBC
economists, there is a natural rate of employment,
which represents the hours of paid employment of
a representative worker when productivity is at its
average level over the business cycle.
Starting in the 1980s, the tools of rational
expectations and continuous market clearing
swept the profession. Classical ideas spread
outwards from the Universities of Chicago and
Minnesota and soon prominent graduate
economics programmes throughout the world
were training their students to study the
macroeconomy using classical tools. This new
approach was called Dynamic Stochastic General
Equilibrium (DSGE) theory.

7
Putting sticky wages and prices into the RBC
model
Keynesian economists were initially resistant to
the classical tools of rational expectations and
continuous market clearing but their resistance did
not last long. They began to use classical
techniques, but they amended them by putting
back sticky prices using Samuelson’s neoclassical
synthesis as an organising principle. With the
publication of an influential volume of readings in
1991, edited by N. Gregory Mankiw and David
5
Romer, new-Keynesian economics was born.
Gradually, new Keynesian researchers
incorporated frictions and additional shocks into
their models. These included sticky prices, shocks
to confidence, monetary disturbances and news
shocks. By the onset of the financial crisis in 2007,
macroeconomists had developed mathematical
equations that captured the ideas of 1920’s
classical business cycle theories described by
6
Pigou (1928).
There is no involuntary unemployment in the
new-Keynesian model

We need to bring unemployment
back into our models
In the wake of the Great Recession, continuous
labour market clearing and rational expectations
have both come under attack. In my view, the
rational expectations concept is useful and, if
applied carefully, can be incorporated into a model
that will help us to understand what went wrong in
7
the crisis. But the assumption of continuous
labour market clearing is seriously misleading.
Based on this assumption, RBC models take
account only of employment, proxied by the
number of hours worked, with no explicit role for
the rate of unemployment.
The distinction between employment and
unemployment is crucial. In this section I draw on
U.S. labour market data from the past half-century
to argue that the RBC approach is fundamentally
flawed, and that any model that aims to explain
business cycle fluctuations must provide an
explicit theory of the unemployment rate.
Hours worked varies for three reasons

Classical and new-Keynesian economists both
use DSGE models. The twin hallmarks of the
DSGE agenda are the assumptions of continuous
labour market clearing and rational expectations.
These assumptions were made in the first RBC
models of Prescott (1980) and Long and Plosser
(1983) and were incorporated into almost every
DSGE model since. That includes almost all of the
work on new-Keynesian economics that predates
the 2008 crisis.

RBC economists use hours spent in employment
by a representative agent as their measure of
employment. This measure varies for three
reasons. First, households decide how many
household members will participate in the labour
market. Second, each potential worker must find a
job. Finally, each employed worker must decide
how many hours to work in a given week. Each of
these three variables displays very different
characteristics.

In new-Keynesian models, there are costs of
changing wages and prices. Because of these so
called menu costs, wages and prices are not
always at the levels that would be chosen in their
absence. Nevertheless, households are still
assumed to be able to find as much employment
as they would like at existing wages and prices.
In new-Keynesian DSGE models, just as in
RBC models, there is no involuntary
unemployment.

Average hours worked do not vary much at
business cycle frequencies. Chart 5 plots U.S.
unemployment, on the left hand axis and average
weekly hours on the right hand axis.
Unemployment is measured as a percentage of
the labour force, and average weekly hours is a
number. The grey shaded areas are recessions
defined by the NBER dating committee. This
chart shows that there has been a secular
downward drift in average weekly hours but
very little movement in hours at business
cycle frequencies.

5

Mankiw and Romer: (1991).
The pinnacle of the NK programme is the model developed by
Frank Smets and Rafael Wouters (2007). That model fits pre
2008 data very well by incorporating large numbers of frictions
and shocks into a DSGE structure. It is much less successful at
explaining the Great Recession. Lakatos (1978) distinguished
between a progressive and degenerative research programme.
Farmer (2013b) argues that New-Keynesian economics is a
degenerative research programme in the sense of Lakatos. It is a
programme that must continually modify a set of subsidiary
hypotheses in order to explain new data.

6

7

For an important and interesting counter argument, see the work
of Roman Frydman and Michael Goldberg (2011).

8
Hours worked does not vary much at business
cycle frequencies

rate. If we want to understand the causes of
business cycles, we cannot neglect the
determinants of the unemployment rate. In spite of
this obvious fact, almost all DSGE models, pre
8
2008, did not contain unemployment.

Chart 5: Hours and employment in the U.S.
Hours and Unemployment
38
37
36
35
34

Unemployment

12

Average Weekly Hours

39
Shaded areas are
NBER Recessions

33

10
8
6
4
2
1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Source: Author

Chart 6 plots unemployment, on the left axis and
the labour force participation rate on the right axis.
The participation rate is measured as a fraction of
the over-16 non-institutional population. This
chart shows that, like hours, most of the
movements in the participation rate are
secular. They are not strongly correlated with
recessions.

Participation and Unemployment
68

Unemployment

64

10

62

8

60

6

58

4
2
1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Participation

12

Although the concept of unemployment
disappeared from modern mainstream
macroeconomics, it did not disappear from
economics entirely. One promising avenue,
pursued by theorists, was the incorporation of
search frictions into simple models of the labour
9
market. This avenue is called search theory.

Imagine that the labour force is constant and that
every worker works a thirty-five-hour week. Since
neither hours not participation varies much at
business cycle frequencies, these assumptions
are useful approximations if our goal is to
understand recessions.

Chart 6: Participation and unemployment in
the U.S.

66

Using search theory to model unemployment

The main innovation of search theory is the
concept of a matching function, which models
the process of finding a job as a search
technology with two inputs. Just as a production
technology combines labour and capital to
produce a commodity, so a search technology
combines the search time of an unemployed
worker with the search time of the recruiting
department of a firm to fill a vacancy.

Unemployment Rate
Average Weekly Hours

Shaded areas are
NBER Recessions

Modelling unemployment

There are approximately 30 million workers in the
UK labour force. Let’s suppose that 40,000 of
them lose their jobs every week, either because
they quit voluntarily or because they are laid off.
How can we replace those workers in a way that
keeps the number of employed people constant?
According to search theory, the matching function
connects the number of vacancies posted, the
number of unemployed people, and the number of
new positions that are filled.

Unemployment Rate
The Labor Force Participation Rate

Table 1: The Matching Function

Source: Author

In both Classical and new-Keynesian theories,
employment variation over the business cycle
occurs through intertemporal substitution, by
rational forward-looking households, of leisure
today for leisure tomorrow. In both theories,
households can work as many hours as they
choose and the demand and supply of labour are
continuously equated by adjustments of the
money wage. The facts contradict this
assumption.
Charts 5 and 6 demonstrate that almost all of the
variation in hours at business cycle frequencies
occurs because of variations in the unemployment

(1)

8

𝐽=

1
𝑉 !/! 𝑈!/!
10

Some notable exceptions are the papers by Merz (1995),
Andolfatto (1996) and Hall (2005).
9
Search theory was recognized, in 2010 with the award of the
Nobel Prize in Economics to Peter Diamond, Dale Mortensen and
Chris Pissarides. It began with a remarkable collection of papers
(Phelps et. al. 1970) that explored the theoretical foundations of
the Phillips Curve. Important contributions include Diamond
(1982), Mortensen (1970), and Pissarides (1976).

9

Equation 1 is an example. Here, J represents the
number of filled jobs in a week; V is the number of
unfilled vacancies that are available that week and
U is the number of unemployed people.
Chart 7 illustrates Equation 1 in a graph. This
chart shows that 40,000 new jobs can be created
in many different ways. One would be if 200,000
unemployed people searched for 800,000
vacancies. Another would be if 800,000
unemployed people searched for 200,000
vacancies. Those different ways of matching
workers with jobs have very different implications
for the unemployment rate. To see this, suppose
the economy in this example has a labour force of
1 million people. The first case would result in an
unemployment rate of 80% and the second in an
unemployment rate of 20%.
Chart 7: The Beveridge curve as an isoquant

800,000
40,000 filled jobs

Search theory and market efficiency
One way of characterizing the efficiency of
markets is to write down a problem that would be
solved by a fictitious social planner who knows the
technologies available to produce goods and the
preferences of all the people in the economy. In
our example, the social planner would also know
the technology for matching unemployed workers
with vacant jobs.
Suppose we ask the social planner to maximize
the utility of a representative household by
choosing the best possible way of matching
unemployed workers with vacant jobs.
Microeconomic theory tells us that the decision of
the social planner can be achieved anonymously
by allocating goods through competitive markets.
The idea that markets solve the planner’s
maximization problem is called the first welfare
theorem of economics. But for the first welfare
theorem to hold there must be enough
markets and enough relative prices.

Vacancies

To apply the first welfare theorem to an economy
with a search technology, there would need to be
a large number of ‘matchmaking’ firms, as well as
the usual assumption of a large number of
production firms. Matchmaking firms and
production firms would play different roles.

200,000
200,000

800,000

Unemployment
Source: Author

Chart 7 resembles an empirical relationship,
called the Beveridge Curve, which characterises
the U.K. and U.S. data. According to search
theory, the Beveridge curve is analogous to an
isoquant in the microeconomic theory of the firm.
In the theory of the firm, an isoquant gives
different levels of capital and labour that can be
used to produce a given amount of physical
goods. In search theory, the Beveridge curve
gives different combinations of vacancies and
unemployed workers that can be used to fill a
10
given number of jobs.
If the theory of the firm can be used to help
explain unemployment then perhaps we can also

10

learn from welfare economics, which teaches us
that the equilibria of competitive markets are
efficient. That turns out not to be the case.

For an interesting link to a real time graph of unemployment
and vacancies, see Farmer (2010c).

Matchmaking firms would pay unemployed
workers for the exclusive right to find them a job.
And they would pay the firms that produce
commodities for the exclusive right to fill their
vacancies. After matching suitable workers with
commodity producing firms, the matchmaking firm
would sell the match back to the worker-firm pair.
In reality we do not see matchmaking firms that
operate in this way because the market would be
difficult to police. For the search markets to work
well, the matchmaking firms would need to buy
the inputs to the search technology in a pair of
competitive markets. These firms would, in effect,
be paying unemployed workers for being idle. It is
easy to see that there is an incentive for these
workers to cheat and to refuse to accept a job
once it is offered.
Because it would be difficult or impossible to force
a matched worker to accept a job, the factor
markets in a search model are necessarily
incomplete. There are not enough relative prices
to send the correct signals to market participants.

10
This lack of enough relative prices leads to a
fundamental indeterminacy in the labour
11
market.
Search theory and the Nash bargain
Search theorists recognized that if firms and
workers take wages and prices as given, there are
not enough equations in a search model to
determine all of the unknowns. To complete their
model, they assume that when a worker and a
firm meet, they bargain over the wage using a
theory called Nash bargaining, after the economist
John Nash. This assumption adds an additional
component to the search model; the Nash
bargaining equation.
Chart 8: The Beveridge curve and the Nash
bargaining equation

that, when a worker meets a firm, they bargain
over the wage. That assumption leads to a unique
ratio of vacancies to unemployment with a slope
that depends on the bargaining weight of the two
parties. Equilibrium occurs at the point where the
bargaining equation and the Beveridge curve
coincide.
Search theory, closed with the Nash bargaining
assumption, is mathematically consistent and has
provided several generations of Ph.D. students
with elegant problems to solve. But it is not a good
description of the data. The Nash bargaining
equation picks a unique natural rate of
unemployment and reasonable calibrations of
standard search and matching models predict that
unemployment will quickly converge back to this
natural rate. As I showed in Chart 4, this is not
12
what happens in the real world.

A new paradigm for macroeconomics
800,000

Vacancies

Beveridge Curve

Bargaining
equation

200,000
200,000

800,000

Unemployment
Source: Author

The Nash bargaining equation introduces a new
parameter to the model: the bargaining weight of
the worker. This parameter captures features like
the strength of unions relative to firms and it
determines how profit-maximizing firms will
choose to allocate resources to the activity of
recruiting. The Nash bargaining weight picks an
equilibrium point on the Beveridge curve.

The belief function: A positive theory of animal
spirits
If we drop the Nash bargaining equation, as I have
done in my work, our economic model will be left
without enough equations to determine all of the
unknowns. It becomes a model with multiple
steady state equilibria. In order to understand
what would happen in a model of this kind, we
must explain how human beings would react in
any given situation.
Whereas standard search theorists close their
models in the labour market with an arbitrary
bargaining equation, I close my model instead in
the asset markets. I capture Keynes’ notion of
‘animal spirits’ by providing an explicit theory of
how animal spirits are determined. I model animal
spirits as a new fundamental that I call the belief
function.
The belief function is a mapping, from
observations of the past to beliefs about the
future. This new fundamental equation plays a

Chart 8 illustrates this idea. The downward
sloping blue curve is the Beveridge curve. This
represents the technological possibilities for filling
a given number of jobs. The upwards sloping
dashed green line follows from the assumption
12

11

Farmer (2006, 2008, 2010a, 2012a,b) constructs a real model
with incomplete factor markets and Farmer (2013b) develops a
monetary model with incomplete factor markets where a belief
function replaces the assumption that output is exogenous. That
model provides a better fit to the data than the New-Keynesian
model because it is able to account endogenously for persistence
in the unemployment rate.

I am not the only economist who has recognized that we must
develop new theories that include unemployment. Since the
onset of the Great Recession, new-Keynesian economists have
also begun to incorporate unemployment into their models.
Notable examples include Gertler et al (2008) and Gertler and
Trigari (2009) who introduce more sophisticated bargaining rules
into search models in an attempt to provide more persistence to
sticky wages. Building on Hall and Milgrom (2008), these newKeynesian models are closed with versions of the Nash
bargaining equation and they cannot account for the failure of the
NRH.

11
similar role to the theory of adaptive expectations:
13
it anchors beliefs.
In models where there are multiple steady state
equilibria, the unemployment rate displays what
Olivier Blanchard and Lawrence Summers (1987)
have labelled hysteresis. In a model with
hysteresis, I have shown that the belief function
selects a unique path for the unemployment rate.
This path wanders across the possible steady
state labour market equilibria. Because each of
these unemployment rates is itself an equilibrium,
so is the non stationary path of unemployment
rates that is realized. The equilibrium in my
model is fully consistent with rational
expectations.
The fact that the equilibrium in my model is
rational, in the sense of rational expectations, is
an important element of the theory that
distinguishes it from the popular idea that animal
spirits are expressions of ‘irrational exuberance’.
Because in my model, beliefs are rational, they
are correct on average, and no one in the model is
consistently fooled when outcomes are realized.

Table 2 describes a parameterized example of the
belief function that I used in my 2013b study.
Here 𝑥! is nominal GDP, 𝑦! is real GDP and 𝑝! is a
price index. All variables are in logs, Δ is the first
difference operator and 𝐸 is the expectations
operator.
Table 2: Modelling the belief function
(2)
(3)

𝑥! = 𝑦! + 𝑝!
𝐸 Δx!!! = Δ𝑥!

The key assumption is Equation 3. This asserts
that households expect that the growth rate of
nominal GDP next period will equal the growth
rate this period. When that assumption is inserted
into a simple three-equation model of the
macroeconomy, as a replacement to the Phillips
curve, the resulting system provides a much better
fit to data than the canonical new-Keynesian
model.
Chart 9: Unemployment and the interest rate in
U.S. data

By specifying what variables agents form beliefs
about, and by providing a functional form for how
those variables depend on present and past
observables, I arrive at a complete theory that
determines employment, prices, GDP and its
components.

Using my new paradigm to explain
the data
Putting the belief function through its paces
In my (2013b) paper I ran a horse race of a three
equation new-Keynesian monetary model against
a “Farmer” monetary model and I showed that the
Farmer model, closed with a belief function, does
a much better job of explaining the data. Why
might that be?
A model that is closed with the Phillips curve
implies that the unemployment rate will show a
tendency to return, over time, to its natural rate.
The data show no such tendency. In contrast, a
model where unemployment can wander around a
set of possible values provides a better
explanation for what we have observed in the last
sixty years.

Source: Beyer and Farmer (2007)

To see why that is the case, Charts 9 and 10
illustrate the behaviour of the data. Data for
unemployment and the short-term interest rate are
trending up before 1980 and down since then. In
joint work, (Beyer and Farmer 2007) Andreas
Beyer and I show that unit root tests cannot reject
the hypothesis that each individual series is a
random walk and that, jointly, the series are
14
connected by two co-integrating equations. It is
these facts that the Phillips curve model, an
equation that incorporates the NRH, cannot
explain.

13

Adaptive expectations may coincide with rational expectations
when there are multiple equilibria. I have explored this idea in a
series of books and papers. See Farmer (1999, 2010a, 2012a,
2013b) and Plotnikov (2013). Farmer (2014, forthcoming)
compares this work with models that contain multiple dynamic
rational expectations equilibria.

14

A pair of cointegrated random walks is a bit like two drunks
walking down the street, tied together by a rope. The drunks can
wander apart from each other in the short run, but in the long run
they can never get too far apart.

12
Chart 10: Unemployment and inflation in U.S.
data

By modelling the labour market with a search
model where factor markets are incomplete, I
have shown how to construct a logical
microeconomic foundation to Keynesian
economics. And by modelling beliefs as a new
fundamental with the same methodological status
as preferences, I have shown how to construct a
complete DSGE model that provides a coherent
explanation of macroeconomic data.
The research agenda that is implied by accepting
my ideas is exciting. It raises new questions,
answers old ones, and provides new ways of
thinking not only about economic theory, but also
15
about policy options. But that is a story for
another day.

Source: Beyer and Farmer (2007)

The reason the Farmer model outperforms the
new-Keynesian model is because the NK
model embodies the natural rate hypothesis.
The reduced form of the model consists of three
stationary time series that cause the data to
cluster around a point in a three dimensional
space.
By contrast, the Farmer model contains Equation
3 as one of its explanatory equations. It does not
embody the NRH and instead, the reduced form is
a set of cointegrated time series that cause the
data to cluster around a line in a three
dimensional space.

Conclusion
Friedman (1970) claimed that there is ‘no
fundamental flaw in the price system’. He was
wrong and my work explains why. The stagnation
that occurred in the United States during the Great
Depression, in Japan during the lost decade of the
1990s and throughout the Western world following
the financial crisis of 2008, supports that claim.
9.
At the outset of this article I offered not
just to provide a critique of macroeconomic theory:
but also to provide a constructive alternative with
which to rebuild it. That alternative is based on a
return to two central ideas of Keynes’ General
Theory. First, that high involuntary unemployment
can persist as an equilibrium of a market economy
and second, that the equilibrium that prevails is
selected by the animal spirits of market
participants.

Economists and central bankers can no longer
afford to continue using the NRH. It is an idea that
is past its sell-by-date. I have offered a
replacement that recovers Keynes’ two central
ideas and I have shown that this new paradigm
outperforms the new-Keynesian model when
confronted with data.

References
Andolfatto (1996) “Business Cycles and Labor-Market
Search,” American Economic Review, Vol. 86, No. 1,
Pages, 112-132
Beyer and Farmer (2007) “Natural Rate Doubts”,
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, Vol. 31,
No. 3, Pager 797-825
Blanchard and Summers (1987) "Hysteresis in
Unemployment," Vol. 31, Nos. 1-2, Pages 288-295.
Diamond (1982) “Aggregate Demand Management in
Search Equilibrium,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
90, No. 5, Pages 881-894
Farmer (1999) The Macroeconomics of Self-Fulfilling
Prophecies, MIT Press, Cambridge
Farmer (2002) “Why Does Data reject the Lucas
Critique?” Annales D’Economie et de Statistique, No.
67-68, Pages 111-129
Farmer (2006) “Old Keynesian Economics,” UCLA
mimeo. Paper presented at a conference in honour of
Axel Leijonhufvud, held at UCLA on August 30th 2006
Farmer (2008) “Aggregate Demand and Supply”,
International Journal of Economic Theory”, Vol. 4, No.
1, Pages 77-93
Farmer (2010a) Expectations Employment and Prices,
Oxford University Press, Oxford

15

Farmer et al (2012) and Farmer (2012b, 2013c) explore the
rationale for active intervention in the asset markets and Farmer
(2012c) provides empirical evidence that an aggressive form of
Quantitative Easing is likely to be effective at reducing
unemployment.

13
Farmer (2010b) How the Economy Works: Confidence,
Crashes and Self-Fulfilling Prophecies, Oxford
University Press, Oxford
Farmer (2010c) Farewell to the natural rate: why
unemployment persists, VoxEU January 2010
http://www.voxeu.org/article/farewell-natural-rate-whyunemployment-persists
Farmer (2012a) “Confidence, Crashes and Animal
Spirits,” Economic Journal, Vol. 122, No. 559, Pages,
155-172
Farmer (2012b) “Qualitative Easing: How it Works and
Why it Matters,” NBER working paper 28421 and
CEPR discussion paper 9153
Farmer (2012c) “The Stock Market Crash of 2008
Caused the Great Recession: Theory and Evidence,”
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, Vol. 36,
No. 5, Pages 696-707
Farmer (2013a) “Animal Spirits, Financial Crises and
Persistent Unemployment”, Economic Journal Vol. 123,
No. 568, Pages 317-340
Farmer (2013b) “Animal Spirits, Persistent
Unemployment and the Belief Function,” Chapter 7 in
Rethinking Expectations: The Way Forward for
Macroeconomics, Princeton University Press, Princeton
New Jersey; Roman Frydman and Edmund Phelps,
Eds.
Farmer (2013c) Quantitative Easing, Evidence
submitted to the U.K. Treasury Committee,
http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201213/cm
select/cmtreasy/writev/qe/m20.htm
Farmer (2014) “The Evolution of Endogenous Business
Cycles”, Macroeconomic Dynamics, forthcoming, 2014.

Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 117, No. 1, Pages
38—86
Gertler, Sala and Trigari (2008) “An Estimated DSGE
Model with Unemployment and Staggered Wage
Bargaining,” Journal of Money Credit and Banking, Vol.
40, No. 8, Pages 1713—1764
Hall (2005) “Employment fluctuations with equilibrium
wage stickiness”, American Economic Review, Vol. 95,
No. 1, Pages 50–65
Hall and Milgrom (2008) "The Limited Influence of
Unemployment on the Wage Bargain." American
Economic Review, Vol. 98 No. 4, Pages 1653-74.
Howitt and McAfee (1987) “Costly search and
recruiting”, International Economic Review, Vol. 28, No.
1, Pages 89–107
Hume (1742) “Of Money,” Essays, Moral, Political,
and Literary. Part 2, Chapter 3, Indianapolis, Indiana:
Liberty Fund Inc., 1987 edition
Keynes (1936) The General Theory of Employment
Interest and Money, McMillan, London
Lakatos (1978) The Methodology of Scientific
Research Programmes, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
Long and Plosser (1983) “Real Business Cycles”,
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 91, No. 1, Pages 3969
Lucas (1972) “Expectations and the Neutrality of
Money,” Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 4, No. 2,
Pages 103-124

Farmer, Nourry and Venditti (2012) "The Inefficient
Markets Hypothesis: Why Financial Markets Do Not
Work Well in the Real World" CEPR discussion
paper, 9283 and NBER Working Paper 18647

Mankiw and Romer (1991) New Keynesian
Economics. Vol. 1: Imperfect competition and sticky
prices, MIT Press, ISBN 0-262-63133-4. Vol. 2:
Coordination Failures and Real Rigidities. MIT Press,
Cambridge MA

Friedman (1948) “A Monetary and Fiscal Framework
for Economic Stability,” The American Economic
Review, Vol. 38, No. 3, Pages 245-264

Merz (1995) “Search in the Labor Market and the
Real Business Cycle,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, Vol. 36, No. 2, Pages, 269-300

Friedman (1968) “The Role of Monetary Policy,” The
American Economic Review, Vol. 58, No. 1, Pages 117

Mortensen (1970) “Job Search, the Duration of
Unemployment, and the Phillips Curve,” American
Economic Review, Vol. 60, No. 5, Pages, 847-862

Friedman (1970) “A Theoretical Framework for
Monetary Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
78, No. 2, Pages 193-238

Pareto (1896) Cours D’Économie Politique, F.
Rouge, Lausanne, 2 Vols.

Frydman and Goldberg (2011) Imperfect Knowledge
Economics, Princeton University Press, Princeton NJ
Gertler and Trigari (2009) “Unemployment
Fluctuations with Staggered Nash Wage Bargaining”,

Pearce and Hoover (1995), “After the Revolution:
Paul Samuelson and the Textbook Keynesian
Model”, History of Political Economy, Vol. 27, No. 5,
Pages 183-216, Supplement

14
Phelps (1967) “Phillips Curves, Expectations of
Inflation and Optimal Employment over Time.”
Economica, Vol. 34, No.3, Pages 254-281

Prescott (1980) “Time to Build and Aggregate
Fluctuations”, Econometrica, Vol. 50, No. 6, Pages
1345-1370

Phelps, Alchian and Holt (1970) Microeconomics of
Employment and Inflation Theory, W.W. Norton 1970,
New York

Ricardo (1817) On the Principles of Political Economy
and Taxation, Library of Economics and Liberty,
http://www.econlib.org/library/Ricardo/ricP.html

Phillips (1958) “The Relation Between

Samuelson (1955) Economics, third edition,
McGraw Hill, New York

Unemployment and the Rate of Change of Money
Wage Rates in the United Kingdom, 1861–1957”,
Economica Vol. 25, No. 100, Pages 283-299
Pigou (1928) Industrial Fluctuations, McMillan,
London
Pissarides (1976) “Job Search and Participation”,
Economica, Vol. 43, No. 169, Pages, 333-349
Plotnikov (2013) Three Essays on Macroeconomics
with Incomplete Factor Markets, Ph.D. Thesis, UCLA

Smets and Wouters (2007) “Shocks and Frictions in
US Business Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE Approach,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 97, No. 3, Pages
586-606
Smith (1776) An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes
of the Wealth of Nations, Metheun & Co., Ltd.,
London, 5th edition, 1904
Walras (1874) Eléments D’Économie Politique Pure,
L. Corbaz and Co. Lausanne. English translation
(1954) by William Jaffe; London, Allen and Unwin

