                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         UNEMPLOYMENT AND BUSINESS CYCLES

                                       Lawrence J. Christiano
                                       Martin S. Eichenbaum
                                         Mathias Trabandt

                                        Working Paper 19265
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19265


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2013




The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, any other person associated with the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19265.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin S. Eichenbaum, and Mathias Trabandt. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Unemployment and Business Cycles
Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin S. Eichenbaum, and Mathias Trabandt
NBER Working Paper No. 19265
August 20135HYLVHG-XQH
JEL No. E2,E24,E32

                                            ABSTRACT

We develop and estimate a general equilibrium search and matching model that accounts for key
businesscycle properties of macroeconomic aggregates, including labor market variables. In sharp
contrastto leading New Keynesian models, we do not impose wage inertia. Instead we derive wage
inertiafrom our specification of how firms and workers negotiate wages. Our model outperforms a
variantof the standard New Keynesian Calvo sticky wage model. According to our estimated model,
thereis a critical interaction between the degree of price stickiness, monetary policy and the duration
ofan increase in unemployment benefits.


Lawrence J. Christiano                              Mathias Trabandt
Department of Economics                             Board of Governors of the
Northwestern University                              Federal Reserve System
2001 Sheridan Road                                  Division of International Finance
Evanston, IL 60208                                  Trade and Financial Studies Section
and NBER                                            20th Street and Constitution Avenue N.W.
l-christiano@northwestern.edu                       Washington, D.C. 20551
                                                    mathias.trabandt@gmail.com
Martin S. Eichenbaum
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
eich@northwestern.edu
1. Introduction

Macroeconomic models have di¢culty accounting for the magnitude of business cycle áuctu-
ations in employment and unemployment. A classic example is provided by the class of real
business cycle models pioneered by Kydland and Prescott (1982).1 Models that build on the
search and matching framework of Diamond (1982), Mortensen (1982) and Pissarides (1985)
also have di¢culty accounting for the volatility of labor markets. For example, Shimer (2005)
argues that these models can only do so by resorting to implausible parameter values.
    Empirical New Keynesian models have been relatively successful in accounting for the
cyclical properties of employment, by assuming that wage setting is subject to nominal
rigidities.2 The implied wage inertia prevents sharp, counterfactual cyclical swings in wages
and ináation that would otherwise occur in these models.3 Empirical New Keynesian models
have been criticized on at least four grounds. First, these models do not explain wage inertia,
they simply assume it. Second, agents in the model would not choose to subject themselves
to the nominal wage frictions imposed on them by the modeler.4 Third, empirical New
Keynesian models are inconsistent with the fact that many wages are constant for extended
periods of time. In practice, these models assume that agents who do not reoptimize their
wage simply index it to technology growth and ináation.5 So, these models predict that all
wages are always changing. Fourth, these models cannot be used to examine some key policy
issues such as the e§ects of changes in unemployment beneÖts.6
    We integrate search and matching models into an otherwise standard New Keynesian
framework. Our models can account for the response of key macroeconomic aggregates
to monetary and technology shocks. These aggregates include labor market variables like
wages, employment, job vacancies and unemployment. In contrast to leading empirical New
Keynesian models, we do not assume that wages are subject to exogenous nominal rigidities.
Instead, we derive wage inertia as an equilibrium outcome.
    As in standard New Keynesian models, we assume that price setting is subject to Calvo-
style rigidities. But, guided by the micro evidence on prices, we assume that Örms which do
   1
      See, for example, the discussion in Chetty, Guren, Manoli and Weber (2012).
   2
      For example, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005), Smets and Wouters (2007) and Gali, Smets
and Wouters (2012) assume that nominal wages are subject to Calvo-style rigidities.
    3
      See, for example, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005).
    4
      This criticsm does not necessarily apply to a class of models initially developed by Hall (2005). We
discuss these models in the conclusion.
    5
      See, for example, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005), Smets and Wouters (2007), Christiano,
Trabandt and Walentin (2011a,b), and Gali, Smets and Wouters (2012).
    6
      GalÌ (2011) provides an interpretation of the sticky wage model which has implications for unemployment,
and unemployment beneÖts. However, that interpretation relies on the presence of pervasive union power
in labor markets, an assumption that seems questionable in the United States. For additional discussion of
this approach, see GalÌ, Smets and Wouters (2012) and Christiano (2012). The standard sticky wage model
associated with Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000) has no implications for unemployment.


                                                      2
not reoptimize their price must keep it unchanged, i.e. no price indexation.
     One version of our model pursues a variant of Hall and Milgromís (2008) (henceforth
HM) approach to labor markets, in which real wages are determined by alternating o§er
bargaining (henceforth AOB).7 We also consider a version of the model in which real wages
are determined by a Nash bargaining sharing rule. In both versions of the model we assume,
as in Pissarides (2009), that there is a Öxed cost component in hiring.
     We estimate the di§erent versions of our model using a Bayesian variant of the strategy
in Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) (henceforth CEE).8 That strategy involves
minimizing the distance between the dynamic response to monetary policy shocks, neutral
technology shocks and investment-speciÖc technology shocks in the model and the analog
objects in the data. The latter are obtained using an identiÖed vector autoregression (VAR)
for 12 post-war, quarterly U.S. times series that include key labor market variables.
     Both the AOB and Nash bargaining models succeed in accounting for the key features of
our estimated impulse response functions. In both models, real wages have two key properties
which deÖne what we refer to as wage inertia. First, the real wage responds relatively little to
shocks. Second, the response that does occur is very persistent. These properties are essential
ingredients in the AOB and Nash bargaining modelís ability to account for the estimated
response of the economy to shocks. The role of wage inertia plays a particularly important
role for the dynamics of ináation. According to our VAR analysis, ináation responds very
little to a monetary policy shock. The only way for the model to account for this small
response is for a monetary policy shock to generate a small change in Örmsí marginal costs.
But that requires an inertial response of real wages. According to our VAR analysis, there
is a relatively large drop in ináation after a positive neutral technology shock. Other things
equal, a rise in technology drives down marginal cost and ináation in our model. Wage
inertia prevents a substantial rise in real wages that would otherwise undo this downward
pressure on ináation.
     As it turns out, the estimated AOB model outperforms the estimated Nash bargaining
model in terms of the marginal likelihood of the data. At the posterior mode of the para-
meters, both models generate impulse response functions that are virtually identical to each
other. But, for the Nash bargaining model to match the empirical impulse response functions
requires a very high replacement ratio that is extremely implausible from the perspective of
our prior.9 In contrast, the AOB model does not require implausible parameter values to
   7
     For a paper that uses a reduced form version of HM in a calibrated real business cycle model, see
Hertweck (2006).
   8
     We implement the Bayesian version of the CEE procedure which was developed in Christiano, Trabandt
and Walentin (2011a).
   9
     For a discussion of micro data which suggests that a high replacement ratio is implausible, see, for
example, the discussion in Hornstein, Krusell and Violante (2010).



                                                   3
account for the data. Taken together, these observations explain why the marginal likelihood
of the AOB model is substantially higher than that of the Nash bargaining model and why
we take the former to be our benchmark search and matching model.
    Wage inertia is central to the success of our AOB and Nash bargaining models. But is
it a central property of a broader class of empirically successful models? To address this
question, we begin by noting that in our AOB and Nash bargaining models, the real wage is
the solution to a bargaining problem. The surplus sharing rules implied by these models can
also be interpreted as restricted rules for setting the real wage as a function of the modelsí
date t state variables. So, we estimate a model in which the sharing rule is replaced by a
general real wage rule. The latter makes the date t real wage an unrestricted function of the
modelís date t state variables. Our key result is that the estimated general real wage rule
does in fact satisfy wage inertia in the sense deÖned above. These results provide evidence in
favor of the view that wage inertia is an important component of a broad class of empirically
successful macro models.
    How does the performance of the AOB model compare with that of the standard empirical
New Keynesian model? That model incorporates Calvo wage-setting frictions along the lines
developed in Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000) (henceforth EHL). The version of the model
that we emphasize does not allow for wage indexation because the resulting implications are
strongly at variance with micro data on nominal wages of incumbent workers. We show that
the AOB model substantially outperforms the Calvo sticky wage New Keynesian model with
no wage indexation in terms of statistical Öt. SpeciÖcally, the latter model does a worse job
than the AOB model of accounting for the empirical impulse response functions. The Calvo
sticky wage model with indexation does about as well as the AOB model in accounting for
the VAR-based impulse response functions. We conclude that given the limitations of Calvo
sticky wage models, there is simply no need to work with them. The AOB model Öts the
data at least as well and can be used to analyze a broader set of labor market variables and
policy questions.
    A key advantage of the AOB model is that we can use it to investigate the consequences
of changes in economic policies. SpeciÖcally, we analyze the e§ects of an unanticipated,
transitory increase in unemployment beneÖts, both when the zero lower bound (ZLB) on the
nominal interest rate is binding and when it is not (ìnormal timesî). In our estimated AOB
model, there is a critical interaction between nominal rigidities, monetary policy and the
e§ects of a change in unemployment beneÖts. In normal times, monetary policy ampliÖes the
type of contractionary e§ects of an increase in unemployment beneÖts stressed in the áexible
price models considered in the literature (see, for example, Hagedorn, Karahan, Manovskii,
and Mitman, 2013). But when the ZLB binds, the contractionary e§ects associated with an
increase in unemployment beneÖts are mitigated. Depending on parameter values, e.g., the

                                              4
amount of time that agents expect the ZLB to bind, an increase in unemployment beneÖts
can actually be expansionary. That said, for the empirically plausible case, the estimated
AOB model implies that the e§ects of an increase in unemployment beneÖts in the ZLB are
likely to be quite small.
    Our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our search and matching model
economy. Section 3 presents the standard sticky wage model. Section 4 describes our econo-
metric methodology. Sections 5 and 6 present the empirical results for our search and
matching models, and our alternative models, respectively. Section 7 reports the results of
our experiments with unemployment beneÖts.10 Concluding remarks appear in section 8.


2. The Model Economy

In this section we discuss our benchmark model economy. We embed search and matching
labor market frictions into an otherwise standard New Keynesian model. We do so in a way
that preserves the analytic tractability of the Calvo-style price setting model.11

2.1. Households

The economy is populated by a large number of identical households. The representative
household has a unit measure of workers which it supplies inelastically to the labor market.
We denote the fraction of employed workers in the representative household in period t by lt :
An employed worker earns the nominal wage rate, Wt . An unemployed worker receives Dt
goods in government-provided unemployment compensation. We assume that each worker
has the same concave preferences over consumption and that households provide perfect
consumption insurance, so that each worker receives the same level of consumption, Ct .
The preferences of the representative household are the equally-weighted average of the
preferences of its workers:
                                      X
                                      1
                                 E0         ( t ln (Ct % bCt"1 ) ; 0 & b < 1:                      (2.1)
                                      t=0

Here, b controls the degree of habit formation in preferences. The representative householdís
budget constraint is:

 Pt Ct + PI;t It + Bt+1 & (RK;t uK      K
                                 t % a(ut )PI;t )Kt + (1 % lt ) Pt Dt + Wt lt + Rt"1 Bt % Tt : (2.2)


Here, Tt denotes lump sum taxes net of proÖts, Pt denotes the price of consumption goods,
PI;t denotes the price of investment goods, Bt+1 denotes one period risk-free bonds purchased
 10
      A technical appendix is available at: sites.google.com/site/mathiastrabandt/home/downloads/CETtechapp.pdf.
 11
      For an early application of this strategy, see Walsh (2003).

                                                        5
in period t with gross return, Rt ; and It denotes the quantity of investment goods. The object
RK;t ; denotes the rental rate of capital services, Kt denotes the householdís beginning of
period t stock of capital, a(uK
                              t ) denotes the cost, in units of investment goods, of the capital
utilization rate, uK        K
                   t and ut Kt denotes the householdís period t supply of capital services.
The functional form for the increasing and convex function, a (') ; is described below. All
prices, taxes and proÖts in (2.2) are in nominal terms.12
    The representative householdís stock of capital evolves as follows:

                             Kt+1 = (1 % 4 K ) Kt + [1 % S (It =It"1 )] It :

The functional form for the increasing and convex adjustment cost function, S (') ; is de-
scribed below.

2.2. Final Good Producers

A Önal homogeneous good, Yt ; is produced by competitive and identical Örms using the
following technology:
                                     "Z 1           $&
                                                 1
                                Yt =      (Yj;t ) dj ;
                                                 !                               (2.3)
                                                0
where : > 1: The representative Örm chooses specialized inputs, Yj;t ; to maximize proÖts:
                                           Z 1
                                  Pt Y t %     Pj;t Yj;t dj;
                                                    0

subject to the production function (2.3). The Örmís Örst order condition for the j th input is:
                                                            !
                                        Yj;t = (Pt =Pj;t ) !!1 Yt :                                (2.4)

The homogeneous output, Yt can be used to produce either consumption goods or investment
goods. The production of the latter uses a linear technology in which one unit of Yt is
transformed into +t units of It :

2.3. Retailers

The j th input good in (2.3) is produced by a retailer, with production function:
                                              (
                                      Yj;t = kj;t (zt hj;t )1"( % ?t :                             (2.5)

The retailer is a monopolist in the product market and is competitive in factor markets.
Here kj;t denotes the total amount of capital services purchased by Örm j and ?t represents
  12
    In Christiano, Eichenbaum and Trabandt (2015) we argue that our model is not subject to the Chodorow-
Reich and Karabarbounis (2014) critique of the setup of Hall and Milgrom (2008), which implies a highly
procyclical opportunity cost of employment.

                                                        6
a Öxed cost of production. Also, zt is a neutral technology shock. Finally, hj;t is the quantity
of an intermediate good purchased by the j th retailer. This good is purchased in competitive
markets at the price Pth from a wholesaler. As in CEE, we assume that to produce in period
t; the retailer must borrow Pth hj;t at the gross nominal interest rate, Rt . The retailer repays
the loan at the end of period t after receiving sales revenues. The j th retailer sets its price,
Pj;t ; subject to the demand curve, (2.4), and the following Calvo sticky price friction (2.6):
                                  %
                                     Pj;t"1 with probability @
                           Pj;t =                                    :                       (2.6)
                                       P~t   with probability 1 % @

Here, P~t denotes the price set by the fraction 1 % @ of producers who can re-optimize at time
t. We assume these producers make their price decision before observing the current period
realization of the monetary policy shock, but after the other time t shocks. This assumption
is necessary to ensure that our model satisÖes the identifying assumptions that we make
in our empirical work. We do not allow the non-optimizing Örms to index their prices to
some measure of ináation. In this way, the model is consistent with the observation that
many prices remain unchanged for extended periods of time (see Eichenbaum, Jaimovich
and Rebelo, 2011, and Klenow and Malin, 2011).

2.4. Wholesalers, Workers and the Labor Market

The law of motion for aggregate employment, lt ; is given by:

                                        lt = (A + xt ) lt"1 :

Here, A is the probability that a given Örm/worker match continues from one period to the
next. So, Alt"1 denotes the number workers that were attached to Örms in period t % 1
and remain attached at the start of period t: Also, xt denotes the hiring rate so that xt lt"1
denotes the number of new Örm/worker meetings at the start of period t: The number of
workers searching for work at the start of period t is the sum of the number of unemployed
workers in period t % 1; 1 % lt"1 , and the number of workers that separate from Örms at the
end of t % 1; (1 % A) lt"1 : The probability, ft ; that a searching worker meets a Örm is given
by:
                                                  xt lt"1
                                         ft =             :
                                               1 % Alt"1
    Wholesaler Örms produce the intermediate good using labor which has a Öxed marginal
productivity of unity. As in Pissarides (2009), a wholesaler Örm that wishes to meet a worker
in period t must post a vacancy at cost st ; expressed in units of the consumption good. The
vacancy is Ölled with probability Qt : In case the vacancy is Ölled, the Örm must pay a Öxed



                                                 7
real cost, Ft ; before bargaining with the newly-matched worker. Let Jt denote the value to
the Örm of a worker, expressed in units of the Önal good:

                                            Jt = #pt % wtp :                               (2.7)

Here, #pt denotes the expected present value, over the duration of the worker/Örm match, of
the real intermediate good price, #t ( Pth =Pt . Also, wtp denotes a similar present value of
the real wage, wt ( Wt =Pt : The real wage is determined by worker-Örm bargaining and is
discussed below. In recursive form:

                         #pt = #t + AEt mt+1 #pt+1 ; wtp = wt + AEt mt+1 wt+1
                                                                          p
                                                                              :            (2.8)

Here, mt+1 is the time t household discount factor which Örms and workers view as an
exogenous stochastic process and is discussed below. Free entry by wholesalers implies that,
in equilibrium, the expected beneÖt of a vacancy equals the cost:

                                          Qt (Jt % Ft ) = st :                             (2.9)

   Let Vt denote the value to a worker of being matched with a Örm. We express Vt as
the sum of the expected present value of wages earned while the match endures and the
continuation value, At ; when the match terminates:

                                            Vt = wtp + At :                               (2.10)

Here,
                 At = (1 % A) Et mt+1 [ft+1 Vt+1 + (1 % ft+1 ) Ut+1 ] + AEt mt+1 At+1 :   (2.11)
The variable, Ut ; denotes the value of being an unemployed worker :

                                            Ut = Dt + U~t ;                               (2.12)

where U~t denotes the continuation value of unemployment:

                             U~t ( Et mt+1 [ft+1 Vt+1 + (1 % ft+1 ) Ut+1 ] :              (2.13)

    The vacancy Ölling rate, Qt ; and the job Önding rate for workers, ft ; are assumed to be
related to labor market tightness, .t ; as follows:

                         ft = N m .1"+
                                   t   ; Qt = N m ."+
                                                   t ; N m > 0; 0 < N < 1;


where
                                                vt lt"1
                                           .t =         :                                (2.14)
                                              1 % Alt"1
Here, vt lt"1   denotes the number of vacancies posted by Örms at the start of period t:

                                                   8
2.5. Alternating O§er Bargaining (AOB) Model

This section describes the details of bargaining arrangements between Örms and workers.13
At the start of period t; lt matches are determined. At this point, each worker in lt engages in
bilateral bargaining over the current wage rate, wt ; with a wholesaler Örm. Each worker/Örm
bargaining pair takes the outcome of all other period t bargains as given. In addition,
agents have beliefs about the outcome of future wage bargains, conditional on remaining
matched. Under their beliefs those future wages are not a function of current actions.
Because bargaining in period t applies only to the current wage rate, we refer to it as period-
by-period bargaining.
    The periods, t = 1; 2; ::: in our model represent quarters. We suppose that bargaining
proceeds across M subperiods within the period, where M is even. The Örm makes a wage
o§er at the start of the Örst subperiod. It also makes an o§er at the start of a subsequent odd
subperiod in the event that all previous o§ers have been rejected. Similarly, the worker makes
a wage o§er at the start of an even subperiod in case all previous o§ers have been rejected.
The worker makes the last o§er, which is take-it-or-leave-it.14 In subperiods j = 1; :::; M % 1;
the recipient of an o§er has the option to accept or reject it. If the o§er is rejected the
recipient may declare an end to the negotiations or he may plan to make a countero§er at
the start of the next subperiod. In the latter case there is a probability, 4; that bargaining
breaks down. We now explain the bargaining in detail.
    Consider a Örm that makes a wage o§er, wj;t ; in subperiod j < M; j odd. The Örm sets
wj;t as low as possible subject to the worker not rejecting it. The resulting wage o§er, wj;t ;
satisÖes the following indi§erence condition:

                        Vj;t = max fUj;t ; 4Uj;t + (1 % 4) [Dt =M + Vj+1;t ]g :                    (2.15)

We assume that when an agent is indi§erent between accepting and rejecting an o§er, he
accepts it. The left hand side of (2.15), Vj;t ; denotes the value to a worker of accepting the
wage o§er wj;t :
                                    Vj;t = wj;t + w~tp + At :                            (2.16)

Here, w~tp denotes the present discounted value of the future wages that workers and Örms
believe will prevail while their match endures:

                                         ~tp = AEt mt+1 wt+1
                                         w               p
                                                             :                                     (2.17)
  13
     A well known feature of bargaining models is that equilibrium outcomes depend on the speciÖcation of
what happens out of equilibrium. This dependence is a feature of many models. Examples include models
of debt and strategic models of monetary policy, as well as models of strategic interactions between Örms.
  14
     Here our bargaining environment di§ers from that of HM. The latter assume that bargaining can in
principle go on forever, so that there is no last o§er.


                                                    9
In (2.16) and (2.17), w~tp and At are taken as given by the period t worker-Örm bargaining
pair.
    The right hand side of (2.15) is the maximum, over the workerís outside option, Uj;t ; and
the workerís disagreement payo§. The latter is the value of a worker who rejects a wage
o§er with the intention of making a countero§er in the next subperiod. We assume the
disagreement payo§ exceeds the outside option, though in practice this must be veriÖed.
The Örst term in the disagreement payo§ reáects that the negotiations break down with
probability 4; in which case the worker reverts to his outside option, with value Uj;t :
                                             M %j+1
                                    Uj;t =          Dt + U~t :
                                               M
Here, U~t is deÖned in (2.13). Also, the term multiplying Dt reáects our assumption that the
worker receives unemployment beneÖts in period t in proportion to the number of subperiods
spent in non-employment. The second term in the disagreement payo§ reáects the fact that
with probability 1 % 4 the worker receives unemployment beneÖts, Dt =M; and then makes a
countero§er wj+1;t to the Örm which he (correctly) expects to be accepted.
    Next, consider the problem of a worker who makes an o§er in subperiod, j; where j <
M and j is even. The worker o§ers the highest possible wage, wt;j , subject to the Örm not
rejecting it. The resulting wage o§er, wj;t ; satisÖes the following indi§erence condition:

                        Jj;t = max f0; 4 + 0 + (1 % 4) [%Q t + Jj+1;t ]g :             (2.18)

The left hand side of (2.18) denotes the value to a Örm of accepting the wage o§er wj;t :
                                    M %j+1      ~ p % (wj;t + w~tp ) ;
                           Jj;t =          #t + # t                                    (2.19)
                                      M
where
                                       ~ p = AEt mt+1 #p :
                                       #                                               (2.20)
                                         t             t+1

The term multiplying #t in (2.19) reáects our assumption that a worker produces 1=M
intermediate goods in each subperiod during which production occurs.
    The expression on the right of the equality in (2.18) is the maximum over the Örmís
outside option (i.e., zero) and its disagreement payo§. We assume the Örmís disagreement
payo§ exceeds its outside option, though in practice this must be veriÖed. If the Örm rejects
the workerís o§er with the intention of making a countero§er there is a probability, 4, that
negotiations break down and both the worker and Örm are sent to their outside options.
With probability 1 % 4 the Örm makes a countero§er, wj+1;t ; in the next subperiod which it
(correctly) expects to be accepted. To make a countero§er, the Örm incurs a real cost, Q t .
The second expression in the square bracketed term in (2.18) is the value associated with a
successful Örm countero§er, wj+1;t .

                                                 10
   Finally, consider subperiod M in which the worker makes the Önal, take-it-or-leave-it
o§er. The worker chooses the highest possible wage subject to the Örm not rejecting it,
which leads to the following indi§erence condition:

                                                   JM;t = 0:                               (2.21)

Here, JM;t is (2.19) with j = M:
    We now discuss the solution to the bargaining game. To this end, it is useful to note
that wj;t and w~tp always appear as a sum in the indi§erence conditions, (2.15) and (2.18) (see
(2.16) and (2.19)). DeÖne,
                                         p
                                        wj;t ( wj;t + w~tp ;                             (2.22)
                              p
for j = 1; :::; M: We obtain wM;t by solving (2.21):
                                                                     p
                                             p
                                            wM;t           ~ :
                                                 = #t =M + # t

                                                   p                                  p      15
    Then, (2.15) for j = M % 1 can be solved for wM  "1 and (2.18) can be solved for wM "2 :
In this way, the indi§erence conditions can be solved uniquely to obtain:
                                           p      p      p           p
                                          w1;t ; w2;t ; w3;t ; :::; wM;t ;                 (2.23)

conditional on variables that are exogenous to the worker-Örm bargaining pair. The solution
to the bargaining problem, wtp ; is just w1;t
                                          p
                                              : The linearity of the indi§erence conditions gives
rise to a simple closed-form expression for the solution:16
                                1
                     wtp =           [R1 #pt + R2 (Ut % At ) + R3 Q t % R4 (#t % Dt )] ;   (2.24)
                             R1 + R2
where

                             R1 = 1 % 4 + (1 % 4)M ; R2 = 1 % (1 % 4)M ;
                                     1%4               1 % 4 R2
                             R3 = R2       % R1 ; R4 =          + 1 % R2 :
                                       4               2%4M
It can be shown that R1 ; R2 ; R3 and R4 ; are strictly positive.
    It is useful to observe that after rearranging the terms in (2.24) and making use of (2.7)
and (2.10), (2.24) can be written as follows:

                                Jt = ( 1 (Vt % Ut ) % ( 2 Q t + ( 3 (#t % Dt ) ;           (2.25)

with ( i = Ri+1 =R1 ; for i = 1; 2; 3: We refer to (2.25) as the Alternating O§er Bargaining
sharing rule.
 15
      Recall our assumption that disagreement payo§s are no less than outside options.
 16
      See the technical appendix for a detailed derivation.

                                                        11
    It is a standard result that the solution to the Önite horizon AOB game is unique. Con-
sistent with this observation, we see that for given w~tp ; #t ; #pt ; Ut ; At ; Dt ; the real wage is
uniquely determined by
                                         wt = wtp % w~tp ;                                      (2.26)
where wtp is deÖned in (2.24). In e§ect, we have deÖned a mapping from beliefs about future
wages, summarized in w  ~tp ; to the present actual wage, wt : We only consider equilibria in
which the current actual wage and the believed future wages are the same time invariant
functions of the contemporaneous state of the economy.

2.6. Nash Bargaining Model

It will be useful to contrast the quantitative implications of our model with one in which
wages are determined according to a Nash sharing rule. SpeciÖcally, we deÖne the Nash
Bargaining model as the version of our model in which we replace the AOB sharing rule,
(2.25) with the Nash sharing rule:
                                                1%T
                                         Jt =       (Vt % Ut ):                                     (2.27)
                                                 T
Here, T is the share of total surplus, Jt + Vt % Ut ; received by the worker. The bargaining
solution in both the Nash and AOB models takes the form of a static sharing rule. However,
the two sharing rules are not nested. The Nash sharing rule obviously does not nest the
AOB sharing rule. More subtly, the AOB sharing rule does not nest the Nash sharing rule.
The reason is that, in general, for a given T in (2.27), one cannot Önd M; 4; Q such that
( 1 = (1 % T) =T and ( 2 = ( 3 = 0:17 The non-nested nature of the sharing rules is the reason
that we treat the two models as distinct.

2.7. Present Value Bargaining

The equilibrium allocations associated with period-by-period bargaining can also be sup-
ported by an alternative bargaining arrangement, which we call present value bargaining.
Under this arrangement, a given Örm/worker pair bargains only once, over wtp ; when they
Örst meet. It is straightforward to verify that if they pursue AOB, then the wtp that they
agree on satisÖes (2.24) or, equivalently, (2.25). Under Nash bargaining, wtp satisÖes (2.27).
Under these respective bargaining arrangements it is immaterial to the Örms and workers
how exactly the period by period wage rate is paid out, so long as it is consistent with the
   17
      Binmore, Rubenstein and Wolinsky (1986) describe a class of environments in which the Nash bargaining
solution is the solution to AOB bargaining. Our bargaining environment is di§erent and the Nash solution
is nested in the AOB solution only in the special case, ! = 1=2: In this case, as M ! 1; &; ' ! 0; &=' ! 0;
        M
(1 % ') ! 0; then ( 1 ! 1; ( 2 ; ( 3 ! 0: For ! 6= 1=2 we have not been able to Önd M; &; ' such that
( 1 = (1 % !) =! and ( 2 = ( 3 = 0:

                                                    12
agreed-upon wtp : For example, in one scenario workers and Örms simply agree to the constant
áow nominal wage rate that is consistent with wtp :18 In this scenario, the only workers that
experience a wage change is the subset that start new jobs.
    A potential problem with present value bargaining is that not all the state contingent
wage payments that are consistent with an agreed-upon wtp are time consistent. For exam-
ple, consider a scenario in which wt = wtp and the wage rate is zero thereafter. If bargaining
were re-opened at a later date, the worker would no longer have an incentive to accept the
previously agreed-upon zero wage rate. That is, in general present value bargaining requires
strong assumptions about agentsí ability to commit. Under period by period bargaining we
are able to avoid these assumptions. Moreover, wt is uniquely determined so it is straight-
forward to incorporate wage data into our analysis.

2.8. Market Clearing, Monetary Policy and Functional Forms

Market clearing in intermediate goods and in the services of capital require,
                             Z 1                        Z 1
                                                 K
                                 hj;t dj = lt ; ut Kt =     kj;t dj;
                                     0                           0

respectively. Market clearing for Önal goods requires:

                      Ct + (It + a(uK
                                    t )Kt )=+t + (st =Qt + Ft )xt lt"1 + Gt = Yt ;                    (2.28)

where Gt denotes government consumption.
    Perfect competition in the production of investment goods implies that the nominal price
of investment goods equals the corresponding marginal cost:

                                               PI;t = Pt =+t :

   Equality between the demand for loans by retailers, ht Pth ; and the supply by households,
Bt+1 =Rt ; requires:
                                   ht Pth = Bt+1 =Rt :
The asset pricing kernel, mt+1 ; is constructed using the marginal contribution of consumption
to discounted utility, which we denote by :t :

                                            mt+1 = (:t+1 =:t :

       We adopt the following speciÖcation of monetary policy:

                                                               W ) + ry ln (Yt =Yt# )] + N R "R;t :
           ln(Rt =R) = AR ln(Rt"1 =R) + (1 % AR ) [r/ ln (W t =4
  18
   See Pissarides (2009) and Shimer (2004) for a closely related discussion in simple search and matching
models with no nominal frictions.

                                                     13
Here, W
      4 denotes the monetary authorityís ináation target. The monetary policy shock, "R;t ;
has unit variance and zero mean. Also, R is the steady state value of Rt : The variable, Yt ;
denotes Gross Domestic Product (GDP):

                                            Yt = Ct + It =+t + Gt ;

and Yt# denotes the value of Yt along the non-stochastic steady state growth path.
    Working with the data from Fernald (2012) we Önd that the growth rate of total factor
productivity is well described by an i:i:d: process. Accordingly, we assume that ln Yz;t (
ln (zt =zt"1 ) is i:i:d: We also assume that ln Y(;t ( ln (+t =+t"1 ) follows a Örst order autore-
gressive process. The parameters that control the standard deviations of the innovations
in both processes are denoted by (N z ; N ( ); respectively. The autocorrelation of ln Y(;t is
denoted by A( :
    The sources of growth in our model are neutral and investment-speciÖc technological
progress. Let:
                                                    "
                                           5t = +t1!" zt :                                  (2.29)
To guarantee balanced growth in the nonstochastic steady state, we require that each element
in [?t ; st ; Ft ; Q t ; Gt ; Dt ] grows at the same rate as 5t in steady state. To this end, we adopt
the following speciÖcation:19

                               [?t ; st ; Ft ; Q t ; Gt ; Dt ]0 = [?; s; F; Q; G; D]0 6t :           (2.30)

Here, 6t is deÖned as follows:
                                             6t = 52t"1 (6t"1 )1"2 ;                                 (2.31)
where 0 < Z & 1 is a parameter to be estimated. With this speciÖcation, 6t =5t"1 converges to
a constant in nonstochastic steady state: When Z is close to zero, 6t is virtually unresponsive
in the short-run to an innovation in either of the two technology shocks, a feature that we
Önd attractive on a priori grounds. Given the speciÖcation of the exogenous processes in
the model, Yt =5t ; Ct =5t , wt =5t and It =(+t 5t ) converge to constants in nonstochastic steady
state.
    We assume that the cost of adjusting investment takes the form:
                   1&     hp                           i      h p                       i)
   S (It =It"1 ) =    exp S 00 (It =It"1 % Y + Y( ) + exp % S 00 (It =It"1 % Y + Y( ) % 1:
                   2
Here, Y and Y( denote the unconditional growth rates of 5t and +t . The value of It =It"1
in nonstochastic steady state is (Y + Y( ): In addition, S 00 denotes the second derivative
of S ('), evaluated at steady state: The object, S 00 ; is a parameter to be estimated. It is
straightforward to verify that S (Y + Y( ) = S 0 (Y + Y( ) = 0:
  19
       Our speciÖcation follows Christiano, Trabandt and Walentin (2012) and Schmitt-GrohÈ and Uribe (2012).

                                                          14
   We assume that the cost associated with setting capacity utilization is given by:

                    a(uK               K 2                      K
                       t ) = N a N b (ut ) =2 + N b (1 % N a ) ut + N b (N a =2 % 1)

where N a and N b are positive scalars. For a given value of N a we select N b so that the steady
state value of uK
                t is unity. The object, N a ; is a parameter to be estimated.



3. The Calvo Sticky Wage Model

We now describe a medium-sized DSGE model which incorporates the Calvo sticky wage
framework of EHL. The Önal homogeneous good, Yt ; is produced by competitive and iden-
tical Örms using the technology, (2.3). The representative Önal good producer buys the j th
specialized input, Yj;t ; from a monopolist who produces the input using the technology, (2.5).
Capital services are purchased in competitive rental markets. In (2.5), hj;t now refers to the
quantity of a homogeneous labor input that the monopolist purchases from a representative
labor contractor. The representative contractor produces the homogeneous labor input by
combining di§erentiated labor inputs, li;t ; i 2 (0; 1) ; using the technology:
                                      "Z 1             $&w
                                                   1
                                 ht =      (li;t ) w di
                                                  !        ; :w > 1:                      (3.1)
                                         0

Labor contractors are perfectly competitive and take the nominal wage rate, Wt ; of ht as
given. They also take the wage rate, Wi;t ; of the ith labor type as given. ProÖt maximization
on the part of contractors implies:
                                                          !w
                                      li;t = (Wt =Wi;t ) !w !1 ht :                          (3.2)

    There is a continuum of households, each indexed by i 2 (0; 1) : The ith household is the
monopoly supplier of li;t and chooses Wi;t subject to (3.2) and Calvo wage-setting frictions.
That is, the household optimizes the wage, Wi;t ; with probability 1 % @ w . With probability
@ w the wage rate is given by:
                                       Wi;t = Wi;t"1 :                                  (3.3)
Note that we do not allow for indexation when households do not reoptimize.
   With two exceptions, the ith householdís budget constraint is given by (2.2). First,
Dt = 0: Second, we replace lt Wt by li;t Wi;t + Ai;t : Here, Ai;t represents the net proceeds of an
asset that provides insurance against the idiosyncratic uncertainty associated with the Calvo
wage-setting friction. Apart from employment and Ai;t ; the other choice variables in (2.2)
need not be indexed by i because of household access to insurance and our speciÖcation of
preferences:
                                                   1+
                                                 li;t
                          ln (Ct % bCt"1 ) % {          ; { > 0; 2 0:                         (3.4)
                                                 1+

                                                   15
4. Econometric Methodology

We estimate our model using a Bayesian variant of the strategy in CEE that minimizes
the distance between the dynamic response to three shocks in the model and the analog
objects in the data. The latter are obtained using an identiÖed VAR for post-war quarterly
U.S. times series that include key labor market variables. The particular Bayesian strategy
that we use is the one developed in Christiano, Trabandt and Walentin (2011a) (henceforth
CTW).
    To facilitate comparisons, our analysis is based on the same VAR as used in CTW who
estimate a 14 variable VAR using quarterly data that are seasonally adjusted and cover the
period 1951Q1 to 2008Q4. As in CTW, we identify the dynamic responses to a monetary
policy shock by assuming that the monetary authority sees the contemporaneous values of
all the variables in the VAR and a monetary policy shock a§ects only the Federal Funds Rate
contemporaneously. As in Altig, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Linde (2011), Fisher (2006)
and CTW, we make two assumptions to identify the dynamic responses to the technology
shocks: (i) the only shocks that a§ect labor productivity in the long-run are the innovations
to the neutral technology shock, zt ; and the innovation to the investment-speciÖc technology
shock, +t and (ii) the only shock that a§ects the price of investment relative to consumption
in the long-run is the innovation to +t . These identiÖcation assumptions are satisÖed in our
model. Standard lag-length selection criteria lead CTW to work with a VAR with 2 lags.20
    We include the following variables in the VAR:21 9 ln(relative price of investment),
9 ln(real GDP=hours), 9 ln(GDP deáator), unemployment rate; ln(capacity utilization);
ln(hours); ln(real GDP=hours) % ln(real wage), ln(nominal C=nominal GDP ), ln(nominal
I=nominal GDP ); ln(vacancies); job separation rate, job Önding rate, ln (hours=labor force) ;
Federal Funds rate.
    Given an estimate of the VAR we can compute the implied impulse response functions
to the three structural shocks. We stack the contemporaneous and 14 lagged values of each
of these impulse response functions for 12 of the VAR variables in a vector, ^ : We do not
include the job separation rate and the size of the labor force because our model assumes
those variables are constant. We include these variables in the VAR to ensure the VAR
results are not driven by an omitted variable bias.
    The logic underlying our model estimation procedure is as follows. Suppose that our
structural model is true. Denote the true values of the model parameters by Z0 : Let (Z)
denote the model-implied mapping from a set of values for the model parameters to the
analog impulse responses in ^ : Thus, (Z0 ) denotes the true value of the impulse responses
 20
      See CTW for a sensitivity analysis with respect to the lag length of the VAR.
 21
      See the technical appendix in CTW for details about the data.



                                                     16
whose estimates appear in ^ : According to standard classical asymptotic sampling theory,
when the number of observations, T; is large, we have
                         p &              ) a
                            T ^ % (Z0 ) ~ N (0; W (Z0 ; ] 0 )) :

Here, ] 0 denotes the true values of the parameters of the shocks in the model that we do
not formally include in the analysis. Because we solve the model using a log-linearization
procedure, (Z0 ) is not a function of ] 0 : However, the sampling distribution of ^ is a function
of ] 0 : We Önd it convenient to express the asymptotic distribution of ^ in the following form:
                                         a
                                      ^ ~ N ( (Z0 ) ; V ) ;                                (4.1)

where
                                      V ( W (Z0 ; ] 0 ) =T:
For simplicity our notation does not make the dependence of V on Z0 ; ] 0 and T explicit. We
use a consistent estimator of V: Motivated by small sample considerations, this estimator has
only diagonal elements (see CTW). The elements in ^ are graphed in Figures 1 % 3 (see the
solid lines). The gray areas are centered, 95 percent probability intervals computed using
our estimate of V .
    In our analysis, we treat ^ as the observed data. We specify priors for Z and then compute
the posterior distribution for Z given ^ using Bayesí rule. This computation requires the
likelihood of ^ given Z: Our asymptotically valid approximation of this likelihood is motivated
by (4.1):
              &       )                      "     &         )0      &           )$
                                 N      1
            f ^ jZ; V = (2W) 2 jV j 2 exp %0:5 ^ % (Z) V
                               "      "                           "1   ^ % (Z) :           (4.2)

The value of Z that maximizes the above function represents an approximate maximum
likelihood estimator of Z: It is approximate for three reasons: (i) the central limit theorem
underlying (4.1) only holds exactly as T ! 1; (ii) our proxy for V is guaranteed to be
correct only for T ! 1; and (iii) (Z) is calculated using a linear approximation.
    Treating the function, f; as the likelihood of ^ ; it follows that the Bayesian posterior of
Z conditional on ^ and V is:
                                                &         )
                                  &       ) f ^ jZ; V p (Z)
                                f Zj ^ ; V =        &       )    :                         (4.3)
                                                  f    ^ jV
                                                       &     )
Here, p (Z) denotes the prior distribution of Z and f    ^ jV denotes the marginal density of
^:
                                &     ) Z &             )
                              f   ^ jV = f       ^ jZ; V p (Z) dZ:

                                               17
The mode of the posterior distribution of Z can be computed by maximizing the value of
the numerator in (4.3), since the denominator is not a function of Z: We compute the pos-
terior distribution of the parameters using a standard Monte Carlo Markov chain (MCMC)
algorithm.
    We evaluate the relative empirical performance of di§erent models by comparing their
implication for the marginal likelihood of ^ : To compute a marginal likelihood, we use
Gewekeís modiÖed harmonic mean procedure. For an analysis of the validity of this approach
to comparing models, see Inoue and Shintani (2015).
    In part of our analysis, we Önd it convenient to compute the marginal likelihood of
a subset, ^ 1 ; of the elements in ^& (see)the technical appendix for details). The latter
computation requires integrating f ^ jV with respect to the elements of ^ not in ^ 1 : To
                                                                            &     )
this end, we Önd it convenient to make use of the Laplace approximation of f ^ jV : Below,
we provide evidence of the accuracy of the Laplace approximation for computing the marginal
likelihood.


5. Empirical Results for Search and Matching Models

In this section we present the empirical results for our search and matching models. The Örst
subsection discusses the a priori restrictions that we impose on the models. The next two
subsections report estimation results for the AOB and Nash Bargaining models, respectively.

5.1. Parameter and Steady State Restrictions

Some model parameter values were set a priori. See Panel A of Table 1. We specify ( so that
the steady state annual real rate of interest is 3 percent. The depreciation rate on capital,
4 K ; is set to imply an annual depreciation rate of 10 percent. The values of Y and Y( are
determined by the sample average of real per capita GDP and real investment growth. We
set the parameter M to 60; which roughly corresponds to the number of business days in
a quarter. This assumption is consistent with HM, who assume that it takes one day to
counter an o§er. We set A = 0:9 which implies a match survival rate that is consistent with
the values used in HM, Shimer (2012a) and Walsh (2003). We discuss the parameters, @ w
and :w ; which pertain to the sticky wage model, below.
     We choose values for Öve model parameters, N m ; Q; ?; G; W4 ; so that, conditional on the
other parameters, the model satisÖes the Öve steady state targets listed in Panel B, Table 1.
Following den Haan, Ramey and Watson (2000) and Ravenna and Walsh (2008), the target
for the steady state vacancy Ölling rate, Q; is 0:7. The steady state unemployment rate is
5:5 percent which corresponds to the average unemployment rate in our sample. The proÖts



                                              18
of wholesalers are zero in steady state, the steady state ratio of government consumption to
gross output is 0:2, and steady state ináation, W; is 2:5 percent.

5.2. AOB Model Results

Table 3 reports the mean and 95 percent probability intervals for the priors and posteriors
of the parameters in the AOB model. Several features are worth noting. First, the posterior
mode of @ implies a reasonable degree of price stickiness, with prices changing on average
once every four quarters.
    Second, the posterior mode of 4 implies that there is a roughly 0:2 percent chance of
an exogenous break-up in negotiations when a wage o§er is rejected. Our estimate of 4 is
somewhat lower than HMís calibrated value of 4 of 0:55 percent.
    Third, the posterior mode of our model parameters imply that it costs roughly 0:6 of one
dayís revenue for a Örm to prepare a countero§er to a worker (see the bottom of Table 2).
    Fourth, the Öxed cost component of hiring accounts for the lionís share of the total cost
of meeting a worker. Table 3 reports the posterior mode values of:
                                                   svl        Fxl
                                            Ts =       ; Th =     :
                                                    Y          Y
Here, T s and T h denote the share of vacancy posting costs and hiring Öxed costs to gross
output in steady state, respectively. The Öxed cost component of meeting a worker, expressed
as a percent of the total cost is:22
                                                Th
                                                      = 0:94:
                                              Th + Ts

The importance of hiring Öxed costs is consistent with micro evidence reported in Yashiv
(2000), Cheremukhin and Restrepo-Echavarria (2010) and Carlsson, Eriksson and Gottfries
(2013).23
   Fifth, in steady state the total cost associated with hiring a new worker is roughly 7
percent of the wage rate. That is:
                                    s
                                    Q
                                        +F         Ts + Th Y
                                              =              = 0:068:
                                        w           1 % A wl

Silva and Toledo (2009) report that, depending on the exact costs included, the value of this
statistic is between 4 and 14 percent, a range that encompasses our estimate.
  22
     Here, we have used the facts, v = x=Q and that the cost of meeting a worker is, by (2.9), equal to
s=Q + -:
  23
     Using di§erent models estimated on macro data of various countries, Christiano, Trabandt and Walentin
(2011b), Furlanetto and Groshenny (2012) and Justiniano and Michelacci (2011) also conclude that hiring
Öxed costs are important relative to the vacancy posting cost.


                                                      19
    Sixth, the prior mode of the replacement ratio, D=w; is roughly 0:4. Based on studies of
unemployment insurance, HM report a range of estimates for the replacement ratio between
0:1 and 0:4. Based on their summary of the literature, Gertler, Sala and Trigari (2008)
argue that a plausible upper bound for the replacement ratio is 0:7 when one takes informal
sources of insurance into account. Our prior mode for D=w is roughly in the middle of all
these estimates. According to Table 3 the prior and posterior distributions of D=w are quite
similar. We interpret this result as indicating that the replacement ratio does not play a
critical role in the AOB modelís ability to account for the data. A corollary of this result is
that identiÖcation of D=w must come from microeconomic data.
    Seventh, the posterior mean of Z which governs the responsiveness of [?t ; Ft ; Q t ; Gt ; st ; Dt ]
to technology shocks, is small (0:05) and the associated probability interval is quite tight.
So, these variables are quite unresponsive in the short-run to technology shocks. A large
value of Z would make Q t and Dt rise by more after a positive technology shock. But, this
would imply a larger rise in the real wage rate and induce counterfactual implications for
hours worked and ináation.
    Eighth, the posterior mode of the parameters governing monetary policy are similar to
those reported in the literature (see for example Christiano, Trabandt and Walentin, 2011a).
    Ninth, the point estimate of the markup is roughly 42 percent, which is higher than the
20 percent estimate in the benchmark model reported in CEE, which assumes dynamic price
indexation. By that we mean, Örms which do not reoptimize their current period price adjust
that price by the aggregate ináation rate realized in the previous period. In contrast, the
point estimate of the markup is roughly 40 percent when CEE estimate a version of their
model with static price indexation. By that we mean, Örms which do not reoptimize their
current period price adjust that price by the steady state ináation rate. This version of the
model seems most comparable to ours, in which there is no indexation at all.
    The solid black lines in Figures 1 - 3 display VAR-based estimates of impulse responses to
a monetary policy shock, a neutral technology shock and an investment-speciÖc technology
shock, respectively. The grey areas represent 95 percent probability intervals. The solid lines
with the circles correspond to the impulse response functions of the AOB model evaluated
at the posterior mode of the estimated parameters.
    Figure 1 shows that the AOB model does reasonably well at reproducing the estimated
e§ects of an expansionary monetary policy shock, including the hump-shaped rise of real
GDP and hours worked, as well as the muted response of ináation. Notice that real wages
respond by less than hours to the monetary policy shock. Even though the maximal rise in
hours worked is roughly 0:13 percent, the maximal rise in real wages is only 0:08 percent:
SigniÖcantly, the model accounts for the hump-shaped fall in the unemployment rate as well
as the rise in the job Önding rate and vacancies that follow in the wake of an expansionary

                                                  20
monetary policy shock. The model does understate the rise in the capacity utilization rate.
The sharp rise of capacity utilization in the estimated VAR may reáect that our capacity
utilization rate data pertains to the manufacturing sector, which may overstate the average
response across all sectors in the economy.
    The basic intuition for how a monetary policy shock a§ects the economy in the AOB
model is as follows. As in standard New Keynesian models, an expansionary monetary policy
shock drives the real interest rate down, inducing an increase in the demand for Önal goods.
This rise induces an increase in the demand for the output of sticky price retailers. Since
they must satisfy demand, the retailers purchase more of the wholesale good. Therefore,
the relative price of the wholesale good increases and the marginal revenue product, #t ;
associated with a worker rises. Other things equal, this rise motivates wholesalers to hire
more workers and thus increases the probability that an unemployed worker Önds a job.
The latter e§ect induces a rise in workersí disagreement payo§s. The resulting increase in
workersí bargaining power generates a rise in the real wage. Given our estimated parameter
values, alternating o§er bargaining generates a moderate increase in real wages, a large rise
in employment, a substantial decline in unemployment, and a small rise in ináation. If there
was a large, persistent rise in the real wage, the model would generate a counterfactually
large rise in ináation. The reason is that real wages are a key component of Örmsí real
marginal costs. Firms that have a chance to reset prices set those prices as an increasing
function of current and expected future real marginal cost. So, to account for the observed
cyclical behavior of ináation it is critical for the model to generate small cyclical movements
in marginal cost.
    From Figure 2 we see that the model also does a good job of accounting for the estimated
e§ects of a neutral technology shock. Of particular note is that the model reproduces the
estimated sharp fall in the ináation rate that occurs after a positive neutral technology
shock.24 For ináation to fall sharply, there must be a sharp drop in marginal cost. This in
turn requires that the rise in the real wage that occurs after a technology shock is small.
As Figure 2 shows, the AOB model has this property. Below, we argue that the ability to
account for the sharp fall in ináation after a technology shock is useful for discriminating
between di§erent models. Also, the model generates a sharp fall in the unemployment rate
along with a large rise in job vacancies and the job Önding rate. So, the estimated AOB
model is not subject to Shimerís (2005) critique of search and matching models with low
replacement rates.
    Finally, Figure 3 shows that the model also does a good job of accounting for the estimated
response of the economy to an investment-speciÖc technology shock.
  24
    For additional evidence that ináation responds more strongly to technology shocks than to monetary
policy shocks, see Paciello (2011).


                                                 21
5.3. Nash Bargaining Model Results

When we estimated the Nash Bargaining model, the resulting impulse response functions
are virtually identical to the ones implied by the estimated AOB model. For this reason,
we do not report the Nash Bargaining modelís impulse response functions in Figures 1 - 3.
Priors and posteriors for the model parameters are reported in Table 3. With one important
exception, the posterior mode values of the parameters that the Nash Bargaining and AOB
models share in common are basically the same. The important exception is the replacement
ratio, D=w: The posterior mode for D=w is 0:88 in the Nash Bargaining model, versus 0:37
in the AOB model. In both cases, the posterior probability intervals are very tight, with no
overlap. Two other parameter estimates come out slightly di§erent: the curvature on the
capacity utilization adjustment cost function, N a ; and the share of hiring Öxed cost, T h .
    There is a substantial 14 log point di§erence in the marginal likelihood between the
two models because the Nash Bargaining model must reach far into the right tail of the
prior distribution for D=w to match the impulse response functions. To explain this it is
convenient to work with the Laplace approximation of the marginal likelihood because it
involves a simple product of the likelihood and the prior, evaluated at the posterior mode.
As noted before, this approximation appears to be an excellent one in our application. Let
L denote the log of the Laplace approximation of the marginal likelihood of the data:
                             &         )    h                     i
                     L = ln f ^ jZ# ; V % ln (2W)"N jG22 (Z# )j1=2 + ln p (Z# ) ;        (5.1)

where Z# denotes the mode of the posterior distribution of Z and G22 denotes the Hessian of
the log posterior distribution, evaluated at Z# :25 The other variables in (5.1) are deÖned in
section 4.
    We compute (5.1) for both&the AOB  ) model and the Nash Bargaining model. It turns out
that the log likelihoods, ln f ^ jZ ; V ; of the two models are essentially the same: 344:6
                                   #

and 343:9 in the case of the AOB and Nash Bargaining model, respectively. The object in
square brackets in (5.1) turns out to be also roughly the same for the two models. Thus,
the 14 log point gap between the AOB and Nash Bargaining models is due to the di§erence
in the prior term, ln p; evaluated at posterior modes, Z# ; of the two models: Most of that
di§erence is due to the implausibly high value of D=w (0.88) that the Nash Bargaining model
needs to account for the data.
    The high value of D=w is critical to the performance of the Nash Bargaining model.
To make this observation precise we begin by re-calculating the impulse response functions
implied by the Nash Bargaining model making only one change: we re-parameterize the
replacement ratio, D=w; from 0:88 to 0:37, where the latter value is posterior mode of D=w
 25
      See, for example, Christiano, Trabandt and Walentin (2011a).


                                                    22
in the estimated AOB model. The dashed lines in Figures 4 - 6 are the impulse response
functions corresponding to this re-parameterized Nash Bargaining model while the solid
lines with circles depict the impulse responses of the Nash bargaining model evaluated at
the estimated posterior mode with D=w equal 0:88.
    Figure 4 shows that this one change leads to a dramatic deterioration in the performance
of the Nash bargaining model. All of the quantity variables like hours worked, real GDP as
well as unemployment are now much less responsive to a monetary policy shock. In contrast,
the real wage and ináation respond by too much relative to the VAR-based impulse response
functions. Figures 5 and 6 reveal a similar pattern with respect to the technology shocks.
Consistent with the results in Shimer (2005), the Nash bargaining model with the lower
replacement ratio generates very small changes in the unemployment rate after a neutral
technology shock. SigniÖcantly, this version of the model also generates counterfactually large
movements in ináation. However these shortcomings are remedied by a higher value of D=w.
With respect to unemployment, this Önding is reminiscent of Hagedorn and Manovskiiís
(2008) argument that a high replacement ratio has the potential to boost the volatility of
unemployment and vacancies in search and matching models with Nash Bargaining.
    To further assess the role played by D=w, we re-estimated the Nash Bargaining model
holding the value of D=w Öxed at 0:37: The marginal likelihood of the Nash Bargaining
model with D=w = 0:37 is a dramatic 126 log points lower than the marginal likelihood in
the estimated AOB model.26 The dashed - dotted lines in Figures 4 - 6 correspond to the
impulse response functions associated with this version of the Nash Bargaining model. Figure
4 indicates that this model cannot account for the rise in output, hours worked, consumption,
investment, vacancies and the job Önding rate that occur after an expansionary monetary
policy shock. Just as importantly, the model implies that real wages rise in a counterfactual
manner after such a shock. While less dramatic, Figures 5 and 6 show that the modelís
performance with respect to the technology shocks also deteriorates. Taken together, our
results indicate that empirically plausible versions of the Nash Bargaining model must assume
a very high value of D=w.


6. Assessing the Search and Matching Models Against Alternatives

In our search and matching model, the real wage is the solution to a bargaining problem, the
implications of which are fully summarized in the sharing rule. The next subsection reports
the results of estimating our model with a reduced form sharing rule that nests the AOB
and Nash sharing rules as special cases. The second subsection below reports the results of
replacing the sharing rule with two alternative wage rules: i) a general wage rule that makes
 26
      The full set of parameter estimates is available upon request from the authors.


                                                      23
the date t real wage a log-linear function of all of the modelís date t state variables, and
ii) motivated by the results in i) we consider an easy-to-interpret simple wage rule which
summarizes the key characteristics of the general wage rule. In the Önal subsection, we
consider how the performance of our model compares with that of the standard empirical
New Keynesian model with Calvo sticky wages.

6.1. The Reduced Form Sharing Rule Model

Consider the following reduced form sharing rule:

                                  Jt = _1 (Vt % Ut ) % _2 6t + _3 (#t % Dt ) ;                     (6.1)

where 6t is deÖned in (2.31). We deÖne the reduced form sharing rule model as the version
of our model in which the sharing rule is given by (6.1) and the _i ís are unrestricted. The
reduced form sharing rule model nests, as special cases, the AOB and Nash models. In the
AOB model, _1 = ( 1 ; _2 = ( 2 Q; _3 = ( 3 : Here, ( 1 ; ( 2 ; ( 3 are the functions of 4 and M deÖned
after (2.25). In the Nash model, _1 = (1 % T)=T; _2 = _3 = 0: By comparing the estimated
values of the sharing rule coe¢cients of the three models we can assess the plausibility of
the Nash and AOB models.
    To maximize the impact of the data on inference about the _i ís, we adopt uniform priors
on these parameters. The upper (lower) bound of the uniform distribution is 3 times (%1
times) the mode of the posterior distribution on _i , i = 1; 2; 3; when we estimate the AOB
model: We estimate the model with the reduced form sharing rule using the same priors for
the other parameters as in the estimated AOB model (see Table 3). Our results are reported
in Table 4.27
    Panels A and B report the mode and a 95 percent probability interval implied by the
posterior distribution of _1 ; _2 and _3 in the AOB and Nash models, respectively. Denote
the mode of these distributions by _xi ; for x = AOB; N ash; i = 1; 2; 3: Panel C reports
a measure of closeness of the _xi ís to the corresponding posterior distribution implied the
reduced form sharing rule model. We use the p-value as our measure of closeness. Thus,
                                        *             +
according to panel C in Table 4, prob _i > _AOB i        is between 0:21 and 0:24 for i = 1; 2; 3: So,
the sharing rule parameters implied by the AOB model are quite plausible relative to the
posterior distribution implied by the reduced form sharing rule model.
                                                                                            *           +
    In contrast, the Nash model does very poorly by this metric. SpeciÖcally, prob _1 > _N        1
                                                                                                    ash

is essentially zero. Thus, the sharing parameters implied by the Nash model are extremely
implausible under the posterior distribution implied by the generalized sharing rule model.
This last result corroborates our Öndings, based on the marginal likelihood, that the AOB
model provides a better statistical Öt of the data than the Nash model.
  27
       A full set of parameter estimates is available upon request from the authors.

                                                       24
6.2. General Wage Rule Model

While more general than the Nash and AOB sharing rules, equation (6.1) might still be quite
restrictive. Accordingly, we also consider a reduced form model in which the date t real wage
is assumed to a be a log-linear function of all date t state variables of the AOB model. We
treat the coe¢cients on the state variables as free parameters to be estimated.
    Let w4t denote the real wage scaled by 5t :

                                               w4t ( wt =5t :                                           (6.2)

Here, 5t denotes the combination of neutral and investment-speciÖc technology shocks de-
Öned in (2.29). The state variables of the model include Rt"1 ; kt"1 = Kt"1 = (+t"1 5t"1 ) ; lt"1 ;
6t"1 ; ct"1 = Ct"1 =5t"1 , it"1 = It"1 = (+t"1 5t"1 ) ; Yz;t ; Y(;t ; p#t"1 :28 Let,

                4t = constant + {1 ln Rt"1 + {2 ln kt"1 + {3 ln lt"1 + {4 ln p#t"1
             ln w                                                                                       (6.3)
                          +{5 ln 6t"1 + {6 ln ct"1 + {7 ln it"1 + {8 ln Yz;t + {9 ln Y(;t :

    We deÖne the general wage rule model as the version of our model in which the wage
is determined by (6.3). Table 5 reports the posterior mode and probability interval of the
coe¢cients {i ; i = 1; ::9 in the log-linearized representation of the general wage rule.29 The
marginal likelihood is roughly 20 log points higher than the one for the estimated AOB
model. Figure 7 displays the impulse response functions of unemployment, ináation and the
real wage to our three shocks.30 Notice that wages and ináation respond somewhat more
to a monetary policy shock in the AOB model than in the general wage rule model. This
di§erence helps to explain the lower marginal likelihood associated with the AOB model. It
also illustrates the crucial role that real wages play in determining the response of ináation
to a monetary policy shock. SpeciÖcally, the reason that the response of ináation is stronger
in the AOB model than in the general wage rule model is because the real wage response is
stronger. Figure 7 also shows that the dynamic responses of the AOB and general wage rule
models to technology shocks are very similar.
    We infer from Figure 7 that the general wage rule has two key features. First, the
real wage responds relatively little to shocks. Second, the response that does occur is very
persistent. Any successful account of the data will have to somehow account for those
features.
  28
     Here, p!t denotes the measure of price dispersion across retailers, which captures the e§ects of resource
                                                                                               !
misallocation due to price-setting frictions (see Yun, 1996). In particular, p!t = (Pt! =Pt ) !!1 where Pt! =
"             $ 1!!          "             $1%%
  R 1 1!!!       !             R 1 1!!1

   0
     Pi;t  di       and Pt =    0
                                  Pi;t  di      .
  29
     The constant term in (6.3) is adjusted so that, conditional on the other model parameters, the steady
unemployment rate is 5.5 percent.
  30
     A complete set of impulse response functions is available upon request from the authors.

                                                     25
6.3. Simple Wage Rule Model

Next, we work with the following simple ñ easy-to-interpret ñ rule for the real wage, which
in principle has the ability to capture the two key features of the general wage rule discussed
in the previous section:

                 ln w4t = constant + c1 ln w4t"1 + c2 ln lt"1 + c3 ln Yz;t + c4 ln Y(;t :         (6.4)

We deÖne the simple wage rule model as the version of our model in which the wage is
determined by (6.4). The deÖnition of w        4t in (6.2) implies that the impact on ln wt of an
innovation in ln zt and in ln +t is 1 + c3 and 1 + c4 R= (1 % R) ; respectively. So, negative
values of c3 and c4 imply less than complete pass-through from technology shocks to the real
wage in the period of the shock. High values of c1 ensure that the incomplete pass-through
persists over time. Finally, note that we exclude the time t shock to monetary policy in (6.4)
in order to be consistent with the identifying assumptions in our VAR analysis. Monetary
policy does a§ect wt dynamically through ln lt"1 : Other things equal, we anticipate a low
value of c2 because the estimated response of wt to a monetary policy shock is persistently
small.
    Table 5 reports the posterior mode and probability interval of the coe¢cients ci ; i = 1; ::; 4
in the simple wage rule.31 Four things are worth noting. First, the data are quite informative
about the coe¢cients, ci ; i = 1; :::; 4; in the sense that, in each case, the posterior probability
interval is much smaller than the prior probability interval. Second, as anticipated, the
posterior mode for c1 is quite large. Third, the posterior mode for c2 is small. Finally, the
posterior modes for c3 and c4 are negative.
    According to Table 5, the marginal likelihoods for the simple wage rule model and the
general wage rule model are very similar. It is evident that the impulse response functions of
the general wage rule model and the simple wage rule model are very similar. We interpret
these two observations as supporting the notion that the simple wage rule succinctly captures
the key features of the general wage rule.
    We conclude this section by addressing the question: ìIf the simple wage rule is a good
description of the data, why bother with structural models like the AOB model?î First, it
is important to recall that the AOB model does capture the key features of both wage rule
models. Second, it is important to be clear about the limitations of the wage rule models.
For example, these models cannot be used to study the e§ects of policy interventions such as
a change in unemployment beneÖts. From the perspective of the AOB and the Nash models,
the coe¢cients in the wage rule models, including the constants, depend on objects like the
  31
   The constant term in (6.4) is adjusted so that, conditional on the other model parameters, the steady
unemployment rate is 5.5 percent.


                                                   26
level of unemployment beneÖts, D: The wage rule models are silent on how these coe¢cients
vary in response to changes in policy.
    Finally, one could in principle reinterpret our wage rules as a wage norms in the sense of
Hall (2005). Even with this interpretation it would be di¢cult to use the model to analyze
the e§ects of policy changes. For example, one would have to verify that the wage produced
by the general wage rule does not induce the worker or the Örm to walk away from the
match. If the implied wage did not satisfy this condition the model would be silent about
the resulting implications.

6.4. Calvo Sticky Wage Model

In this subsection we discuss the empirical properties of the Calvo sticky wage model and
compare its performance to the AOB model. Recall that our Calvo sticky wage model rules
out indexation of wages to technology and ináation. We comment on a version of the model
that allows for such indexation at the end of this subsection.
    Table 1 reports parameter values of the sticky nominal wage model that we set a priori.
Note in particular that we Öx @ w to 0:75 so that nominal wages change on average once a
year.32 Table 3 reports the posterior modes of the estimated sticky wage model parameters.
Figures 1 - 3 show that with two important exceptions, the Calvo sticky wage model does
reasonably well at accounting for the estimated impulse response functions. These exceptions
are that the model substantially understates the response of ináation to a neutral technology
shock and, to a somewhat lesser extent, to a monetary policy shock.
    We now compare the marginal likelihood of the AOB model with that of the Calvo sticky
wage model. Doing so is complicated by the fact that the two models do not address the
same data. For example, the Calvo sticky wage model has no implications for vacancies
and the job Önding rate. To obtain a measure of Öt based on a common data set, we
integrate out unemployment, the job Önding rate and vacancies from the marginal likelihood
associated with the AOB model. As discussed in section 4, the integration is performed
on the Laplace approximation of the posterior distribution. The marginal likelihoods based
on the impulse response functions of the nine remaining variables are reported in Table 3
(see ìLaplace, 9 Observablesî). The marginal likelihood for the AOB model is about 60
log points higher than it is for the Calvo sticky wage model. We conclude that, subject
to the approximations that we used to compute the marginal likelihood function, there is
substantial statistical evidence in favor of the AOB model relative to the Calvo sticky wage
model. The evidence reported in the table suggests that the Laplace approximation is quite
accurate in our setting. To see this, note that the marginal likelihood for the 12 variable
  32
    We encountered numerical problems in calculating the posterior mode of model parameters when we did
not place a dogmatic prior on 2 w .


                                                  27
system based on the Laplace approximation is essentially the same as the marginal likelihood
based on MCMC simulations. This result holds for both the AOB and Nash models.
    We also estimated a version of the Calvo sticky wage model where we allow for wage
indexation. In particular, we assume that if a labor supplier cannot re-optimize his wage
then it changes by the steady state growth rate of output times the lagged ináation rate.
The impulse response functions of the AOB model and the Calvo sticky wage model with
indexation are qualitatively very similar. The marginal likelihood of the latter model about
3 log points higher than that of the AOB model. Overall, we conclude that the performance
of the two models is similar. But, the performance of the Calvo sticky wage model depends
very much on the troubling wage indexation assumption.


7. The Dynamic E§ects of a Change in Unemployment BeneÖts

In this section we investigate the implications of our estimated AOB model for changes in
unemployment beneÖts. We look at these implications when beneÖts are changed when the
zero lower bound (ZLB) on nominal interest is binding and when it is not (i.e. in ìnormal
timesî). According to our estimated model, price setting frictions and monetary policy play
a key role in determining the response of the economy to a change in unemployment beneÖts,
D. Our key Önding are as follows. First, in normal times, a rise in D increases the value
of being unemployed, so that the real wage rises, aggregate economic economic activity falls
and the unemployment rate rises.33 Second, other things equal, when the ZLB is binding
a rise in D gives rise to countervailing expansionary forces. If those forces are su¢ciently
strong, a rise in D can in principle lead to an economic expansion. Third, whether we are
in the ZLB or in normal times, the e§ects of a rise in D depend very much on how sticky
prices are. SpeciÖcally, the e§ects of a change in D are smaller the stickier prices are, i.e.,
the larger is @. Fourth, our estimated AOB model implies that a one percent increase in D
that lasts roughly 2 years has a contractionary e§ect when the economy is not in the ZLB.
The same increase has essentially no e§ect when the economy is in the ZLB.

7.1. A Rise in Unemployment BeneÖts in Normal Times

We investigate the e§ects of an unanticipated, transitory increase in unemployment beneÖts
using the estimated version of our AOB model. The speciÖc experiment that we perform is
as follows. We suppose that the economy is in nonstochastic steady state and is expected to
remain there indeÖnitely. In period t = 0 there is an unanticipated jump in unemployment
beneÖts. Thereafter, there are no further shocks. Agents correctly understand that unem-
  33
   These e§ects are qualitatively similar to those documented in Hagedorn, Karahan, Manovskii and Mit-
man (2013) in a áexible price search and matching model with Nash bargaining.


                                                 28
ployment beneÖts will revert back to steady state. We replace D in (2.30) by dt in time
t = 0; where
                            ln dt+1 = (1 % AD ) ln D + AG ln dt ;

for t = 0; 1; 2; ::: . We set d0 > D so that the ratio of D0 to the unshocked steady state
value of w0 jumps from its initial steady state value of 0:37 to 0:38. We consider two values
of AD ; 0:75 and 0:90. The time needed to close 90 percent of the gap between dt and D in
these two cases is roughly two and Öve years, respectively. The Örst row of Figure 8 reports
the dynamic impact of the shock to d0 on unemployment for the estimated AOB model.
Recall that the mode of the posterior distribution for the price stickiness parameter, @; is
0.75. Since the e§ects of a change in unemployment beneÖts depend in an interesting way
on the parameter @; we also report results for a version of the model where @ = 0:5; so that
prices are less sticky (see row 2).
    Row 1 in Figure 8 shows that, in normal times, the increase in unemployment beneÖts
leads to a relatively small, but persistent, increase in the unemployment rate. The intuition
for this result is straightforward. In normal times, a rise in unemployment beneÖts increases
the value of unemployment so that real wages rise. That rise has two e§ects. First, it reduces
the incentive of Örms to post vacancies. This standard contractionary e§ect is the one that
is stressed in the literature (see, for example, Hagedorn, Karahan, Manovskii and Mitman,
2013). The second e§ect reáects the presence of price-setting frictions in our model. These
frictions have the consequence that the rise in the real wage leads to an increase in ináation.
These frictions also imply that the response of monetary policy to ináation has an impact
on economic activity. SpeciÖcally, our estimated monetary policy rule has the property that
the nominal interest rate rises by more than ináation. The resulting rise in the real interest
rate drives spending on goods and services down, thus magnifying the decline in aggregate
economic activity induced by the rise in unemployment beneÖts.
    Figure 8 shows that the magnitude of the rise unemployment after the increase is in-
creasing in AD and decreasing in @: The larger is AD ; the more the value of unemployment
rises with an increase in d0 ; so the standard contractionary e§ect stressed in the literature
is larger. The smaller is @; i.e. the more áexible prices are, the larger is the immediate e§ect
on ináation of a given rise in the real wage. Since it is the one-period ináation rate that
enters the monetary policy rule, the more áexible prices are, the larger is the increase in
the nominal interest rate associated with an increase in d0 : So, the magnitude of the second
e§ect (i.e. the real interest rate e§ect) discussed above is larger.




                                              29
7.2. A Rise in Unemployment BeneÖts When the ZLB Binds

We now consider the e§ects of the same rise in d0 studied in the previous section, with
one modiÖcation. The ZLB is binding in period t = 0; when the shock occurs. We do
not explicitly model why the ZLB is binding. Instead we simply assume that the nominal
interest rate is Öxed at its steady state value for x quarters after t = 0. We consider two
cases, x = 4; 8:34 This choice is motivated by results in Swanson and Williams (2014), who
argue that, during the period 2009Q1-2012Q4, professional forecasters expected the ZLB to
be binding between one and two years. In our experiments we assume that after the ZLB
ceases to bind, policy reverts to our estimated interest rate rule.
    We use the same two mechanisms discussed above to describe the dynamic e§ects of
the increase in unemployment beneÖts. The standard contractionary e§ect - which raises
the real wage and reduces Örmsí incentive to post vacancies - is still present. However the
second e§ect, which is based on the interaction of price setting frictions and monetary policy,
operates very di§erently when the ZLB is binding. As before, the increase in real wages leads
to a rise in ináation. But, with a Öxed nominal interest rate the rise in ináation leads to a
fall in the real interest rate. That fall drives spending on goods and services up. So, when
the ZLB is binding the model embodies forces that, other things equal, lead to an expansion
in economic activity after an increase in unemployment beneÖts. These expansionary forces
are stronger the longer the ZLB is expected to bind relative to the duration of the increase
in unemployment beneÖts. To understand this point, suppose that the bulk of the increased
beneÖts occurs after t = x; i.e., after the ZLB ceases to bind. The logic of the previous
section applies and the economy experiences a recession after t = x. Internalizing this fact,
forward looking agents spend less in the ZLB than they would have otherwise.35 Finally,
these expansionary forces are also stronger the more áexible prices are, conditional on the
ZLB binding.36
    Columns 2 and 3 in Figure 8 report our results for x = 4 and 8, respectively. Recall
that row 1 corresponds to the estimated AOB model. Note that when AD = 0:75; the
standard contractionary e§ect and the e§ects stemming from the price setting frictions in
the ZLB roughly cancel. So, the net e§ect of an increase in unemployment beneÖts in the
ZLB is roughly zero. Consistent with our discussion above, when AD = 0:9 and x = 4
the contractionary e§ect of an increase in unemployment beneÖts dominates and there is
a positive, albeit small, rise in unemployment. Also consistent with the discussion above,
  34
     We obtain an exact solution to the nonlinear equilibrium conditions of the model using the extended
path method (see, for example, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Trabandt, 2015).
  35
     The reasoning here is similar to the logic in Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebeloís (2011) discussion of
the dependence of the government spending multiplier on the duration of the ZLB and the duration of an
increase in government spending.
  36
     This phenomenon is also discussed in Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2011) and Werning (2012).


                                                    30
when AD = 0:9 and x = 8; the responses are shifted down. So, there is a small fall in
unemployment for the Örst year after the increase in beneÖts, followed by a small rise in
unemployment. Finally, row 2 shows that the more áexible prices are, the larger are the
e§ects stemming from price setting frictions. We conclude that, from the perspective of our
model, there is a critical interaction between the degree of price stickiness, monetary policy
and the duration of an increase in unemployment beneÖts.
    We are keenly aware that our model does not capture some potentially important e§ects
of unemployment compensation. SpeciÖcally, our model abstracts from heterogeneity among
agents so that we cannot address the impact of an increase in the amount of time that
agents are eligible for unemployment beneÖts. Pursuing this would expand the number
of labor market states in the model and it would substantially complicate the worker-Örm
bargaining problem.37 Finally, we have also abstracted from liquidity constraints, and we
have assumed complete insurance against labor market outcomes. We leave these important
extensions to future research.


8. Conclusion

This paper constructs and estimates an equilibrium business cycle model which can account
for the response of the U.S. economy to neutral and investment-speciÖc technology shocks
as well as monetary policy shocks. The focus of our analysis is on how labor markets
respond to these shocks. SigniÖcantly, our model does not assume that wages are sticky.
Instead, we derive inertial wages from our speciÖcation of how Örms and workers interact
when negotiating wages. This inertia can be interpreted as applying to the period-by-period
wage, or to the present value of the wage package negotiated at the time that a worker and
Örm Örst meet.
    We have been critical of standard sticky wage models in this paper. Still, Hall (2005)
describes one interesting line of defense for sticky wages. He introduces sticky wages into the
search and matching framework in a way that satisÖes the condition that no worker-employer
pair has an unexploited opportunity for mutual improvement (Hall, 2005, p. 50). A sketch
of Hallís logic is as follows: in a model with labor market frictions, there is a gap between
the reservation wage required by a worker to accept employment and the highest wage a
Örm is willing to pay an employee. This gap, or bargaining set, áuctuates with the shocks
that a§ect the surplus enjoyed by the worker and the employer. When calibrated based on
aggregate data, the áuctuations in the bargaining set are su¢ciently small and the width
of the set is su¢ciently wide, that an exogenously sticky wage rate can remain inside the
  37
   For interesting work on this issue in a áexible price setting, see Costain and Reiter (2008) and Hagedorn,
Karahan, Manovskii and Mitman (2013).



                                                     31
set for an extended period of time. Gertler and Trigari (2009) and Shimer (2012b) pursue
this idea in a calibrated model while Gertler, Sala and Trigari (2008) do so in an estimated,
medium-sized DSGE model.38 A concern about this strategy for justifying sticky wages is
that the microeconomic shocks which move actual Örmsí bargaining sets are far more volatile
than what the aggregate data suggest. As a result, it may be harder to use the preceding
approach to rationalize sticky wages than had initially been recognized.
    We wish to emphasize that our approach follows HM in assuming that the cost of dis-
agreement in wage negotiations is relatively insensitive to the state of the business cycle.
This assumption played a key role in the empirical success of our model. Assessing the
empirical plausibility of this assumption using microeconomic data is a task that we leave
to future research.

References
    Altig, David, Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum and Jesper Linde,
2011, ìFirm-SpeciÖc Capital, Nominal Rigidities and the Business Cycle,î Review of Eco-
nomic Dynamics, vol. 14(2), pp. 225-247, April.
    Binmore, Ken, Ariel Rubinstein, and Asher Wolinsky, 1986, ìThe Nash Bargain-
ing Solution in Economic Modelling,î RAND Journal of Economics, 17(2), pp. 176-88.
    Carlsson, Mikael, Stefan Eriksson and Nils Gottfries, 2013, ìProduct Market
Imperfections and Employment Dynamics,î Oxford Economic Papers, 65, pp. 447-470.
    Cheremukhin, Anton and Paulina Restrepo-Echavarria, 2010, ìThe Labor Wedge
as a Matching Friction,î Working Paper 1004, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
    Chetty, R., A. Guren, D. Manoli and A. Weber, 2012, ìDoes Indivisible Labor
Explain the Di§erence Between Micro and Macro Elasticities? A Meta-Analysis of Extensive
Margin Elasticities,î NBER Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 27, ed. by D. Acemoglu, J.
Parker, and M. Woodford, Cambridge: MIT Press, pp. 1-56.
    Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel and Loukas Karabarbounis, 2014, ìThe Cyclicality of
the Opportunity Cost of Employment,î manuscript, June.
    Christiano, Lawrence J., 2012, ìComment on ìUnemployment in an Estimated New
Keynesian Modelî by Gali, Smets and Wouters,î NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2011, Vol-
ume 26, pp. 361-380, University of Chicago Press, October 2011.
    Christiano, Lawrence J., Cosmin Ilut, Roberto Motto and Massimo Rostagno,
2008, ìMonetary Policy and Stock Market Boom-Bust Cycles,î European Central Bank
Working Paper no. 955, October.
    Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum and Charles L. Evans, 2005,
ìNominal Rigidities and the Dynamic E§ects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,î Journal of
Political Economy, 113(1), pp. 1-45.
    Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum and Mathias Trabandt, 2015,
ìUnderstanding the Great Recession,î American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Amer-
ican Economic Association, vol. 7(1), pages 110-67, January.
    Christiano, Lawrence J., Mathias Trabandt and Karl Walentin, 2011a, ìDSGE
Models for Monetary Policy Analysis,î in Benjamin M. Friedman, and Michael Woodford,
editors: Handbook of Monetary Economics, Vol. 3A, The Netherlands: North-Holland.
    Christiano, Lawrence J., Mathias Trabandt and Karl Walentin, 2011b, ìIntro-
ducing Financial Frictions and Unemployment into a Small Open Economy Model,î Journal
of Economic Dynamics and Control, 35(12), pp. 1999-2041.
  38
    See also Krause and Lubik (2007), Christiano, Ilut, Motto and Rostagno (2008), Thomas (2008), Gali
(2010) and Christiano, Trabandt and Walentin (2011b).


                                                 32
    Christiano, Lawrence J., Mathias Trabandt and Karl Walentin, 2012, ìInvolun-
tary Unemployment, and the Business Cycle,î manuscript, Northwestern University, 2012.
    Costain, James and Michael Reiter, 2008, ìBusiness cycles, unemployment insur-
ance, and the calibration of matching models,î Journal of Economic Dynamics & Control
32 (2008) 1120ñ1155
    den Haan, Wouter, Garey Ramey, and Joel Watson, 2000, ìJob Destruction and
Propagation of Shocks,î American Economic Review, 90(3), pp. 482-98.
    Diamond, Peter A., 1982, ìAggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium,î
Journal of Political Economy, 90(5), pp. 881-894.
    Eichenbaum, Martin, Nir Jaimovich and Sergio Rebelo, 2011, ìReference Prices
and Nominal Rigidities,î, American Economic Review, 101(1), pp. 242-272.
    Erceg, Christopher J., Henderson, Dale, W. and Andrew T. Levin, 2000, ìOp-
timal Monetary Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,î Journal of Monetary
Economics, 46, pp. 281-313.
    Fernald, John, 2012, ìA Quarterly, Utilization-Adjusted Series on Total Factor Pro-
ductivity,î Manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
    Fisher, Jonas, 2006, ìThe Dynamic E§ects of Neutral and Investment-SpeciÖc Tech-
nology Shocks,î Journal of Political Economy, 114(3), pp. 413-451.
    Furlanetto, Francesco and Nicolas Groshenny, 2012, ìMatching E¢ciency and
Business Cycle Fluctuations,î manuscript, Norges Bank.
    GalÌ, Jordi, 2010, ìMonetary Policy and Unemploymentî, in: Benjamin M. Friedman
& Michael Woodford (ed.), Handbook of Monetary Economics, edition 1, volume 3, chapter
10, pages 487-546 Elsevier.
    GalÌ, Jordi, 2011, ìThe Return of the Wage Phillips Curve,î Journal of the European
Economic Association, 9(3), pp. 436-461.
    GalÌ, Jordi, Frank Smets and Rafael Wouters, 2012, ìUnemployment in an Esti-
mated New Keynesian Model,î NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2011.
    Gertler, Mark, Luca Sala and Antonella Trigari, 2008, ìAn Estimated Monetary
DSGE Model with Unemployment and Staggered Nominal Wage Bargaining,î Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, 40(8), pp. 1713-1764.
    Gertler, Mark and Antonella Trigari, 2009, ìUnemployment Fluctuations with Stag-
gered Nash Bargaining,î Journal of Political Economy, 117(1), pp. 38-86.
    Hagedorn, Marcus and Iourii Manovskii, 2008, ìThe Cyclical Behavior of Equi-
librium Unemployment and Vacancies Revisited,î American Economic Review, 98(4), pp.
1692-1706.
    Hagedorn, Marcus, Karahan, Fatih, Manovskii, Iourii and Mitman, Kurt,
2013. "Unemployment BeneÖts and Unemployment in the Great Recession: The Role of
Macro E§ects," NBER Working Papers 19499, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
    Hall, Robert E., 2005, ìEmployment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,î
American Economic Review, 95(1), pp. 50-65.
    Hall, Robert E. and Paul R. Milgrom, 2008, ìThe Limited Ináuence of Unemploy-
ment on the Wage Bargain,î The American Economic Review, 98(4), pp. 1653-1674.
    Hertweck, Matthias S., 2006, ìStrategic Wage Bargaining, Labor Market Volatility
and Persistence,î European University Institute Working Paper no. 2006/42.
    Hornstein, Andreas, Per Krusell and Giovanni Violante, 2010, ìFrictional Wage
Dispersion in Search Models: A Quantitative Assessment,î American Economic Review,
101(7), pp. 2873-2898.
    Inoue, Atsushi and Mototsugu Shintani, 2015, ëQuasi-Bayesian Model Selection,í
unpublished manuscript, Vanderbilt University, February.
    Justiniano, Alejandro and Claudio Michelacci, 2010, ìThe Cyclical Behavior of
Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies in the US and Europe,î NBER-ISOM Macro
Annual 2011, Vol. 8.
    Klenow, Pete and Benjamin Malin, 2011, ìMicroeconomic Evidence on Price-Setting,î



                                         33
in the Handbook of Monetary Economics 3A, editors: B. Friedman and M. Woodford, Else-
vier, pp. 231-284.
    Krause, Michael U. and Thomas A. Lubik, 2007, ìThe (Ir)relevance of Real Wage
Rigidity in the New Keynesian Model with Search Frictions,î Journal of Monetary Eco-
nomics, 54(3), pp. 706-727.
    Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott, 1982, ìTime-to-Build and Aggregate
Fluctuations,î Econometrica, pp. 1345-1370.
    Mortensen, Dale T., 1982, ìProperty Rights and E¢ciency in Mating, Racing, and
Related Games,î American Economic Review, 72(5), pp. 968ñ79.
    Nakamura, Emi and Jon Steinsson, 2012, ìPrice Rigidity: Microeconomic Evidence
and Macroeconomic Implications,î manuscript, Columbia University.
    Paciello, Luigi, 2011, ìDoes Ináation Adjust Faster to Aggregate Technology Shocks
than to Monetary Policy Shocks,î Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 43(8).
    Pissarides, Christopher A., 1985, ìShort-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemploy-
ment, Vacancies, and Real Wages,î American Economic Review, 75(4), pp. 676-90.
    Pissarides, Christopher A., 2009, ìThe Unemployment Volatility Puzzle: is Wage
Stickiness the Answer?î, Econometrica, vol. 77, no. 5, pp. 1339-1369.
    Ravenna, Federico and Carl Walsh, 2008, ìVacancies, Unemployment, and the
Phillips Curve,î European Economic Review, 52, pp. 1494-1521.
    Schmitt-GrohÈ, Stephanie, and Martin Uribe, 2012, ìWhatís News in Business
Cycles?,î Econometrica, 80, pp. 2733-2764.
    Shimer, Robert, 2004, ìThe Consequences of Rigid Wages in Search Models,î Journal
of the European Economic Association, April-May 2(2-3):469-479
    Shimer, Robert, 2005, ìThe Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Va-
cancies,î The American Economic Review, 95(1), pp. 25-49.
    Shimer, Robert, 2012a, ìReassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment,î Review of
Economic Dynamics, 15(2), pp. 127-48.
    Shimer, Robert, 2012b, ìJob Search, Labor Force Participation, and Wage Rigidities,î
in Daron Acemoglu, Manuel Arellano, and Eddie Dekel, eds., Advances in Economics and
Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Tenth World Conference, forthcoming.
    Silva, J. and M. Toledo, 2009, ìLabor Turnover Costs and the Cyclical Behavior of
Vacancies and Unemployment,î Macroeconomic Dynamics, 13, Supplement 1.
    Smets, Frank and Rafael Wouters, 2007, ìShocks and Frictions in US Business
Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE Approach,î American Economic Review, 97(3), pp. 586-606.
    Swanson, Eric T. and John C. Williams, 2014, ìMeasuring the E§ect of the Zero
Lower Bound On Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates,î American Economic Review
104, October, 3154ñ318.
    Thomas, Carlos, 2008, ìSearch and matching frictions and optimal monetary policy,î
Journal of Monetary Economics, Elsevier, vol. 55(5), pages 936-956, July.
    Walsh, Carl, 2003, ìLabour Market Search and Monetary Shocks,î Chapter 9 in Dy-
namic Macroeconmic Analyis, Theory and Policy in General Equilibrium, edited by Sumru
Altug, Jagjit S. Chadha and Charles Nolan, Cambridge University Press.
    Werning, Ivan, 2012, ìManaging a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy,î un-
published manuscript, April, MIT.
    Yashiv, Eran, 2000, ìThe Determinants of Equilibrium Unemployment,î American
Economic Review, 90(5), pp. 1297-1322.
    Yun, Tack, 1996, ìNominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogeneity, and Business
Cycles,î Journal of Monetary Economics, 37(2), pp. 345-370.




                                          34
                  Table 1: Non-Estimated Parameters and Calibrated Variables
       Parameter     Value Description
                                    Panel A: Parameters
          !K          0.025 Depreciation rate of physical capital
           "         0.9968 Discount factor
           #           0.9   Job survival probability
          M             60   Max. bargaining rounds per quarter (alternating o§er model)
          %w           1.2   Wage markup parameter (Calvo sticky wage model)
          &w          0.75   Wage stickiness (Calvo sticky wage model)
       400ln(')        1.7   Annual output per capita growth rate
     400ln(' ! '! )    2.9   Annual investment per capita growth rate
                                 Panel B: Steady State Values
      400(( " 1)       2.5   Annual net ináation rate
       prof its         0    Intermediate goods producers proÖts
          Q            0.7   Vacancy Ölling rate
           u         0.055 Unemployment rate
         G=Y           0.2   Government consumption to gross output ratio




         Table 2: Steady States and Implied Parameters at Estimated Posterior Mode in
              Structural Alternating O§er Bargaining and Nash Bargaining Models
            Alternating O§er            Nash
Variable                                             Description
                Bargaining            Bargaining
  K=Y                7.35                 6.64       Capital to gross output ratio (quarterly)
  C=Y                0.56                 0.58       Consumption to gross output ratio
  I=Y                0.24                 0.21       Investment to gross output ratio
    l               0.945                0.945       Steady state labor input
   R                1.014                1.014       Gross nominal interest rate (quarterly)
  Rreal            1.0075               1.0075       Gross real interest rate (quarterly)
   mc                0.70                 0.70       Marginal cost (inverse markup)
   <b               0.036                0.036       Capacity utilization cost parameter
   Y                 1.18                 1.06       Gross output
    f                0.63                 0.63       Job Önding rate
    #                0.91                 0.84       Marginal revenue of wholesaler
    x                 0.1                  0.1       Hiring rate
    J                0.06                 0.07       Value of Örm
   V                271.2                258.4       Value of work
   U                270.4                258.2       Value of unemployment
    v                0.14                0.14        Vacancy rate
    w                0.90                0.84        Real wage
    (                 2.5                  2.5       Ináation target (annual percent)
  D=Y                0.42                 0.43       Fixed cost to gross output ratio
   <m                0.66                 0.66       Level parameter in matching function
    E                  -                  0.67       Total surplus share received by workers
F=(#=M )             0.59                   -        Countero§er costs as share of daily revenue
                       Table 3: Priors and Posteriors of Parameters: Structural Wage Setting Models
                                                               Alternating O§er             Nash              Calvo
                                                                  Bargaining            Bargaining       Sticky Wagesa
                                       Prior Distribution                         Posterior Distribution
                                      D,Mode,[2.5-97.5%]                           Mode,[2.5-97.5%]
                                                  Price Setting Parameters
Price Stickiness, !                    B,0.68,[0.45 0.84]        0.75,[0.69 0.78]     0.74,[0.69 0.79]    0.74,[0.67 0.77]
Price Markup Parameter, "              G,1.19,[1.11 1.31]        1.42,[1.33 1.51]     1.43,[1.35 1.52]    1.24,[1.14 1.31]
                                              Monetary Authority Parameters
Taylor Rule: Smoothing, #R             B,0.76,[0.37 0.94]        0.84,[0.81 0.87]     0.84,[0.82 0.87]    0.77,[0.75 0.81]
Taylor Rule: Ináation, r#              G,1.69,[1.42 2.00]        1.38,[1.21 1.65]     1.38,[1.23 1.69]    2.02,[1.82 2.39]
Taylor Rule: GDP, ry                   G,0.08,[0.03 0.22]        0.03,[0.01 0.07]     0.04,[0.02 0.08]    0.01,[0.00 0.02]
                                          Preferences and Technology Parameters
Consumption Habit, b                   B,0.50,[0.21 0.79]        0.80,[0.78 0.84]     0.81,[0.78 0.84]    0.68,[0.65 0.74]
Capacity Utilization Adj. Cost, & a    G,0.32,[0.09 1.23]        0.11,[0.04 0.30]     0.18,[0.05 0.32]    0.03,[0.01 0.16]
                                00
Investment Adjustment Cost, S          G,7.50,[4.57 12.4]        15.7,[11.0 19.6]     15.2,[10.7 19.0]    5.03,[4.15 7.95]
Capital Share, (                       B,0.33,[0.28 0.38]        0.26,[0.20 0.27]     0.23,[0.21 0.27]    0.33,[0.27 0.34]
Technology Di§usion, )                 B,0.50,[0.13 0.87]        0.05,[0.02 0.07]     0.03,[0.01 0.05]    0.04,[0.02 0.86]
                                                 Labor Market Parameters
Prob. Bagaining Breakup, 100*          G,0.18,[0.04 1.53]        0.19,[0.09 0.37]
Replacement Ratio, D=w                 B,0.39,[0.21 0.60]        0.37,[0.22 0.63]     0.88,[0.85 0.90]
Hiring Fixed Cost / Output, 100. h     G,0.91,[0.50 1.67]        0.46,[0.24 0.84]     0.64,[0.34 1.07]
Vacancy Cost / Output, 100. s          G,0.05,[0.01 0.28]        0.03,[0.00 0.12]     0.02,[0.00 0.09]
Matching Function Parameter, &         B,0.50,[0.31 0.69]        0.55,[0.47 0.61]     0.54,[0.47 0.61]
Inverse Labor Supply Elasticity,       G,0.94,[0.57 1.55]                                                 0.92,[0.33 1.01]
                                              Exogenous Processes Parameters
Std. Dev. Monetary Policy, 400& R      G,0.65,[0.56 0.75]        0.63,[0.57 0.70]     0.63,[0.58 0.70]    0.64,[0.57 0.71]
Std. Dev. Neutral Tech., 100& 'z       G,0.08,[0.03 0.22]        0.16,[0.11 0.19]     0.14,[0.11 0.18]    0.32,[0.28 0.35]
Std. Dev. Invest. Tech., 100& !        G,0.08,[0.03 0.22]        0.12,[0.08 0.15]     0.11,[0.08 0.16]    0.15,[0.12 0.19]
AR(1) Invest. Technology, #!           B,0.75,[0.53 0.92]        0.72,[0.60 0.85]     0.74,[0.59 0.83]    0.57,[0.44 0.66]
                                                        Memo Items
Log Marginal Likelihood (MCMC, 12 Observables):                       286.7                 272.9
Log Marginal Likelihood (Laplace, 12 Observables):                    286.5                 272.6
Log Marginal Likelihood (MCMC, 9 Observablesb ):                                                               262.6
Log Marginal Likelihood (Laplace, 9 Observables):                    321.1                 306.9              262.3
Notes: For model speciÖcations where particular parameter values are not relevant, the entries in this table are blank. Posterior mode and
parameter distributions are based on a standard MCMC algorithm with a total of 10 million draws (11 chains, 50 percent of draws used
for burn-in, draw acceptance rates about 0.24). B and G denote beta and gamma distributions, respectively.
a
    Calvo sticky wage model as in Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000).
b
    Dataset excludes unemployment, vacancies and job Önding rates.
        Table 4: AOB, Nash vs. Reduced Form Sharing Rule at Posterior Modes

                   Sharing Rule: Jt = "1 (Vt ! Ut ) ! "2 $t + "3 (#t ! Dt )

           Panel A: Alternating O§er Bargaining (AOB) Sharing Rule a
                                  "1            "2                 "3
Posterior Mode                   0.06          0.28              0.47
95% Probability Interval      [0.03 0.12]   [0.13 0.35]       [0.44 0.49]

                      Panel B: Nash Bargaining Sharing Rule b
                                   "1            "2                                        "3
Posterior Mode                    0.48           0                                         0
95% Probability Interval       [0.28 0.88]        -                                         -

                     Panel C: Reduced Form Sharing Rule c
Reduced Form Sharing Rule p("1 > 0:06)d p("2 > 0:28)                                p("3 > 0:47)
vs. AOB                        0.23         0.21                                        0.24

Reduced Form Sharing Rule p("1 > 0:48)e                       p("2 > 0)              p("3 > 0)
vs. Nash Bargaining                         8e-5                0.25                    0.26
a
   AOB model with "1 = * 1 ; "2 = * 2 , and "3 = * 3 where * 1 ; * 2 ; * 3 are functions of - and M;
see section (2.5) in the text. Values of "1 ; "2 ; "3 as implied by estimated parameters listed in Table 2 :
b
  Nash Bargaining model where "1 is a function of /; see section (2.6) in the text. Parameter
value of "1 as implied by estimated parameters listed in Table 2 :
c
  Reduced form sharing rule model in which "1 and "3 are estimated as unrestricted parameters
and "2 is set to obtain a steady state unemployment rate of 5:5 percent.
d
   p("1 > 0:06) denotes the probability that "1 in the estimated reduced form sharing rule model
is larger than the mode value for "1 in the estimated AOB model.
e
   p("1 > 0:48) denotes the probability that "1 in the estimated reduced form sharing rule model
is larger than the mode value for "1 in the estimated Nash model.
                     Table 5: Priors and Posteriors of Parameters: Simple and General Wage Rules
                                                                                    Simple               General
                                                                                  Wage Rule            Wage Rule
                                                          Prior Distribution            Posterior Distribution
                                                         D,Mode,[2.5-97.5%]               Mode,[2.5-97.5%]
                                               Price Setting Parameters
Price Stickiness, !                                        B,0.68,[0.45 0.84]   0.75,[0.70 0.85]      0.60,[0.58 0.70]
Price Markup Parameter, "                                  G,1.19,[1.11 1.31]   1.36,[1.26 1.47]      1.39,[1.31 1.48]
                                           Monetary Authority Parameters
Taylor Rule: Smoothing, #R                                 B,0.76,[0.37 0.94]   0.87,[0.84 0.89]      0.87,[0.85 0.89]
Taylor Rule: Ináation, r"                                  G,1.69,[1.42 2.00]   1.33,[1.23 1.68]      1.35,[1.20 1.64]
Taylor Rule: GDP, ry                                       G,0.08,[0.03 0.22]   0.06,[0.03 0.12]      0.05,[0.02 0.10]
                                        Preferences and Technology Parameters
Consumption Habit, b                                       B,0.50,[0.21 0.79]   0.82,[0.80 0.85]      0.83,[0.81 0.85]
Capacity Utilization Adjustment Cost, & a                  G,0.32,[0.09 1.23]   0.25,[0.02 0.43]      0.28,[0.13 0.40]
                                00
Investment Adjustment Cost, S                              G,7.50,[4.57 12.4]   13.4,[10.7 18.3]      14.8,[10.7 17.8]
Capital Share, (                                           B,0.33,[0.28 0.38]   0.23,[0.20 0.27]      0.23,[0.20 0.26]
Technology Di§usion, )                                     B,0.50,[0.13 0.87]   0.01,[0.00 0.02]      0.01,[0.00 0.02]
                                               Labor Market Parameters
Hiring Fixed Cost / Output, 100* h                         G,0.91,[0.50 1.67]   0.52,[0.23 0.78]      0.47,[0.25 0.86]
Vacancy Cost / Output, 100* s                              G,0.05,[0.01 0.28]   0.05,[0.00 0.13]      0.03,[0.00 0.14]
Matching Function Parameter, &                             B,0.50,[0.31 0.69]   0.52,[0.45 0.59]      0.55,[0.47 0.60]
                                            Simple Wage Rule Parameters
Scaled Real Waget!1 ; ,1                                   B,0.75,[0.53 0.92]   0.96,[0.92 0.97]
Employmentt!1 ; ,2                                        N ,0.00,[-1.96 1.96]  0.03,[0.03 0.06]
Neutral Technology Growtht ; ,3                           N ,0.00,[-1.96 1.96] -0.15,[-0.55 0.00]
Investment Technology Growtht ; ,4                        N ,0.00,[-1.96 1.96] -0.26,[-0.53 -0.18]
                                            General Wage Rule Parameters
Nominal Interest Ratet!1 ; {1                             U,n.a.,[-1.42 0.47]                        -0.27,[-0.39 0.07]
Scaled Capitalt!1 ; {2                                    U,n.a.,[-0.18 0.06]                         0.06,[0.02 0.06]
Employmentt!1 ; {3                                        U,n.a.,[ -0.03 0.01]                       -0.03,[-0.04 0.01]
Price Dispersiont!1 ; {4                                  U,n.a.,[ -2.25 0.75]                       -1.00,[-2.04 0.77]
Composite Technology Di§usiont!1 ; {5                     U,n.a.,[ -0.76 2.27]                        0.01,[0.01 0.24]
Scaled Consumptiont!1 ; {6                                U,n.a.,[ -0.13 0.40]                        0.05,[0.03 0.19]
Scaled Investmentt!1 ; {7                                 U,n.a.,[-0.08 0.24]                         0.04,[0.02 0.08]
Neutral Technology Growtht ; {8                           U,n.a.,[-2.84 0.95]                       -1.01,[-1.75 -0.23]
Investment Technology Growtht ; {9                        U,n.a.,[-0.67 0.22]                       -0.29,[-0.69 -0.04]
                                           Exogenous Processes Parameters
Standard Deviation Monetary Policy Shock, 400& R           G,0.65,[0.56 0.75]   0.58,[0.51 0.64]      0.56,[0.51 0.64]
Standard Deviation Neutral Technology Shk., 100& (z        G,0.08,[0.03 0.22]   0.17,[0.14 0.20]      0.17,[0.14 0.20]
Standard Deviation Invest. Technology Shock, 100& *        G,0.08,[0.03 0.22]   0.12,[0.08 0.16]      0.12,[0.09 0.16]
AR(1) Investment. Technology, #*                           B,0.75,[0.53 0.92]   0.70,[0.60 0.83]      0.70,[0.57 0.80]
                                                       Memo Item
Log Marginal Likelihood (MCMC, 12 Observables):                                      306.5                 308.9
Notes: For model speciÖcations where particular parameter values are not relevant, the entries in this table are blank. Posterior mode
and parameter distributions are based on a standard MCMC algorithm with a total of 10 million draws (11 chains, 50 percent of draws
used for burn-in, draw acceptance rates about 0.24). B, G, N and U denote beta, gamma, normal and uniform distributions, respectively.
                    Figure 1: Responses to a Monetary Policy Shock: AOB vs. Calvo
                         VAR 95%          VAR Mean             Alternating Offer Bargaining (AOB)        Calvo Sticky Wages

            GDP                            Unemployment Rate                            Inflation                    Federal Funds Rate
                                                                                                              0.2
 0.4                                                                      0.2
                                     0                                                                         0
 0.2                                                                      0.1
                                                                                                            −0.2
                                   −0.1                                     0                               −0.4
  0
                                                                         −0.1                               −0.6
                                   −0.2
−0.2
    0   5           10                0         5         10                 0         5            10          0         5        10

            Hours                              Real Wage                              Consumption                   Rel. Price Investment

 0.3
                                   0.05                                   0.2                                 0.2
 0.2                                                                                                         0.15
                                     0
 0.1                                                                      0.1
                               −0.05                                                                          0.1
  0                                                                         0                                0.05
                                   −0.1
−0.1                                                                                                           0
                               −0.15
                                                                         −0.1
   0    5           10              0           5         10                 0         5            10          0         5        10

        Investment                         Capacity Utilization                    Job Finding Rate                      Vacancies
                                     1                                    1.5                                  4
  1
                                                                            1
 0.5                                0.5                                                                        2
                                                                          0.5
  0
                                     0                                      0                                  0
−0.5

   0    5           10                0         5         10                 0         5            10          0         5        10
                                           Notes: x−axis: quarters, y−axis: percent




                  Figure 2: Responses to a Neutral Technology Shock: AOB vs. Calvo
                         VAR 95%          VAR Mean             Alternating Offer Bargaining (AOB)        Calvo Sticky Wages

            GDP                            Unemployment Rate                            Inflation                    Federal Funds Rate
                                                                            0
 0.6
                                    0.1                                  −0.2                                  0
 0.4
                                     0                                   −0.4
 0.2                                                                                                        −0.2
                                   −0.1                                  −0.6
  0
                                                                         −0.8                               −0.4
   0    5           10                0         5         10                 0         5            10          0         5        10

            Hours                              Real Wage                              Consumption                   Rel. Price Investment

 0.4                                0.4                                                                        0
                                                                          0.6
                                    0.3
                                                                                                            −0.1
 0.2
                                    0.2                                   0.4
                                                                                                            −0.2
                                    0.1
  0                                                                       0.2                               −0.3
                                     0

   0    5           10                0         5         10                 0         5            10          0         5        10

        Investment                         Capacity Utilization                    Job Finding Rate                      Vacancies
                                    0.5                                     1
 1.5
                                                                                                               2
  1                                                                       0.5
                                     0
                                                                            0                                  0
 0.5
                                   −0.5                                  −0.5
  0
                                                                           −1                                 −2
−0.5
   0    5           10                0         5         10                 0         5            10          0         5        10
                                           Notes: x−axis: quarters, y−axis: percent
        Figure 3: Responses to an Investment Specific Technology Shock: AOB vs. Calvo
                           VAR 95%           VAR Mean              Alternating Offer Bargaining (AOB)          Calvo Sticky Wages

             GDP                              Unemployment Rate                             Inflation                       Federal Funds Rate
 0.6                                                                                                                0.4
                                                                                0
 0.4                                   0                                                                            0.2
                                                                             −0.2
 0.2                                                                                                                  0
                                     −0.1
                                                                             −0.4
  0                                                                                                                −0.2
                                     −0.2
   0     5            10                 0          5         10                 0         5            10             0        5         10

             Hours                                 Real Wage                             Consumption                       Rel. Price Investment
 0.4                                                                          0.6
                                      0.2
                                                                                                                   −0.2
                                      0.1
 0.2                                                                          0.4
                                       0                                                                           −0.4

  0                                  −0.1                                     0.2
                                                                                                                   −0.6
                                     −0.2
   0     5            10                0           5         10                 0         5            10             0        5         10

         Investment                            Capacity Utilization                    Job Finding Rate                         Vacancies


  1                                    1
                                                                                1                                     2
 0.5
                                      0.5
  0                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                0
−0.5                                   0

                                                                             −1                                      −2
 −1
   0     5            10                0          5         10                 0          5            10             0        5         10
                                              Notes: x−axis: quarters, y−axis: percent




                     Figure 4: Responses to a Monetary Policy Shock: Nash Bargaining
                      VAR 95%               VAR Mean         Nash            Nash (D/w=0.37)            Nash (D/w=0.37,re−estimated)

             GDP                              Unemployment Rate                             Inflation                       Federal Funds Rate
                                                                                                                    0.2
 0.4
                                       0                                      0.2                                     0
 0.2                                                                          0.1                                  −0.2
                                     −0.1                                                                          −0.4
  0                                                                             0

                                                                             −0.1                                  −0.6
                                     −0.2
−0.2
    0    5            10                0           5         10                 0         5            10             0        5         10

             Hours                                 Real Wage                             Consumption                       Rel. Price Investment
                                      0.2
 0.3
                                                                              0.2                                   0.2
 0.2                                  0.1                                                                          0.15
 0.1                                                                          0.1
                                       0                                                                            0.1
  0                                                                             0                                  0.05
                                     −0.1
−0.1                                                                                                                  0
                                                                             −0.1
   0     5            10                0           5         10                 0         5            10             0        5         10

         Investment                            Capacity Utilization                    Job Finding Rate                         Vacancies
                                       1                                      1.5                                     4
  1
                                                                                1
 0.5                                  0.5                                                                             2
                                                                              0.5
  0
                                       0                                        0                                     0
−0.5

   0     5            10                0           5         10                 0         5            10             0        5         10
                                              Notes: x−axis: quarters, y−axis: percent
                Figure 5: Responses to a Neutral Technology Shock: Nash Bargaining
                     VAR 95%          VAR Mean         Nash         Nash (D/w=0.37)              Nash (D/w=0.37,re−estimated)

             GDP                        Unemployment Rate                            Inflation                       Federal Funds Rate

 0.6
                                0.1                                 −0.2                                       0
 0.4
                                 0                                  −0.4
 0.2                                                                                                        −0.2
                               −0.1                                 −0.6
  0
                                                                    −0.8                                    −0.4
   0     5           10           0           5         10              0           5            10             0        5         10

             Hours                           Real Wage                             Consumption                      Rel. Price Investment

 0.4                            0.4                                                                            0
                                                                      0.6
                                                                                                            −0.1
 0.2                            0.2
                                                                      0.4
                                                                                                            −0.2

  0                              0                                    0.2                                   −0.3

   0     5           10           0           5         10               0          5            10             0        5         10

         Investment                      Capacity Utilization                  Job Finding Rate                          Vacancies
                                0.5                                     1
 1.5
                                                                                                               2
  1                                                                   0.5
                                 0
                                                                        0                                      0
 0.5
                               −0.5                                 −0.5
  0
                                                                      −1                                      −2
−0.5
   0     5           10           0          5         10                 0         5            10             0        5         10
                                        Notes: x−axis: quarters, y−axis: percent




       Figure 6: Responses to an Investment Specific Technology Shock: Nash Bargaining
                     VAR 95%          VAR Mean         Nash         Nash (D/w=0.37)              Nash (D/w=0.37,re−estimated)

             GDP                        Unemployment Rate                            Inflation                       Federal Funds Rate
 0.6                                                                                                         0.4
                                                                        0
 0.4                             0                                                                           0.2
                                                                    −0.2
 0.2                                                                                                           0
                               −0.1
                                                                    −0.4
  0                                                                                                         −0.2
                               −0.2
   0     5           10            0          5         10               0          5            10             0        5         10

             Hours                           Real Wage                             Consumption                      Rel. Price Investment
 0.4                                                                  0.6
                                0.2
                                                                                                            −0.2
                                0.1
 0.2                                                                  0.4
                                 0                                                                          −0.4

  0                            −0.1                                   0.2
                                                                                                            −0.6
                               −0.2
   0     5           10           0           5         10               0          5            10             0        5         10

         Investment                      Capacity Utilization                  Job Finding Rate                          Vacancies


  1                              1
                                                                        1                                      2
 0.5
                                0.5
  0                                                                                                            0
                                                                        0
−0.5                             0

                                                                       −1                                     −2
 −1
   0     5           10           0          5         10                 0         5            10             0        5         10
                                        Notes: x−axis: quarters, y−axis: percent
                                                               Figure 7: Impulse Responses to Shocks: Simple and General Wage Rules
                                                              VAR 95%               VAR Mean               Alternating Offer Bargaining                Simple Wage Rule                  General Wage Rule

                                                             Unemployment Rate                                                    Inflation                                               Real Wage
Monetary Policy Shock
                                                                                                          0.2
                                                   0                                                                                                                0.05
                                                                                                          0.1                                                           0

                                      −0.1                                                                  0                                                     −0.05
                                                                                                                                                                    −0.1
                                                                                                        −0.1
                                      −0.2                                                                                                                        −0.15
                                          0                       5               10                          0               5               10                       0                 5               10

                                                             Unemployment Rate                                                    Inflation                                               Real Wage
Neutral Technology Shock




                                                                                                                                                                      0.4
                                                  0.1                                                   −0.2
                                                                                                                                                                      0.3
                                                   0                                                    −0.4                                                          0.2

                                                                                                        −0.6                                                          0.1
                                      −0.1
                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                        −0.8
                                                    0             5               10                        0                 5               10                         0               5               10

                                                             Unemployment Rate                                                    Inflation                                               Real Wage
Invest. Technology Shock




                                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                            0
                                                   0                                                                                                                  0.1
                                                                                                        −0.2                                                            0
                                      −0.1
                                                                                                                                                                    −0.1
                                                                                                        −0.4
                                                                                                                                                                    −0.2
                                      −0.2
                                          0                       5               10                          0               5               10                         0               5               10


                                                                                                         Notes: x−axis: quarters, y−axis: percent




                                                                         Figure 8: Dynamic Effects of a Rise in Unemployment Benefits
                                                              Normal Times                                                   1 Year ZLB                                              2 Years ZLB
                                                            Unemployment Rate (%)                                      Unemployment Rate (%)                                       Unemployment Rate (%)
            Estimated Price Stickiness (ξ=0.75)




                                                   7                                                        7                                                           7

                                                  6.5                                                     6.5                                                         6.5

                                                   6                                                        6                                                           6

                                                  5.5                                                     5.5                                                         5.5

                                                   5                                                        5                                                           5

                                                  4.5                                                     4.5                                                         4.5
                                                                  Benefits AR(1)=0.90
                                                   4              Benefits AR(1)=0.75                       4                                                           4

                                                  3.5                                                     3.5                                                         3.5
                                                     0        1          2          3          4             0           1           2          3          4             0           1          2          3      4




                                                            Unemployment Rate (%)                                      Unemployment Rate (%)                                       Unemployment Rate (%)
                                                   7                                                        7                                                           7
            More Flexible Prices (ξ=0.5)




                                                  6.5                                                     6.5                                                         6.5

                                                   6                                                        6                                                           6

                                                  5.5                                                     5.5                                                         5.5

                                                   5                                                        5                                                           5

                                                  4.5                                                     4.5                                                         4.5

                                                   4                                                        4                                                           4

                                                  3.5                                                     3.5                                                         3.5
                                                     0        1         2           3          4             0           1           2          3          4             0           1          2          3      4
                                                                      Years                                                        Years                                                      Years
                                              Notes: 1pp rise in unemployment benefits relative to steady state wage. Normal Times: Taylor rule. 1 or 2 Years ZLB: 1 or 2 years constant nominal interest rate.
