                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     PRICING TO MARKET WHEN
                   THE EXCHANGE RATE CHANGES




                          Paul Krugman




                     Working Paper No. 1926




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                             May 1986




This paper was prepared for the AEI Conference on Real-Financial
Linkages, Washington, January 30-31, 1986. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              Working Paper #1926
                                              May 1986




              Pricing to Market When the Exchange Rate Changes




                                 ABSTRACT




     It has been widely remarked that US import prices have not fully

reflected movements in the exchange rate. This paper begins with an

investigation of the actual extent of "pricing to market" by foreign

suppliers. It shows that pricing to market is a real phenomenon, but not

universal; in particular, evidence on German export prices suggests that

stickiness of import prices is largely confined to machinery and

transport equipment. The paper then considers a number of possible

models. While the evidence is not sufficient to distinguish among these

models, it seems probable that a full explanation will involve both

dynamics   and imperfect competition.




                                              Mr.   Paul Krugmn
                                              Epartiierit   of Economics
                                             MIT
                                              E52—383A
                                              Carrbridge,       02139
                                      1




       It   has been widely remarked that the prices of many imports into

the US have not fallen to the degree that one might expect given the

strong dollar. The most conspicuous examples have been European luxury

automobiles, whose US prices have in many cases actually risen in

dollar terms despite huge declines in European currencies against the

dollar. Since prices in Europe, in European currencies, have not risen

dramatically, the    effect   has been to create large differences between

prices of the same automobiles in the US and Europe. The price

differential in turn has given rise to "gray markets' in which

individuals and firms bypass normal distribution channels to import

automobiles directly from Europe.

       The phenomenon of foreign firms maintaining or even increasing

their export prices to the US when the dollar rises may      be described
as   "pricing to market" (PTM).   Pricing   to market is an interesting

subject for both practical and intellectual reasons. The immediate

practical     concern is with the effects of a declining dollar on
inflation.    While many economists expect a declining dollar to

contribute to a resurgence of inflation, some observers from the

business community have disputed this. They argue that foreign firms

did not cut their prices as the dollar rose, and that they will

maintain their pricing to market as the dollar falls. Thus these
                                 2



observers argue that the effects of a decline in the   US dollar   on

import prices will in fact be small.

     The intellectual interest of pricing to market is that it offers

evidence on the role of market structure in international trade. For

the past decade, theorists have been proposing new models of

International trade that stress imperfect competition and dynamic

aspects. These models have unfortunately often proved difficult to

test. The phenomenon of pricing to market, however, offers a possible

new piece of evidence. As I will argue below, pricing to market

properly understood almost certainly involves both imperfect

competition and dynamics, so that its apparent importance is a

confirmation of the practical importance of 'new wave' models of

trade. Furthermore, as we will see below, the importance of pricing to

market appears to vary widely across industries. This raises the

prospect that by correlating the importance of pricing to market with

industry characteristics we will be able to distinguish between

alternative unconventional trade models.

     This paper does not pretend to offer either a full empirical

examination or a definitive analytical treatment of the phenomenon of

pricing to market. It is instead offered as a preliminary overview of

the subject. The paper begins with some rough evidence on the extent

to which pricing to market has actually occurred, and on the relative

extent of PTM in different industries. I then turn to some possible

theoretical models of PTM. The intention of this theoretical
                                  3



 discussion is to be provocative rather than definitive; that is, I

 offer a large batch of suggestive models (six in all) without

 attempting to settle on any one as the right one.




I. Some Empirical Evidence




     A. Conceptual issues



     Before examining some admittedly rough empirical evidence it is

important to be more precise about what we mean by pricing to market.

In general, we mean that import prices fall "too little" when a

currency appreciates. This should not be taken to mean, however, that

PTM is present whenever import prices fail to fall in proportion to

the exchange rate appreciation. For a large country like the United

States, a less—than—proportional response of import prices to the

exchange rate is not in general surprising, and need not lead us to

look for exotic explanations.

     The best way to define when PTM is and is not occurring is to

consider an example. Suppose that we measure the real exchange rate

using unit labor costs, and that the US experiences a real

appreciation in this sense against both France and Germany. For

simplicity, let us in fact take nominal unit labor costs as fixed in
                                4



each country. Suppose also that France exports wine to the US, and

Germany exports BMWs. Wine is traded on an arms—length basis by

middlemen who are prepared to arbitrage any international price

differences; BMW shipments are arranged by the manufacturer, who

therefore sets c.l.f. prices in each market rather than simply setting

a single f.o.b. price in Germany.

     Now even though the law of one price will apply to wine, we would

not be too surprised if the dollar price of wine fails to fall as much

as the US real appreciation. As French wine becomes cheaper in the US,

we will buy more; if the US market is a significant share of French

demand, this will drive up the price of wine in francs. The price of

wine will not fall as much as the real dollar rises, but the price of

French exports to the US will not rise relative to the prices on

domestic sales or exports to Germany. This is an example of a case in

which the import price appears to fall "too little", yet we would not

want to call this a case of pricing to market.

     By contrast, suppose that BMW decides for some reason to keep

both its dollar prices in the US and its mark prices in Germany

constant. In this case the price of BMWs will certainly not fall as

much as the dollar rises, but that is not the distinctive point. What

would be striking would be that prices of autos in Germany and prices

of German exports to France would fall relative to export prices to

the US. Indeed, if the prices diverged far enough there would be an

incentive for individuals to bypass BMW's distribution channels and
                                   5



create a gray market. This is the situation that I have in mind when

discussing pricing to market.

     Notice that when we look at aggregate price indices it does not

matter whether the import price effects of an exchange rate change are

dampened by garden variety supply and demand considerations, as in the

case of wine, or by noncompetitive pricing practices, as in the case

of BMWs. The reason for distinguishing PTM is analytical and

microeconomic. We understand the competitive model of traded goods

prices pretty well (although empirically the behavior of commodity

prices in response to exchange rate changes is rather puzzling; see

Dornbusch 1985). Thus I focus instead on what seems harder to explain,

pricing to market that involves divergent movements in different

markets.

     The implication of our distinction is that the usual way in which

price effects of exchange rate changes are assessed, by comparing some

price change directly with an exchange rate movement, will not do in

this case. We always need to compare the price change with some

measure that takes into account any effect of the exchange rate on

world prices of the imported good, so that we can exclude these

effects from our measure of PTM.

     I have attempted to measure the extent of pricing to market using

three kinds of comparison. (Unfortunately, in all cases the price data

are unit value indices rather than true price indices. The problems

with these measures are well known,    but   there do not seem to be better
                                      6



numbers). The first is a comparison of aggregate US manufactures

import prices with a 'predicted" import price index using export

prices   of major   US trading partners The second is a comparison of

Germany's prices on exports to other EC countries with her prices on

extra-European exports. The third is a comparison of prices of German

exports to the US and to the rest of the world.



     B. Aggregate US manufactures import prices



     The first comparison is shown in Figure 1. Three series are

shown. First, we show how the actual unit value of US manufactures

imports changed from 1980 to 1984. This measure of the import price

rose imperceptibly, by 0.5 percent, over the period. Second, we show a

"predicted" US import price. This is an average of the manufactures

export unit values in dollars of Canada, Japan, the European

Community, and developing countries, weighted by their shares in US

imports in 1980. This index fell by       9.2   percent from 1980 to 1984.

Finally, for reference we include the US manufactures export unit

value, which rose 21 percent in four years.

     To interpret these series, suppose that each country exported

only a single manufactured good, and that this good were sold at a

single world price ——     i.e.,   that there were no pricing to market. Then

we would expect the aggregate US import price index to fall in

proportion to our "predicted" price index. The extent to which this

fails to happen can then be interpreted as our measure of PTM.
       Clearly, US manufactures import prices fell "too little", by 9.7

percent. If we use the divergence between US and trading partner

export prices —— 30. 5 percent —— as a measure of the   real   exchange

rate   change,   then PTM was 9.7/30.5 = .32 of the real exchange rate

movement.




       C. Aggregate German eçports



       Figure 2 shows our, second comparison. It makes use of the

convenient fact that Germany reports separate unit value series for

trade with other EC countries and trade with the rest of the world.

This is useful, because during the first half of the 1980s Germany had

fairly stable exchange rates against most of the EC, while the ecu

depreciated sharply against the dollar and to a lesser extent the yen.

    Two series are shown, both for finished manufactures. First, we

show the ratio of import unit values from EC countries to those from

outside the community. This series can serve as an indicator of the

extent to which the mark depreciated more in real terms relative to

the world at large than it did relative to the EC. By 1984 this

measure had declined by 9.4 percent. This is not as large a change as

in the case of the US, so that problems of measurement error become

even more acute. Nonetheless, there is some evidence of PTM.
                                     8



     The evidence is contained in the second series, which compares

German export unit values to the EC with those on exports to the rest

of the    world.   This series shows a decline of 2.5 percent. If Germany

did not    engage in any pricing to market (and if the price indices for
EC and rest of world exports were truly comparable) this number should

be zero. Clearly we do not want to lay too much stress on this number,

which is within the bounds of measurement error. For what it is worth,

however, the implied extent of PTM is 2.5/9.4 =     .26, which is not too
inconsistent with our results for US import prices.




     D. German—US trade



     Our last evidence is shown in Figure 3. Here an attempt is made

to compare the movement of German export prices to the US with prices

to other countries from 1980 to 1983. Again if Germany did not engage

in any pricing to market (and if the price indices were comparable)

these movements would be identical.

     To construct these numbers, the following procedure was used.

First, unit values were constructed for German three—digit SITC

exports to the US and to all other trading parteners for both 1980 and

1983. Then "price indexes" were constructed by applying these unit

values to the bundle of three—digit export quanta that Germany

exported to the US in 1980. That is, the measures are supposed to
                                     9



measure what the 1980 bundle of US imports from Germany would have

cost if the US had been able to buy these imports at the prices other

countries   were paying. These indexes were calculated both for one—
digit categories and for German manufactured exports as       a whole. The

weaknesses of this method are severe enough to make us treat the

results with great caution. Nonetheless, it is interesting to have a

look, however crude, at the disaggregated pattern of pricing to

market.

      Let us consider first however the aggregate change. The German

price index for manufactured exports to the US, in dollars, appears on

our calculation to have fallen by only one percent from 1980 to 1983.

(The mark fell by 29 percent in nominal terms). Meanwhile, the price

of the same bundle of exports to other countries fell in terms of

dollars by 14 percent. This gives us a PTM divergence of 13 percent.

Over the same period, US export un-it values, as reported in

International Financial Statistics, rose 33 percent relative to

Germanys. so that    the   extent of PTM may   be estimated at 13/33 = .39
-- a
     number again reasonably consistent with our estimate for US

aggregate imports.

     When we look at the data by single—digit SITC, the basic result

seems so dramatic that it is hard to discount, the limitations of the

data notwithstanding. This is that PTM, instead of being comparable

across sectors, in fact occurs in only one sector, machinery and

transport equipment. In this sector the export price to the US
                                        10


actually    rises by     percent, while the price to other countries falls

by 12 percent. Admittedly this is a large sector, hut PTM is absent in

other    large   German export sectors such as chemicals and basic

manufactures. This      selectivity   of the occurrence of pricing to market

is one of the things that we would like our theoretical analysis to

explain.




        E. Summarizing the evidence



        Our examination of the data may be summarized as saying two

things. First, pricing to market when the exchange rate changes is a

real phenomenon: both our examination of aggregate US import prices

and our data on US-German trade suggest that more than 30 percent of

the real appreciation of the dollar was reflected in a divergence

between prices of US imports and prices of the same goods in other

markets. Second, however, PTM is not universal. Our disaggregated US—

German evidence seems to say that pricing to market is limited to the

transportation equipment and machinery industries.

        We should note that the evidence does not support the extreme

claims some have made about the failure of exchange rate changes to be

reflected in import prices. A good deal less than half of the rise in

the dollar was reflected in a divergence between US and foreign prices

of US imports. This is because pricing to market seems to be selective
                                          11


across sectors, and perhaps also because even when it occurs it is not

complete.

        On   the other band , the    extent    of PTM is ci ea1v enough to he
significant        for   macro analyses. That will    not, however, be the concern

of this paper. Instead, I          will now    turn to the microeconomic question:

How can we explain pricing to market?




II. Theoretical Analysis: Static Models




        In   our   theoretical discussion of the pricing to     market
phenomenon, we will consider a series of models. These models fall
into two classes, first are static models. What I mean by a static

model in this context is a model in which the belief on the part of

firms that the dollar's rise is temporary does not play any role in

their pricing behavior. That is, in these static models the pricing to
market would last even if the real appreciation of the currency were
expected to remain unchanged indefinitely. It seems a priori unlikely

that a static approach would be adequate here, but it makes sense to

consider the simplest option first.

     Then we will turn to dynamic models. In these models it is

assumed to be crucial that the dollar's rise is taken to be temporary.

That is, in these models foreign firms are for some reason pricing
                                         12



based on    their   expected long run costs rather than on their

temporarily low Costs      during a period of       a strong dollar. The point is

of   course to expi a   in why   the firms should   adopt such a long run

pricing    rule.
       Let us begin, however, with the static models. Three such models

will be considered. First is simple supply and demand. It will become

clear that this model cannot account for the key phenomenon of

divergent prices, but it is still illuminating to consider what it can

explain. Second. we consider monopolistic price discrimination. This

model turns out to he somewhat in its implications. Finally, we turn

to a simple    oligopoly   model. This has some nice features, but is

ultimately implausible as an explanation of what we observe.




       A. ply and demand


       The supply—and--demand model of the price implications of exchange

rates goes back at least to Haberler (1949), and has recently been

restated by Dornbusch (1985). Thus it needs only brief restatement

here. We imagine a world of two countries, US and EC, and two

currencies, dollar and ecu. Let P be the dollar price of some US

importable. P" the ecu price, e the number of ecus per dollar. Also

let S(P), S*(P*) be the supply from each region, while D(P) and D*(P*)

are the demands. Then equilibrium may be described by two equations.

First, we have world market clearing:
                                             13




(1) S(P)     S*(P*) -   0(P)   —   fl*(p*)    =   0



     Second, we have the       law of one price:


(2) P = eP



     Equilibrium and the effects of a dollar appreciation may be

illustrated as in Figure 4, which follows Dornbusch. Clearly a dollar

appreciation, while it lowers the dollar price, raises the ecu price.

Thus the dollar price does not fall in full proportion to the

appreciation. Obviously this depends on the US being a large country:

specifically, the elasticity of the ecu price with respect to the

exchange rate is




                   d(S —   0S         —   D*)/dP


     Thus the extent to which import prices will fall "too little"

will be equal to the US share in the response of world excess demand

to price. Since the US is a large country. if the failure of import

prices to fall as much as the dollar has appreciated was the only

puzzle, the simple supply—and—demand model might be sufficient.
                                    14


     What this model cannot explain, however, is the pricing to market

phenomenon of divergence between prices of goods sold to the US and to

other markets. Indeed, equation 2, by    asserting   the   law of one   price,
rules this out by assumption. That is, this analysis can explain why

the dollar prices of Volvos and BMWs fail to fall in proportion to the

dollar's rise, but it cannot explain why these prices have fallen in

Europe relative to the US (that is, literally, a fall in P relative

to eP).

     To explain such price divergence, we would have to add another

element: we would have to have some kind of specificity of supply to

the US market. Suppose, for example. that there were an upward—sloping

supply curve for transportation of importahies to the US market. Then

the law of one price would be replaced with a new relation of the form



(2') P* = eP -       t

where t   is   marginal transport cost, and is increasing in the volumeof

US imports:



(3) t =   t(D   —
                    S)



     Without working this out in full detail, we can immediately see

how this would work. A rise in the dollar would be accompanied by a

fall in the US price, and thus a rise in US imports. The rise in
                                 15


imports would however be associated with a rise in marginal

transportation costs, and thus with a widened wedge between US and EC

prices.

     There are, however, several problems with a formulation like

this. First, how plausible is it to suppose that marginal

transportation costs are strongly upward sloping? Surely we would

imagine that given time the supply of transportation is highly

elastic. There could be short—run bottlenecks ——    but this then brings
us into the issue of dynamic response, which we will deal with in the

next section. Also, this formulation does not account for the

specificity of the pricing to market: why should marginal costs of

transport of machinery and transport equipment be much more steeply

upward sloping than those for other manufactures?
     A possible answer is that what matters are not transport costs

per se so much as other costs such as marketing and distribution.

These could be highly specific to a particular set of products, and

arguably might be more important for autos than for other goods. The

marketing and distribution issue is, however, inevitably a dynamic

one; thus we reserve fuller discussion until next section..




     B. Monopolistic price discrimination
                                     16



     We turn next to the possibility that pricing to market can be

exulained by   mononolistic price   discrimination   To make the point most

c]earJy, let   us assume that a monopolistic firm can sell either in the

US or the EC, and that it has a constant marginal cost in ecus.

Transport costs will be ignored. Then the monopolist's optimal pricing

rule is:



(4) P* =   c*E*/(E*   —    1)


(5) eP =   c*E/(E   — 1)




where c is marginal cost in ecus, and E and E* are the elasticity of

market demand in the US and EC respectively. E and E* may of course

depend on P and P*.

     If P does not change, neither will E*, the elasticity of demand

in the EC market. Thus P is invariant to e. The question is whether a

rise in e will produce a more or less than proportional change in P.

    This question corresponds exactly to a morefaniiliar question in

the recent theoretical literature on protection under imperfect

competition: namely, will a tariff be partly absorbed by foreign

firms? As Brander and Spencer (1984) among others have shown, the

result depends on the shape of the demand curve. Clearly, if the

demand curve has constant elasticity, the US price will fall in full

proportion to the exchange rate change. In order to get pricing to
                                      17


market, we must have a fall in the elasticity of demand; that is, the

elasticity of demand must be increasing in      the   price (so   that   it falls

as the price falls).

     Unfortunately this means that the predicted behavior of a

monopolist depends crucially on the shape of the demand curve ——            or
more accurately, on the monopolist's perception of the shape of the

demand curve. We might hope to put some bounds on what can happen by

looking at the two most popular assumed demand curves, constant—

elasticity and linear. The problem is that these hounds are very wide

indeed. In the constant elasticity case we have already seen that

there will be no     pricing   to market. In the linear case, on the other

hand, the percentage fall in the US price will always be less than

half of the percentage exchange rate change. Let E be the intial

elasticity of demand, with the monopolist facing linear demand

schedules; then we can show that the elasticity of P with respect to e

is (E —   l)/2E,   which is always less than 0.5.

     In principle, then, price discriminating monopoly can explain

pricing to market if demand curves have the right shape. It is

disturbing to rely so heavily on the shape of demand curves, however.

Surely we would prefer to have shifts in the perceived elasticity of

demand result from some more fundamental cause. One possibility is

that such shifts arise from shifting market share in an oligopolistic

market, which we consider next.
                                 18




     C.




     Suppose now that the European firm, which still has constant

marginal ecu cost of c, faces a US competitor with constant dollar

marginal cost c. How will this affect pricing?

     Let us assume in this case that the firms compete in Cournot

fashion, each firm taking the others deliveries to the market as

given. Also, to isolate the new element added by imperfect

competition, let us assume constant elasticity of market demand, so

that there would be no pricing to market by the European firm if it

did not have to face a domestic competitor (for an ana'ysis in the

linear case, see Dornbusch (1985)).

     The basic rule of Cournot competition in the constant elasticity

case is that a firm will face a perceived elasticity of demand equal

to E/s, where E is the market elasticity and s is the firmss market

share. Let s be the market share (in the US market) of the US firm,

and s = 1-s be the market share of the EC firm. Then the pricing

rules of the two firms will be



(6) p =   cE/(E   —   s)


for the US firm and
                                                         19



(7) P =     c*E/e(E       —    s*)


for the EC firm. In equilibrium, market shares must he such that these

two pricing rules coincide.

       To see the implications of (6) and (7), consider Figure 5. The

higher is the import market share, the lower the elasticity of demand

perceived by the foreign firm and thus the higher its price for any

given marginal cost. Similarly, the higher the import share, the

higher the elasticity of demand perceived by the domestic firm and

thus the lower the domestic firm's price.

       Now suppose that e rises. The foreign firm's pricing schedule

will shift down proportionately to this change. Its actual price will

however not fall by as much, because its market share will rise and

thus its perceived elasticity of demand will fall. Algebraically, we

can take logs of both (6) and (7):



ln(P) =     ln(cE)    —       ln(E   —   s)


        =   ln(c*E)       —
                               ln(e)     —    ln(E   —   s*)


Differentiating and substituting, we get



ds =   —dln(e)(E          —   s*)(E      —
                                              s)I/(E      —
                                                               s*) +   (E —   s)]
                                          20



for the change in the US share of output, and



UIn(P = —dln(e)(E      —
                           s*)/[(E - s)   —    CE   —
                                                        s*)]


for the change in the price. I.e., the elasticity of the price with

respect to the exchange rate will be less than one.

        We should note, however, that this result depends crucially on

two unrealistic assumptions. First, we are assuming that the domestic

and   foreign   firm produce perfect substitutes. This is empirically

unreasonable for the industries in which we actually seem to see PTM;

those   manufacturing sectors in which German              and US goods would seem
likely to be near—perfect substitutes, such as chemicals and basic

materials, show no evidence of PTM in practice. Second, competition is

assumed to be Cournot in form. Obviously Bertrand competition will

lead to a collapse of either imports or domestic production in the

perfect substitutes case.

      A more realistic model, then, would be one in which the firms

produce differentiated products, and probably engage in Bertrand

competition. The general point here is that there is no general point:

whether the perceived elasticity of demand of the EC firm rises or

falls depends on the particular functional form, bringing us back to

the problems of the discriminating monopolist.
                                 21



III. Dynamic_Models




     The models described in the last section were static in the sense

that neither the actual nor the expected duration of the exchange rate

change affect the extent of pricing to market. That is, the extent to

which import prices fall is independent of whether the dollar has just

risen or has been high for a number of years, and is also insensitive

to whether the current strength of the dollar is regarded as permanent

or soon to be reversed. intuitively this seems implausible. The extent

of pricing to market in the US is often regarded as being due at least

partly to the belief of foreign firms that the dollar will fall again

in the not too distant future. In this section I present three models

that offer possible rationalizations for the idea that import prices

will fail less than proportionately to the exchange rate change when

that change is either unanticipated or expected to reverse. The first

of these models stresses dynamics that arise from the supply side. The

second asks whether slow adjustment of demand to the market price will

give rise to a slow adjustment of the price itself. Finally, the third

attempts to justify price stickiness by a concern of firms for

reputation.




    A. Sulv-sidedvnamjcs
                                       22




     I   our i SOUS si   on of the supp I v-a   d—oenianci   approach to import
prices it   was pointed out that increasing marginal transportation

costs could explain a failure of import prices to fall as much as one

might expect following an appreciation. I suggested, however, that

marketing and distribution costs were more likely candidates than

transport costs per se, especially given the apparent disparity in the

extent of pricing to market across sectors. It was also suggested that

upward—sloping marginal cost in       this   case was more likely      to be a
short—run   phenomenon than a permanent feature. What we would like               to
do, then. is to formalize the idea that pricing to market can              result
from temporary bottlenecks to changing import volume.
     To do this, let us return to the model of a price discriminating

monopolist introduced in the last section, but make one change: we

will now suppose that the monopolist has costs to changing deliveries

to the market. We might imagine, for example, that foreign auto

manufacturers cannot expand their sales without also providing an

expanded sales, distribution, and service "infrastructure'. To expand

this infrastructure is costly, and presumably more costly the more

rapid the attempted expansion. Suppose that the dollar rises suddenly.

Then there will be no point in cutting prices immediately if there is

no capacity to meet the expanded demand. Instead, we would expect

prices to fall gradually as the infrastructure is put in place.

Furthermore, if the dollar's rise is seen as temporary, foreign firms
                                            23


will not see it as worth their while to expand the infrastructure much

+   j: i p      h       Sr   this approach says that the degree of   po Ic:

market ShOuld depend both how recentI the            exchange rate has changed
ond on how long the change is expected to last.

      We can model this formally as follows. There is an EC firm that

sells a good in the US market. It faces a demand curve which we write

in inverse form:



() P         P(x)




where x is the rate of deliveries to the US market. If we want to make

a clean separation of the dynamic reasons for pricing to market from

the static ones we considered above, we can assume that the demand

curve has constant elasticity.

       The EC firm's costs will be assumed to consist of two parts.

First. there is production cost; marginal production cost will be

taken to be constant in ecus. Second. we will attempt to capture the

dynamic aspects of marketing and distribution by assuming that there

are costs to adjusting the level of US sales. i.e., an adjustment cost

which is increasing in the deviation of dx/dt from zero. Let us write

this adjustment cost as h(dx/dt): then the firms instantaneous

profits will be



(9) V =      Px/e   —   cx   —
                                 h(dx/dt)
                                       24




            t1o f     wj 111 want t ( dn    i   t        rr.i   ze   th   Turn
discounted va]ue of V. Probi ems of this sort are by now familiar in

many parts of economics (see for example Sargent (197?)), so it should

not be necessary to rework the solution. Instead, let us simply review

the basic characteristics of the outcome. The most useful way to think

about the problem is to regard the firm as placing a shadow price on

output: if this shadow price is positive, it will expand output, if it

is    negative it wi]i    contract. The evolution of this shadow price

itself uepends on the     marginal   prof itabilitv      of an       increase in x. The
optimal solution    takes the form of       a saddle    path.

       Sumpos€ that we now shock this system by changing                  the exchange
rate e. The result depends on how permanent the shock is assumed to
be.   Figure 6 illustrates how the price of imports would behave

following a permanent and a temporary exchange rate change. In the

case of a permanent appreciation the price would fall only gradually

as x rose. in the long run finally failing by the full amount of the

appreciation. ifl   the   case of a temporary appreciation the price would

not only begin rising again after the exchange rate returned to its

Intlal level. it would fall more       slowly       from the start, and might

actually begin to rise before the exchange rate reversal.

       Allowing for costs of adjustment. then, can rationalize pricing

to market. The extent of PTM in this case turns out to depend both on

how long the appreciation has lasted and on how persistent it is
                                       25



expected    to be These are reasonable things to inc]ude iii our model,
ccc nrrI;ihJv                 coot den cf    tTh   this p]rin.tIo
woui    douut however,       whether it s sufficient In particular   f the
divergence of      prices between the US and EC markets is wholly due to

marginal costs of distribution etc., how do we explain the emergence

of gray markets, that is, of individuals bypassing the normal

distribution channels? To explain this would seem to require that this

model be supplemented with some additional considerations affecting

thE'   pricing   decision.




       B. Dynamics of demand



       Another possible route to a dynamic account of pricing to market

might he to appeal to slow adjustment of demand. Suppose that there

are lags in the effect of price on demand. Then a firm's pricing

decision will in effect have an investment—like component. trading off

lower profits now for higher sales later. It seems intuitively

reasonable that when the lags are long pricing will be dictated by

long—run cost rather than short run fluctuations.

       Somewhat surprisingly, this intuition is by no means easy to

confirm. Analyzing optimal pricing under lags in demand is in general

fairly difficult, but the main points can be conveyed with a two-

period example. This example gives some presumption that transitory
                                         2



exchange rate shocks will have less effect on prices than permanent,

but   it is   no more than a presumption

      Consider a Foreign firm that plans to sell a good in the US over

two periods. In the first period it faces a demand          in the

second a demand D2(p1,p2), where subscripts refer to periods. Marginal

costs are c*/e1, c*/e2 respectively. The firm will seek to maximize



(e1p1 -                          -
          c*)D1(P1)     R(e2P2       c*)D2(P1,P2)


where R is a discount factor.

      The question we need to answer is whether the price in the first

period will fall more if the exchange rate rises in both periods than

if it rises only in the first period. That is, will an exchange rate

appreciation that is regarded as temporary have less effect on hte

price than one that is regarded as permanent? What writing out the

model in this way shows is that this question is equivalent to asking

whether an increase in e2 will lead to a fall in F,

      The answer to this question hinges on how the second period

appreciation affects the incentive of the firm to keep its first

period price down. We note that the derivative of second period

profits with respect to P1 is




      (dX2/dP1)(e2P2 —   c)   < 0
                                           27




where   Ys    sF'Ofl(i--pr   led   sales



     This may be rewritten as



    [(dX2/dP1)(p/X)][(ep — c*)X2J/P1


     The first term in square brackets here is the cross elasticity of

demand; the second term is second period profits themselves. The

direction   of the   effect of e2 on the price in   the   first period can be

determined by asking how the size of this expression is affected

holding P1 constant: if it increases in absolute value, there will be

an increased incentive to hold down the first period price.

     What we can say definitely is that the second term will increase:

a rise in e will definitely increase second period profits. If we

could assume that the cross elasticity of demand would remain

unchanged, then we would be sure that a rise in second—period e would

lead to a fall in first period P. Unfortunately, we cannot be sure of

this. Here as elsewhere in our analysis, the answer seems to be

contingent on functional form.




     C. Reputation and Pricing
                                   28



     We have now seen that an ad hoc model of dynamic demand, in which

       a5   ei       reeL   pricer are s1mpl     asurne1] te aft ert the

quantity sold, provides only a presumption that pricing to market will

be profitable. On wonders, however, whether some less ad hoc

formulation of demand dynamics might give a clearer reason for a

failure to pass cost reductions on in price reductions. As our final

theoretical model, I will suggest a particular version of dynamics

that could justify the stickiness of prices without appeal to

particular functional forms or arbitrary lags in price effects.

     The basic idea is that purchase of imported goods is a two-stage

process. First, potential buyers must decide whether to put themselves

in the market for a product ——   for    example, whether to visit the

showroom and test—drive a particular firm's automobiles. We must

presume that putting oneself into a market is costly, and will be done

only if the price is expected to be sufficiently attractive. Second,

those in the market must then decide whether in fact to purchase, and

how much to buy.

    The effect of this two—stage process will be that demand depends

not only on the actual price but on the price that customers expect to

pay when they decide whether or not to put themselves in the market.

The question then is how the expected price gets determined. In

practice, the way this seems to happen is that firms cultivate a

reputation over time for being in a certain price range. For example,

I know that in looking for a car it is sensible to look at the major
                                                29


Japanese imports, hut not worth while looking at Voivos or Mercedes

given nv    esource      We c-.'in    fcma1     jze    e   jes ae a SOj] ified   wv
by imagining that a firm        announces a price, and that customers arrive
on its doorstep provided that they expect it               to honor its
announcement. If the firm fails to honor its announcement, in future
periods it will not be believed.

        Let Pe be the price expected by potential customers to prevail,

and let N be the number of customers that actually enter a firms

market. Then what we will            say   is   that


(10) N = N(Pe)


        Letting   X be the quantity sold, we will then have a demand

function



(11) X = X(N,P)


        To see the implications of this formulation, consider Figure 7.

Two dema:d curves are illustrated. The first, labelled DD, is what we

might    call tije cx ante curve: it represents the eventual quantity

sold if the expected price Pe is validated by the actual price P.

Corresponding to DD is a marginal revenue curve MR. Given marginal

cost C*/e, we show the profit—maximizing price given this demand

curve.
                                       30


       Once customers have committed themselves to entering the market
        r   r            ::ea   a-    a at a i -rr a ad a r '-ye I ill a t a a

by the ex post' curve dd. Short run profit maximization would then
lead   the firm to charge a higher price than Pe, as shown by the            fact
that   the corresponding marginal revenue curve mr lies below marginal

cost when the price equals Pe. If the firm takes advantage of its full

short run market power in this way, however, the result will be that

customers will no longer believe its future announcements, and will

expect that the firm will always exploit its ex post monopoly power.

Provided that the    discount rate is    not   too high, the cost    of this loss

of reputation wIll    exceed the benefits of exploiting short run market
power, and the firm will thus choose to keep P = Pe.

       How does this explain price stickiness? The answer seems clear

for   increases in marginal cost. An unexpected rise In marginal cost,
provided   that it is not too large, will be not be passed on in higher

prices so as not to lose reputation. Less obvious, perhaps, is that

aecreases in   marginal   cost will also not be passed on      If they are    not

too large. The reason is that short—run marginal revenue lies below

marginal cost. with    price   increases prevented by the need to retain

reputation. A fall in marginal cost that does not bring it           below
short—run marginal revenue     will   therefore not provide    an   incentive to

cut the price; in effect, a firm will treat it        as   a windfall that

allows it to exploit short run monopoly power without breaking its

implicit promise not to charge a price in excess of Pe.
                                      31


       In context, tIiis implies   a story   something like the following: at
l-Ri   excnii? rates      sv)    Europertr ranufact           ij( 'i3e
its    long   run profit maximizing price is S20,000. Its   short   run profit

maximizing price would however be higher, because ex post demand is

less elastic than ex ante, so that if reputation were not an issue the

price would be $30,000. Now suppose that there is a rise in the dollar

that lowers marginal cost, so that the short run maxiiizing price is

$24,000. If this rise is not expected to persist, the firm will not
find it worthwhile cultivating a reputation as a lower priced seller:
and the short run incentives will not lead it to cut its price.
       n   interesting   feature of this story is that it   suggests   that
pricing    to   market will be more likely to happen where there are

substantial firm—specific costs to entering a market, so that ex ante

and ex post demand elasticities are very different. One might guess

that this will happen where buyers make occasional discrete purchases

rather    than continuous small ones, and where the products are complex
and differentiated enough that the information costs of evaluating

quality and thus interpreting prices are high. This combination of
features might explain why pricing to market is apparently confined to
the   machinery and transport equipment sector.




IV. Conclusions
                                      32




              IC) innrset        tn I m '-                1H1jr.;C5 )'fj)-')
to iuxur Luooean automobiles. The aggregate estimates renorted iii
the first part of this paper suggest that 35 to 40 percent of the real

appreciation of the dollar since 1980 has been absorbed by foreign

exporters in a rise in their prices to the US compared with prices in

other markets. If the German case is representative, however, and if

the crude data are to be believed, the phenomenon of pricing     to   market

is not general but is specific to tne machiner and transport

equipment sector.

     Explaining   pricing to market is not as simple as one might hope.

It seems clear that a perfectly competitive model will not do the

trick. Static models of imperfect competition could explain it in

principle, but there are serious objections to both a simple

explanation in terms of price discriminating monopoly and a slightly

more complex explanation in   terms   of noncooperative oligopoly.

     The best hope of understanding pricing to market therefore seems

to come from dynamic models of imperfect competition. At this point,

my preferred explanation would stress the roles of both supply

dynamics, resulting from the costs of rapidly adjusting the marketing

and distribution infrastructure needed to sell some imports, and

demand dynamics, resulting from the need of firms to invest in

reputation.
                                   33


     'hat   is needed at this point is not so much more theory as more
      ( Ji ly   fl- n-:t step    I h:\7e   ift   U frus oh pi ticulai
inciust'ies wnere it is possible both to construct better series on
pricing and   to use institutional knowledge about the particulars of

industries to inform the assumptions of our models.
                                            34


                                     References


brander, J.   and Spencer,    E.   1984):        "Tariff Protection and imperfect

     Competition,' in H. Kierzkowski, ed., Monopolistic Competition and

     International Trade, Oxford University Press.

Dornbusch, R. (1985): "Exchange Rates and             Prices,"   NBER working Paper

    # 1769.
Haberler, G. (1949): "The Market for Foreign Exchange and the Stability

     of 'the Balance   of   Paynients: A     Theoretical    Analysis,"   Kykios, 3,
     193-218.
Sargent, T. J. (1979):       :acroecononic       Theory, New York, Academic Press.
                                                    I
                          kTUAL 'JE E:-'E:          LC)P RICES




•
    110-
    108
                      /
    1OG
    104-        / //




      1980                 1981            1982              1983                1984




      USX =    Unit   value of US manufactures exports

      USM =    Unit   value of US manufactures imports

     FORX =    Unit value of manufactures export by     US trading   partners
     Source:    US data from Department of Commerce, United      States Trade:
                Performance in 1984 and Outlook
                Foreign data from UN Monthly Bulletin of Statistics
                                            Ti
             -..r
                                EL'N         -LEI -:iEiR EC Y       r—


             -
     0.99 -
                                                                                         EXPO
     0.97-
     0.96-
V)   0.95 -

     0.94

     r- az

     0.92 -

     0.91    —                                        I
                                                                                         tMPO
         1980                   1981                1982            1983             1984




     EXPO =         Ratio of prices of finished manufactures exports from Germany,
                    EC/non—EC destinations.

     IMPO =         Ratio of prices of   finished   manufactures imports into Germany,
                    EC/non—EC sources.


     Source: German Statistisches Jahrbach.
                                                 —

                                         GELA EC,RT pc:s


         0
     —-,

     —4
0
     —

LU
     —p  -
C




              SITO 5         STTC B        SJTC 7         SITO         TOTAL

                    EXPORTS TO US                     EXPORTS TO ROW




     SITC 5 = Chemicals and related products

     SIT C   6 =   Basic manufactures
     S ITC   7 = Machines and transport equipment

     S IIC   8 =   Miscellaneous manufactured goods

     Source: UN, Commodity Trade Statistics
                                       /
                                   /
                               /           = eP
                           /

                       /
                   /
               /

           /
       /                                                S + S* =   D   + D*




                                                                          P




FIGURE 4: Supply and demand model of the price effect
P




                                    Foreign firm
            Domestic firm




                                        7,




FIGURE 5: Pricing under oligopoly
P




                                                                  Temporary




                                                      Permanent




                                                                     time


    FIGUPI 6: Supply dynamics following exchange rate appreciation
                d


  D

   M



            \




                       \
                       m


                             \
                                 \                   d   D
                                     \


                                         I


                                             \
                                                 r

FIGURE 7:   Pricing   with   reputation
