NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMMIGRANTS EQUILIBRATE LOCAL LABOR MARKETS:
EVIDENCE FROM THE GREAT RECESSION
Brian C. Cadena
Brian K. Kovak
Working Paper 19272
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19272
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013
Maria Esther Caballero Sanchez, Emily Rentschler, Patty Stubel, Marisa Pereira Tully, and Nathalia
Rodriguez Vega provided excellent research assistance. We are thankful for helpful comments from
George Borjas, Ben Keys, Rebecca Lessem, Ethan Lewis, Craig McIntosh, Terra McKinnish, Pia Orrenius,
Abbie Wozniak, Jim Ziliak, and seminar participants at the Wisconsin- Madison Institute for Research
on Poverty, the University of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research, the PAA Economic Demography
Workshop, the IZA/SOLE Transatlantic Meeting, the University of Chicago Demography Workshop,
the University of Maryland, DePaul University, the SOLE Annual Meeting, and Dartmouth. Sarah
Bohn graciously provided a compilation of state and local immigration legislation, and Jesse Rothstein
graciously provided wage rigidity estimates. This project was supported by a grant from the University
of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research through the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, grant number 3 U01 PE000002-06S3,
and by a grant from the Russell Sage Foundation's Great Recession Initiative. The opinions and conclusions
expressed herein are solely those of the authors and should not be construed as representing the opinions
or policies of the UKCPR, any agency of the Federal government, or the Russell Sage Foundation.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Brian C. Cadena and Brian K. Kovak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Immigrants Equilibrate Local Labor Markets: Evidence from the Great Recession
Brian C. Cadena and Brian K. Kovak
NBER Working Paper No. 19272
August 2013, Revised April 2015
JEL No. F22,J21,J61,R23
ABSTRACT
This paper demonstrates that low-skilled Mexican-born immigrants' location choices in the U.S. respond
strongly to changes in local labor demand, and that this geographic elasticity helps equalize spatial
differences in labor market outcomes for low-skilled native workers, who are much less responsive.
We leverage the substantial geographic variation in employment losses that occurred during Great
Recession, and our results confirm the standard finding that high-skilled populations are quite geographically
responsive to employment opportunities while low-skilled populations are much less so. However,
low-skilled immigrants, especially those from Mexico, respond even more strongly than high-skilled
native-born workers. These results are robust to a wide variety of controls, a pre-recession falsification
test, and two instrumental variables strategies. Moreover, we show that natives living in metro areas
with a substantial Mexican-born population are insulated from the effects of local labor demand shocks
compared to those in places with few Mexicans. The reallocation of the Mexican-born workforce reduced
the incidence of local demand shocks on low-skilled natives' employment outcomes by roughly 40
percent.
Brian C. Cadena
Department of Economics
University of Colorado Boulder
256 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309-0256
http://spot.colorado.edu/~cadenab/
brian.cadena@colorado.edu
Brian K. Kovak
H. John Heinz III College
Carnegie Mellon University
4800 Forbes Avenue, HBH 3012
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
bkovak@cmu.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19272

1

Introduction

Over the past two decades, the labor market in the United States has shown signs of becoming less
dynamic in a number of important ways. Job creation, job destruction, and job-to-job transitions
have all fallen markedly (Davis, Faberman and Haltiwanger 2012, Hyatt and Spletzer 2013). Additionally, fewer people are making long-distance moves (Molloy, Smith and Wozniak 2011), which is
concerning because geographic labor mobility is a primary means of equilibrating differences across
local labor markets (Blanchard and Katz 1992). This declining dynamism is of particular concern
for low-skilled workers during periods like the Great Recession, which featured mass unemployment
and sharp differences across local markets. Not only are less educated workers disproportionately
affected by job losses during downturns (Hoynes 2002, Hoynes, Miller and Schaller 2012), but a
prominent literature finds that they are the least likely to move from depressed areas toward markets with better earnings prospects (Topel 1986, Bound and Holzer 2000, Wozniak 2010). The
substantial geographic variation in labor market conditions during the Great Recession, combined
with low levels of geographic mobility, created the potential for sharply disparate labor market
outcomes across space, especially among workers without a college education.
In this paper, we examine mobility responses to geographic variation in the depth of the Great
Recession, with the goal of determining how such mobility affects the incidence of local demand
changes. The analysis reveals an important and novel finding: in sharp contrast to their native-born
counterparts, low-skilled Mexican-born workers were quite likely to make earnings-sensitive location
choices, and this population shifted markedly away from the hardest hit metro areas toward more
favorable markets.1 Importantly, this mobility occurred not only among new arrivals, but also
among immigrants who were living in the US prior to the recession. Moreover, demand-sensitive
migration by Mexican-born immigrants dramatically reduced the geographic variability of labor
market outcomes faced by less-skilled natives. Natives in metro areas with a substantial Mexicanborn population experienced a 40 percent weaker relationship between local demand shocks and
1
As discussed below, we focus on the mobility of Mexican-born immigrants not because we find strong evidence
against mobility of other immigrant groups, but rather because Mexicans exhibit the strongest and most precisely
estimated mobility responses among the foreign-born.

1

local employment rates, compared to metro areas with relatively small Mexican-born populations.
Conducting this type of analysis requires identifiable changes in labor demand. During the Great
Recession, as in previous downturns, the primary employer response to declining product demand
was to cut employment rather than to reduce wages. This feature makes it possible to determine
which metro areas faced larger and smaller demand shocks by observing relative changes in employment across those locations. We also use two instrumental variables strategies to mitigate concerns
that employment declines may be driven by population changes. The results confirm the previous
literature’s finding of a strong education gradient in geographic responsiveness to labor market
conditions. For example, among highly skilled (some college or more) native men, a 10 percentage
point larger decline in local employment from 2006 to 2010 led to a 4.6 percentage point relative
decline in the local population, compared with no measurable supply response among less skilled
(high school degree or less) natives. In sharp contrast, less skilled Mexican-born men responded
even more strongly than highly skilled natives, with a 10 percentage point larger employment decline driving a 5.7 percentage point larger decline in population. Immigrants thus play a crucial
and understudied role in increasing the overall geographic responsiveness of less skilled laborers in
the U.S., and this result adds a new dimension to the existing literature that focuses on workers’
responsiveness to demand shocks based on education and demographics.2
To reinforce the interpretation that the reallocation of Mexican-born labor was caused by demand changes, we implement a wide array of robustness checks, all of which support the central
results. The strong labor supply elasticities among the Mexican-born are unaffected by controlling for diffusion of Mexican immigrants away from traditional enclaves (Card and Lewis 2007),
new anti-immigrant employment legislation, and new immigration enforcement policies (Bohn and
Santillano 2012, Watson 2013). We further show in a pre-Recession false experiment that the ob2

Bartik (1991), and Blanchard and Katz (1992) show that workers generally respond to declines in labor demand
by migrating toward stronger labor markets. In the immigration context, Hanson and Spilimbergo (1999) show
that migration flows between the U.S. and Mexico respond as expected to changes in real wages in each country,
and McKenzie, Theoharides and Yang (2014) similarly find that migration rates from the Philippines responds to
demand conditions. Topel (1986), Bound and Holzer (2000), and Wozniak (2010) demonstrate substantial differences
in geographic responsiveness across education and demographic groups, while a more recent literature argues that
educational attainment itself increases individuals’ geographic elasticity (Hickman 2009, Malamud and Wozniak 2012,
Machin, Salvanes and Pelkonen 2012, Böckerman and Haapanen 2013).

2

served differences in mobility between low skilled natives and Mexicans were not part of an ongoing
pre-Recession trend. We instrument for local labor demand using (i) the standard Bartik (1991)
measure that predicts shifts in local labor demand based on the pre-Recession industrial composition of local employment and (ii) pre-Recession household leverage, following Mian and Sufi
(2012). Both sets of IV results confirm the sharp differences in responsiveness between less skilled
Mexican-born and native-born workers, which reinforces interpreting the observed population shifts
as responses to changes in demand.
Having established that less skilled Mexicans are highly geographically responsive to changes in
labor market conditions while less skilled natives are not, we examine the implications of Mexican
mobility for natives’ employment outcomes. We find that in metro areas where the Mexican-born
comprised a substantial share of the low-skilled workforce prior to the recession, there was a much
weaker relationship between labor demand shocks and native employment probabilities than in areas
with relatively few Mexican workers. Natives living in metro areas with many similarly skilled
Mexicans were thus insulated from local shocks, as the departure (arrival) of Mexican workers
absorbed part of the relative demand decline (increase). Therefore, Mexican mobility serves to
equalize labor market outcomes across the country, even among the less mobile native population.
Finally, we consider possible explanations for why the Mexican-born are more likely to make
demand-sensitive long-distance moves. We begin by noting that a portion of the difference can be
explained by larger overall mobility rates when including international migration. The remainder
reflects differential sensitivity to changing labor market conditions, and we thus examine a number of reasons why the location decisions of the Mexican-born are more responsive. We consider
differences in observable demographic characteristics such as age, education, family structure, and
home ownership, but find that these do not account for the differential responsiveness. Instead,
we conclude that a likely contributing factor is the fact that the Mexican-born are a self-selected
group of people with high levels of labor force attachment and a greater willingness to move long
distances to encounter more favorable labor market conditions. In addition, Mexican-born workers
have access to a particularly robust network that reduces both the costs of acquiring information

3

about distant labor markets and the financial costs of moving (Munshi 2003).
These findings have important implications for multiple literatures. First, as mentioned above,
multiple papers find that the mobility of workers reduces geographic inequality (Bartik 1991, Blanchard and Katz 1992) and that differences in responsiveness across worker types determine the
degree to which local shocks are realized in local outcomes for particular worker groups (Topel
1986, Bound and Holzer 2000). Prior work has focused on differences across education groups, and
we confirm that native-born less skilled workers respond much less strongly to local market conditions than their higher skilled counterparts do. We further demonstrate an even larger difference
in responsiveness within the less skilled market, between immigrants and natives. This distinction
between less skilled immigrants and natives likely explains why we find an important role for equalizing migration while other recent work focusing on citizens (Yagan 2014) or total population (Mian
and Sufi 2012) finds a more limited role for migration during the Great Recession. We show that
the presence of highly responsive immigrants increases the overall geographic elasticity of the less
skilled labor force, and immigrants’ mobility serves as a form of labor market insurance by transferring employment probability from relatively strong markets to relatively weak ones. Importantly,
immigrants’ mobility mitigates the very negative outcomes that natives otherwise would have faced
in the most depressed local markets, which had been the primary concern of the earlier literature.
Second, demand-driven location choices by immigrants represent a central challenge in the literature measuring immigrants’ effects on natives’ labor market outcomes. To address this challenge, researchers have used instrumental variables based on the existing locations of immigrant
enclaves (Card (2001), for example) or relied on national time-series identification rather than
cross-geography comparisons (Borjas 2003).3 Our results confirm the hypothesis that immigrants’
location choices respond strongly to local economic conditions, and we show that during the Great
Recession more than 75 percent of Mexican immigrants’ geographic response occurred through return migration or internal migration by previous immigrants, channels that are largely neglected in
3

While most of the literature seeks to mitigate the effects of endogenous location choices, a few papers focus
directly on immigrants’ location choices in response to demand shocks, including Borjas (2001), Jaeger (2007),
Cadena (2013), and Cadena (2014).

4

prior work.4 This finding demonstrates that geographic arbitrage can occur even without much new
immigration, as long as the labor market has a large stock of immigrants whose location choices are
highly sensitive to employment opportunities. Moreover, the fact that immigrants’ mobility reduces
variability in labor market outcomes faced by natives is an important effect of immigration on the
host country, and a complete welfare accounting should take it into consideration.5
Third, the most closely related prior work is Borjas’s (2001) seminal paper, which introduced
the possibility of spatial arbitrage through the arrival of new immigrants to states with high wage
levels and simulated the potential geographic smoothing effect on natives’ wages. Although similar
in examining geographic smoothing resulting from immigrants’ location choices, the current paper
differs in important ways. Our unit of analysis is the metropolitan area rather than the state,
allowing us to more closely approximate local labor markets. Importantly, we focus on responses
to plausibly exogenous labor demand shocks rather than to unconditional wage levels or wage
growth. As just mentioned, we examine the importance of return migration and internal migration
rather than focusing only on newly arrived immigrants. Finally, we introduce a test to demonstrate
empirically the geographic smoothing that Borjas investigated through simulation. Rather than
assuming a particular degree of substitutability between immigrants and natives, we uncover a
relationship in the data that would not exist if immigrants and natives did not compete for similar
jobs. In this sense, our work provides strong empirical support for his hypothesis that immigration
“greases the wheels of the labor market,” while expanding the finding to show that immigrants
continue to fulfill this role even after arrival.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: the next section provides context for examining labor supply elasticities during the Great Recession. Section 3 provides the main results
and multiple robustness checks of the Mexican/native-born differences in geographic responsive4

Bartel (1989) and Bartel and Koch (1991) show that immigrants’ educational attainment and the presence of
enclaves influenced immigrants’ internal migration in the U.S. between 1975 and 1980. Similarly, a few demographic
studies discuss immigrants’ internal migration patterns (Belanger and Rogers 1992, Kritz and Nogle 1994, Gurak
and Kritz 2000). More recently, Maré, Morten and Stillman (2007), study initial and subsequent location choices of
immigrants to New Zealand.
5
In a similar vein, di Giovanni, Levchenko and Ortega (2015) expand the traditional welfare analysis to include
effects of immigration on consumption varieties.

5

ness. Section 4 demonstrates that Mexican immigrants’ mobility smooths labor market outcomes
for natives. Section 5 discusses similar mobility and smoothing results for the pre-Recession period.
Section 6 decomposes the supply responses into various channels and discusses potential reasons
why Mexican-born immigrants may be uniquely positioned to serve as an equilibrating force in the
low-skilled labor market. Section 7 concludes.

2

Background and Conceptual Framework

2.1

Measuring Demand Shocks

Like many previous recessions, the Great Recession was characterized by large employment declines
and much smaller wage cuts.6 Our initial identification strategy exploits the fact that employers
adjusted primarily on the employment margin rather than the wage margin, which makes it possible
to observe the relative size of demand declines across metro areas directly through employment
changes. Note that for our purposes, it is unimportant why employers responded this way; rather,
this approach simply requires the descriptive fact that the bulk of the response occurred through
employment.7 We therefore initially measure each metro area’s demand shock as the proportional
decline in observed payroll employment, and then examine how local labor supply responded to
this measure of the degree to which local conditions deteriorated. It is important to emphasize
that this approach is appropriate only because of the particular features of the labor market during
the Great Recession and would likely not be applicable in periods with low rates of unemployment
when employment changes are more likely to reflect shifts in both supply and demand.
Although the recessionary environment makes it plausible that changes in employment reflect
6

Appendix section A.1 presents our own calculations and evidence from Rothstein (2012) that changes in average
wages were relatively small compared to substantial changes in employment.
7
Bewley (1999) details multiple potential explanations for the empirical regularity that employers prefer to reduce
employment rather than cut wages in response to low product demand. As discussed by Daly, Hobijn and Lucking
(2012), one possibility is that employers may face a fairness constraint in bargaining with employees, wherein cuts
to the nominal wage in response to demand changes are considered exploitative. However, Elsby, Shin and Solon
(2013) find little evidence that employers faced a larger wage rigidity constraint during the Great Recession than in
previous recessions, despite lower rates of inflation.

6

only changes in demand, changes in the size of the local population may affect local labor demand
through the consumer demand channel, creating a reverse causality problem. As we discuss in more
detail in section 3.3, it is unlikely that the resulting bias will vary substantially across demographic
groups, implying that the relative supply responses across groups remain informative. We further
support this interpretation by conducting IV analyses, which yield very similar results to the OLS.
Importantly, in most specifications, we fail to reject the null hypothesis that the two sets of estimates
are equal, which supports the interpretation that measured employment changes reflect demand
shocks.

2.2

Geographic Variation in Employment Changes

There was considerable geographic variation in the depth of the recession. The hardest-hit locations
(e.g. Nevada, Michigan, Florida) lost more than ten percent of employment from 2006-2010, while a
few places (including North and South Dakota and Texas) experienced modest employment growth
over the same period.8 Our empirical specifications define a local labor market as a metropolitan
area (we will use the word “city” interchangeably for ease of exposition), and there was even greater
variation in employment changes at this level of geography.9
Several recent papers examine the sources of these differences. Mian and Sufi (2012) show that
counties with higher average household debt-to-income ratios in 2006 experienced larger declines in
household expenditure and hence larger employment declines, particularly in non-traded industries
that depend on local consumer demand. Greenstone and Mas (2012) show that counties whose small
businesses borrowed primarily from banks that cut lending following the financial crisis experienced
larger employment declines, and Chodorow-Reich (2013) provides direct evidence that firms with
greater exposure to such banks experienced greater employment losses. Fort, Haltiwanger, Jarmin
and Miranda (2013) show that states facing larger housing price declines experienced declining
8

See Appendix Section A.2 for details. The few employment increases were sufficiently small relative to population
growth that it is reasonable to treat them as very mild declines.
9
Appendix Figure A-4 provides time series information on employment for the metro areas with the largest decline,
largest increase, and the median change in employment over this same time period, showing substantial variation
across cities.

7

employment among young small businesses who often rely on home equity financing. Further,
certain industries (notably construction and manufacturing) experienced especially large losses in
employment, and these industries comprised different shares of local demand for labor. Our initial
empirical strategy leverages the resulting geographic variation in the depth of the recession from
these and other sources to identify effects of labor market strength on individuals’ location choices,
while the IV specifications use only an identifiable portion of the variation.

2.3

Geographic Mobility 2006-2010

Throughout our analysis, we consider locational supply responses separately by sex, skill, and nativity. Table 1 reports long-distance (cross-city or international) mobility rates for these demographic
groups. Immigration and internal migration are measured using the ACS, while emigration to Mexico is measured in the 2010 Mexican Decennial Census. In all cases, the numbers reflect average
annual mobility rates throughout our study period.10 Notably, every demographic and skill group
experienced substantial mobility over this time period, which suggests that there is scope for the
reallocation of labor across markets in response to local shocks. In nearly all cases the more educated portion of each demographic group exhibits a higher mobility rate. Natives are generally
more likely to have moved within the U.S., while the foreign-born are more likely to have moved
from an international location.11 As expected, emigration to Mexico is an important channel for
Mexican-born population adjustment during this time period.12 Overall, less skilled Mexican-born
individuals are substantially more likely to have moved during our sample period than are similarly
skilled natives. For example, less skilled Mexican men’s yearly migration rate was 7.0 percent, while
the same rate for natives was 4.0 percent.
We stratify our analysis by nativity not only because immigrants are more mobile in general, but
also because they are likely more motivated by labor market conditions when selecting a location. In
10

Although geographic mobility has been declining in the US since around 1980, there is little evidence that the
recession reduced rates further than a continuation of the trend would predict (Molloy et al. 2011).
11
Moves that begin or end in an area that is not identifiable or not in an MSA are counted in these averages unless
both the current and previous location are not in a valid MSA.
12
Similar emigration may occur for other immigrant groups, but measuring return migration for all source countries
is beyond the scope of this study.

8

section 6.2, we provide direct evidence that the Mexican-born are especially likely to report moving
for economic rather than personal reasons. Thus, the differences across groups in supply responses
that we document below reflect both differences in the unconditional probability of moving and
differences in responsiveness to economic conditions among those who migrate.

3

Population Responses to Demand Shocks

3.1

Data Sources and Specifications

Our empirical strategy examines changes in a city’s working age population (separately by sex, skill
level, and nativity) as a function of the relevant demand shock, as reflected by changes in payroll
employment. Our dependent variable is the change in the natural log of the relevant demographic
group’s population from 2006-2010, calculated from the American Community Survey (ACS).13
Note that the ACS sample includes both authorized and unauthorized immigrants.14 Our sample
includes individuals ages 18-64, not currently enrolled in school, and not living in group quarters.
Because we will examine tightly defined groups of workers, we limit our analysis to cities with a
population of at least 100,000 adults meeting these sampling criteria. Additionally, we drop cities
with fewer than 60 sampled Mexican-born individuals in 2006 and cities with any empty sample
population cells (for any demographic group) in the 2006 or 2010 ACS. These city-level restrictions
are imposed uniformly, resulting in a sample of 95 cities in every regression.15
Although we do not estimate a formal location choice model, both Borjas (2001) and Cadena
(2013) provide theoretical (discrete-choice-based) justifications for using linear models to examine
proportional changes in supply as a function of changes in expected earnings.16 Note that with
13

We obtained the data from IPUMS (Ruggles, Alexander, Genadek, Goeken, Schroeder and Sobek 2010).
Official Department of Homeland Security estimates of the unauthorized immigrant population of the U.S. are
based on the discrepancy between ACS estimates of the immigrant population and records from ICE (Hoefer, Rytina
and Baker 2012). In addition, using changes in logs as the dependent variable eliminates the influence of any
consistent undercount among unauthorized migrants.
15
We experimented with various city sample criteria including a restriction based only on overall population without
any qualitative change in results.
16
The linearity assumption allows for the value of fixed amenities to be differenced out, which avoids the incidental
parameters problem.
14

9

only small changes to wages, the percentage change in expected earnings that a labor market
offers (prior to any mobility) will be approximately equal to the percentage change in the number
of jobs. We therefore use changes in the natural log of employment as our primary measure of
local demand shocks, which we calculate using employment information from County Business
Patterns (CBP) data.17 Throughout the discussion we use the notation ẋ to signify changes in logs:
ẋ ≡ log(x1 )−log(x0 ). Unless otherwise noted, this change refers to the 2006 to 2010 long difference.
Our primary specification is thus
Ṅc = β0 + β1 L̇c + c ,

(1)

where c indexes metro areas, Ṅc is the proportional change in working-age population, and L̇c is
the proportional change in employment from 2006-2010.
One concern with this basic specification is that overall employment changes understate the
change in expected earnings for low-skilled and foreign-born workers, who were disproportionately
represented in the hardest-hit industries.18 There was considerable variation in employment declines across industries, and Mexican-born workers (the largest single group among the low-skilled
foreign-born) were more concentrated in the types of jobs that experienced the largest declines (see
Appendix section A.2 for details). We therefore construct group-specific employment changes that
account for these differing industrial compositions.19 Note that the proportional change in city
c’s overall employment can be expressed as a weighted average of industry-specific (i) employment
changes, with weights equal to the industry’s share of total employment in the initial period.

L̇c =

X

ϕtic0 L̇ic ,

(2)

i
17
The metropolitan area definitions used in the ACS and the CBP are not entirely consistent, so we aggregate
county-level employment information in the CBP data to match the definitions used in the ACS. Further, the MSAs
in Connecticut do not coincide well with counties. We therefore treat the entire state of Connecticut as a single
metropolitan area.
18
Orrenius and Zavodny (2010) find that Mexican-born workers are especially hard-hit by recessions due with likely
explanations including their comparatively low levels of education and concentration within more cyclical industries.
19
As expected, the results using employment declines that are not specific to nativity groups show even larger
differences in responsiveness between natives and the foreign-born. Results using shocks that are calculated at the
the (city x skill group) level are available in Appendix section A.9.1.

10

with
ϕtic0

Ltic0
≡ t0 .
Lc

Based on this insight, we calculate the relevant change in employment for a given education and/or
0
demographic group, g, using industry employment shares that are specific to each group, ϕgt
ic , rather
P
0
20
than shares for the local economy as a whole, such that L̇gc ≡ i ϕgt
ic L̇ic .

The primary advantage of the CBP is that it obtains data from the universe of establishments
in covered industries. Unfortunately, the CBP data do not cover employment in agricultural production, private household services, or the government. In our preferred specifications, therefore,
we fill in the missing changes in employment using (city x industry) calculations from the ACS.21
The only remaining concern, therefore, is the informal sector. If the employment losses in the informal sector are similar (in proportional terms) to losses in the formal sector, the results will be
unaffected. It is nevertheless possible that foreign-born workers face larger employment declines
than our measure indicates. Given the substantial difference in the responsiveness of native and
foreign-born individuals, however, this issue seems unlikely to drive the results.
Our preferred specification also weights each city to account for the heteroskedasticity inherent
in measuring proportional population changes across labor markets of various sizes. We construct
efficient weights based on the sampling distribution of population counts, accounting for individuals’
ACS sampling weights.22 In practice, nearly all of the cross-city variation in the optimal weights
derives from differences in the 2006 population, and results from population-weighted specifications
are quite similar.23 Additionally, unweighted specifications produce qualitatively similar results in
20

We estimate these shares at the group × city level by running a multinomial logit predicting a worker’s industry
based on his/her location and demographic group using data from the 2005 and 2006 ACS. This approach addresses
the relatively small cell sizes for some demographic groups. Details of this estimation, which also accounts for the
racial and ethnic composition of native-born workers, are available in section A.3 in the appendix. Note that ignoring
small cell sizes using simple shares from the ACS yields similar results.
21
The results are qualitatively similar (although somewhat attenuated) when we instead treat these employment
changes as missing. Additionally, we obtain similar results when using only the ACS to calculate employment changes
at the city-industry level. Details of these alternative demand shock measures are available in Appendix section A.9.2.
22
Further details of this procedure are available in the appendix in section A.4
23
For demographic and skill groups with some very small cells (see Appendix Table A-1), the weighted and
unweighted results occasionally differ. In each of these cases, the efficiency-motivated weighting reduces the estimated
standard errors, which suggests that the weighted estimates are preferable.The full set results is available in appendix
section A.9.4.

11

most specifications, particularly for the native-born and Mexican-born low-skilled workers that we
focus on.
Finally, we note that although employment changes represent the bulk of employers’ responses
to demand changes, there is a small positive correlation between wage changes and employment
changes across metro areas.24 Thus the elasticity of population with respect to payroll employment
slightly overstates the supply elasticity with respect to expected earnings. However, our primary
interest is the difference in elasticities across demographic groups rather than the level of the effect
per se, and we do not expect wages to adjust differently across nativity groups. In fact, we have
examined the time series of wages separately for native-born and Mexican-born workers, and we
find no appreciable difference in the degree to which wages adjusted rather than employment.

3.2

Geographic Labor Supply Elasticities by Demographic Group

Table 2 reports estimated elasticities based on Equation 1 for groups defined by skill, sex, and
nativity.25 Each coefficient in the table comes from a separate regression, with the change in
employment constructed separately for each worker type.26 The first column shows results for groups
defined only by sex and education. The second and third columns report estimated elasticities
separately for native-born and foreign-born populations. The first notable result is the distinct
skill gradient in responsiveness. Within each nativity group, workers with at least some college
education are much more responsive than are workers with at most a high school degree. As an
example, for native-born men or women with at least some college, a ten percentage point larger
decline in employment leads to between a four and five percentage point larger decline in the size of
a city’s local population with that education level. In contrast, the results for natives with at most
a high school degree exhibit much smaller point estimates that cannot be statistically distinguished
from zero. There are also substantial differences among skill groups by nativity, with the foreign24

As discussed in more detail in Appendix section A.5, wage changes range from roughly zero nominal growth in
the hardest hit cities to growth in line with inflation in the cities with the mildest changes in employment.
25
Throughout the analysis, we group together workers without a high school degree and high school graduates.
Evidence suggests that these two groups are nearly perfect substitutes, although workers with a degree represent
more effective units of labor (Card 2009).
26
Descriptive statistics for the variables in the analysis in this section can be found in Appendix section A.7.

12

born consistently more responsive than the native-born. Most notably, the results for less skilled
foreign-born workers are in stark contrast to those for native-born workers; these elasticities for
low-skilled immigrants are of a similar magnitude to those of high-skilled natives and are strongly
statistically significant.
The fourth and fifth columns of Table 2 show the results of estimating our primary specification using population and employment changes calculated separately for Mexican-born immigrants
and for those from all other source countries. These estimates demonstrate a large positive and
statistically significant response by less skilled immigrants from Mexico. In fact, this elasticity exceeds that of high-skilled native men and women.27 Additional testing reveals that the less skilled
Mexican-born elasticities are statistically significantly larger than those of natives (p=0.014) in the
male subsample. As we will show below, this sharp difference between native and Mexican population responses is very robust to changes in specification and estimation strategy. The surprising
negative point estimate for other foreign-born less-skilled men is less robust, and additional analysis
reveals that this coefficient’s sign and significance vary depending upon the specification and estimation strategy, and that this result may partly reflect the continuation of a pre-existing trend (see
Appendix section A.9).28 Hence, we focus on the contrast between Mexican-born and native-born
mobility, both of which are consistent across estimation strategies and precisely estimated.
These results confirm the well-established empirical regularity that highly-skilled natives respond
much more strongly to geographic variation in local labor demand than do less-skilled individuals.
The fact that less-skilled Mexican-born immigrants respond so strongly to labor demand shocks is,
to our knowledge, a novel finding. We therefore spend the remainder of the paper examining this
result and its implications in detail.
27

Note that this split is motivated primarily by the low-skilled labor market, wherein slightly more than half of all
immigrants are from Mexico. We report results for higher-skilled Mexican immigrants for completeness, but these
cell sizes are quite small and the resulting estimates are rather imprecise. See Appendix Table A-1 for a complete
set of population totals of the cells in Table 2.
28
Additional analysis shows that results for subgroups within the other foreign-born are similarly inconsistent
across specifications. In fact, we have examined population responses for more tightly defined groups of both natives
and immigrants, and the full set of results, many of which are typically imprecisely estimated and which do not
reveal any particular pattern, are available in Appendix section A.9.6.

13

3.3

Robustness of the Mexican-Native Elasticity Difference

Figure 1 shows the data underlying the results for low-skilled men, both native-born and Mexicanborn. These scatter plots show that the relationships summarized in the regression results are not
driven by any particular set of cities and appear to hold broadly throughout the country.29 In
addition, the value of the optimal weighting scheme is readily apparent, as outlier cities in the
figures are those with ex ante higher sampling variance of estimated population changes. Finally,
this figure provides a reminder that the positive elasticity is identified primarily by less negative
changes to employment, with the Mexican-born population shifting from the hardest-hit cities to
those with relatively milder downturns.
In order to interpret these results as evidence that geographic variation in employment losses
caused the differential local population growth rates of less skilled Mexican-born, we consider a
variety of robustness tests. First, we rule out changes in other determinants of location choice that
may be correlated with local changes in demand. Column (1) of Table 3 reproduces the baseline
response of low-skilled Mexican-born men. In Column (2) we control for the Mexican-born share of
each city’s population in 2000 to account for the potential decline in the value of traditional enclaves
discussed by Card and Lewis (2007).30 Columns (3) and (4) add indicators for cities in states that
enacted anti-immigrant employment legislation or new 287(g) agreements allowing local officials to
enforce federal immigration law, based on the immigration policy database in Bohn and Santillano
(2012).31 In Column (4), all of these controls enter with a negative sign, as expected. Also, while
the addition of the controls reduces the magnitude of the geographic elasticity slightly, it increases
the estimate’s precision as well. Table 4 provides results analogous to column (4) of Table 3 for
29

We have conducted additional analysis examining potential heterogeneity in responses. The results are robust
to excluding cities in California, and there is no statistically significantly heterogeneity in elasticities for cities closer
to the Mexican border or that have traditionally attracted large Mexican-born populations (see Appendix section
A.10).
30
Recall that the dependent variable is measured as the within-city change, which implies that this control allows
for differential growth trends based on a city’s traditional enclave status.
31
Bohn, Lofstrom and Raphael (forthcoming) show that the Legal Arizona Workers’ Act, which required employers
to participate in the federal E-Verify program, led to a decline in the foreign-born population of Arizona relative to
other states. Bohn and Santillano (2012) and Watson (2013) show that local 287(g) policies also affected immigrants’
location choices.

14

all nativity, skill, and gender groups. The results show that the pattern of elasticities identified in
Table 2 remains, and the difference in response between low-skilled natives and Mexicans is still
statistically significant (p-value of 0.020).32
Although the Mexican-born elasticity is robust to the controls just mentioned, it remains possible
that unobserved factors other than local demand changes contributed to the observed relationship.
We use a false experiment approach to rule out persistent unobserved factors by regressing prerecession (2000-2006) population changes on the demand shocks from 2006-2010. Other than the
change in the timing for the dependent variable, these specifications are identical to the main
analysis. Figure 2 shows this falsification test for low-skilled Mexican-born and native-born men.33
For both groups, we find a negative relationship. Thus, if anything, the large population responses
among the Mexican-born in the latter half of the decade represent a reversal of pre-recession trends.
These findings rule out the hypothesis that low-skilled Mexican-born workers were coincidentally
leaving the cities that would be hardest-hit during the recession even before it began. Note that
cities facing larger employment declines during the Great Recession on average experienced larger
employment increases during the pre-recession period, and additional analysis in section 5 directly
supports the interpretation that population changes in the earlier period also reflect earningsmaximizing behavior.34
A final possibility is reverse causality, in which unmeasured factors drive population changes
and these population changes result in changes in employment, either through decreasing consumer
demand or by mechanically reducing the number of workers. We address this issue in two ways.
First, we note that this mechanism would apply to all demographic and nativity groups. Thus,
this alternative interpretation cannot explain the lack of a relationship between native population
changes and employment changes, which exists despite substantial cross-city mobility (see Table 1).
Moreover, since Mexicans often remit a substantial portion of their income rather than spending it
32

We may be overcontrolling by including the policy indicators, since a deep local recession may increase antiimmigrant sentiment. If so, we conservatively bias the results away from finding the observed differences between
natives and Mexicans.
33
The full sets of falsification results with and without controls are available in Appendix Table A-17.
34
Monras (2013) documents similar responses before and after the Great Recession, although he treats the preRecession growth rates as the counterfactual in the recession period.

15

locally, reverse causality through the demand channel would be stronger for natives and would bias
the difference in elasticities in the opposite direction of the observed gap.
Second, we use two separate instrumental variables for employment changes that are plausibly
exogenous to counterfactual population growth and that strongly relate to changes in local employment through well-understood economic mechanisms. The first instrument is the standard “Bartik
instrument” (Bartik 1991), which predicts changes in local labor demand by assuming that national
employment changes in each industry are allocated proportionately across cities, based on each city’s
P
initial industry composition of employment.35 We calculate the instrument as ψc = i ϕtic0 L̇i , where
ϕtic0 is the fraction of city c employment in industry i in 2006, and L̇i is the proportional change in
national employment in industry i.
The results when using ψc as an instrument for the local employment decline are presented in
Table 5; these specifications also include the controls introduced in Table 3.36 For each specification,
we report the IV elasticity estimates, the p-value of a test that the OLS and IV coefficients are
equal, the first-stage coefficients on the instrument, and partial F Statistics for the instrument in
the first stage.37 Although the instrument is identical in all cases, the first-stage coefficients differ
based on how the Bartik measure relates to each group-specific employment decline. With the
exception of highly skilled native women, we do not appear to face a weak instrument problem,
and the first stage coefficients are similar in magnitude to those in the prior literature.38 The IV
elasticity estimates for men are similar to the OLS results and exhibit an even larger difference
in responsiveness between less skilled natives and Mexicans, though the estimates are less precise.
In spite of a few negative point estimates for other immigrants and highly skilled workers, our
conclusions regarding the strong responsiveness of less skilled Mexican immigrants and essentially
no response among less skilled natives are supported when using this standard method of isolating
35

Other examples of the Bartik instrument appear in Bound and Holzer (2000), Blanchard and Katz (1992), Autor
and Duggan (2003), Wozniak (2010), Notowidigdo (2013), and Charles, Hurst and Notowidigdo (2013).
36
These specifications include only 94 of the 95 cities used in the OLS results. We drop Brazoria, TX because it
is a substantial outlier in both the first stage and reduced form. See Appendix section A.8 for details.
37
We use Wooldridge’s (1995) score test of instrument exogeneity because our specification includes
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors.
38
Stock and Yogo (2005) report that a first-stage F statistic greater than 8.96 is sufficient to reject the null
hypothesis that the actual size of a 5 percent test is greater than 15 percent.

16

demand shocks.39
The second instrument is based on Mian and Sufi’s (2012) finding that counties with more
highly leveraged households experienced larger employment losses during the Great Recession. Importantly, they find that these employment losses were concentrated in industries providing goods
and services locally, suggesting that the tightening of credit during the financial crisis led to a
decline in consumer demand and that this decline was largest among households that were more
indebted.40 We construct the household leverage ratio analogously to Mian and Sufi (2012), aggregating MSA-level variables from county-level information provided by Equifax (total household
debt) and the Internal Revenue Service (total income).41 Table 6, which is identical in format to
Table 5, presents the results of these specifications.42 On the whole, the results are quite consistent
with the OLS results in Table 4, and, in fact, none of the population elasticity estimates using this
instrument is statistically significantly different than the OLS version at the five percent level. The
pattern of elasticities continues to show strong differences by skill level, and among the low-skilled,
only the Mexican-born population responds significantly to changes in local labor demand.
Note that the Mian and Sufi measure may fail to satisfy the IV exclusion restriction by influencing
migration through channels other than local labor market conditions, especially because Hispanic
households held a disproportionate share of subprime mortgages prior to the credit crisis. For
example, foreclosures, which lead people to move out of their homes, may also trigger out-migration.
If, instead, foreclosures induce former homeowners to enter the local rental market, the resulting
39

The significant negative result for non-Mexican immigrants is puzzling, but we note that this result reflects
an ongoing trend in the pre-recession period, as shown in Appendix Table A-17, and is reversed under alternate
weighting schemes. Hence, we avoid making strong conclusions regarding non-Mexican immigrants. A few estimates
for highly skilled workers are negative using this IV approach, though none are significant.
40
Mian and Sufi (2011) identify several mechanisms through which household leverage drove declining demand.
Indebted households became less able to roll over their debt and were thus forced to spend a greater share of their
incomes on debt service rather than consumption. Households in cities with higher average leverage had a large
share of their debts in mortgages, and many may have treated the annual increase in home value as “income,” which
disappeared during the crisis. Finally, some households may have decided that their previous levels of consumption
were unsustainable and decided to find a new equilibrium spending path.
41
Mian and Sufi (2012) provide more detail on the data sources. The Equifax data are available through the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York. Our restriction to large MSAs avoids the concern that only a portion of the counties
used in the original paper are publicly available, as the restricted data are for counties with small populations.
42
These specifications also include the controls introduced in Table 3.

17

increase in prices for rental housing may drive net out-migration.43 Recall, however, that our
primary interest is in determining the relative responsiveness of different groups to local demand
conditions. While these concerns suggest that the IV estimates may be somewhat more positively
biased among Mexican immigrants, it seems unlikely that they are sufficient to explain the entirety
of the differential population responses, especially because the native-born point estimates remain
indistinguishable from zero.
The consistency of the OLS results with the IV results using each instrument suggests that the
OLS specifications are unlikely to be contaminated by remaining omitted variables or simultaneity.44
In fact, they provide strong support to the interpretation that employment declines are an effective
measure of demand shocks in this time period. Overall, the wide variety of robustness tests presented
in this section confirm the sharp differences in the responsiveness of less skilled natives and Mexican
immigrants to local labor demand shocks.

4

Mexican Mobility Smooths Employment Outcomes

The previous section provides robust evidence that Mexican-born workers leave labor markets experiencing larger labor demand declines in favor of markets facing smaller declines. Here we show
that natives living in cities with substantial Mexican populations are insulated from the employment
effects of local labor demand shocks. This result is robust to changes in specification and appears to
be driven by the combination of Mexican mobility and labor market competition between Mexicans
and natives.
43

Note that the native mobility results are essentially unchanged when restricting the sample to renters.
In Appendix section A.11, we provide an additional set of IV specifications that use both instruments simultaneously. Based on these specifications, we test the null hypothesis that the IV coefficients in Tables 5 and 6 are equal
to each other, commonly referred to as a test of instrument exogeneity. Across the twenty specifications, we receive
a p-value less than 0.05 for only one group (college education foreign-born women).
44

18

4.1

Approach to Measuring Smoothing

We define smoothing as the degree to which workers’ expected earnings are equalized across space
rather than tied to local demand. Given approximately flat wages, the proportional change in
expected earnings is captured primarily by the proportional change in the probability of being
employed. Assuming that the employment probability is given by ratio of employment to workingage population, Lc /Nc , one can measure the degree of smoothing based on the observed relationship
between local changes in the employment to population ratio (d ln(Lc /Nc )) and the local demand
shock (d ln Lc ). In the absence of any equalizing migration response, the labor demand decline
in each city would be proportional to the local change in employment probability. In contrast, if
earnings-sensitive migration was sufficient to equilibrate employment probabilities across cities, then
the local change in employment probability would be uncorrelated with the local demand shock.
To formalize this intuition, one can quantify the degree to which local labor markets are integrated across space by examining the relationship between local changes in employment probability
and the local demand shock:
d ln Nc
d ln(Lc /Nc )
=1−
.
d ln Lc
d ln Lc

(3)

This expression makes clear that labor demand shocks have a proportional direct effect on local
changes in employment probability but that the observed effect may be mitigated by equalizing
migration reflected in a positive relationship between d ln Lc and d ln Nc . We therefore quantify
smoothing by running the following regression:
˙ c ) = γ0 + γ1 L̇c + εc
(Lc /N

(4)

The dependent variable is the change in the natural log of the employment to working-age population
ratio calculated from ACS data.45 . The independent variable is the change in the natural log
of payroll employment, calculated from CBP data. Recall from Section 3.1 that we calculate
proportional changes in city level payroll employment using a weighted average of proportional
45

Descriptive statistics for this new dependent variable are available in Appendix Table A-28

19

changes in city level industry employment. For this smoothing analysis, we initially use weights
based on the pre-recession industry shares among all low-skilled workers in each city and calculate
employment rates among the entire low skilled population.
A slope coefficient of one in this regression would imply that local employment changes depend
entirely on local shocks, whereas a coefficient of zero would indicate that local outcomes are unrelated to local shocks, with only the aggregate national shock determining the realized change
in employment rates. Because we only approximate the employment losses incident on low-skilled
workers, however, we expect some attenuation of the estimated coefficient due to measurement error. We therefore focus on relative differences in coefficients across different cities rather than their
absolute levels when evaluating the degree of smoothing.46
In particular, we measure the smoothing influence of Mexican mobility by dividing our sample
of cities into those above and below the median Mexican-born share of the low-skilled population.47
Cities with few Mexican immigrants have little scope for outmigration in response to a larger-thanaverage demand decline. Further, when selecting a new location, Mexican movers (including new
arrivals from abroad) tend to choose cities with higher Mexican-born populations, either because
these populations themselves are a direct amenity or because they proxy for unobserved amenities
especially valued by the Mexican-born. As a result, less-skilled workers’ employment probabilities
in cities with many Mexicans should be less strongly related to local labor demand shocks than are
those in cities with few Mexicans, which do not have access to equalizing Mexican mobility. We
therefore estimate versions of (4) separately for cities with above- and below-median Mexican-born
population shares, expecting to observe weaker relationships between employment probabilities and
labor demand shocks in cities with many Mexican-born workers.
46

If L̇c is measured with additive classical error given by νc , then the observed slope will be the true influence of
var(L̇c )
c
local shocks on local employment multiplied by a factor of var L̇ +var(ν
∈ (0, 1).
( c )c
c)
47
Given our focus on less-skilled men, we measure Mexican-born population shares for that demographic group.
Among the 95 cities in our sample, there is a great deal of variation in the share of the low-skilled population that
is Mexican-born, with Values ranging from just over one percent in cities like St. Louis and Miami to more than 40
percent in parts of Texas and California. The median Mexican-born share is roughly 15 percent, and Sacramento
has the highest share below the median while Omaha has the lowest share above.

20

4.2

Smoothing in the Overall Less-Skilled Market

We first examine the smoothing effects of Mexican mobility for the low-skilled labor force as a whole.
Figure 3 provides a visual representation of the results, also reported in Panel (a) of Table 7.48 As
expected, there is a much weaker relationship between employment probabilities and demand shocks
in cities with large Mexican populations than in cities with smaller Mexican populations.49 In fact,
the relationship is roughly 40 percent weaker in cities with high concentrations of Mexican-born
workers. By increasing the average mobility of the less-skilled population, Mexicans smooth average
employment probabilities across space for less-skilled workers.
This finding is a direct consequence of the mobility results in Section 3. Consider the following decomposition of the change in the less-skilled employment to population ratio (Lc /Nc ) in a
particular city.


d ln Ncn
d ln(Lc /Nc )
d ln Ncm
= 1 − (1 − ηc )
+ ηc
,
d ln Lc
d ln Lc
d ln Lc

(5)

where superscripts m and n refer to Mexicans and natives respectively, and ηc is the Mexican
population share. Section 3 reveals that Mexican populations are more responsive to changes in
m

demand than are native populations ( ddlnlnNLcc >

d ln Ncn
),
d ln Lc

so cities with larger Mexican population

shares exhibit a weaker (less positive) relationship between local shocks and local employment
probabilities. Hence, the mobility results directly imply that Mexican mobility smooths average
employment probabilities for the aggregate low-skilled workforce.

4.3

Smoothing in the Native Less-Skilled Market

The results presented thus far leave open the possibility that Mexican mobility equalizes overall lessskilled employment probabilities simply by equalizing employment rates among Mexicans without
48

The results in this table report OLS results; in Appendix Table A-30 we show a parallel set of IV results using
the Bartik (1991) instrument to predict local changes in employment. These results are qualitatively similar, and, if
anything, show somewhat greater smoothing in high Mexican population share cities.
49
In this and subsequent smoothing analyses we were concerned that the relatively small sample size may lead to
influential outliers, so we estimated the relationships using local linear regressions, and the estimated slopes were
quite similar to those shown in the figures. We also estimated this relationship separately by quartiles of pre-recession
Mexican share. These results, which are available in Appendix Table A-29, show decreasing coefficients from the
first (lowest) quartile of Mexican share through the third quartile followed by a leveling off.

21

having any effect on the employment rates for less-mobile natives. We now determine whether native
labor market outcomes are less related to local shocks in locations with larger Mexican population
shares.

4.3.1

Mexican Population Insulates Natives

To do so, we estimate versions of Equation (4) in which the dependent variable is calculated using
employment to population ratios for low-skilled native men (Lnc /Ncn ). Importantly, results using
this approach are not mechanically driven by the preceding mobility results because changes in
Mexican population do not appear in the denominator. Instead, Mexican mobility can affect the
native employment to population ratio only by affecting native employment in the numerator.
Panel (b) of Table 7 shows the results of this modified analysis. Changes in employment probabilities for natives living in cities with large Mexican populations are much less related to local
demand conditions than are changes in cities with few Mexicans. The degree of smoothing between
high and low Mexican share cities is nearly identical for less skilled native men as for the overall
less skilled male population; the relationship in above-median cities is 41 percent weaker than in
below-median cities. Thus, native employment probabilities were insulated from local shocks in the
presence of substantial numbers of Mexican-born workers, with improved native outcomes in the
hardest hit cities and diminished ones in more favorable markets.
This finding is precisely what one would expect if the presence of Mexicans in a local market
weakened the effects of a decline in labor demand on natives’ employment probabilities. However,
there are two potential alternative explanations that we consider. In both cases the evidence
supports interpreting the differential slopes as resulting from larger Mexican population shares.
First, suppose that less skilled Mexican immigrants and natives worked in completely different
types of jobs, i.e. that the labor market were perfectly segmented by nativity. In this case, a general
measure of the local decline in low skilled employment would not necessarily capture the demand
declines facing the native portion of the job market. The weaker relationship between shocks and
employment rates could derive, in part, from measuring the relevant decline in demand for native

22

workers more accurately in cities with fewer Mexican-born workers.50 To address this possibility,
in panel (c) of Table 7 we adjust the independent variable and calculate proportional job losses
using the city-specific industry distribution of native less skilled workers rather than the industry
distribution of all less skilled workers in the city as in panel (b). The gap between high and low
Mexican share cities decreases only slightly; the shock-outcome relationship is still 37 percent weaker
in below-median cities and the difference remains statistically significant at conventional levels
(p=0.008). While this adjustment does not rule out segmentation by occupation within industry,
the very modest change in observed smoothing when accounting for the substantial differences in
natives’ and Mexicans’ industry distributions (see Appendix Figure A-6) suggests that labor market
segmentation is an unlikely explanation for the differences between these two sets of cities.
As a second alternative, we consider the possibility that some other unobserved factor causes
some local labor markets to adjust to shocks more easily and that this other factor is correlated with
the Mexican share of the low-skilled population. Perhaps Mexicans are attracted to local economies
that are more flexible on a number of other dimensions including differences in local regulations
and capital flexibility. Under this alternative, natives’ outcomes would have been smoother in these
cities even in the absence of a large Mexican population. We address this hypothesis by repeating
the smoothing analysis for highly skilled native-born men. Because we do not expect low-skilled
Mexican mobility to affect outcomes for higher skilled workers, any differential incidence of local
shocks among this skill group would suggest the presence of such an unobserved factor.
Panel (d) of Table 7 reports the relationship between changes in highly skilled native employment
rates and labor demand shocks, calculated using highly skilled native men’s industry employment
distribution. We maintain the same classification of cities into above- and below-median Mexican
population share (among low-skilled workers) used in the previous panels. There is no evidence that
50

Measurement error resulting from segmented labor markets may result in upward or downward bias in cities with
larger Mexican share. The multiplicative bias is given by
(1 − φ) var(L̇n ) + φ cov(L̇n , L̇m )
,
(1 − φ)2 var(L̇n ) + φ2 var(L̇m ) + 2(1 − φ)φ cov(L̇n , L̇m )
where φ is the Mexican share of employment, var(L̇n ) and var(L̇m ) are the variance in labor demand shocks in the
native and Mexican segments of the labor market, and cov(L̇n , L̇m ) is their covariance.

23

the incidence of employment shocks is any different for highly skilled workers in the two groups of
cities. Thus, there is no support for the hypothesis that the labor markets with higher Mexican
population share are more able to absorb labor demand shocks in general.51
This set of results therefore implies that the presence of substantial Mexican-born population
insulates less skilled natives from the effects of local labor demand shocks. This is an important
finding, as it indicates very different outcomes for natives living in cities facing similar labor demand
shocks but with different Mexican population shares. Importantly, the smoothing result applies
both to relatively positive and relatively negative shocks, with the presence of Mexicans improving
outcomes for natives in the hardest hit markets and depressing outcomes for natives in the most
positively affected locations.

4.3.2

Migration as the Smoothing Mechanism

The preceding results show that cities with a large Mexican population experienced smoother labor
market outcomes among native low-skilled workers. We now discuss whether this smoothing is likely
the consequence of equalizing migration or whether larger Mexican populations affect the incidence
of labor demand shocks and native employment through some other mechanism. Consider the
following identity demonstrating how the Mexican employment share, φc , influences the relationship
between native employment probability, Lnc /Ncn , and the local employment shock.52
d ln(Lnc /Ncn )
= 1 + φc
d ln Lc



d ln Lm
d ln Lnc
c
−
d ln Lc
d ln Lc


−

d ln Ncn
d ln Lc

(6)

The last term on the right hand side is the native population response, which the results in Section 3 show is approximately zero on average.53 The term in parentheses captures the differential
51

In Appendix section A.13, we explore and reject additional alternative interpretations, including the possibility
that the above-median cities had more flexible wage structures and the possibility that the results depend critically
on the inclusion of California metro areas.
52
Note that we have introduced the φc term as distinct from ηc to emphasize that this expression relates to the
share of Mexican immigrants in employment rather than in the population. These are not necessarily equal in general,
and Mexican immigrants tend to have higher employment rates empirically.
53
Further, this population response does not differ between above- and below-median Mexican share cities. See
Appendix section A.10.2 for details.

24

equilibrium incidence of local job losses on native and Mexican workers, and it must be negative
to be consistent with a weaker relationship between changes in natives’ employment probabilities
and local employment shocks in cities with larger Mexican shares. Thus, in equilibrium, following
job losses, turnover, and any migration responses, local employment declines are disproportionately
reflected in declining local employment of Mexican-born workers.
This is precisely what one would expect if Mexican mobility had a direct effect on natives’
employment probability. By leaving (or failing to enter) the most depressed local markets, Mexican workers absorb a disproportionate share of the local employment decline, and natives’ share
of employment rises as a result. To reinforce this interpretation, we show that it implies a degree
of smoothing that is very similar to that observed in the data. Suppose that less skilled natives
and Mexicans are perfect substitutes, in the sense that they are indistinguishable to employers. In
this case, a given decline in overall employment will decrease equilibrium employment probabilities
identically for both nativity groups, and differential employment changes will be driven by differential population changes.54 Under this interpretation, one can predict the amount of smoothing
using employment shares and mobility responses. Indexing cities with Mexican population shares
above and below the median by a and b respectively, plugging the estimated mobility responses into
(6), and differencing across the two groups of cities yields the following expression:


d ln(Lnc /Ncn )
d ln Lc

a


−

d ln(Lnc /Ncn )
d ln Lc

b

= (φac − φbc )

d lnˆNcn d lnˆNcm
−
d ln Lc
d ln Lc

!
(7)

Implementing this calculation yields a predicted gap of -0.16, which is very similar to the difference
in slopes reported in panel (c) Table 7.55 Thus, the observed scale of smoothing closely matches
the prediction of a simple model of differential mobility and labor market competition between less
skilled native-born and Mexican born workers.56
54

d ln(Ln /N n )

d ln(Lm /N m )

d ln Ln

d ln Lm

d ln N n

d ln N m

c
c
To see this, note the following: d lnc Lc c =
⇒ d ln Lcc − d ln Lcc = d ln Lcc − d ln Lcc .
d ln Lc
55
This calculation requires the elasticity of Mexican population with respect to “native” shocks (average employment declines using native industry weights). This elasticity, which has a descriptive rather than causal interpretation,
is 0.713 (0.161).
56
An alternative interpretation is that employers choose to lay off Mexican workers before natives and hire natives
first when filling vacancies. This could occur due to employer preferences or due to a seniority-based layoff policy

25

Taken as a whole, the results in the section imply that Mexican immigrants’ willingness to move
away from the hardest hit cities and toward the least affected cities substantially reduced geographic
inequality during the Great Recession. Further, their mobility exerted an equilibrating influence
on the employment rates of native-born workers in addition to smoothing outcomes among the
Mexican low-skilled population. Mexican mobility therefore provides an implicit form of insurance
to native workers by transferring native employment probability from cities with relatively strong
demand to cities experiencing the largest negative shocks.

5

Pre-Recession Analysis

In this section, we examine whether the differential population responses and associated smoothing
that occurred during the Great Recession were similarly operative during the preceding boom (20002006). As discussed previously, OLS regressions of population changes on employment changes are
likely appropriate only in an environment like the Great Recession, where adjustment to demand
shocks occurred primarily through employment rather than wages. As this feature was not present
during the boom, Table 8 presents Bartik IV specifications for 2000-2006, following Table 5.57 In
this earlier time period, high-skilled workers of both genders are more responsive than were lowskilled workers, at least among the native-born. There is not as clear of a pattern among other
groups, and the elasticities are, on the whole, estimated less precisely. Importantly, however, the
strong positive elasticity among low-skilled Mexican-born men remains. Recall that the set of cities
that experienced large demand increases during the boom period tended to have larger declines in
the bust. Thus, this additional analysis directly supports interpreting the reversal of trends among
(Ritter and Taylor 1998). In this case, Mexican workers insulate natives from job losses directly, by absorbing
a portion of the employment decline and smoothing natives’ outcomes even without any migration. Part of the
difference between the calculations presented and the estimated difference may derive from this (or other forms of
imperfect substitution. However, these employer choices in hiring and firing would be unlikely to persist without
Mexican migration, as unemployed Mexican workers would create a profit-increasing source of cheaper labor, even
if the two groups of workers were imperfect substitutes. Even in this alternative scenario, Mexicans’ willingness to
relocate in response to demand conditions likely still facilitates the smoothing of natives’ outcomes.
57
Note that in this time period, unlike in the recession, many of the instrument exogeneity tests return p-values
below conventional significance levels, which supports the assertion that IV estimation is more appropriate than OLS
specifications.

26

the Mexican-born shown in Figures 1 and 2 as reflecting a substantial and rapid population response
to local demand conditions.
Table 9 presents smoothing results for the pre-Recession period, splitting the city sample into
those above and below median Mexican-born population share, as in Table 7. Again, we use
the Bartik instrument to predict changes in local employment.58 In panels (a)-(c), the results
continue to show that less-skilled men’s local outcomes are less tied to local shocks in cities with
greater access to Mexican-born workers, although the differences are not statistically significantly
different from zero in the latter two panels. Importantly, the results in panel (d) continue to show
no substantial difference in smoothing in the high-skilled labor market based on Mexican-born
population share. Thus, the phenomena of large population responses among the Mexican-born
and the resulting smoothing occur to some extent regardless of whether the economy is growing
or shrinking, although it is reasonable to conclude that the smoothing effect may be especially
operative during downturns.

6

Extensions and Discussion

In this section we study the mechanisms through which the less skilled Mexican-born population
adjusted to labor demand shocks and investigate some hypotheses for why Mexicans respond so
much more strongly than similarly skilled natives.

6.1

Channels of Population Adjustment

A city’s Mexican-born working-age population, Ncm , can change between 2006 and 2010 through
five channels: 1) arrivals from abroad after 2006, 2) migration between cities within the U.S., 3)
departures from the U.S., 4) aging in or out of the sample, and 5) entering or leaving the sample
due to changing schooling status. Here, we measure the importance of each channel in driving the
strong population responses among less skilled Mexican-born men. Channels 1 and 4 are directly
58

The analogous Bartik IV results during the 2006-2010 time period are available in Appendix Table A-30.

27

observable, as the ACS records immigrants’ age and year of arrival. Channel 5 likely makes a
very small contribution, particularly among the less skilled working-age immigrants in our sample.
Channels 2 and 3 are more difficult to separate in the data; we return to this below.
We begin by examining changes in the number of Mexican-born individuals who arrived in the
U.S. before and after 2007. Thus, we partition a city’s change in Mexican population as (suppressing
city subscripts):
m,2010
m,2006
m,2010
+ (Npre−2007
− Npre−2007
).
N m,2010 − N m,2006 = Nnew

(8)

In words, the change in the Mexican-born population consists of the number of immigrants who
m
arrived in 2007 or later (Nnew
) plus the change in the number of immigrants who arrived in the
m,2006
m
U.S. in 2006 or earlier (Npre−2007
). Notice that Npre−2007
is simply the resident Mexican population

in 2006. Dividing both sides of (8) by N m,2006 , one can decompose the proportional change in
Mexican population into components resulting from new arrivals (channel 1) and from reallocation
of existing residents (channels 2-5).
We therefore estimate slightly modified versions of Equation (1) for less skilled Mexican men,
 m,2010 m,2006 
−N
using the proportional change in the population N N m,2006
and each component thereof as
dependent variables, rather than the change in log population. The results are presented in Table
10. Column (1) reproduces the overall elasticity from column (1) of Table 3; column (2) shows the
slight change in the magnitude from the change in the dependent variable. The next two columns
additively decompose that estimate into components coming from new arrivals and movement of
existing residents. The coefficient in column (3) implies that 22 percent of the reallocation occurred
through differential inflows of new immigrants in response to differential demand shocks. Note
that fewer than 22 percent of Mexican-born immigrants living in the US in 2010 arrived during
the preceding five years; thus these new arrivals account for more than their “fair share” of the
reallocation.59 It is likely that during periods with larger immigration inflows, this channel would
59

This clustering of low-skilled new arrivals in high demand areas complements Kerr’s (2010) finding that U.S.
cities with relative increases in innovation (measured by patenting rates) from 1995-2004 increase the immigrant share
of their inventors while cities with declining relative innovation experience a disproportionate decline in immigrant
invention.

28

account for a larger share of overall adjustment, but net migration inflows approached zero by the
end of the decade (Passel, Cohn and Gonzalez-Barrera 2012). The remaining 78 percent of the
reallocation occurred among existing residents (channels 2-5), and this aggregate effect is reflected
in the coefficient in column (4). Column (5) provides a direct estimate of the contribution of net
aging in (channel 4); as expected the contribution of this channel is negligible.60
Most of the reallocation therefore occurred through migration by those already resident by 2006.
The large share of reallocation among existing immigrants is an important finding, as the majority of the previous literature focuses only on location choices among newly arriving immigrants.
Decomposing this channel further is difficult, however, because there are no available data sources
that allow reliable measurement of return migration flows to Mexico separately by US city during
this time period.61 In addition, the ACS asks respondents only about internal movement over the
past year; the five year mobility question, standard in prior decennial censuses, does not appear in
the ACS. Thus, it is not possible to precisely decompose the pre-2007 Mexican-born observations in
the 2010 ACS into those who lived in the city in 2006 and those who lived in another US location.
Nevertheless, one can construct imperfect estimates of internal migration by aggregating internal
inflows and outflows from each successive annual ACS survey. The regressions in columns (6) and
(7) are based on this technique, and they reveal that, together, measured internal migration can
explain roughly 20 percent of the overall reallocation, with internal outflows relatively more important. Given the lack of a direct measure of return migration and the fairly wide confidence intervals
on each of the other components, it is difficult to precisely estimate the relative contribution of
return migration. It is clear, though, that both migration internal to the US and return migration
to Mexico were important components of the overall local supply elasticity, consistent with the
descriptive migration rates for Mexican-born individuals reported in Table 1.
60

People between the ages of 18 and 21 in 2010 who arrived prior to 2007 are assumed to have aged in. Individuals
61-64 in 2006 are assumed to age out.
61
The Mexican Decennial Census, intercensal counts, and the Mexican National Survey of Employment and Occupation (ENOE) do not include sub-national geographic information for return migration sources in the U.S. The
National Survey of Demographic Dynamics (ENADID) only includes U.S. state information and does not allow one
to isolate return migration between 2006 and 2010. Finally, the Northern Border Migration Survey (EMIF) uses
non-standard sampling procedures that raise questions of representativeness and interpretation.

29

6.2

Why are the Mexican-Born More Responsive?

We now consider potential explanations for the sharp differences in population elasticity between
native-born and Mexican-born less skilled workers. Recall from Table 1 that, although the less
skilled Mexican-born are less likely than similarly skilled natives to migrate within the U.S., their
much higher rate of international mobility implies a substantially larger overall probability of migrating. This difference may simply reflect a process of self-selection in which the immigrant pool
consists primarily of highly mobile individuals.
Thus, to some extent, immigrants’ demographics and other observable characteristics may account for their increased responsiveness compared to natives. To investigate this possibility, we first
estimate probit regressions in which we predict Mexican-born status based on either age, marital
status, detailed educational attainment, home ownership, or all of these factors together.62 We then
use the resulting propensity score weights to calculate city-level populations and industry shares (to
calculate the relevant employment changes) using native workers whose observable characteristics,
on average, match those of the Mexican-born. We then repeat our main analysis for this reweighted
group of natives. The results are shown in columns (3)-(7) of Table 11, with the baseline results for
less skilled Mexican-born and native-born men provided for reference in columns (1) and (2). Even
after making these adjustments, we find no evidence that natives move toward cities with better
job prospects.
We then consider the possibility that natives who have previously made long-distance moves
may be similarly more responsive. Column (8) presents the results of a version of column (2),
but with population changes and city-level employment changes calculated based on the subset of
low-skilled natives who are living outside of their state of birth. The estimated elasticity in this
group is substantially larger than the elasticity among all natives, and the coefficient is marginally
statistically significant. In column (9), we further reweight the population used in column (8)
to reflect all of the covariates included in column (7). This specification yields the largest point
estimate among any native population, although it is imprecisely estimated. Thus, it appears that
62

The propensity score equation estimates are presented Appendix Section A.14.

30

part of the strong mobility responses among the Mexican-born derive from self-selection, although
the differences do not appear to be entirely driven by differences in demographics.
Additionally, Mexican immigrants may be more responsive to labor market conditions for a
variety of other reasons. First, they are less likely to be eligible for Unemployment Insurance (UI)
and other social safety net programs, the existence of which reduces geographic differences in total
income (Tatsiramos 2009). More than half of Mexican-born immigrants are in the US without
authorization (Passel 2005) and are thus ineligible for UI benefits. Empirically, foreign-born individuals are substantially less likely to receive UI benefits compared to natives (see Appendix Section
A.15), which makes immigrants’ total incomes more dependent on their labor market earnings.63
Moreover, many Mexican immigrants report moving to the U.S. intending a relatively short
stay, often planning to save a particular amount of money to invest back in Mexico or with the
objective of remitting a particular amount at regular intervals (Massey, Durand and Malone 2003).64
Additionally, Massey et al. (2003) report that some individuals migrate to the U.S. from Mexico
as part of a larger household’s diversification of human capital across labor markets. Workers with
either of these types of motivations will find extended periods of unemployment especially costly
and may therefore be more willing to relocate in order to find new employment more quickly.
These factors suggest that Mexican-born immigrants are especially likely to make an earningsimproving move because they have strong attachment to the labor market. Mexican-born workers’
unemployment durations are, on average, 33 percent shorter than than those of natives (see Appendix Figure A-14), and among movers, the Mexican-born are especially likely to report moving
to look for work or because they lost a previous job (see Appendix Table A-35). In fact, among
all possible answers, this category is the most common response among the Mexican-born (23.6
percent). This descriptive evidence is consistent with the idea that Mexican immigrants are more
63

A worker who was using false documentation rather than being paid under the table may be able to make a
claim by continuing to claim the previous identity as long as there are not other workers continuing to receive covered
wages under the same social security number. This type of fraudulent claim, however, is certainly more difficult than
the claiming process for a former employee who had legal authorization. Further, one could potentially examine
the importance of this channel using data on natives who are also ineligible for UI, such as those who are paid as
independent contractors, rather than as employees. Unfortunately, the ACS does not ask this information of survey
respondents.
64
Nekoei (2013) uses temporal variation in exchange rates to provide evidence consistent with this phenomenon.

31

likely to consider the strength of a local labor market when making a location decision.
Finally, the Mexican-born have access to particularly robust networks and a diffuse set of enclaves. There are nontrivial Mexican-born populations in many more of the nation’s labor markets
than there are for any other immigrant source country. Mexican immigrants comprise at least one
percent of the population of more than half of US metro areas, whereas no other source country is similarly represented in more than ten percent of cities.65 Several studies have found that
immigrants tend to locate in markets with previous migrants from the same source country, and
the Mexican-born population has continued to spread out geographically over the previous two
decades.66 Further, networks provide information about local labor market conditions and lower
moving costs, thereby increasing the probability that a move across labor markets will result in a
favorable employment outcome (Munshi 2003).
A natural remaining question is what factors motivate less skilled natives’ cross-city moves
and why labor market conditions are of relatively little importance. One prime candidate is the
substantial home bias that has been identified in prior work (Kennan and Walker 2011, Diamond
2012). In fact, over our study period, 47 percent of all cross-city moves by low-skilled natives had the
mover’s state of birth as the destination. This substantial likelihood of selecting a city in one’s home
state does not simply reflect a generally higher prevalence of within state moves; of those beginning
in a state other than their state of birth, only one third moved to a different city within the same
state. Among those beginning from a city in their home state, in contrast, roughly two thirds chose
another city in the same state.67 Although not conclusive, these calculations suggest that much of
the substantial cross-city mobility occurs for reasons related to family or other amenities of one’s
home state rather than for employment conditions.
In sum, while we are unable to explain with certainty all of the sources of the higher responsiveness among the less skilled Mexican-born, the available evidence suggests that they are so responsive
65

Calculations based on the 2000 Census. Mexicans comprise at least one percent of the population of working
age adults in 54 percent of metropolitan areas; the next closest source country is the Philippines, with at least a one
percent population share in 9.6 percent of cities.
66
The importance of ethnic enclaves was first shown by Bartel (1989). Card and Lewis (2007), among others,
document the recent diffusion beginning in the 1990s.
67
All of the calculations mentioned in this paragraph are based on the same sample used for Table 1.

32

because they are a self-selected group of highly mobile individuals, they have particularly strong
labor market motivations, and they have the informational and informal financial resources necessary to make demand-sensitive location choices. Relative to natives, they also have lower access to
programs such as unemployment insurance that make remaining in a weak labor market less costly.

7

Conclusion

This paper has demonstrated that low-skilled Mexican-born workers’ location choices responded
very strongly to geographic variation in labor demand during the Great Recession (and during
the preceding boom). This behavior is in sharp contrast to low-skilled native-born workers who
show little response. Further, the reallocation of Mexican immigrants reduced spatial variation in
employment outcomes for natives living in cities with substantial Mexican-born share. This novel
empirical finding represents economically significant behavior, and it is quite robust to a number of
alternative interpretations.
The high degree of mobility among low-skilled Mexican-born individuals has a number of important implications. First, Mexican immigrants comprise an increasing share of the less skilled labor
force, and their growing presence has raised this group’s average geographic supply elasticity substantially. The rising share of the Mexican-born among the low-skilled therefore partially mitigates
concerns that the relative lack of mobility among less skilled workers leads to large disparities in
these workers’ earnings across local labor markets (Bound and Holzer 2000). As U.S. policy makers
seek ways to normalize the status of unauthorized workers and put in place legal channels for less
skilled temporary migrant workers, they should consider the geographic flexibility immigrants provide labor markets when they are free to change locations and employers in response to changing
demand conditions.
Second, this paper provides evidence that immigration inflows respond to demand conditions,
and it further shows that immigrants continue to alter their locations in response to labor demand
after residing in the country for some time. Although precisely disentangling the contributions of

33

internal migration and return migration to Mexico is difficult, the evidence shows that both channels
are important and that a substantial share of the geographic reallocation occurred among previously
resident immigrants. This additional layer of responsiveness is an understudied phenomenon, and
it deserves continued research.
Finally, these findings support previous evidence showing that immigrants’ location choices
respond to exogenous changes in labor market conditions (Cadena 2013, Cadena 2014). This endogenous supply response potentially confounds research designs relying on geographic variation
in immigration inflows to identify immigrants’ effects on natives. A further examination of the
methods used to overcome this empirical challenge is likely warranted given the growing body of
evidence favoring endogenous immigrant inflows.

34

References
Autor, David H. and Mark Duggan, “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in Unemployment,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (1), 157–206.
Bartel, Ann P., “Where Do the New U.S. Immigrants Live?,” Journal of Labor Economics, 1989, 7 (4), 371–391.
and Marianne J. Koch, “Internal Migration of U.S. Immigrants,” in John M. Abowd and Richard B.
Freeman, eds., Immigration, Trade and the Labor Market, University of Chicago Press, 1991, pp. 121–134.
Bartik, Timothy J, “Who Benefits From State and Local Economic Development Policies?,” Books from Upjohn
Press, 1991.
Belanger, Alain and Andrei Rogers, “The Internal Migration and Spatial Redistribution of the Foreign-Born
Population in the United States: 1965-70 and 1975-80,” International Migration Review, 1992, 26 (4), 1342–
1369.
Bewley, Truman F, Why wages don’t fall during a recession, Harvard University Press, 1999.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Lawrence F. Katz, “Regional Evolutions,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1992, 1992 (1), 1–75.
Böckerman, Petri and Mika Haapanen, “The Effect of Polytechnic Reform on Migration,” Journal of Population
Economics, 2013, 26 (2), 593–617.
Bohn, Sarah and Robert Santillano, “Do Local Immigration Laws Impact Employment and Wages? Evidence
from the 287(g) Program,” 2012. Public Policy Institute of California Working Paper.
, Magnus Lofstrom, and Stephen Raphael, “Did the 2007 Legal Arizona Workers Act Reduce the States
Unauthorized Immigrant Population?,” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Borjas, George J., “Does Immigration Grease the Wheels of the Labor Market?,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 2001, 2001 (1), 69–119.
, “The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact of Immigration on the Labor
Market,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (4), 1335–1374.
Bound, John and Harry J. Holzer, “Demand Shifts, Population Adjustments, and Labor Market Outcomes
during the 1980s,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2000, 18 (1), 20–54.
Cadena, Brian C., “Native Competition and Low-Skilled Immigrant Inflows,” Journal of Human Resources, 2013,
48 (4), 910–944.
, “Recent Immigrants as Labor Market Arbitrageurs: Evidence from the Minimum Wage,” Journal of Urban
Economics, 2014, 80, 1–12.
Card, David, “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Market Impacts of Higher Immigration,” Journal
of Labor Economics, 2001, 19 (1), 22–64.
, “Immigration and Inequality,” The American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 2009, 99 (2), 1–21.
and Ethan G. Lewis, “The Diffusion of Mexican Immigrants During the 1990s: Explanations and Impacts,”
in George J. Borjas, ed., Mexican Immigration to the United States, University of Chicago Press, 2007, pp. 193–
227.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Erik Hurst, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo, “Manufacturing Decline, Housing Booms,
and Non-Employment,” 2013. University of Chicago Manuscript.
Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, “The Employment Effects of Credit Market Disruptions: Firm-level Evidence from
the 2008-09 Financial Crisis,” 2013. University of California-Berkeley mimeo.
Daly, Mary, Bart Hobijn, and Brian Lucking, “Why Has Wage Growth Stayed Strong?,” FRBSF Economic
Letter, 2012, 10, 1–5.
Davis, Steven J., R. Jason Faberman, and John Haltiwanger, “Labor Market Flows in the Cross Section
and Over Time,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2012, 59, 1–18.
di Giovanni, Julian, Andrei A Levchenko, and Francesc Ortega, “A Global View of Cross-Border Migration,”
Journal of the European Economic Association, February 2015, 13 (1), 168–202.
Diamond, Rebecca, “The Determinants and Welfare Implications of US Workers’ Diverging Location Choices by
Skill: 1980-2000,” mimeo, 2012.

35

Elsby, Michael W, Donggyun Shin, and Gary Solon, “Wage Adjustment in the Great Recession,” 2013. NBER
working paper w19478.
Fort, Teresa C, John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “How Firms Respond to Business
Cycles: The Role of Firm Sage and Firm Size,” IMF Economic Review, 2013, 61 (3), 520–559.
Greenstone, Michael and Alexandre Mas, “Do Credit Market Shocks affect the Real Economy? QuasiExperimental Evidence from the Great Recession and Normal Economic Times,” MIT Working Paper, 2012,
(12-27).
Gurak, Douglas T. and Mary M. Kritz, “The Interstate Migration of U.S. Immigrants: Individual and Contextual Determinants,” Social Forces, 2000, 78 (3), 1017–1039.
Hanson, Gordon H. and Antonio Spilimbergo, “Illegal Immigration, Border Enforcement, and Relative Wages:
Evidence from Apprehensions at the U.S.-Mexico Border,” American Economic Review, 1999, 89 (5), 1337–1357.
Hickman, Daniel C, “The Effects of Higher Education Policy on the Location Decision of Individuals: Evidence
from Florida’s Bright Futures Scholarship Program,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 2009, 39 (5),
553–562.
Hoefer, Michael, Nancy Rytina, and Bryan C Baker, “Estimates of the Unauthorized Immigrant Population Residing in the United States: January 2011,” Population Estimates, Office of Immigration Statistics,
Department of Homeland Security, 2012.
Hoynes, Hilary, Douglas L Miller, and Jessamyn Schaller, “Who Suffers During Recessions?,” The Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 2012, 26 (3), 27–47.
Hoynes, Hilary W, “The Employment, Earnings, and Income of Less Skilled Workers over the Business Cycle,”
in David Card and Rebecca Blank, eds., Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform, Russell Sage Foundation,
2002, chapter 1, pp. 23–71.
Hyatt, Henry R. and James R. Spletzer, “The Recent Decline in Employment Dynamics,” US Census Bureau
Center for Economic Studies Paper CES-WP-13-03, 2013.
Jaeger, David A., “Green Cards and the Location Choices of Immigrants in the United States, 1971-2000,” Research
in Labor Economics, 2007. forthcoming.
Kennan, John and James R. Walker, “The Effect of Expected Income on Individual Migration Decisions,”
Econometrica, 2011, 79 (1), 211–251.
Kerr, William R, “Breakthrough Inventions and Migrating Clusters of Innovation,” Journal of Urban Economics,
2010, 67 (1), 46–60.
Kritz, Mary M. and June Marie Nogle, “Nativity Concentration and Internal Migration among the ForeignBorn,” Demography, 1994, 31 (3), 509–524.
Machin, Stephen, Kjell G Salvanes, and Panu Pelkonen, “Education and Mobility,” Journal of the European
Economic Association, 2012, 10 (2), 417–450.
Malamud, Ofer and Abigail Wozniak, “The Impact of College on Migration Evidence from the Vietnam Generation,” Journal of Human Resources, 2012, 47 (4), 913–950.
Maré, David C., Melanie Morten, and Steven Stillman, “Settlement Patterns and the Geographic Mobility
of Recent Migrants to New Zealand,” New Zealand Economic Papers, 2007, 41 (2), 163–196.
Massey, Douglas S, Jorge Durand, and Nolan J Malone, Beyond smoke and mirrors: Mexican immigration
in an era of economic integration, Russell Sage Foundation Publications, 2003.
McKenzie, David, Caroline Theoharides, and Dean Yang, “Distortions in the International Migrant Labor
Market: Evidence from Filipino Migration and Wage Responses to Destination Country Economic Shocks,”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2014, 6 (2), 49–75.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, “House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the U.S. Household Leverage
Crisis,” American Economic Review, August 2011, 101, 2132–2156.
and
, “What Explains High Unemployment? The Aggregate Demand Channel,” 2012. University of
Chicago mimeo.
Molloy, Raven, Christopher L Smith, and Abigail Wozniak, “Internal Migration in the United States,” The
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25 (3), 173–96.

36

Monras, Joan, “Economic Shocks and Internal Migration: Evidence from the Great Recession,” mimeo, 2013.
Munshi, Kaivan, “Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the U. S. Labor Market,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (2), 549–599.
Nekoei, Arash, “Immigrants’ Labor Supply and Exchange Rate Volatility,” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 2013, 5 (4), 144–164.
Notowidigdo, Matthew J., “The Incidence of Local Labor Demand Shocks,” 2013. University of Chicago
Manuscript.
Orrenius, Pia M. and Madeline Zavodny, “Mexican Immigrant Employment Outcomes Over the Business
Cycle,” The American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 2010, 100 (2), 316–320.
Passel, Jeffrey S., “Unauthorized Migrants: Numbers and Characteristics,” Technical Report, Pew Hispanic Center
2005.
, D’Vera Cohn, and Ana Gonzalez-Barrera, “Net Migration from Mexico Falls to Zero - and Perhaps
Less,” Technical Report, Pew Hispanic Center 2012.
Ritter, Joseph A. and Lowell J. Taylor, “Seniority-Based Layoffs as an Incentive Device,” Federal Reserve Bank
of St. Louis Working Papers, 1998, (1998-006A).
Rothstein, Jesse, “The Labor Market Four Years into the Crisis: Assessing Structural Explanations,” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, July 2012, 65 (3), 467–500.
Ruggles, Steven, J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder, and
Matthew Sobek, “Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0,” 2010. Machine-readable database.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
Stock, James H and Motohiro Yogo, “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression,” in Donald W. K.
Andrews and James H. Stock, eds., Identification and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of
Thomas Rothenberg, Cambridge University Press, 2005, pp. 80–108.
Tatsiramos, Konstantinos, “Geographic Labour Mobility and Unemployment Insurance in Europe,” Journal of
Population Economics, 2009, 22 (2), 267–283.
Topel, Robert H., “Local Labor Markets,” The Journal of Political Economy, 1986, 94 (3), S111–S143.
Watson, Tara, “Enforcement and Immigrant Location Choice,” NBER Working Paper, 2013, (19626).
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M, “Score diagnostics for linear models estimated by two stage least squares,” Advances in
Econometrics and Quantitative Economics, 1995, pp. 66–87.
Wozniak, Abigail, “Are College Graduates More Responsive to Distant Labor Market Opportunities?,” Journal
of Human Resources, 2010, 45 (4), 944–970.
Yagan, Danny, “Moving to Opportunity? Migratory Insurance over the Great Recession,” 2014.

37

Figure 1: Population Responses to Employment Shocks:
Native-born and Mexican-born Low-Skilled Men

.2
0
-.6

-.4

-.2

Chg. in log Group Population

0
-.2
-.6

-.4

Chg. in log Group Population

.2

.4

Low-Skilled Mexican-Born Men

.4

Low-Skilled Native-Born Men

-.6

-.4

-.2

0

.2

-.6

Change in log Group-Specific Employment

-.4

-.2

0

.2

Change in log Group-Specific Employment
Two cities fall above the graph range: Amarillo, TX (-0.097,0.694) and Birmingham, AL (-0.148,0.754).
Regression line based on all observations.

Source: Authors’ calculations from American Community Survey and County Business Patterns. Changes calculated as the long difference
in logs from 2006 to 2010. Individual sample, 95 city sample, and construction of group-specific employment changes described in the
text. Weighted to account for heteroskedasticity (details in appendix).

38

Figure 2: Falsification Test:
Population Change 2000-06 vs. Group-Specific Employment Change 2006-10

.6
.4
-.2

0

.2

Chg. in log Group Population 2000-2006

.6
.4
.2
-.2

0

Chg. in log Group Population 2000-2006

.8

Low-Skilled Mexican-Born Men

.8

Low-Skilled Native-Born Men

-.6

-.4

-.2

0

.2

-.6

Change in log Group-Specific Employment 2006-2010

-.4

-.2

0

.2

Change in log Group-Specific Employment 2006-2010
Three cities fall above the graph range: Baltimore, MD (-0.153,1.141), Monmouth, NJ (-0.222,1.106),
and Richmond, VA (-0.219,1.065). Regression line based on all observations.

Source: Authors’ calculations from American Community Survey and County Business Patterns. Falsification test with changes in
log(population) from 2000 to 2006 and changes in log(payroll employment) from 2006 to 2010. Individual sample, 95 city sample, and
construction of group-specific employment changes described in the text. Weighted to account for heteroskedasticity (details in appendix).

39

0
-.1
-.2
-.3

Change in log Total Low-Skilled Emp/Pop

.1

Figure 3: Mexican Mobility Smooths Employment Outcomes:
Change in Male Low-Skilled Emp/Pop Ratio vs. Change in Low-Skilled Employment

-.6

-.4

-.2

0

.2

Change in log Employment (Low-Skilled Industry Weights)
Below-Median Mexican-Born Population Share
Above-Median Mexican-Born Population Share

Source: Authors’ calculations from 2006-2010 American Community Survey and County Business Patterns. Changes in log(employment)
and log(employment to population ratio) are calculated from 2006 to 2010 for low-skilled men (without regard to nativity). Construction
of group-specific employment changes and weights described in the text and the appendix. Fitted lines are from a weighted regression
using efficiency weights based on the entire low-skilled male population in each city. See Table 7 for slope estimates.

40

Table 1: Average Yearly Mobility Rates
Native-Born
Panel A: Men, High-school or less
Immigration
Internal Migration
Emigration to Mexico
Total
Panel B: Men, Some college or more
Immigration
Internal Migration
Emigration to Mexico
Total
Panel C: Women, High-school or less
Immigration
Internal Migration
Emigration to Mexico
Total
Panel D: Women, Some college or more
Immigration
Internal Migration
Emigration to Mexico
Total

0.2%
3.8%
4.0%
0.3%
4.6%
4.8%
0.1%
3.6%
3.7%
0.2%
4.4%
4.5%

Foreign-Born Mexican-Born Other Foreign-Born

1.9%
3.3%
1.2%
6.4%

1.8%
3.0%
2.3%
7.0%

2.8%
4.7%
0.1%
7.7%

1.9%
3.3%
1.0%
6.2%

1.8%
2.9%
0.4%
5.1%

1.2%
2.4%
1.0%
4.5%

2.8%
4.3%
0.1%
7.2%

1.7%
3.1%
0.8%
5.6%

2.1%
3.6%
5.7%
2.9%
4.9%
7.8%
2.4%
3.2%
5.6%
2.9%
4.4%
7.3%

Sample: individuals aged 18-64, not enrolled in school, and not in group quarters at the time of the survey. “Immigration” and “Internal
Migration” are calculated using the 1-year mobility question in the 2006-2010 ACS. “Immigration” reports (individuals arriving in MSAs
from abroad) / (individuals living in an MSA in the survey year or prior year). “Internal Migration” reports (individuals moving across
MSA boundaries within the U.S. who arrived in or left an MSA) / (individuals living in an MSA in the survey year or prior year). These
are calculated for each ACS year and averaged across years. “Emigration to Mexico” is calculated using the 2010 Mexican Census and
the 2005 ACS, and reports (individuals moving from the U.S. to Mexico between June 2005 and June 2010) / (individuals living in the
U.S. in 2005), divided by 5 for the average yearly rate. The values are approximately zero for all but the Mexican-born.

41

Table 2: Population Response to Labor Demand Shocks
All

Dependent Variable: Change in log of Population
Native-Born
Foreign-Born
Mexican-Born

Other Foreign-Born

Panel A: Men, High-school or less
Change in log of Group-Specific
Employment

0.163***
(0.061)

0.041
(0.072)

0.388**
(0.169)

0.569***
(0.202)

-0.087
(0.264)

0.498***
(0.090)

0.463***
(0.092)

0.605***
(0.206)

0.171
(0.316)

0.717***
(0.209)

0.408***
(0.115)

0.196
(0.156)

0.616***
(0.186)

0.652***
(0.192)

0.505
(0.332)

0.475***
(0.126)

0.440***
(0.118)

0.826***
(0.271)

0.218
(0.505)

0.898***
(0.268)

Panel B: Men, Some college or more
Change in log of Group-Specific
Employment
Panel C: Women, High-school or less
Change in log of Group-Specific
Employment
Panel D: Women, Some college or more
Change in log of Group-Specific
Employment

Each listed coefficient represents a separate regression of the change in log(population) for the relevant group (from the American
Community Survey) from 2006-2010 on the change in log(group-specific employment) from County Business Patterns data over the same
time period, using the demographic group’s industry mix. All regressions include an intercept term and 95 city observations. Observations
are weighted by the inverse of the estimated sampling variance of the dependent variable (see appendix for details). Heteroskedasticityrobust standard errors in parentheses - *** significant at the 1% level, ** 5%, * 10%.

Table 3: Population Response to Labor Demand Shocks:
Low-Skilled Mexican-Born Men With Enclave and Policy Controls
Dependent Variable: Change in log Population - Mexican-born Men, High-school or less
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Change in log Employment

0.569***
(0.202)

Enclave Measure
(Mexican-born Share of City Population)

0.564***
(0.205)

0.506***
(0.186)

0.475***
(0.172)

0.058
(0.152)

0.009
(0.159)

-0.041
(0.166)

-0.057
(0.060)

-0.016
(0.032)

New State Immigrant Employment Legislation
New State 287g Policy

-0.119**
(0.051)

Constant

0.028
(0.035)

0.019
(0.047)

0.025
(0.046)

0.032
(0.045)

R-squared

0.206

0.207

0.223

0.264

Each column represents a separate regression of the change in log(population) among low-skilled Mexican-born men (2006-2010, using the
American Community Survey) on the change in log(group-specific employment) from County Business Patterns data over the same time
period, using that demographic group’s industry mix. All regressions include an intercept term and 95 city observations. Observations are
weighted by the inverse of the estimated sampling variance of the dependent variable (see appendix for details). Heteroskedasticity-robust
standard errors in parentheses - *** significant at the 1% level, ** 5%, * 10%.

42

Table 4: Population Response to Labor Demand Shocks - With Enclave and Policy Controls
All

Native-Born

Foreign-Born

Mexican-Born

Other Foreign-Born

Panel A: Men, High-school or less
Change in log of Group-Specific
Employment

0.150**
(0.063)

0.040
(0.071)

0.292**
(0.141)

0.475***
(0.172)

-0.084
(0.281)

0.479***
(0.074)

0.435***
(0.082)

0.631***
(0.187)

0.014
(0.285)

0.742***
(0.204)

0.395***
(0.121)

0.166
(0.157)

0.631***
(0.179)

0.743***
(0.202)

0.444
(0.348)

0.473***
(0.095)

0.423***
(0.102)

0.841***
(0.243)

0.315
(0.597)

0.939***
(0.248)

Panel B: Men, Some college or more
Change in log of Group-Specific
Employment
Panel C: Women, High-school or less
Change in log of Group-Specific
Employment
Panel D: Women, Some college or more
Change in log of Group-Specific
Employment

Each listed coefficient represents a separate regression of the change in log(population) for the relevant group (2006-2010, using the
American Community Survey) on the change in log(group-specific employment) from County Business Patterns data over the same time
period, using the demographic group’s industry mix. These specifications include the enclave and policy controls in Column (4) of Table
3. All regressions include an intercept term and 95 city observations. Observations are weighted by the inverse of the estimated sampling
variance of the dependent variable (see appendix for details). Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses - *** significant
at the 1% level, ** 5%, * 10%.

43

Table 5: Population Response to Labor Demand Shocks:
Bartik (1991) IV Estimates
All

Dependent Variable: Change in log Population
Native-Born
Foreign-Born
Mexican-Born

Other Foreign-Born

Panel A: Men, High-school or less
IV Estimate
Change in log of Group-Specific
Employment
P-value testing shock exogeneity
First Stage
Predicted Change in log Employment
Partial F Statistic

0.223
(0.166)
0.541

0.007
(0.090)
0.764

0.402
(0.409)
0.606

0.992**
(0.468)
0.029

-0.675**
(0.278)
0.072

4.196***
(0.702)
35.74

4.038***
(0.672)
36.13

4.590***
(0.912)
25.31

5.108***
(1.478)
11.94

4.717***
(0.699)
45.60

0.270*
(0.157)
0.316

0.411**
(0.192)
0.935

-0.237
(0.264)
0.017

-0.475
(0.387)
0.331

-0.161
(0.329)
0.081

2.651***
(0.542)
23.89

2.662***
(0.569)
21.91

2.985***
(0.486)
37.76

5.337***
(0.947)
31.79

2.727***
(0.449)
36.89

0.145
(0.168)
0.169

-0.405
(0.287)
0.040

0.273
(0.504)
0.315

1.811***
(0.665)
0.047

-0.979*
(0.556)
0.022

2.067***
(0.387)
28.59

2.068***
(0.405)
26.09

2.167***
(0.419)
26.76

2.502***
(0.675)
13.73

1.983***
(0.317)
39.17

-0.066
(0.378)
0.209

-0.054
(0.420)
0.368

-0.754
(0.716)
0.010

0.438
(0.919)
0.886

-1.092
(0.738)
0.056

1.081**
(0.447)
5.854

1.061**
(0.449)
5.578

1.580***
(0.439)
12.97

2.915***
(0.558)
27.33

1.364***
(0.377)
13.12

Panel B: Men, Some college or more
Change in log of Group-Specific
Employment
P-value testing shock exogeneity
First Stage
Predicted Change in log Employment
Partial F Statistic
Panel C: Women, High-school or less
Change in log of Group-Specific
Employment
P-value testing shock exogeneity
First Stage
Predicted Change in log Employment
Partial F Statistic
Panel D: Women, Some college or more
Change in log of Group-Specific
Employment
P-value testing shock exogeneity
First Stage
Predicted Change in log Employment
Partial F Statistic

Each listed coefficient represents a separate instrumental variables regression of the change in log(population) for the relevant group (20062010, using the American Community Survey) on the change in log(group-specific employment) from County Business Patterns data
over the same time period, using the demographic group’s industry mix. All regressions include an intercept term, 94 city observations,
and the enclave and policy controls in Column (4) of Table 3. These specifications omit Brazoria, TX, which is a substantial outlier in
the first stage; see appendix section A.8 for details. Observations are weighted by the inverse of the estimated sampling variance of the
dependent variable (see appendix for details). Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses - *** significant at the 1% level,
** 5%, * 10%. The excluded instrument is the predicted change in log(employment), based on Bartik (1991) and described in the text.
The listed “p-value testing shock exogeneity” is from a test of the null hypothesis that the OLS and IV slope coefficients are equal to
each other. The first-stage coefficient on the instrument and the partial F statistic are reported below the corresponding IV estimate.

44

Table 6: Population Response to Labor Demand Shocks:
Household Leverage IV Estimates
All

Dependent Variable: Change in log Population
Native-Born
Foreign-Born
Mexican-Born

Other Foreign-Born

Panel A: Men, High-school or less
IV Estimate
Change in log of Group-Specific
Employment
P-value testing shock exogeneity
First Stage
Household Leverage
Partial F Statistic

0.078
(0.102)
0.439

-0.092
(0.107)
0.184

0.312
(0.216)
0.890

0.546**
(0.252)
0.650

-0.216
(0.401)
0.681

-0.116***
(0.017)
48.03

-0.105***
(0.016)
41.34

-0.128***
(0.019)
44.71

-0.141***
(0.022)
41.78

-0.109***
(0.023)
21.98

0.509***
(0.155)
0.831

0.507***
(0.193)
0.693

0.604*
(0.344)
0.929

-0.367
(0.415)
0.302

0.958**
(0.422)
0.611

-0.060***
(0.016)
13.56

-0.058***
(0.017)
11.55

-0.064***
(0.015)
18.75

-0.119***
(0.016)
56.19

-0.056***
(0.017)
11.09

0.108
(0.169)
0.061

0.053
(0.214)
0.548

0.745**
(0.316)
0.674

1.104***
(0.318)
0.203

-0.065
(0.808)
0.440

-0.062***
(0.011)
34.11

-0.063***
(0.011)
34.52

-0.059***
(0.011)
29.60

-0.070***
(0.011)
41.46

-0.042***
(0.016)
7.174

0.552***
(0.178)
0.600

0.676***
(0.218)
0.167

0.607
(0.481)
0.485

0.916
(0.708)
0.299

0.383
(0.628)
0.387

-0.048***
(0.011)
17.26

-0.047***
(0.012)
15.51

-0.046***
(0.011)
17.76

-0.069***
(0.009)
55.74

-0.041***
(0.013)
10.28

Panel B: Men, Some college or more
Change in log of Group-Specific
Employment
P-value testing shock exogeneity
First Stage
Household Leverage
Partial F Statistic
Panel C: Women, High-school or less
Change in log of Group-Specific
Employment
P-value testing shock exogeneity
First Stage
Household Leverage
Partial F Statistic
Panel D: Women, Some college or more
Change in log of Group-Specific
Employment
P-value testing shock exogeneity
First Stage
Household Leverage
Partial F Statistic

Each listed coefficient represents a separate instrumental variables regression of the change in log(population) for the relevant group (20062010, using the American Community Survey) on the change in log(group-specific employment) from County Business Patterns data over
the same time period, using the demographic group’s industry mix. All regressions include an intercept term, 95 city observations, and
the enclave and policy controls in Column (4) of Table 3. Observations are weighted by the inverse of the estimated sampling variance
of the dependent variable (see appendix for details). Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses - *** significant at the
1% level, ** 5%, * 10%. The excluded instrument is average household leverage, calculated using household debt data from Equifax
and household income data from the IRS (see text for details). The listed “p-value testing shock exogeneity” is from a test of the null
hypothesis that the OLS and IV slope coefficients are equal to each other.The first-stage coefficient on the instrument and the partial F
statistic are reported below the corresponding IV estimate.

45

Table 7: Mexican Mobility Smooths Employment Outcomes:
Change in Low-Skilled Emp/Pop Ratio vs. Change in Payroll Employment
dependent variable: change in log employment/population (ACS)
City's Mexican population share
below-median
above-median

difference

(a) dependent variable sample: less-skilled men
change in log employment for
less-skilled men (CBP)

0.503***
(0.048)

0.299***
(0.043)

-0.204***
(0.064)

0.524***
(0.056)

0.309***
(0.043)

-0.215***
(0.070)

0.546***
(0.059)

0.342***
(0.047)

-0.204***
(0.075)

0.238***
(0.048)

0.246***
(0.046)

0.008
(0.066)

(b) dependent variable sample: native less-skilled men
change in log employment for
less-skilled men (CBP)
(c) dependent variable sample: native less-skilled men
change in log employment for
less-skilled native men (CBP)
(d) dependent variable sample: native high-skilled men
change in log employment for
high-skilled native men (CBP)

Examines the relationship between labor market outcomes (changes in employment probability) and labor demand shocks (changes in
payroll employment) separately for cities with above- and below-median Mexican population share to demonstrate the smoothing effect
of Mexican mobility. Smaller coefficients indicate more smoothing. Changes measured as the long difference from 2006-2010. Panel (a)
examines the relationship between low-skilled employment shocks and low-skilled men’s employment probability. Panel (b) examines
the relationship between low-skilled employment shocks and low-skilled native men’s employment probability. Panel (c) examines the
relationship between low-skilled native employment shocks and low-skilled native men’s employment. Panel (d) examines the relationship
between high-skilled native employment shocks and high-skilled native men’s employment.

46

Table 8: Population Response to Labor Demand Shocks 2000-2006:
Bartik (1991) IV Estimates
All

Dependent Variable: Change in log Population
Native-Born
Foreign-Born
Mexican-Born

Other Foreign-Born

Panel A: Men, High-school or less
IV Estimate
Change in log of Group-Specific
Employment
P-value testing shock exogeneity
First Stage
Predicted Change in log Employment
Partial F Statistic

0.322**
(0.145)
0.026

0.127
(0.139)
0.029

0.050
(0.584)
0.005

0.872***
(0.221)
0.638

-0.142
(0.775)
0.004

3.856***
(0.984)
15.37

4.005***
(0.856)
21.92

3.467***
(1.277)
7.368

4.207***
(1.129)
13.87

3.101**
(1.447)
4.590

0.356**
(0.139)
0.998

0.296*
(0.165)
0.965

0.040
(0.421)
0.003

1.495*
(0.767)
0.330

-0.090
(0.454)
0.001

3.485***
(1.084)
10.33

3.447***
(1.018)
11.47

3.777***
(1.377)
7.523

3.165***
(1.049)
9.109

3.865***
(1.433)
7.272

0.367
(0.227)
0.051

0.232
(0.234)
0.139

-0.266
(0.707)
0.001

0.561
(0.382)
0.466

-0.076
(0.707)
0.007

2.759***
(0.812)
11.55

2.837***
(0.756)
14.07

2.961***
(0.892)
11.02

3.648***
(0.742)
24.15

2.623**
(1.080)
5.898

0.492**
(0.240)
0.453

0.422*
(0.244)
0.637

-0.142
(0.665)
0.018

0.455
(0.842)
0.598

-0.240
(0.695)
0.016

2.603**
(1.291)
4.065

2.662**
(1.279)
4.335

2.637*
(1.366)
3.724

2.076**
(0.855)
5.897

2.737*
(1.438)
3.624

Panel B: Men, Some college or more
Change in log of Group-Specific
Employment
P-value testing shock exogeneity
First Stage
Predicted Change in log Employment
Partial F Statistic
Panel C: Women, High-school or less
Change in log of Group-Specific
Employment
P-value testing shock exogeneity
First Stage
Predicted Change in log Employment
Partial F Statistic
Panel D: Women, Some college or more
Change in log of Group-Specific
Employment
P-value testing shock exogeneity
First Stage
Predicted Change in log Employment
Partial F Statistic

Each listed coefficient represents a separate instrumental variables regression of the change in log(population) from 2000 to 2006 for the
relevant group (from the American Community Survey) on the change in log(group-specific employment) from County Business Patterns
data over the same period, using the demographic group’s industry mix. All regressions include an intercept term, 95 city observations,
and the enclave control listed in Column (2) of Table 3. Observations are weighted by the inverse of the estimated sampling variance of
the dependent variable (see appendix for details). Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses - *** significant at the 1%
level, ** 5%, * 10%. We use the predicted change in log(employment), based on Bartik (1991) and described in the text, as an instrument
for the change in log(group-specific employment). The listed “p-value testing shock exogeneity” is from a test of the null hypothesis that
the OLS and IV slope coefficients are equal to each other. The first-stage coefficient on the instrument and the partial F statistic are
reported below the corresponding IV estimate.

47

Table 9: Mexican Mobility Smooths Employment Outcomes 2000-2006:
Bartik (1991) IV Estimates
dependent variable: change in log employment/population (ACS)
City's Mexican population share
below-median
above-median

difference

(a) dependent variable sample: less-skilled men
change in log employment for
less-skilled men (CBP)

0.526**
(0.241)

-0.108
(0.215)

-0.634**
(0.323)

0.285***
(0.078)

0.175
(0.128)

-0.111
(0.150)

0.289***
(0.079)

0.190
(0.142)

-0.099
(0.162)

0.140**
(0.063)

0.105*
(0.063)

-0.035
(0.089)

(b) dependent variable sample: native less-skilled men
change in log employment for
less-skilled men (CBP)
(c) dependent variable sample: native less-skilled men
change in log employment for
less-skilled native men (CBP)
(d) dependent variable sample: native high-skilled men
change in log employment for
high-skilled native men (CBP)

Examines the relationship between labor market outcomes (changes in employment probability) and changes in payroll employment
separately for cities with above- and below-median Mexican population share to demonstrate the smoothing effect of Mexican mobility.
This table reports the results of specifications run using data from 2000-2006 for both the dependent and independent variables. Smaller
coefficients indicate more smoothing. We use the predicted change in log(employment), based on Bartik (1991) and described in the text,
as an instrument for the change in log(group-specific employment). Panel (a) examines the relationship between low-skilled employment
shocks and low-skilled men’s employment probability. Panel (b) examines the relationship between low-skilled employment shocks and
low-skilled native men’s employment probability. Panel (c) examines the relationship between low-skilled native employment shocks and
low-skilled native men’s employment. Panel (d) examines the relationship between high-skilled native employment shocks and high-skilled
native men’s employment.

48

Table 10: Channels of Population Response:
Male Low-Skilled Mexican-Born Population
(1)

(2)

Total Elasticity
Total Elasticity
(Chg. In log Pop..) (Prop. Chg. In Pop..)

(3)

(4)

(5)

New Arrival
Sorting

Change in
Pre-2007 Arrivals

(6)

Net Aging In

(7)

Internal Inflows Internal Outflows

Change in log Employment

0.569***
(0.202)

0.528***
(0.177)

0.115***
(0.024)

0.413**
(0.174)

-0.025
(0.019)

0.025
(0.060)

0.087**
(0.034)

Constant

0.028
(0.035)

0.034
(0.033)

0.072***
(0.007)

-0.039
(0.031)

0.005
(0.007)

0.090***
(0.018)

-0.066***
(0.007)

21.8%
N/A
0.132

78.2%
100.0%
0.142

-4.8%
-6.1%
0.013

Share of Total Elasticity
Share of Pre-2007 Elasticity
R-squared

N/A
N/A
0.203

100.0%
N/A
0.178

4.7%
6.1%
0.001

16.5%
21.1%
0.055

Column (1) reproduces the corresponding estimate from Table 2. Column (2) replaces the change in log(population) with the proportional
change in population. As described in the text, Columns (3)-(7) decompose the overall response in column (2) into different migration
components. All other specification details are identical to Table 2. The dependent variable in column (7) is the growth in the local
population due to internal outflows, i.e. the negative of the proportional change in population due to outflows. A test of the null
hypothesis that the sum of the coefficients in columns (6) and (7) is zero returns a p-value of 0.108.

Table 11: Propensity Score Reweighting of Less Skilled Native Men to Match Less Skilled
Mexican-Born Men’s Observables
(1)
(2)
No Reweighting

Mexican-Born

(3)

(4)

Age Only

(5)
(6)
(7)
Reweighted Natives Based on Listed Covariates
Rent vs. Own
Only

Family
Structure Only

All Prior
Covariates

(8)

(9)

Outside Birth
State

Outside Birth
State and Other
Covariates

Native-Born

Skill Only

Proportional Change in
Group-Specific Employment

0.569***
(0.202)

0.041
(0.072)

-0.028
(0.101)

0.119
(0.084)

-0.047
(0.094)

0.047
(0.067)

0.014
(0.122)

0.211*
(0.119)

0.385
(0.282)

Constant

0.569***
(0.202)

-0.013
(0.010)

-0.022
(0.015)

-0.022**
(0.011)

0.010
(0.012)

-0.017
(0.011)

-0.002
(0.022)

-0.026
(0.020)

-0.018
(0.054)

R-squared

0.203

0.005

0.001

0.028

0.004

0.005

0.000

0.031

0.023

Columns (1) and (2) reproduce corresponding estimates from Table 2 for Mexican-born and native-born less skilled men. Columns (3)(7) present population responses for natives, reweighted to match Mexican-born individuals’ based on the listed characteristics. Column
(8) provides population responses among natives living outside of their state of birth, and in column (9) these populations are further
reweighted to match the same set of covariates as in column (7). All other specification details are identical to Table 2. See text and
appendix for details.

49

