NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ARE WOMEN MORE ATTRACTED TO COOPERATION THAN MEN?
Peter J. Kuhn
Marie-Claire Villeval
Working Paper 19277
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19277

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

We are grateful to Philip Babcock, David Cooper, Uri Gneezy, Dorothea KuÌˆbler, Shelly Lundberg,
Matthias Sutter, Lise Vesterlund and participants at the 6th European Workshop on Experimental and
Behavioral Economics in Munich, the conference of the European Association of Labour Economists
at Bonn, the European meeting of the Economic Science Association in Cologne, the Broom Center
conference on Gender and Family in the New Millennium in Santa Barbara, the ASFEE conference
in Montpellier, and seminar participants at Oxford University, THEMA in Paris, WZB Berlin, UT
Austin, UN Reno, Wharton, DIW Berlin and University of Hamburg for useful comments on an earlier
version of this paper. We thank Sylvain Ferriol for programming this experiment. This research program
has been supported by a grant from the French National Research Agency (ANR, EMCO program,
HEIDI grant) and was performed within the framework of the LABEX CORTEX (ANR-11-LABX-0042)
of Université de Lyon, within the program “Investissements d'Avenir” (ANR-11-IDEX-007) operated
by the French National Research Agency (ANR). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19277.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Peter J. Kuhn and Marie-Claire Villeval. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Are Women More Attracted to Cooperation Than Men?
Peter J. Kuhn and Marie-Claire Villeval
NBER Working Paper No. 19277
August 2013
JEL No. C91,J16,J24,J31,M5
ABSTRACT
We conduct a real-effort experiment where participants choose between individual compensation and
team-based pay. In contrast to tournaments, which are often avoided by women, we find that women
choose team-based pay at least as frequently as men in all our treatments and conditions, and significantly
more often than men in a well-defined subset of those cases. Key factors explaining gender patterns
in attraction to co-operative incentives across experimental conditions include women’s more optimistic
assessments of their prospective teammate’s ability and men’s greater responsiveness to efficiency
gains associated with team production. Women also respond differently to alternative rules for team
formation in a manner that is consistent with stronger inequity aversion

Peter J. Kuhn
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Barbara
2127 North Hall
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
pjkuhn@econ.ucsb.edu
Marie-Claire Villeval
GATE, CNRS, University of Lyon,
93, Chemin de Mouilles,
69130, Ecully,
France
and IZA
villeval@gate.cnrs.fr

1. Introduction
A considerable body of recent research has shown that women tend to shy away from
competitive work environments, and tend to perform worse than men when placed in those
environments (see for example Gneezy, Niederle and Rustichini, 2003; Gneezy and Rustichini,
2004; and Niederle and Vesterlund, 2007). In most of this research, women’s avoidance of
competition is attributed to a combination of distastes for competition and lower levels of
confidence in their relative abilities. This avoidance of competition has been offered as an
explanation for the continuing underrepresentation of women in top economic or political
positions in modern societies.
If indeed women’s talents are sometimes wasted because they avoid competitive
environments, it seems important to know which types of work environments do attract women,
and how women fare relative to men in those environments. In this paper we study women’s
choices to enter a work environment characterized by team incentives, and the role of women’s
perceived relative abilities in those choices. In our real-effort laboratory experiment, participants
can choose to receive either an individual piece rate or an equal share of a group’s output, after
experiencing each compensation scheme successively. In many respects, the design of our
experiment is similar to Niederle and Vesterlund’s (2007) study of selection into competitive
environments. The main contrast is that, instead of choosing between individual pay and a
situation where workers’ rewards depend negatively on their co-workers’ performance, in our
experiment the participants choose between individual pay and an environment where workers’
pay depends positively on their co-workers’ performance.
In addition to addressing a gap in the literature on self-selection into pay schemes –which
has focused almost exclusively on selection into tournaments--, our focus on selection into team
pay is motivated in part by the increasing use of explicit team-based incentives in the workplace.
For example, Lawler et al. (2003) report that the share of Fortune 1000 companies using workgroup or team incentives for more than a fifth of their workers more than doubled, from 21 to 51
percent, between 1990 and 2002. Well known studies of this transition towards team pay at the
firm- and industry level include Boning et al. (2007) for U.S. steel minimills, and Berg et al.
(1996) and Hamilton et al. (2003) for the apparel industry.1 More broadly, though, our objective
is to understand gender differences in selection into work environments where incentives for
cooperation versus competition can be implicit features of the employment contract, or are
1

Interestingly, teams also play an increasingly dominant role in the production of scientific information (Wuchty et
al., 2007).

2

deeply ingrained in corporate cultures. We hope thereby to shed light on the causes of gender
differences in occupational choice and wages, and on how changes in human resource
management policy and corporate culture might make work environments more female-friendly.
While it might be tempting to imagine that women are disproportionately attracted to
cooperative environments because they have more other-regarding preferences (e.g. Andreoni
and Vesterlund 2007), our results are more complex than this. On the one hand, we do find that
women are significantly more likely than men to select team-based compensation in our baseline
condition, where team production offers no efficiency advantages over individual production.
Statistically, this gap can be explained by gender differences in confidence: essentially, the same
confidence deficit that pushes women out of competitions pulls women into teams, where it is
beneficial to have an abler teammate. On the other hand, men become much more likely to join
teams and the gender gap vanishes when we introduce an instrumental reason for joining teams,
in particular an efficiency advantage to team production. We also find that women’s relative
propensities to join a team are strongly affected by the experimental ‘rules’ for team formation.
Specifically, when we replace Niederle-Vesterlund’s group formation procedure by an arguably
more realistic one where teams are formed by mutual consent, women’s team formation rates
increase dramatically. We show that this phenomenon is consistent with a model in which
women are more inequity-averse than men.
Other findings include the following. In contrast to a number of tournament studies, we find
a zero causal effect of the team environment on women’s absolute and relative task performance.
This is true both for the pure treatment effect of teams, i.e. when participants are randomly
assigned to different pay schemes, and for the treatment-on-the-treated (ToT) effect of teams, i.e.
the causal effect of team compensation for the subset of workers who self-select into teams when
choice is voluntary. At the same time, consistent with simple payoff-maximizing behavior, we
find strong and consistent evidence of adverse selection into teams: taking experimental
conditions as given, abler participants of both genders tend to avoid teams, and participants who
thought their partner was able tend to join teams. As a result, self-selected teams perform worse
than randomly-assigned teams, and worse than subjects who choose to avoid teams. Also, since
adverse selection is stronger among men, voluntarily-formed female teams outperform selfselected male teams. Notably, this is not because women respond better (or less adversely) to the
team environment; it is purely a selection effect. Taken together, these findings may be useful
information for the design of work environments that are attractive to workers of both genders.

3

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the related
literature. Section 3 develops the experimental design and procedures. Sections 4 to 7 present the
results. Section 8 discusses these results and concludes.

2. Related Literature
As we have noted, the literature on gender and methods of pay has been dominated by a
comparison between piece rates --where compensation depends only on one’s own performance- and tournaments, where an individual’s reward depends negatively on her co-workers’
performance. In a well known early study, Gneezy et al. (2003) found that women were less
effective than men in competitive environments, despite the fact that their performance was
similar to men’s in a noncompetitive environment. This result has been confirmed for a variety
of tasks and subject populations, including schoolchildren (Gneezy and Rustichini 2004).
Concerning selection into competitive environments, Niederle and Vesterlund (2007) provide
evidence that women “shy away” from competition in a task involving adding up sets of twodigit numbers. Men are much more likely to enter a payoff-equivalent tournament than women in
their study, and the authors attribute this both to gender differences in overconfidence and tastes
for competition. This result has also been replicated in a variety of contexts and populations,
including children as young as three years old (Sutter and Rützler, 2010), but the effect varies
with factors such as school type (Booth and Nolen, 2012a and b) and runners’ ages (Garratt et
al., 2013), suggesting a possible role for culture.2 Villeval (2012) provides a survey of this
literature.
Compared to the literature on gender and tournaments, the economics literature on gender
and teams is relatively sparse.3 Turning first to studies of gender and performance in teams, most
existing work focuses on a different question from ours: Rather than comparing an individual’s
performance in a team versus a non-team environment, the typical approach is to take the team
environment as given and ask how a team’s gender mix affects its performance. Thus, for
example, Ivanova-Stenzel and Kübler (2011) find that compared to a single-sex environment,

2

Additional evidence of cultural influences is provided by Gneezy et al. (2009) who show that this gender
difference is reversed in experiments performed in a matrilineal society. Also, no gender difference in
competitiveness between boys and girls is found in Sweden (Dreber et al., 2012) nor in Columbia (Cardenas et al.,
2013).
3
While there is a large literature in psychology and management science on gender and team performance, most of
it is based on observational studies of behavior in existing teams (not self-selection into teams), and teams are rarely
incentivized (see Graves and Powell, 2007, for a review).

4

gender diversity raises the gender performance gap in a team pay setting. Perhaps surprisinigly,
this effect is reversed when competition between teams (“team competition”) is introduced.
Interestingly, other studies of gender mix and team performance, including Bornstein et al.
(2002), Hoogedoorn et al. (2011), Apesteguia et al. (2012) and Delfgaauw et al. (2013) also
focus their attention on the case of team competition, an environment that is strategically much
more complex than pure team-based pay.4 There is also a literature on gender differences in
public goods games, which share important features with the team incentives problem. A recent
survey is provided in Table 4 of Croson and Gneezy (2009) (see also Eckel and Grossman,
2008). The results do not show systematic gender differences, though we note that the context is
very different from ours: ‘Teams’ have 4 or 5 members, the individually rational contribution
level is zero, and there is no real-effort task.
Two additional related papers pose the following question: How does grouping workers into
teams affect the gender gap in willingness to compete? Specifically, Dargnies (2012) first lets
her subjects choose between an individual piece rate and a two-person individual tournament,
then lets the same subjects choose between an individual piece rate and a tournament between
two two-person teams. She finds that the gender gap in tournament entry is lower under team
competition than individual competition. Healy and Pate (2011) allow one group of subjects to
choose between an individual piece rate and competing against four others in a tournament. A
second group of subjects choose between a two-person group piece rate and a tournament
composed of four two-person groups. They found a smaller gender gap in tournament entry in
the second case. Thus, in both cases, making subjects compete as teams mitigates women’s
aversion to competition. Neither paper, however, allows subjects to choose a pure group pay
option (without competition attached), so subjects’ preferences for this simpler option cannot be
elicited.5

4

In the linear revenue-sharing scheme that characterizes most team pay experiments, an individual’s marginal
financial return from producing an extra unit of output is just the price of a unit divided by the number of team
members. Computing the marginal return in a tournament requires estimating the derivative of the probability of
winning with respect to own output, which depends on the distribution of output levels and abilities of all the
competitors. Combining tournaments and teams extends this complexity even further, making it difficult to infer
subjects’ underlying preferences from experimental behavior, which is a key objective of our paper.
5
It is interesting to ask whether team competition or pure team pay describes a larger share of real-world jobs that
women might consider taking. In that regard it is hard to see that group competition, either between or within firms,
plays a large role in the many ‘helping’ occupations where women remain highly overrepresented. That said,
converting individual tournaments into group tournaments might be a useful tool for making situations that are
inherently competitive more attractive to women, as suggested by Dargnies and Healy and Pate.

5

Finally, to our knowledge only two papers allow subjects to choose between (pure) team pay
and some alternative incentive scheme. Wozniak et al. (2010) include team-based pay as the
least ‘competitive’ of five options available to subjects; they find that men are more likely than
men to choose tournaments, and women are (insignificantly) more likely to choose team pay.
An unusual feature of Wozniak et al.’s design, however, is that participants knew they would be
randomly grouped with others who could be working under different pay schemes than their
own; it is not clear how realistically this represents team or tournament compensation in action.
Dohmen and Falk (2011) study agents’ choices between fixed and variable pay; in different
treatments the variable pay option was either an individual piece rate, a tournament, or a group
piece rate. They find that men choose the variable pay option more frequently than women, with
an especially strong preference in the case of tournaments. While informative on a number of
questions, both Wozniak et al. and Dohmen and Falk’s designs make it difficult to infer a
subject’s preferences between a situation where she is rewarded for her own efforts (i.e. an
individual piece rate) and a situation where she is rewarded for the performance of her group (i.e.
a group piece rate), which is the question at the heart of our paper.6
Two additional unique features of our study are the fact that we explore the effects of adding
an efficiency advantage to team production, and the consequences of alternative team-formation
processes. Allowing for efficiency advantages seems important, since otherwise it is difficult to
understand why many firms use group-based compensation even when good measures of
individual performance are available.7 And as it turns out, we find that even small efficiency
advantages can generate large changes in behavior, especially for men. Similarly, a common
issue that arises in experimental studies of selection into both teams and tournaments is how to
allocate all the individuals who choose to join (say) a team to one or more partners. Approaches
include matching each team chooser with the past output of a random ‘mandated’ team player
6

Wozniak et al.’s design only lets us see subjects’ top choice from a menu; thus it does not provide a ranking of
preferences for team versus individual pay for the large share of subjects who chose a tournament. Dohmen and
Falk’s design never allows subjects to choose between individual and group piece rates; this can generate very
different selection patterns. For example, in their design it is a dominant strategy for high-ability individuals to pick
group pay over fixed pay (because they can do better under team pay even if their teammate does nothing); this is
consistent with their finding of strong positive selection into teams based on ability. In contrast, we find negative
selection into teams because abler subjects have the option of receiving variable individual pay, which is not
available when the team option is present in Dohmen-Falk. Thus, it is not straightforward to translate selection
patterns from one context to the other.
7
Hamilton et al. (2003) is one well known example, and the increasing proliferation of group incentives during a
period when the availability and usability of electronic information on individual workers’ performance expanded
dramatically suggests that lack of information about individual performance is not firms’ main motivation for using
group incentives.

6

(e.g. Niederle-Vesterlund); randomly pairing all team choosers, with various ‘fixes’ for solitary
choosers and odd numbers of choosers (Dargnies, Dohmen-Falk); and randomly implementing
the decision of one prospective team member (Healy-Pate). We implement the first of these plus
a new approach --requiring mutual consent for team formation—, which strikes us as more
representative of real-world team- and partnership formation processes. Again, we find
surprisingly large differences that also vary by gender. We argue that these differences actually
shed useful light on the types of social preferences that might explain some gender differences in
team choices.
Finally, we note that a handful of other studies have examined the team-formation process in
both the lab and the field without focusing on gender differences. For example, Hamilton et al. ’s
(2003) well-known field study of a textile plant argues that neither free riding nor adverse
selection were significant factors in voluntarily-formed teams, which is consistent with our
results for free riding but not for adverse selection.8 In a field experiment involving
farmworkers, however, Bandiera et al. (2013) did find that when the incentives facing an entire
team are strengthened, assortative matching of team members by ability is increased. Cooper and
Jabs (2010) studied the determinants of selection into teams in a sample of entrepreneurs; in their
experiment there is a large (50%) efficiency advantage to team production. Consistent with our
results in the presence of efficiency advantages, they find no gender difference.
In sum, to our knowledge ours is the first experiment that directly presents subjects with a
choice between two simple options: working under an individual piece rate (where your reward
depends on your performance only) and working under a group piece rate (where your pay
depends on your team’s performance). We argue that subjects’ decisions between these two
strategically simple options shed new light on gender differences in the tendency to gravitate into
situations where co-operation rather than competition is rewarded, and on the role of underlying
beliefs and preferences in accounting for those gender gaps.

8

This finding may be related to the fact that the firm was in the process of converting its entire production process
to a team-based one. Workers may have perceived that early adoption of the team process would help them keep
their jobs during the transition.

7

3. Experimental Design
The design is partly inspired by Niederle and Vesterlund (2007). At the beginning of each
session, we elicit the participants’ risk attitudes using the Holt and Laury (2002) procedure.9
Then, each participant enters his/her first name on the computer before being paired with another
participant who is located in another room; in essentially all cases this revealed the participant’s
gender.10 Participants remain paired with the same co-participant for the entire session. The
physical location and timing of participants’ arrival and departure from the two rooms were
arranged to make it extremely unlikely they would ever see any individual participant from the
other room.
In a session, participants have to perform a task during sequences of 4 minutes. This task
consists of decoding numbers into letters according to a code which changes repeatedly (see
instructions in the online Appendix). Two features of this task made it well suited for the current
experiment. First, the task is gender neutral: unlike, for example, some sports activities, it is not
commonly associated with any particular gender. Second, previous experiments with this task
show no evidence of learning-by-doing after a short practice period (Charness et al., 2013).
Although our main results are based on between-subject comparisons, this lack of learning
simplifies the interpretation of the within-subject comparisons we make.
Before the experiment begins, participants are given three minutes to practice the task. At
any time, they have the option to read magazines that are available in their cubicle or to surf the
Internet instead of performing the task (this was made common information in the instructions
but only one participant used this opportunity). Each session consists of six parts, always in the
same order. One of these six parts is randomly selected for payment at the end of the session.
Participants observe their own outputs in all parts but do not learn their co-participant’s actual
output in any part until the very end of the session. Immediately below, we describe the entire
experimental design for the Baseline (B) treatment. Aspects that were changed for our Efficiency
Advantages (EA) treatment are described after that.
9

The participants have to make 10 successive choices between two paired lotteries, “option A” and “option B”.
The payoffs for option A are either €2 or €1.60, whereas the riskier option B pays either €3.85 or €0.10. In the first
decision, the probability of the high payoff for both options is 1/10. In the second decision the probability increases
to 2/10. Similarly, the chance of receiving the high payoff for each decision increases as the number of the decision
increases. A risk neutral participant should cross over from option A to option B at the fifth decision.
10
Because we expected team-formation decisions to depend on the teammate’s gender as well as the participant’s,
we were careful not to invite people with gender-neutral names. All participants, except four (all men), reported
their true name (this could be checked with the list of participants registered in each session). Three participants
changed their name but kept a male name. One participant chose a pseudo that was not a name; identification of the
gender could have been more difficult.

8

The Baseline (B) Treatment
Parts 1 and 2 of the experiment are designed to measure the gender gap in participants’ task
performance in the individual and team environments respectively, in a situation where subjects
are assigned to each pay scheme by the experimenter. Specifically, in Part 1 participants are paid
a piece rate: each participant’s pay for this part (if this part is selected for actual payment) is
given by YiI = rI Qi1, where Qi1 is his own output. We set rI = 20 Euro-cents. In Part 2,
participants are teamed with their co-participant to perform the task; they share the output of the
team equally. In other words, individual i is paid YiT = rT (Qi1 + Qi2)/ 2 for her work during this
part, where Qi2 is her co-participant’s output. Throughout the baseline treatment, we set rT = rI =
20 Euro-cents; thus there is no efficiency advantage to team production. For any convex
disutility-of-effort function, individually rational behavior implies that participants should exert
less effort in the team setting than the individual piece rate.
Part 3 is the first of two key elements in our experiment. Its goal is to study participants’
revealed preference for teamwork in the simplest possible environment. To this end, in Part 3
participants choose between being paid an individual piece-rate (as in Part 1) or according to a
team-based payment scheme (as in Part 2). Then, they perform the task. If they have chosen
teamwork, their performance in this part is added to the output of their co-participant in part 2;
this approach follows Niederle-Vesterlund (2007) and provides a guaranteed ‘co-worker’ for all
participants who choose the team environment. This is clearly explained to the participants, and
comprehension tests indicate it is well understood. Thus, Part 3 measures participants’ responses
to an important feature of team production: the fact that their pay will depend on their partner’s
performance while that partner is working under team incentives. At the same time, Part 3 does
not tell us about participants’ responses to another typical feature of team production: the fact
that choosing to join a team could also affect other workers’ monetary payoffs. This is because,
by construction, neither subjects’ team-formation nor their effort decisions in Part 3 have any
effect on their partners’ payoffs.11
In Part 4, participants do not perform the task; instead they simply choose the payment
scheme that will apply to their Part 1 performance: individual pay versus team pay based on

11

This follows directly from the fact that every subject is paired with their partner’s pervious-period actions, and
applies also to Niederle-Vesterlund’s experiment. In their context, it has the (perhaps surprising) implication that all
four contestants can win the tournament if they enter: To win, each player simply has to beat the highest output
achieved by others in their group in the previous period.

9

their partner’s Part 1 performance. Our motivation was to test for subjects’ expectations of freeriding by their partner: If they expected their partner to free-ride when on a team, they should be
more willing to choose team production based on their partner’s Part 1 output (when he is paid
individually) than on his Part 2 output.12 Since expectations about relative ability are crucial in
decision-making, between Parts 4 and 5 we administer a short interim questionnaire. Participants
are asked to estimate the number of problems they believe their co-participant solved correctly in
Parts 1 and 2. They are rewarded 50 Euro-cents for each correct answer (plus or minus one unit).
Part 5 is the second key element of our experimental design. Its purpose is to study
participants’ team preferences in a richer context that more closely mimics real-world processes
of team formation. Here, in contrast with Part 3, participants in a team are paid based on their
teammate’s actual output in the current period; since this requires an active teammate, teams are
formed only when both partners agree to form a team. If a team is formed, subjects are informed
of this, then both subjects work and are paid equally according to the team formula. If no team is
formed, participants are informed of that, then both partners work and are paid on an individual
basis.13 As one might expect, a cost of Part 5’s greater realism is greater complexity. In addition
to the factors affecting team choice explored in Part 3, subjects’ team choices can now depend on
their social preferences, since their actions now affect their partner’s payoffs. Later in the paper,
we sketch out a simple model of social preferences and show how a comparison of Part 3 and
Part 5 behavior sheds light on the nature and strength of those preferences, by gender.
Finally, Part 6 is the same as Part 5, except that after teams are formed (but before
production occurs), participants who have agreed to form teams are given two minutes of
unstructured time during which to exchange instant messages.14 Its goal was to test whether the
opportunity to socialize affects team membership and performance.15 In fact we found no
significant differences between subjects’ rates of team choice in Parts 5 and 6. Accordingly, after
12

Of course, if preferences for the team environment also depend on whether the work is actually performed, Part 4
behavior could differ from Part 3 for that reason as well.
13
If compensation is to be based on current performance of all team members, some team-formation rule is required.
While it might be interesting to explore the effects of other rules (such as a rule that makes teams the default unless
both parties exit, or majority rule in the case of larger teams), the mutual-consent rule seems the most realistic to us
for the formation of two-person partnerships. Note that analogous rules are also required to form “real” tournaments,
where payoffs are based on the current performance of those who have agreed to join.
14
Participants are informed of this opportunity before they choose their compensation mode. Communication occurs
after the payment scheme has been chosen because we wanted to create a more social team environment, but we
were not interested in how the participants’ choices to join the team could be directly influenced by communication.
15
In order to keep participants’ choices confidential within rooms, we gave all participants an option to type text on
their computer during this period. All participants had to wait till the communication period was ended before
beginning Part 6 production: choosing individual compensation did not allow individuals to finish earlier.

10

presenting descriptive results for all Parts of the experiment, we focus most of our detailed
analysis of team choice on Parts 3 and 5.16
Table 1 summarizes the time structure of the game.
(Insert Table 1 about here)
The Efficiency Advantage (EA) treatment
This treatment is identical to the Baseline (B) treatment, with the exception that team
production has a 10 percent productivity advantage over individual production. Specifically, the
individual piece rate remains the same at rI = 20 Euro-cents, but the team piece rate is raised to rT
= 22 Euro-cents. The purpose of the Efficiency Advantage (EA) treatment is to study selection
into teams in a setting where technological factors favor production in groups (Lazear, 1999).
Procedures
The experiment consisted of 10 sessions conducted at the laboratory of the GATE (Groupe
d’Analyse et de Théorie Economique) institute in Lyon, France. We invited undergraduate
students from the local engineering and business schools via the ORSEE software (Greiner,
2004). Due to no-shows, between 14 and 20 individuals actually took part in each session, for a
total of 174 participants. The B treatment was implemented in 5 sessions involving 86
participants and the EA treatment in 5 sessions with a total of 88 participants.17 We organized
only gender-mixed sessions. To guarantee a balance between genders, the number of participants
of each gender in each session could not deviate by more than 2 from the other gender. In the B
treatment, we have collected 16 individual observations of women paired with women, 14
individual observations of men paired with men, and 56 observations of persons in mixed pairs.
In the EA treatment, the corresponding values are 22, 24, and 42, respectively.
We used our two contiguous laboratories. To preserve anonymity, upon arrival the first 9
participants were assigned to a room and the next ones were directed to the other room and we

16

An additional consideration which complicates the interpretation of Part 6 is that this is the only part of the
experiment where participants have received information about any of their partner’s decisions: specifically, those
participants who picked ‘team’ in Part 5 will know whether their partner picked ‘team’ in Part 5. Thus, participants
could, in principle, use their Part 6 team-choice decisions either to reward or punish their partner’s Part 5 teamchoice decision (recall that partners’ effort levels are not revealed till the very end of the experiment).
17
Due to a technical breakdown in one B session, we had to stop the session after Part 4. In our results, we include
data from Parts 1-4 of that session, which results in 10 more observations for Parts 1-4 than for Parts 5 and 6 of the
B treatment. We have replicated all our results excluding all the data from this session; the results are virtually
identical.

11
proceeded to the necessary adjustments before distributing the instructions.18 As such, since each
participant was paired with someone from the opposite room, two or more friends showing up at
the same time could not be paired together.
The experiment was computerized, using the REGATE software (Zeiliger, 2000). The
participants first participated in the Holt and Laury (2002) test to elicit their risk preferences, as
the uncertainty regarding the potential partner’s ability could affect the choice of the team
payment scheme. Then, the instructions for the main task were distributed. They specified that
there would be six parts and that one of these parts would be selected for payment at the end of
the session, but only the instructions for the Part 1 were included. A quiz was used to check the
understanding of the instructions and answers were checked individually. Participants practiced
during three minutes to familiarize themselves with the task. Then, they were required to type
their first name and after being randomly paired with a participant located in the other room, they
were informed of the first name of this co-participant; they knew that they would be paired with
the same participant throughout the session. The instructions for each new part were distributed
after completion of the previous part. At the end of Part 6 and after completion of an exit
questionnaire, the participants of the first lab were allowed to proceed to the payment room.
Once these were paid, the participants located in the other lab were invited to move to the
payment room.
On average a session lasted 75 minutes and participants earned €16.66 in the Baseline and
€17.23 in the Efficiency Advantage treatment, including a €3 show up fee and the payment of
correct predictions.

4. Gender and Performance in Exogenously-Assigned Teams
In this Section, we present results from Parts 1 and 2, where all participants were assigned to
work first under an individual piece rate, then under team compensation.
Result 1: a) When individuals cannot choose their compensation scheme, there is no gender
difference in performance in any scheme and in any treatment. b) Individuals of both genders do
not free ride.
18

After 18 participants had shown up, we directed the 19th participant to the first room and the 20th to the second
room. If fewer than 18 participants showed-up, we moved participants from the first to the second room to make
sure that we had the same number of participants in both rooms. An alternative option would have been to put all the
females in one lab and all the males in the other lab, but this might have made gender highly salient to the
participants. Aside from asking participants to use their real first names, all of our instructions and procedures were
carefully designed to draw as little attention to the participants’ genders as possible.

12

Support for Result 1.
Table 2 shows participants’ mean output levels in Parts 1 and 2 by gender and treatment. It
also displays the p-values from t- tests for differences between the means.19
(Insert Table 2 about here)
Table 2 confirms, first of all, that our experimental task is gender neutral: there is no
significant difference in output between men and women when they receive individual piece
rates. This gender neutrality extends to performance in teams, irrespective of whether team
production has efficiency advantages over individual production. Taken together, these two
features of our task are useful because they eliminate gender differences in workers’ actual
performance under the two incentive schemes as possible explanations of any gender gaps in
team choices. Put a different way, it is conceivable that one gender might respond better to the
team incentive environment than the other, which could help explain the gender gap in decisions
to join teams. But that is not the case in our experiment.
The other key finding from Table 2 is that, despite the anonymous nature of interactions and
the fact that participants do not learn their partner’s performance in any part until the conclusion
of the experiment, participants do not appear to free ride on their partners when teams are
formed. In fact, if anything the data show an increase in task performance between Parts 1 and 2,
though the increase is not significant at conventional levels.20 In our view, the most likely
explanation of the lack of free riding (aside from the fact that we use smaller groups than typical
public goods experiments) is the nature of the task. Essentially, all of our results are consistent
with a scenario in which effort costs are low and the time available to work in each part is short.
In such situations, participants’ individually rational decisions can be simply to exert the
maximum possible effort for a wide range of marginal financial incentives.21 Fortuitously,
focusing on a low moral-hazard scenario such as ours not only dramatically simplifies the
19

Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests of equality of distributions were also done, with similar outcomes. In all these tests,
each participant is considered as one independent observation.
20
This increase could reflect a small amount of residual task learning between Parts 1 and 2. We think this is
unlikely, however, based on Charness et al.’s (2013) results with the same task. Without a practice period, Charness
et al. observed learning only between the first and second two-minute periods of their experiment. Since we
included a three-minute practice period, their results would suggest zero learning between our Parts 1 and 2. Like
us, Charness et al. found no gender difference in task performance.
21
Consistent with this interpretation, we find no significant performance differentials when the group piece rate is
changed from 20 to 22 cents. Also, as we show below, participants’ team-choice responses to own and expected
partner ability are strongly consistent with own-payoff-maximizing behavior; this argues against strong social
preferences as an explanation for the lack of free riding. Indeed, note that under this interpretation even strong social
preferences would not affect task performance levels, though they may certainly affect the choice of compensation
scheme (individual versus team).

13

interpretation of the results, it may also enhance the applicability of our results to real workplace
teams. As a number of field-based studies have shown (Knez and Simester, 2001; Hamilton et
al., 2003; Boning et al, 2007; Babcock et al., 2011), free-riding seems to be effectively absent in
most workplace teams that have been studied.
Our next result refers to the players’ beliefs and expectations.
Result 2: a) Neither men nor women expect free riding in teams. b) Women have much higher
expectations regarding their partner’s ability than men.
Support for Result 2.
Table 3 shows participants’ mean beliefs concerning their co-participant’s performance in
Parts 1 and 2.
(Insert Table 3 about here)
Table 3 shows that, not only was there no free riding in teams, participants did not expect
free riding in teams either. Specifically, if the participants expect their partner to free ride in the
team setting, they should expect a lower level of output from him/her in Part 2 than in Part 1.
This is decidedly not the case; in fact they expect a small, but statistically significant
improvement in their partner’s performance in the team setting. This increase could reflect some
anticipated learning, or even an expected motivational benefit of the team environment.22
The other key finding from Table 3 is a highly significant gender gap in expectations of the
partner’s ability: As a number of other studies (including Niederle and Vesterlund, 2007) have
found, both men and women expect their partner to be less able than themselves. Strikingly,
however, men have much lower expectations of their partner’s ability than women. Aside from
being statistically significant, this gender gap in expectations is quantitatively large as well. For
example, in the B treatment, women’s mean assessment of their partner’s Part 1 performance
(55.14 units) is at the 47th percentile of participants’ actual Part 1 performance. For men, the
corresponding figure (50.26 units) is at the 16th percentile of actual performance.23

22

Additional, behavioral evidence that subjects did not expect moral hazard is provided in the next section:
participants did not choose teams more often in Part 4 than Part 3, which suggests that they did not expect their
partner to be less productive when team pay was imposed.
23
One might wonder whether participants’ perceptions of their partner’s ability depend on the partner’s gender as
well. This issue is explored in Table O-1 in the online Appendix, which shows that neither actual performance, nor
perceived partner performance, depend on the partner’s gender. The only partner-gender effect that approaches
statistical significance is a tendency for men to rate male partners higher than female partners (p=.149). These
results contrast with some studies on competitiveness showing that the partner’s gender influences decisions or
performance (see notably Gneezy et al., 2003 and Datta Gupta et al., 2013).

14

5. Gender and Team Choice: Basic Results
This Section summarizes participants’ choices in the four ‘team choice’ Parts of the
experiment (Parts 3-6) in which subjects were free to choose their compensation scheme. We
begin with the baseline (B) treatment.
Result 3: In the absence of efficiency advantages, women are much more likely to choose the
team payment scheme than men.
Support for Result 3.
The share of men and women who choose team compensation in the B treatment is shown in
Figure 1.
(Insert Figure 1 about here)
According to Figure 1, female participants elected to receive team-based pay more
frequently than male participants in all of the team-choice parts. Specifically, in Part 3 --which
provides the simplest test of selection into teams--, more than three times as many women as
men (22.73 percent versus 7.14 percent; p =.044) chose to be paid on a team basis; recall that this
choice was made despite the lack of any efficiency advantage to team production and despite the
fact that the team situation could in principle expose the participant to a risk of free-riding by a
self-interested teammate. Perhaps surprisingly, despite designing the experiment to ensure that
participants knew their partner’s gender, we found no evidence that the partner’s gender affected
the decision to receive team-based compensation.24
Comparing Parts 3 and 4 strongly confirms our (incentivized) questionnaire-based evidence
that subjects did not expect free riding in the team environment: in fact, women selected team
compensation less frequently in Part 4, despite the fact that Part 4 protects them against free
riding by pairing them with their co-participant’s output under the individual piece rate. Men, on
the other hand, selected teams slightly more in Part 4, though for both men and women the
difference between their Parts 3 and 4 choice is statistically insignificant (p=.262 for women and
p=.570 for men, two tailed). Comparing Parts 5 and 6, there is no indication that women were
more attracted to teams when the team experience was more interactive. In fact, women selected
team compensation less frequently in Part 6 but insignificantly so (p=.767), despite the fact that
Part 6 allows for a period of communication between the team members prior to production.
24

Table O-3 in the online Appendix shows regression coefficients (with no controls) that parallel the statistics
reported in Figures 1 and 2 of the paper, broken down by the partner’s gender. Table O-4 presents regression results
that replicate Table 4 of the paper. It clearly shows higher team formation rates if the participant is female (unless a
control for beliefs is introduced), regardless of whether her prospective teammate was male or female.

15

Men, on the other hand, selected teams significantly more often in Part 6 than in Part 5 (p=.044).
This difference could be due to gender differences in communication preferences or in the search
for information (during the chat interactions, many try to learn the performance of their
teammate in the previous parts).
Result 4: Women are much more likely to choose the team pay option when choosing ‘team’
affects their partner’s payoff (Part 5).
Support for Result 4.
Comparing Parts 3 and 5, we find essentially no difference in men’s behavior: team pay was
chosen 10.81 versus 7.14 percent of the time (p=.160). Women, on the other hand, are much
more likely to choose teams (41.03 versus 22.73 percent of the time, p=.033) in Part 5, which
captures more features of the team production environment.25 While this dramatic gender gap
could be explained by other differences between Parts 3 and 5, Section 6 of our paper argues that
the distribution of the gap among our subjects is consistent with a simple model of inequity
aversion in which women are more averse to having more income than their partner than men
are.26
Turning next to the Efficiency-Advantage (EA) treatment, we have:
Result 5: The gender gap in the willingness to form a team vanishes when efficiency advantages
are introduced. This is because both genders increase their team choices, but men’s increase is
much larger.
Support for Result 5.
Figure 2 displays the share of participants who choose team compensation in the EA
treatment.
(Insert Figure 2 about here)
Two features of the results are immediately apparent: First, despite only a small
improvement in efficiency associated with team production, the share of both men and women
choosing team compensation is much higher than in the B treatment. In all cases the new rates of

25

At 6.8 percent, the share of women who ultimately formed a team was, not surprisingly, actually lower in Part 5
than in Part 3. For men, team formation was the same in Parts 3 and 5, at 7.1 percent.
26
One non-social-preference-based explanation of the “Part 5 effect” is that women expect more positive selection
into teams than men do, or that they expect a more positive treatment-on-the-treated (ToT) effect of the team
environment on their partners’ performance. While we do not have direct measures of our participants’ beliefs
regarding how others will self-select into team compensation, Results 6 and 7 show that actual selection into teams
is negative and the ToT effect of team pay is effectively zero.

16
team choices are above 50 percent.27 Second, the gender gap in team selection essentially
vanishes: although women still choose teams more frequently than men, the gap is much smaller
in magnitude and statistically insignificant as men’s propensity to choose teams rises much more
between the B and EA treatments. It thus appears that men are more responsive to the
introduction of these extrinsic benefits of being on a team.28
Comparing Parts 3 and 4 of the EA treatment, there is once again no indication that
participants expected a moral hazard problem in the team environment (t-tests, p=.743 for
women and p=.253 for men, two-tailed). Comparing Parts 5 and 6, there is now no indication
that participants of either gender were more attracted to teams when the team experience was
more interactive (p=.421 for women and p=1.0 for men).29 Finally, comparing Parts 3 and 5, we
find additional, strong support for stronger social preferences among women: women are more
likely to choose teams (76.74 versus 53.49 percent of the time) when subjects’ team production
decisions affect their partners’ payoffs, a difference which is highly significant (p=.003). For
men, this difference is smaller (68.89 versus 55.56 percent of the time) and only marginally
significant (p=.083) (it was insignificant in the B case).
Our next result concerns the role of abilities and beliefs in accounting for gender differences
in team formation:

Result 6:
a) Regardless of the institutional environment (i.e. the rules for team formation) and the
economic environment (i.e. the efficiency gains associated with team production), abler
participants of both genders are always less likely to choose the team environment.
b) Similarly, participants who thought their co-participant was abler were more likely to choose
team compensation.
c) Statistically, women’s more generous beliefs about their partner’s ability account for all of the
gender gap in team choices in Part 3 of the experiment.

27

It is perhaps worth noting that, with a 10 percent efficiency advantage to team production, the marginal private
return to effort in teams rises from 50 to 55 percent of the marginal return to effort under individual compensation.
Thus, in a ‘standard’ model, we should still expect high levels of free riding in teams, and would therefore still
expect most if not all participants to rationally avoid the team environment.
28
If participants interpret the EA treatment’s higher piece rate for teams as the experimenter’s preferred choice, then
their responses to the EA treatment could include an experimenter demand effect. To account for our results using
experimenter demand effects, however, men would need to be more eager to please the experimenter than women.
We are not aware of any gender dimension in experimenter demand effects (Zizzo, 2010).
29
All of the differences mentioned are small in magnitude and none are statistically significant at conventional
magnitudes. Perhaps an effect of interaction would be found if we allowed for collaboration on the work task itself.

17

Support for Result 6.
To explore the role of abilities and beliefs on participants’ choices of team compensation,
Table 4 regresses a team choice indicator on measures of individual ability, risk attitudes and
beliefs about partner ability.30 Table 4 pools our results for Parts 3 and 5 of the experiment, and
for the B and EA treatments respectively, with gender-specific fixed effects for the parts and
treatments.31 All the regressions use the participant’s own actual performance in Part 1 as a
measure of his/her ability, and his/her estimates of his/her partner’s Part 1 performance to
measure expected partner ability.32 Since Parts 3 and 5 were administered to the same
participants, all the regressions are clustered at the individual level.
(Insert Table 4 about here)
With no controls except the parts and treatments interacted with gender, column (1) of Table
4 replicates the significant positive gender effect of about 15 percentage points in the
regression’s baseline treatment and condition (Part 3 of the B treatment). It also shows that
workers of both genders elect to form teams more often when team choices affect one’s partner’s
payoffs (Part 5), though the effect is twice as large and statistically more significant for women
(p=.053 for men; p<.001 for women). Both genders also respond positively to efficiency
advantages in team production, though here the effect is much larger for men than women.33
These effects of Part 5 and the EA treatment are highly robust to the addition of controls for
ability, risk aversion and expected partner ability, as indicated in columns 2-4.
Row 2 of Table 4 introduces a control for the participant’s own Part 1 performance. As
claimed, abler participants are less likely to choose the team environment in all specifications.
Since abler participants will earn a lower payoff when matched with a random teammate than
when working independently, this pattern is consistent with a simple, own-payoff maximizing
adverse selection hypothesis. Also consistent with adverse selection, column 4 Table 4 shows
that participants who thought their co-participant was abler were more likely to choose team
30

Risk aversion could affect decisions to join teams, though its predicted effects are ambiguous in sign. On the one
hand, if there is a lot of part-to-part variation in performance, greater risk aversion might lead participants to prefer
teams, since being paid the average of the two workers’ performance adds an element of insurance. On the other
hand, uncertainty about the ability (or intentions) of one’s teammate will work in the opposite direction. We also
detected no statistically significant gender gap in risk aversion in our subject pool.
31
Parallel results for Parts 4 and 6 are shown in Table O-2 of the online Appendix.
32
Arguably we could use expectations of their partner’s Part 2 output, since this reflects his/her performance in a
team environment. In practice, given the lack of free riding in our experiment it makes no difference which measure
we use.
33
The p-value for a test of no gender difference in the Part 5 coefficient is .092, while the p-value for no gender
difference in the EA coefficient is .080.

18

compensation. Notably, the effect of higher estimated partner ability is equal in magnitude but
opposite in sign to the effect of own ability. Another robust result from both Tables is that
regardless of specification, risk attitudes do not predict the choice of team compensation.34
Finally, note that the gender gap in team choice, while robust to controls for own ability and
risk aversion, falls sharply in magnitude and becomes statistically insignificant when controls for
perceived partner ability are added in column 4. This demonstrates our claim that gender
differences in beliefs about others’ ability are a major determinant of the gender gap in team
choices in our experiment.35

6. Social Preferences and the “Part 5 Effect”: A Model
One of our most unexpected findings is the large effect of apparently minor changes in the
‘rules’ of the team-formation process between Part 3 and 5 on the frequency with which subjects,
especially women, pick the ‘team’ option. As already noted, one possible explanation of this
phenomenon might have to do with social preferences, since –unlike Part 3—subjects’ Part 5
team formation decisions affect their partners’ incomes. Pursuing this intuition, the goal of this
section is to develop and test a simple model of how social preferences might affect decisions to
select team-based pay. In addition to helping us interpret the observed choice patterns across
experimental conditions and by gender, the model yields an unanticipated prediction which we
test against our data.
To keep the model simple, we take advantage of the lack of evidence of moral hazard in our
experiment to focus on a pure adverse-selection model where task performance is a fixed
characteristic of the individual; accordingly, let Qi and Qj denote subject i’s and j’s task
performance respectively, regardless of whether either is working under team or individual
incentives. Since output is the same between the team and individual environments, so is effort;
thus the utilities of the various outcomes depend only on the amount of income received by the
two participants. Following Fehr and Schmidt (1999), let individual i’s utility be given by:
34

Table O-4 in the online appendix replicates Table 4, allowing for teammate gender to affect team choices. No
significant effects are detected.
35
In order to quantify the effects of men’s more biased beliefs on their payoffs, we compared the participants’ actual
team-formation rates and Part-specific payoffs to what they would have been if the participants picked the
compensation scheme that maximized their earnings given unbiased expectations. Perhaps surprisingly, while
unbiased expectations generate much higher rates of team choice, especially among men, they did not increase
men’s relative payoffs much. For example, in Part 3 of the Baseline treatment, unbiased expectations would raise
men’s team choices from .071 to .524 and women’s from .227 to .432. Payoffs, however, only rise from €11.55 to
€11.63 for men and from €11.71 to €11.75 for women, due to the relatively compressed distribution of performance
on this task among our participants.

19
Ui = Yi – α(Yj – Yi)(1-P) - β(Yi - Yj)P

(1)

where Yi is i’s experimental income, Yj is his partner’s income, and P is an indicator for whether
Yi > Yj. An individual with no inequity aversion has α=β=0; an individual with symmetric
inequity aversion has 1>α=β>0, and an individual with asymmetric inequity aversion (i.e. who
is more averse to having less income than his partner than to having more income than him has
1>α>β ≥0.36 In what follows, we refer to α as disadvantageous inequity aversion, and to β as
advantageous inequity aversion. Our goal in this section is to see whether such an outcomesbased model can explain the pattern of gender differences in choices across our experimental
conditions, or whether a more general model incorporating other social preferences is required. 37
The main predictions of model (1) for Parts 3 and 5 of our experiment are stated formally in
Propositions 1 and 2 below; importantly, all of these predictions identify the unique, strictly
dominant strategy of player i, conditional on i’s own beliefs only. In other words, these
predictions identify i’s optimal actions, independently of j’s actions, and independently of j’s
beliefs. Proofs of both propositions are supplied in Appendix 1.
Proposition 1 (Baseline Treatment): In the Baseline Treatment, regardless of their social
preferences (α, β) all agents who believe they are less able than their partner (Qi/ Qj < 1) should
pick the ‘team’ option in both Part 3 and Part 5. All agents who believe they are abler than their
partner (Qi/ Qj > 1) should pick the individual option in Part 3. In Part 5, agents who believe
they are abler than their partner should pick ‘team’ if they are sufficiently averse to having more
income than their partner (β>.5) and the individual option otherwise.
A key part of the intuition behind Proposition 1 stems from the fact that in Part 3, player i’s
actions have no impact on player j’s income. Thus, despite the fact that player i might care about
player j’s payoffs, there is nothing i can do to affect them. It follows directly that social
preferences should have no effect on any agent’s Part 3 behavior: all agents should act selfishly
in Part 3, choosing individual pay when they think they are abler than their teammate and team
pay otherwise. A second key piece of intuition is that inequity-aversion should have no effect on
36

It seems reasonable to restrict attention to cases where the individuals’ concern with income inequality is not
greater than their concern for their own income.
37
A distinct type of social preferences, specifically intentions-based preferences, could also generate differences
between Part 3 and Part 5 behavior if subjects are averse to frustrating the partner’s possible desire to form a team,
which can only happen in Part 5. We do not claim that intentions-based behavior of this type is absent; only that a
simpler, outcomes-based model of social preferences is adequate to account for the observed patterns. Other
possible explanations include (a) the fact that participants who choose team in Part 5 will learn the level of their
partner’s pay, and (b) the fact that increasing one’s own effort raises one’s partner’s pay in Part 5, but not in Part 3.
In our discussion, we will assume there is no intrinsic value to knowing one’s partner’s pay. Possibility (b) seems
unlikely given the fact that effort levels do not vary between team and individual pay environments.

20

players who think they are less able than their partner. Selfish players who think they are less
able always pick the ‘team’ option; adding inequity-aversion only strengthens subjects’
motivation to pick ‘team’ since it narrows the income gap between them and their partner. An
interesting implication is that subjects’ degree of disadvantageous inequity aversion (α) has no
effect on team formation decisions in any of our experimental Parts or treatments. Putting these
predictions together, the only case in which inequity-aversion affects predicted behavior is in
Part 5, among subjects who think they are abler than their partner. Some of these subjects, if they
are sufficiently advantageous inequity-averse, might pick team pay to raise their partner’s
income at the expense of reducing their own income.
Proposition 2 (EA Treatment): In the EA Treatment, regardless of their social preferences all
agents who believe they are less than 11/9 as able as their partner (Qi/ Qj < 11/9) should pick
the ‘team’ option in both Parts 3 and Part 5. All agents who believe they are more than 11/9 as
able as their partner should pick the individual option in Part 3. In Part 5, agents who believe
they are more than 11/9 as able as their partner (Qi/ Qj > 11/9) should pick ‘team’ iff their level
aversion to having more income than their partner (β) satisfies

.
.

.

The intuition behind Proposition 2 is parallel to Proposition 1, modified to incorporate the
fact that both selfish and inequity-averse agents now have an additional incentive to pick the
‘team’ option.
Taken together, Propositions 1 and 2 have the following implications. First and most
obviously, the overall rate of team formation should be higher in the EA treatment since the
threshold relative ability below which all agents choose teams is greater than before. This will
be true regardless of the level of inequity-aversion and is thus not directly informative about
social preferences. Second, in both the B and EA treatments, subjects’ choices in Part 3 should
be unaffected by the participants’ level of inequity aversion. It follows that gender differences in
inequity aversion cannot explain the gender gap in team choice in Part 3. Fortunately, this is not
a major concern since we have already demonstrated that gender differences in Part 3 behavior
can be fully accounted for by measured gender differences in overconfidence.
Third, Propositions 1 and 2 imply that if some subjects are sufficiently advantageous
inequity-averse, the rate of team choice should increase between Parts 3 and 5. This is because a
subset of subjects are predicted to switch from individual to team pay between these Parts in
order to benefit their partner, while the rest are predicted to make the same choice in both Parts.
It follows that a simple inequity aversion model has the potential to explain an increase in the

21

rate of team formation between Parts 3 and 5. Further, recall that the increase in team choices
between Parts 3 and 5 was significantly greater for women than men. Propositions 1 and 2
indicate that this is consistent with greater advantageous inequity-aversion (β) among women
than men. Finally, Propositions 1 and 2 also imply that the increase in team choices between
Parts 3 and 5 should be confined to subjects who believe they are abler than their partner (if we
take the model literally), or should at least be concentrated among abler subjects (if we take the
model as a rough guide to where the effects of inequity aversion are most likely to be seen). This
unexpected feature provides a possible test of that model.
To examine this hypothesis, the rates of team choice in Parts 3 and 5, by a subject’s own
perceived relative ability, are presented in Table 5. According to Table 5, women who thought
they were less able than their partner increased their team formation rates by 9 percentage points
(.73-.64) between Parts 3 and 5. Among women who thought they were more able than their
partner, this increase was much larger, at 29 percentage points. The difference is statistically
significant at the 10 percent level (p=.086), and is consistent with our inequity-aversion model.
For men who thought they were less able than their partner there was no difference in team
choices between Parts 3 and 5 (.47 in both cases), while the share choosing ‘team’ rose by 12
percentage points among men who thought they were abler than their partner. This difference is
statistically insignificant (p=.273). Overall, we see these results as supportive of a model in
which inequity-aversion among women raises their team-formation rates between Part 3 (where
abler women can’t help their partner by choosing ‘team’) and Part 5 (where they can). The fact
that the increase in women’s team formation rates between Parts 3 and 5 is concentrated among
women who thought they were abler than their partner may also distinguish an inequity-aversion
model from other social-preference-based explanations (such as intentions-based models) which
do not necessarily depend on perceived relative ability in this way.38

7. Gender and Performance in Self-Selected Teams
Result 1 stated that, when assigned to work in a team environment, men and women perform
equally well, both in absolute terms and relative to their performance when compensated
individually. For at least two reasons, however, this zero treatment effect of teams does not
necessarily imply that men and women will, on average, perform equally on teams that are
38

For example, there is no reason to think that more able women compared to less able ones would chose the team
payment scheme more frequently in Part 5 than in Part 3 because they do not want to frustrate a partner who would
prefer to form a team.

22

voluntarily formed. One reason, of course, is ability bias or selection on levels: indeed we have
demonstrated that there is adverse selection into teams. And because adverse selection is stronger
among men, we would expect voluntarily-formed female teams to outperform voluntarilyformed male teams.
The second reason why performance on self-selected teams might differ from mandated
teams, however, may not work in this direction. Specifically, suppose that participants who
expect that they will respond better to the team environment disproportionately select into teams
(i.e. there is selection on slopes, or on responsiveness to the treatment as in any Roy model of
comparative advantage). If the amount –or direction-- of selection on slopes differs between men
and women, then voluntarily-formed male teams could perform better or worse than voluntarilyformed female teams. Fortunately, our design allows us to non-parametrically estimate causal
effects of the team environment on the sample of persons who chose that environment (i.e. the
treatment on the treated (ToT) effect) without any assumptions on the form of unobserved
heterogeneity. Thus we can determine not only whether self-selected teams perform differently
from randomly-assigned teams, but also why.

Our main findings are as follows:
Result 7: a) Self-selected teams perform worse than mandated teams due to strong selection on
levels, but little evidence is found of selection on slopes. b) Because adverse selection is worse
among men than women, self-selected male teams perform worse than self-selected female
teams.
Support for Result 7.
Appendix 2 presents performance information for team joiners and nonjoiners in Parts 3 and
5, showing that performance on teams was worse than performance under an individual payment
scheme. It also presents information on the Part 1 performance of persons who voluntarily
joined teams in Parts 3 and 5, which demonstrates a strong role for negative self-selection into
teams. Finally, Appendix 2 uses information on each participant’s Part 1 output to partition the
performance gap between voluntary team joiners and nonjoiners into two components: selection
on levels and selection on slopes. It shows that selection on levels is the dominant effect.
In sum, this Section has shown that the output gaps between voluntarily-formed teams and
individuals who choose to produce individually are driven by adverse selection on levels, and not
by differential selection on slopes. Thus, firms offering voluntary teamwork should in general be

23

wary of adverse selection, and especially so in male workplaces: Because men more strongly
underestimate their co-workers’ ability, only the men with low productivity will tend to sign up
for the teams. By the same token, one might expect men who select into “co-operative”
occupations to be more adversely selected than women who do so.
8. Discussion and Conclusion
Our laboratory experiment has found that when participants can choose between team and
individual compensation, and when there is no efficiency advantage associated with team
production, women choose team-based compensation more frequently than men. Statistically,
this gap is entirely explained by a gender gap in overconfidence, as men are more pessimistic
than women about the ability of their potential teammate. In contrast, as soon as we introduce a
small efficiency advantage of team production, women and men join teams with equal
frequency. This suggests that gender differences in responsiveness to efficiency gains can also
play a large role in the team formation process, with men being more responsive to such gains
than women. Finally, superficially minor differences in the rules for team formation also have
large effects on the frequency with which team pay is selected, especially among women; these
effects suggest a strong potential role for social preferences in the choice of team compensation
as well. Specifically, we find that women are much more likely to pick the ‘team’ option when
doing so would have a positive impact on their partner’s incomes, and show that this pattern is
consistent with a higher level of ‘advantageous’ inequity aversion among women than men.
Gender differences in overconfidence have of course been observed in previous studies. For
example, men’s greater overconfidence plays an important role in studies of entry into
competitive environments (Niederle and Vesterlund, 2007, Sutter and Rützler, 2010). Of some
interest is the fact that, consistent with the simplest own-payoff-maximizing models,
overconfidence works in opposite directions in the tournament versus team cases: encouraging
entry in the former while discouraging it in the latter. Similarly, our findings that men respond
more than women to the efficiency gains associated with team production echo those of
Andreoni and Vesterlund (2001) who found that men’s demand curve for altruism is more
reactive to price changes. Finally, our findings regarding inequity aversion relate to a broader
literature on gender differences in social preferences, as summarized in Croson and Gneezy
(2009) and Bertrand (2010). Emerging findings from this literature include the tendency for
women to be more generous in the dictator game (Bolton and Katok, 1995; Eckel and Grossman,

24

1998; Andreoni and Vesterlund, 2001); to have more redistributive preferences in field data; and
– at least in experiments that hold constant the level of risk and provide more anonymity—to
contribute more in public goods games (Eckel and Grossman, 2008). Although the literature also
indicates that women’s social preferences are malleable to the environment, these findings are
consistent with the higher willingness of women to choose a more egalitarian mode of payment
in our experiment.
We recognize, of course, that all the above results are predicated on the specific task
environment we have created: The concept of a team in our experiment is a mere shadow of what
it means to be on a real workplace team. Our team members interact only a few times, never
meet in person, and our linear production process does not exhibit any complementarities.
Moreover, in this environment moral hazard in teams plays little or no role and we have
deliberately eliminated any element of competition between teams from our design. That said, a
key advantage of a tightly-controlled laboratory experiment is that it allows us to distinguish
several fundamental aspects of any team-formation decision, including participants’ willingness
to tie their economic fate to others’ efforts and abilities and their willingness to share rewards
equally with others. In addition, we can isolate the effect of factors like overconfidence, risk
aversion and responsiveness to team-related efficiency gains on gender differences in behavior.
Without varying these factors one by one in a controlled experiment, it would be very difficult to
convincingly isolate their individual effects.
Our results might help shed light on the substantial and continuing gap in the occupational
distribution of men and women, even in societies where a great deal of equality of opportunity
exists. As is well known, women are highly overrepresented in the nonprofit sector and in
helping occupations (Powell and Steinberg, 2006), both of which arguably involve cooperative
production with little financial reward. These are precisely the conditions where the gender gap
in voluntary team participation was the largest in our experiment. Since women are never less
prone to select the team option than men in our experiment, our results also suggest that
replacing tournament- by team-based incentives in highly paid jobs (at least where appropriate
given the production technology) might increase women’s representation in those jobs.

25

References
Andersen, Steffen, Erwin Bulte, Uri Gneezy, and John A. List. “Do Women Supply More Public Goods
than Men? Preliminary Experimental Evidence from Matrilineal and Patriarchal Societies” American
Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 98(2), 376–381. 2008.
Andreoni, James, and Lise Vesterlund. “Which Is the Fair Sex? Gender Differences in Altruism”. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (1), 293-312. February 2001.
Apesteguia, Jose, Ghazala Azmat, and Nagore Iriberri. “The Impact of Gender Composition on Team
Performance and Decision-Making: Evidence from the Field”. Management Science, 58(1), 78-93.
January 2012.
Babcock, Philip, Kelly Bedard, Gary Charness, John Hartman, and Heather Royer. “Letting Down the
Team? Evidence of Social Effects of Team Incentives”. NBER working paper no. 16687. January
2011.
Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul. “Team Incentives: Evidence from a Field
Experiment”. Journal of the European Economic Association. Forthcoming. 2013.
Berg, Peter; Appelbaum, Eileen; Bailey, Thomas; and Kalleberg, Arne L. “The Performance Effects of
Modular Production in the Apparel Industry.” Industial Relations 35, 3563–3573. July 1996.
Bertrand, Marianne. “New Perspectives on Gender”, in David Card and Orley Ashenfelter, eds.,
Handbook of Labor Economics, 4b. Amsterdam, North Holland. 2010.
Bolton, Gary E., and Elena Katok. “An experimental test for gender differences in beneficent behavior.”
Economics Letters, 48(3-4), 287-292. 1995.
Boning, Brent, Casey Ichniowski, and Kathryn Shaw “Opportunity Counts: Teams and the Effectiveness
of Production Incentives.” Journal of Labor Economics, 25(4), 613-650. October 2007.
Booth, Alison L., and Patrick J. Nolen. “Choosing to Compete: How Different Are Girls and Boys?”
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 81(2), 542-555. 2012a.
Booth, Alison L., and Patrick J. Nolen. “Gender Differences in Risk Behavior: Does Nurture Matter?”
The Economic Journal, 122(558), F56-F78. 2012b.
Bornstein, Gary, Uri Gneezy, and Rosemarie Nagel. “The effect of intergroup competition on intragroup
coordination: An experimental study.” Games and Economic Behavior, 41, 1-25. 2002.
Boschini, Anne, and Anna Sjogren. “Is Team Formation Gender Neutral? Evidence from Coauthorship
Patterns.” Journal of Labor Economics, 25 (2), 325-365. April 2007.
Browne, Kingsley R. Biology at work: Rethinking sexual equality. New-Brunswick: Rutgers University
Press. 2002.
Cárdenas, Juan-Camilo, Ana Dreber, Emma von Essen, and Eva Ranehill. “Gender differences in
competitiveness and risk taking: Comparing children in Columbia and Sweden. ” Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization 83(1), 11-23. 2012.
Charness, Gary, David Masclet, and Marie Claire Villeval. “The dark side of competition for status.”
Forthcoming in Management Science. 2013.
Cooper, David J. and Krista Jabs Saral. “Entrepreneurship and Team Participation: An Experimental
Study.” Unpublished paper, Florida State University. January 2010.
Croson, Rachel, and Uri Gneezy. “Gender Differences in Preferences.” Journal of Economic Literature,
47(2), 448-474. June 2009.

26

Dargnies, Marie-Pierre. “Men Too Sometimes Shy Away from Competition: The Case of Team
Competition” Management Science mnsc.1120.1542. Published online. July 18, 2012.
Datta Gupta, Nabanita, Anders Poulsen, and Marie Claire Villeval. “Gender matching and
competitiveness : Experimental evidence.” Economic Inquiry, 51(1), 816–835. 2013.
Delfgaauw, Josse, Robert Dur, Joeri Sol, and Willem Verbeke. “Tournament Incentives in The Field:
Gender Differences in The Workplace.” Journal of Labor Economics, 31(2). 2013.
Dohmen, Thomas and Armin Falk “Performance Pay and Multidimensional Sorting: Productivity,
Preferences, and Gender” American Economic Review 101, 556-590. April 2011.
Dreber, Anna, Emma von Essen, and Eva Ranehill. “Outrunning the gender gap –boys and girls compete
equally.” Experimental Economics 14(4), 567-582. 2012.
Eckel, Catherine C., and Philip J. Grossman. “Are women less selfish than men? Evidence from dictator
experiments.” The Economic Journal 108(448), 726-735. 1998.
Eckel, Catherine C., and Philip J. Grossman. “Differences in the economic decisions of men and women:
experimental evidence.” In Charles R. Plott and Vernon L. Smith (Eds.). Handbook of Experimental
Results. 1, 509-519. 2008.
Fehr, Ernst and Klaus M. Schmidt. “A Theory of Fairness, Competition, and Cooperation.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 114(3), 817-868. August 1999.
Fehr, Ernst, Michael Naef and Klaus M. Schmidt. “Inequality Aversion, Efficiency, and Maximin
Preferences in Simple Distribution Experiments: Comment. ” American Economic Review 96(5),
1912-1917. 2006.
Garratt, Rodney J., Catherine Weinberger and Nick Johnson. “The State Street Mile: Age and Gender
Differences in Competition Aversion in the Field.” Economic Inquiry 51(1), 806-815. 2013.
Gneezy, Uri and Aldo Rustichini. “Gender and Competition at a Young Age.” American Economic
Review, 94(2), 377-381. May 2004.
Gneezy, Uri, Kenneth L. Leonard and John A. List. “Gender Differences in Competition: Evidence from
a Matrilineal and a Patriarchal Society.” Econometrica, 77, 1637–1664. 2009.
Gneezy, Uri, Muriel Niederle, and Aldo Rustichini. “Performance in Competitive Environments: Gender
Differences.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3), 1049-1074. August 2003.
Greiner, B. “An online recruitment system for economic experiments.” In Forschung und
wissenschaftliches Rechnen GWDG Bericht 63, Ed. K. Kremer, and V. Macho. Göttingen:
Gesellschaft für Wissenschaftliche Datenverarbeitung. 2004.
Graves, Laura M., and Gary N. Powell. “Sex, Sex Similarity and Sex Diversity Effects in Teams: The
Importance of Situational Factors.” In Bilimoria, Diana, and Sandy Kristin Piderit (Eds.) Handbook
on Women in Business and Management. Cheltenham, U.K. and Northampton, Mass.: Elgar. 217-31.
2007.
Hamilton, Barton, Jack Nickerson, and Hideo Owan. “Team Incentives and Worker Heterogeneity: An
Empirical Analysis of the Impact of Teams on Productivity and Participation.” Journal of Political
Economy, 111(3), 465-497. June 2003.
Healy, Andrew, and Jennifer Pate. “Can Teams Help to Close the Gender Competition Gap?” The
Economic Journal, 121(555), 1192-1204. 2011.
Holt, Charles A., and Susan K. Laury. "Risk Aversion and Incentive Effects. " American Economic
Review, 92 (5), 1644-1655. December 2002.
Ivanova-Stenzel, Radosveta, and Dorothea Kübler. “Gender Differences in Team Work and Team
Competition.” Journal of Economic Psychology, 32, 797–808. 2011.

27

Kanasawa, Satoshi. “Is ‘discrimination’ necessary to explain the sex gap in earnings?” Journal of
Economic Psychology, 26, 269-287. 2005.
Knez, Marc, and Duncan I. Simester “Firm-Wide Incentives and Mutual Monitoring at Continental
Airlines.” Journal of Labor Economics, 19(4), 743-772. October 2001.
Kuhn, Peter J. and Marie Claire Villeval. “Do Women Prefer a Co-operative Work Environment?” IZA
working paper no 5999, September 2011.
Lawler, Edward E., III, and Susan A. Mohrman, and George Benson. 2001. Organizing for high
performance: employee involvement, TQM, reengineering, and knowledge management in the
Fortune 1000. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Lawler, Edward E., III, and Susan A. Mohrman “Pay Practices in Fortune 1000 Corporations.” Center for
Effective Organizations, publication G 03-20 (448). May 2003.
Lazear, Edward P. “Globalisation and the Market for Team-Mates.” The Economic Journal 109(454),
C15-40. March 1999.
Niederle, Muriel, and Lise Vesterlund. “Do Women Shy Away from Competition? Do Men Compete Too
Much?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(3), 1067-1101. August 2007.
Powell, Walter W., and Richard Steinberg (Eds.). The Non-Profit Sector: A Research Handbook. 2nd
edition. Yale University Press. 2006.
Schwieren, Christiane, and Mattias Sutter. “Trust in Cooperation or Ability? An Experimental Study on
Gender Differences.” Economics Letters 99 (3), 494-497. June 2008.
Sutter, Matthias, Ronald Bosman, Martin Kocher, and Franz van Winden. “Gender pairing and bargaining
– Beware the same sex!” Experimental Economics 12(3), 318-331. 2009.
Sutter, Matthias, and Daniela Rützler. “Gender differences in competition emerge early in life: Three-year
old girls compete as much as boys, but older girls don’t.” Unpublished manuscript. University of
Innsbruck. 2010.
Villeval, M.C. “Steady, Ready, Compete.” Science, 335(6068), 544-545, 3 February 2012.
Wozniak, David, William T. Harbaugh, and Ulrich Mayr. “The Menstrual Cycle and Performance
Feedback Alter Gender Differences in Competitive Choices.” Unpublished paper, University of
Oregon, October 28, 2010.
Wuchty, Stefan, Benjamin F. Jones and Brian Uzzi. “The Increasing Dominance of Teams in Production
of Knowledge” Science 316(5827), 1036-1039, 18 May 2007. Published Online April 12 2007 DOI:
10.1126/science.1136099
Zeiliger, Romain. “A Presentation of Regate, Internet Based Software for Experimental Economics.”
http://www.gate.cnrs.fr/~zeiliger/regate/RegateIntro.ppt., GATE. 2000.
Zizzo, Daniel. “Experimenter demand effects in economic experiments.” Experimental Economics 13(1),
75-98. 2010.

28

Table 1: Summary of the experimental design

1

2

3

4

5

6

Is Work Performed?

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Can participants choose
the pay scheme?

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Individual

Team

Individual
or Team

Individual
or Team

-

Part 2

Part 2

Part 1

Part 5

Part 6

No

No

No

No

No

Yes

Part

Pay scheme

Partner’s performance
in this Part is used to
compute team pay
Communication

Team if
Team if
both agree, both agree,
otherwise
otherwise
Individual Individual

29

Table 2: Task Performance under Mandatory Individual versus Mandatory Team Pay,
by Treatment

A. Baseline Treatment
Women
Men
p-value for gender gap
B. Efficiency Advantage Treatment
Women
Men
p-value for gender gap

(1)
Part 1:
Individual
Compensation

(2)
Part 2:
Team
Compensation

(3)
p-value for difference
between Parts 1 and 2

56.93
54.83
.093

57.95
55.98
.127

.065
.073

54.88
55.49
.624

55.84
55.29
.685

.089
.813

Note: Sample sizes are 44 women and 42 men in the B treatment and 43 women and 45 men in the EA treatment. Pvalues are from 2-sided t-tests for differences between means.

Table 3: Beliefs Regarding Partner’s Task Performance under Mandatory Individual
versus Mandatory Team Pay, by Treatment

A. Baseline Treatment
Women
Men
p-value for gender gap
B. Efficiency Advantage Treatment
Women
Men
p-value for gender gap

(1)
Part 1:
Individual
Compensation

(2)
Part 2:
Team
Compensation

(3)

55.14
50.26
.000

56.39
52.10
.001

.045
.002

53.88
51.47
.031

55.16
52.78
.040

.013
.002

p-value for difference
between Parts 1 and 2

Note: Sample sizes are 44 women and 42 men in the B treatment and 43 women and 45 men in the EA treatment. Pvalues are from 2-sided t-tests for differences between means.

Table 4: Regressions for the Probability of Choosing Team Pay, Parts 3 and 5
(Linear Probability Models with robust standard errors)

1. Female

(1)
.1681*
(.0750)

(2)
.1985**
(.0716)
-.0151**
(.0051)

(3)
.1864*
(.0720)
-.0143**
(.0050)
-.0364
(.0204)
.1400
(.1200)

(4)
.0720
(.0731)
-.0289**
(.0054)
-.0350
(.0187)
.1164
(.1133)
.0301**
(.0061)

.0882
(.0453)
.2083**
(.0543)
.5308**
(.0740)
.3316**
(.0855)
.242

.0906*
(.0452)
.2080**
(.0544)
.5383**
(.0688)
.3009**
(.0867)
.272

.0948*
(.0447)
.2058**
(.0545)
.5202**
(.0694)
.2996**
(.0853)
.288

.0956*
(.0449)
.2092**
(.0544)
.4936**
(.0702)
.3048**
(.0757)
.352

.092
.080

.098
.032

.117
.045

.109
.067

2. Own Part 1 output
3. Holt-Laury switch point
4. Multiple switches
5. Beliefs re partner’s Part 1 output

6. Part5 * Male
7. Part5 * Female
8. EA * Male
9. EA * Female
10. R-squared
p-values for:
11. Part5 * Male = Part5 * Female
12. EA * Male = EA * Female

Note: ** p<0.01, * p<0.05. Standard errors, clustered on participants, in parentheses. N=338 in all
columns.

31

Table 5: Team Choice Rates in Parts 3 and 5, by Perceived Relative Ability

A. WOMEN
Less Able than partner:
Share
Number
Abler than partner:
Share
Number
B. MEN
Less Able than partner:
Share
Number
Abler than partner:
Share
Number

(1)
Chose Team in
Part 3

(2)
Chose Team in
Part 5

(3)
N

0.64
21

0.73
24

33

0.22
11

0.51
25

49

0.47
7

0.47
7

15

0.30
20

0.42
28

67

p-values for (Part 5 – Part 3 among Abler) = (Part 5 – Part 3 among Less Able) :
Women: p=.086
Men: p=.273
p-values are for the significance of an interaction term between Part 5 and relative ability
in a gender-specific regression of team formation on Part, relative ability and their
interaction. Robust standard errors are clustered on participant id. Statistics are for the B
and EA treatments combined.

32

.6

.7

.8

.9

Figure 1: Share of Participants Choosing Team Compensation, by Gender, B Treatment:

p=.002
0.41

p=.044

0 .38

p=.381

.3

.4

.5

p=.113

0.23

.2

0.22
0.16

0

.1

0.11

0.10

0.07

3

4

5
Women

6
Men

Figure 2: Share of Participants Choosing Team Compensation, by Gender, EA Treatment

p=.180

.9

p=.414
0.77

p=.848
0.56

0.53

p=.397

0.69

0.69

0.56

.5

.6

.7

.8

0 .81

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

0.47

3

4

5
Women

p-values in both figures are from two-tailed t-tests

6
Men

33

Appendix 1: Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1:
Predictions of the Inequity-Aversion Model in the Baseline Treatment.
In Part 3 of the baseline treatment, i’s income if he chooses ‘team’ is 20 , where = (Qi +
Qj)/ 2. His income if he chooses individual compensation is Yi = 20 Qi. Similarly, j’s income is
20 if j chooses ‘team’ and 20 Qi otherwise. Thus, in Part 3, each player’s income –by design—
depends only on his/her own actions. This does not, however, imply that the parties’ utilities are
independent of each others’ actions; in fact they are interdependent whenever the players are
inequity-averse. Thus, for example, player i’s utilities as a function of both i’s and j’s choices in
Part 3 of the Baseline treatment are shown below, for the case where i believes he is abler than j.
Player i’s utilities if i believes he is abler than j: Baseline Treatment, Part 3.
j’s choice:
i’s choice:
Team
Individual

Team

20

Individual

20 1
20 1

20
1

Since Qi > > Qj and 0< <1, given these beliefs person i’s strictly dominant strategy is to
pick individual compensation, whether or not person i is inequity-averse. The intuition is
obvious in the absence of inequity-aversion –abler workers sacrifice income if they share team
revenue with a less-able worker. Inequity-averse workers should behave the same way as selfish
workers in Part 3, because i’s choice has no effect on j’s income, so i might as well just
maximize her own income.
Turning to the case where i believes he is less able than j, player i’s utilities are given by :
Player i’s utilities if i believes he is less able than j: Baseline Treatment, Part 3.
j’s choice:
i’s choice:
Team
Individual

Team

20
20

Individual

20 1
20 1

Now, i’s dominant strategy is to pick team pay, regardless of his level of inequity-aversion.
The intuition is that selfish and inequity-related motives now both push i in the same direction :
picking ‘team’ both raises i’s absolute pay, and reduces the gap between i’s pay and his
partner’s. This is true regardless of j’s decision.
Next, we turn to Part 5 of the Baseline treatment. Here, i’s income equals Yi = 20 Qi unless
both i and j choose team compensation. If both players pick ‘team’, they each receive an income
of 20 . So, each player’s income now depends on the other’s choices. Player i’s utilities as a
function of i’s and j’s choices and i’s beliefs are now as follows:

34

Player i’s utilities if i believes he is abler than j: Baseline Treatment, Part 5.
j’s choice:
i’s choice:
Team
Individual

Team

Individual

20 1
20 1

20
20 1

Player i’s utilities if i believes he is less able than j: Baseline Treatment, Part 5.
j’s choice:
i’s choice:
Team
Individual

Team

Individual

20 1
20 1

20
20 1

Now, player i’s choices have no effect on either player’s incomes (and hence on i’s own
utility) if j chooses individual compensation. Thus, i again has a dominant strategy: he should
pick whichever choice maximizes his utility in the event that j chooses ‘team’. If i believes he is
less able than j, that choice is always team compensation because, as before, selfish and inequityrelated motives work in the same direction. If i believes he is abler than j, basic algebra reveals
that i picks individual pay if he is not too inequity-averse (specifically, if β<.5); otherwise i will
pick team compensation.
Proof of Proposition 2:
Predictions of the Inequity-Aversion Model in the Efficiency-Advantages Treatment.
Player i’s utilities as a function of both i’s and j’s choices in Part 3 of the EA treatment are
shown below. As before, the payoffs are displayed separately for the case where i believes he is
abler, and where he is less able, than his partner, j.
Player i’s utilities if i believes he is abler than j: EA Treatment, Part 3.
j’s choice:
i’s choice:
Team
Individual

Team

Individual

20 1
20 1

20
20

1

Player i’s utilities if i believes he is less able than j: EA Treatment, Part 3.
j’s choice:
i’s choice:
Team
Individual

Team

20
20

Individual

20 1
20 1

where θ = 22/20 measures the relative efficiency of the team production environment.39
Following the same logic as in the B Treatment, i will once again always select the team option
(for all levels of social preferences) if he believes he is less able than j (adding efficiency
advantages just strengthens the attractiveness of teams to less-able workers). However, in
39

For simplicity, these tables assume that teaming doesn’t reverse income rankings in the following sense: Suppose
I’m abler, and I choose individual compensation but my partner picks team. We assume that the team efficiency
advantage isn’t so great that –in Part 3 where this is possible-- it would raise my partner’s income above mine.

35

contrast to the B treatment, some workers who believe they are abler than their co-workers will
now pick the team option, due to the associated efficiency gains. In particular, regardless of j’s
choice, and regardless of whether i has social preferences, i’s dominant strategy is to pick team
whenever
. In terms of player i’s relative ability, and for the efficiency advantage
implemented in our experiment (θ = 1.1) this can be expressed as :
Choose team iff

.

In sum, as in Part 3 of the Baseline Treatment, subjects’ decisions to choose the team option
in Part 3 of the EA Treatment should depend only on their perceived relative ability, Qi/ Qj, not
on their level of inequity aversion. While in the B Treatment the threshold level of relative
ability above which subjects should pick the individual pay option was Qi/ Qj = 1, in the EA
treatment this threshold rises to 11/9 ≈ 1.22.
Turning to Part 5 of the EA Treatment, we now have:
Player i’s utilities if i believes he is abler than j: Baseline Treatment, Part 5.
j’s choice:
Team

i’s choice:
Team
Individual

Individual

20 1
20 1

20
20 1

Player i’s utilities if i believes he is less able than j: Baseline Treatment, Part 5.
j’s choice:
Team

i’s choice:
Team
Individual

20
20 1

Individual

20 1
20 1

Since less-able players again always pick ‘team’, we focus once again on the choices of
abler players. Given that player i’s choice has no impact on his utility if j picks individual
compensation in Part 5, player i should choose ‘team’ whenever 20
> 20 1
Simplifying implies that i picks team iff
simplifies to

.
.

. In our experiment, where θ = 1.1, this

. Thus, for example, if i has no social preferences (β=0), the threshold

level of relative ability (Qi/ Qj) above which i avoids teams is the same in Part 5 as in Part 3, at
11/9. As i’s inequity aversion rises, so does this threshold, so that for example when =.35,
only individuals who think they are more than twice as able as their partner should choose
individual pay. For levels of β above .45, all players are predicted to choose the team option
when teams have a ten percent efficiency advantage (θ = 1.1), regardless of their perceived
relative ability.

.

36

Appendix 2: Selection on Slopes versus Levels and the Performance of Self-Selected Teams
For Parts 3 and 5 of the experiment, Table A1 shows the mean performance of participants
who chose team compensation and those who did not, by gender and treatment.40
(Insert Table A1 about here)
In seven of eight cases, team joiners performed worse on average than non-joiners; this gap
is statistically significant (at p < .001, .004 and .058) in three of those cases. Further, the joinernonjoiner output gap is always larger for men than for women, and significantly so (p=.001 and
.028) in two of the four cases. A naïve interpretation of these results might, of course, be that
team production causes free riding, and that men are more prone to free riding than women. On
the other hand, we have already shown that self-selection affects these comparisons; this is
confirmed by Table A2, which shows Part 1 output separately for individuals who chose teams
in Parts 3 and 5, and for individuals who did not. Overall, the patterns are very similar to Table
A1: team joiners were, on average, less productive than nonjoiners even in Part 1 of the
experiment, when everyone was compensated individually. And this joiner-nonjoiner “ability”
gap is always greater for men than women, significantly so the same 2 of 4 times as for currentperiod output (p=.009 and .035). This gap is never statistically significant for women. Thus,
confirming our earlier results, not only is there adverse selection into teams, but this selection is
more pronounced among men than women.
(Insert Table A2 about here)
Finally, to isolate the effects of selection on levels and selection on slopes, note that the
output gap between voluntary team joiners and non-joiners in (say) Part 3 can be expressed as:
E(Q3 | J3 ) - E(Q3 | NJ3 ) = E(Q1 | J3 ) - E(Q1 | NJ3 )
+ [E(Q3 | J3 ) - E(Q1 | J3 )] - [E(Q3 | NJ3 ) - E(Q1 | NJ3 )]

(A1)

where Qi denotes the individual’s performance in Part i, and Ji and NJi respectively denote
whether the participant joined or did not join a team in Part i.
The first term on the RHS of (A1) gives the pure selection component of the performance
gap between joiners and non-joiners in Part 3; it is simply the difference in Part 1 output between
the participants who chose team in Part 3 and those who did not. These numbers are already
shown in Table A1, which are predominantly negative, showing adverse selection into teams.
The remaining two terms in (A1) are the output change between Parts 1 and 3 for Part-3 joiners,
minus the output change for Part-3 non-joiners. Only the first of these changes (for joiners) is
affected by a change of the production environment from an individual to a team situation, while
both are affected by any task learning or pure period effects that distinguish Parts 1 and 3.
Therefore, if these part and task-learning effects are the same for persons who eventually join
teams and those who do not --this is our identifying assumption--, then the last two terms in (A1)
estimate the pure TOT effect of the team environment.
(Insert Table A3 about here)
40

Recall that, in Part 5, choosing team compensation does not necessarily result in being paid on a team basis. When
we repeat the analysis only for participants who sucessfully formed teams (because their partner also chose team
compensation), they are very similar, though with a smaller sample size.

37

Table A3 decomposes the team-non-team output gaps identified in Table A1 using equation
(A1). While the magnitudes of TOT and selection effects vary substantially across treatments
and parts of the experiment, Table A3 shows clearly that selection plays the dominant role in
explaining the gaps observed in Table A1: in five of the eight possible cases, selection accounts
for more than 100 percent of the team-non-team output gaps; in seven of eight cases it accounts
for more than half of the output gap. Also noteworthy is the fact that, in four of the eight cases
(two involving men and two involving women), the TOT causal effect of team production is
positive, not negative. This provides further support for our finding that moral hazard is
essentially absent in this two-person team environment.

38

Table A1: Mean Performance of Participants, by Choice of Team Pay and Treatment
PART 3

PART 5

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Nonjoiners

Joiners

Gap
(2) – (1)

p-value
for gap

NonJoiners

Joiners

Gap
(6) – (5)

p-value
for gap

56.90
47.33
.020

-2.42
-10.85
.001

.203
.004

60.48
60.00
.704

58.38
49.50
.003

-2.10
-10.50
.028

.119
.000

56.43
54.80
.380

-1.27
-4.00
.272

.418
.058

57.40
58.36
.724

57.70
56.52
.379

0.30
-1.84
.438

.865
.372

A. Baseline Treatment
Women
59.32
Men
58.18
p-value for gender gap
.385
B. Efficiency Advantage Treatment
Women
57.70
Men
58.80
p-value for gender gap
.536

Note: In Part 3, joining denotes the participant’s decision to be paid via team compensation; in Part 5 this only
results in team compensation being paid if the co-participant also chose team compensation; however performance
levels are very similar for the (smaller) sample who actually formed teams. All p-values are from 2-sided t-tests for
differences between means, except those for the gender gap in joiner-nonjoiner difference. These come from a Chisquared test that accounts for the fact that the underlying joiner-nonjoiner difference is itself a difference in sample
means.

Table A2: Mean Part 1 Performance of Participants, by Choice of Team Pay in Parts 3 and 5

PART 3
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Nonjoiners

Joiners

Gap
(2) – (1)

p-value
for gap

NonJoiners

Joiners

Gap
(6) – (5)

p-value
for gap

56.20
46.33
.011

-.95
-9.15
.009

.624
.011

57.83
56.30
.311

55.56
45.75
.004

-2.26
-10.55
.035

.218
.001

53.87
54.24
.838

-2.18
-2.81
.789

.214
.110

53.90
57.64
.200

55.18
54.52
.615

1.28
-3.13
.146

.539
.097

A. Baseline Treatment
Women
57.15
Men
55.49
p-value for gender gap
.212
B. Efficiency Advantage Treatment
Women
56.05
Men
57.05
p-value for gender gap
.527

Note: See Table A1.

PART 5

39

Table A3: Decomposition of Performance Gap between Joiners and Non-Joiners,
Parts 3 and 5.

(1)
Gap due to
selection

(2)
Part 3
Gap due to
behavioral
change

A. Baseline Treatment
Women
-.95
-1.48
%
39.08
60.92
Men
-9.15
-1.69
%
84.40
15.60
B. Efficiency Advantage Treatment
Women
-2.18
.92
%
172.34
-72.34
Men
-2.81
-1.19
%
70.25
29.75

(3)
Total
gap

(4)

(5)
Part 5
Gap due to Gap due to
behavioral
selection
change

(6)
Total
gap

-2.42
100.00
-10.85
100.00

-2.26
107.62
-1.55
100.51

.16
-7.62
.05
-.51

-2.10
100.00
-1.50
100.00

-1.27
100.00
-4.00
100.00

1.28
431.64
-3.13
169.84

-.98
-331.64
1.29
-69.84

.30
100.00
-1.84
100.00

40

For Online Publication:
Online Appendix 1. Instructions for the B treatment
(Original in French. The instructions for the EA treatment are similar except that the team
payment is 22 Euro-cents instead of 20)
You are about to participate in an experimental session on decision-making. During this session, you can
earn money. In addition, you will receive €3 for showing up on time. Your earnings will be paid to you in
cash privately at the end of the session.
The session consists of several parts. You have received the instructions for the preliminary part. The
instructions for the next parts will be distributed after you have completed the preliminary part.

Preliminary part
Your computer screen will display ten decisions, as indicated in the table below.

Each decision is a paired choice between “Option A” (on the left) and “Option B” (on the right). You will
make ten choices between option A and option B, but only one of them will be used in the end of the
session to determine your earnings for this part. You will not know in advance which decision will be
used. Obviously, each decision has an equal chance of being used in the end. Before you start making
your ten choices, please let me explain how these choices will affect your earnings for this part.
Look at Decision 1. Option A pays 2 € with 1 chance out of 10, and it pays 1.6 € with 9 chances out of 1.
Option B yields 3.85 € with 1 chance out of 10, and it pays .1 € with 9 chances out of 1. The other

41

decisions are similar, except that as you move down the table, the chances of a higher payoff for each
option increase. For example, look at Decision 2. Option A pays 2 € with 2 chances out of 10, and it pays
1.6 € with 8 chances out of 1. Option B yields 3.85 € with 2 chances out of 10, and it pays .1 € with 8
chances out of 1. In fact, for Decision 10, each option pays the highest payoff for sure, so your choice
here is between 2 € and 3.85 €.
Once you have made your ten decisions, you must validate them by pressing the « validate » button.
At the end of the session, the computer program will randomly select one of the ten decisions. For this
decision, a second random draw will determine your earnings for the option you have chosen. Earnings in
Euros for this choice will be added to your other earnings.
Please read these instructions again and raise your hand if you have any question. We shall answer to
your questions in private. It is strictly forbidden to talk with the other participants during the session.

Instructions (contd) (Instructions distributed after completion of the preliminary part)
The remaining of the session consists of six parts. In most of these parts, you will be asked to complete a
task. The method we use to determine your earnings varies across parts, as explained in detail at the
beginning of each part.
At the end of the session, once you have completed these parts, we will randomly draw one part out of six
for determining your payment. Each part has the same chance to be selected. Your payment in this part
will be added to your payment from the preliminary part and your show-up fee.
In this experiment, participants are located in two adjacent rooms. At the beginning of the first part, each
participant in each room will be paired with one participant located in the other room. You will only be
told the first name of this participant and this participant will learn your first name. You will remain
matched with the same co-participant throughout the rest of the session.
In order to protect your privacy and that of your co-participant, at the end of the session participants in the
two rooms will be dismissed at different times.
Part 1
At the beginning of this part, you enter your first name in the computer and you will be informed on the
first name of your co-participant who is located an the other room.
The task consists of converting letters into numbers during 4 minutes. Your screen displays a table with
two columns. The first column indicates letters and the second column indicates their correspondence in
numbers. You are given a letter and you must enter the corresponding number in the box on your screen.
You must validate your answer by pressing the ‘Execute’ button. Once you have validated your answer,
you are immediately informed whether your answer is correct or not.
As soon as you have validated an answer, whether it is correct or not, the conversion table of letters and
numbers is modified and a new letter to convert is displayed on your screen. You can convert as many
letters as you like during the four-minute period of time.
During these four minutes, and in all future time periods allocated to the task in this experiment, you are
allowed to read a book or a magazine that you have brought with you or to surf on the Internet. To access
the Internet, you can press the “Internet” button located at the top left of your screen; you can come back
to the task whenever you like, by pressing the “task” button located at the same place.
If part 1 is the one randomly selected for payment, you will get 20 Euro-cents per problem you solve
correctly in these 4 minutes. Your payment does not decrease if you provide an incorrect answer to a
problem. We refer to this payment as the individual payment scheme.
 Before we start, you are given a chance to practice this task during three minutes to familiarize
yourself with the task. The number of problems solved during this practice period will not affect your

42

earnings.
 Then you can convert letters into numbers during 4 minutes.
 As in all parts of the experiment, you will be informed on the number of problems you have personally
solved correctly (your “score”) at the end of this part. You will not learn your co-participant’s score in
this or in any other part until the very end of the session: At that time, regardless of which part is
selected for payment, you will be informed of your co-participant’s score in that part.
Please read these instructions again. If you have any questions, please raise your hand.
Part 2 (Instructions distributed after completion of Part 1)
You remain matched with the same co-participant. As in Part 1 you will be given 4 minutes to convert
letters into numbers. As before, you are allowed to read a book or to surf on the Internet.
But for this task your payment depends on your performance and on the performance of your coparticipant.
If Part 2 is the one randomly selected for payment, then both you and your co-participant's earnings are
determined as follows:
Your earnings = Co-participant's earnings = _€.20 * (Work Team output)
2
where Work Team output is the total number of problems correctly solved by you plus the number
correctly solved by your co-participant. Thus, the work team is paid 20 Euro-cents for every question
solved by its members, together. This amount is then divided equally between the two work team
members. We refer to this payment scheme as the team payment.
To understand how the team payment scheme differs from the individual payment scheme, please read the
following examples:
Suppose, for example, that you and your co-participant each solve 40 problems. Then in the team
payment scheme each of you will be paid (.20*80)/2 = €8, which is the same as you would receive in the
individual payment scheme.
If, on the other hand, you solve 50 problems and your co-participant solves 30, you would till be paid
(.20*80)/2 = €8 under team payment, but you (personally) would have received .20 * 50 = €10 under the
individual payment scheme.
Likewise, if you were to solve 30 problems but your co-participant 50, you would both still be paid
(.20*80)/2 = €8 under team payment, compared to the .20*30 = €6 you (personally) would receive under
the individual payment scheme.
As before, at the end of this part, you will only be informed on the total number of problems that you
have personally solved. If this part is selected for payment you will learn your co-participant’s number of
problems solved after all six parts have been completed.
If you have any questions, please raise your hand. Before we begin the work period, please answer the
following comprehension questions.

Comprehension questionnaire
1. If you solved 50 problems, how much would you be paid in the individual payment scheme we used in
Part 1?
2. If you solved 60 problems, how much would you be paid in the individual payment scheme we used in
Part 1?

43

3. If you solved 40 problems, how much would you be paid in the individual payment scheme we used in
Part 1?
4. If you and your co-participant each solve 50 problems, how much will you be paid in the team payment
scheme used in this part?
5. If you solve 60 problems and your co-participant solves 40, how much will you be paid in the team
payment scheme used in this part?
6. If you solve 40 problems and your co-participant solves 60, how much will you be paid in the team
payment scheme used in this part?
Part 3 (Instructions distributed after completion of Part 2)
As in the previous two parts you will be given 4 minutes to convert letters into numbers.
But now, before starting the task, you will get to choose which of the two previous payment schemes you
prefer to apply to your performance.
If Part 3 is the one randomly selected for payment, then your earnings are determined as follows.
 If you choose the individual payment scheme, you receive 20 Euro-cents per problem you personally
solve correctly in this part.
 If you choose the team payment scheme, we will use your co-participant's output in the previous part
(Part 2) to determine your work team's output. (We do this because your co-participant might not
choose team payment this part). In other words, your work team's output in this part equals your own
output in this part plus your co-participant's output in Part 2. As before, the team is paid 20 Euro-cents
for every unit of team output. This amount is then divided equally between the two team members, so
your earnings are again given by:
Your earnings =_€.20 * (Work Team output).
2
As before, at the end of this part you will only be informed on the total number of problems that you have
personally solved. If this part is selected for payment, you will learn your co-participant’s number of
problems solved after all six parts have been completed. You will learn your co-participant’s score in this
part regardless of whether you choose team or individual compensation.
If you have any questions, please raise your hand.
Part 4 (Instructions distributed after completion of Part 3)
You do not have to convert any letters into numbers for the fourth part of the experiment. Instead, if Part
4 is the one selected for payment, you will be paid one more time for the number of problems you (and
possibly your co-participant) solved in Part 1. Recall that, in Part 1, both you and your co-participant
were paid according to the individual payment scheme.
But you now have to choose which payment scheme you want applied to the number of problems that
were solved correctly in Part 1. You can either choose to be paid according to the individual payment
scheme, or according to the team payment scheme.
If the Part 4 is the one selected for payment, then your earnings are determined as follows.
 If you choose the individual payment scheme, you receive 20 Euro-cents per problem you solve
correctly in Part 1.
 If you choose the team payment scheme, your team's performance will equal your performance in Part
1 plus your co-participant's performance in Part 1. As before, the team is paid 20 Euro-cents times
team output, which is then divided equally between you and your co-participant.
The next computer screen will remind you how many problems you personally solved correctly in Part 1,

44

and will ask you to choose whether you want the individual payment scheme or the team payment scheme
applied to your performance. As always, you will not learn the number of problems correctly solved by
your co-participant until all parts of this experiment are completed; this holds whatever your choice in this
part.
If you have any questions, please raise your hand.
Interim Questions (Instructions distributed after completion of Part 4)
We would now like to ask you some questions about the number of problems you estimate that your coparticipant solved in the experiment so far. Thinking back to Parts 1 and 2, how many problems do you
think your co-participant solved correctly?
You earn .50 Euro more for each correct prediction in questions 1 and 3 (plus or minus 1 problem
solved).
1. Number of problems you estimate your co-participant solved in Part 1 (Recall that in Part 1, each
person worked on their own, and was paid 20 Euro-cents per problem solved):
2. To determine how confident you are you of your estimate in Question 1, please select a number from 1
to 5, where 5 indicates you believe your estimate is extremely accurate, and 1 indicates you really have no
idea of what your co-participant produced.
3. Number of problems you estimate your co-participant solved in Part 2 (Recall that in Part 2, each
person worked on a team with their co-participant; each team was paid 20 cents per problem solved,
which was shared equally between the co-participants).
4. To determine how confident you are of your estimate in Question 3, please select a number from 1 to 5,
where 5 indicates you believe your estimate is extremely accurate, and 1 indicates you really have no idea
of what your co-participant produced.
Part 5 (Instructions distributed after completion of the interim questionnaire)
You will again be given 4 minutes to convert letters into numbers.
Before this, you will again have to choose which of the two possible payment schemes will be applied to
your performance in this part. Next, we will tell you which payment scheme your co-participant selected.
The team payment is used only if both you and your co-participant choose it.
If Part 5 is the one randomly selected for payment, then your earnings are determined as follows.
 If you choose the individual payment scheme, you receive 20 Euro-cents per problem you personally
solve correctly in this part.
 If you AND your co-participant both choose the team payment scheme, your team's performance will
equal your performance in this part plus your co-participant's performance in this part. As always, the
team is paid 20 Euro-cents times team output, which is then divided equally between you and your coparticipant.
 If one of you chooses the individual payment scheme and the other one chooses the team payment
scheme, both you and your co-participant are paid the individual payment scheme. Therefore, you
receive 20 Euro-cents per problem you personally solve correctly in this part.
The next computer screen will ask you to choose between the individual payment scheme or the team
payment scheme. Then, you will be informed of the choice of your co-participant. Last, you will then be
given 4 minutes to convert letters into numbers. As always, reading books or magazines or surfing on the
Internet is allowed during this time.

45

If you have any questions, please raise your hand.
Part 6 (Instructions distributed after completion of Part 5)
You will again be given 4 minutes to convert letters into numbers. Everything is exactly the same as in
Part 5, except that persons who form teams will have an opportunity to communicate with each other
before starting the task.
As before, you will begin by choosing which of the two possible payment schemes you prefer to apply to
your performance in this part. Next, we will tell you which payment scheme your co-participant selected.
The team payment is used only if both you and your co-participant choose it.
If both you AND your co-participant have chosen the team payment, you are given two minutes to
exchange instant messages with your co-participant, before performing the task. A box will appear on
your screen in which you can type your messages. The messages must not include information that could
identify you or your co-participant; they must not be threatening; and they must use an appropriate
language.
Note that this box will also appear on your screen even if you and your co-participant do not form a team,
i.e. even if one or both of you selected the individual payment scheme. In this case, you may type any
message you want, but your messages will not be transmitted to your co-participant.
If Part 6 is the one randomly selected for payment, then your earnings are determined as in Part 5.
 The next computer screen will ask you to choose whether you want individual payment scheme or the
team payment scheme applied to your performance.
 Then, whatever your choice, you will be informed of the choice of your co-participant.
 When applicable, you have two minutes to exchange instant messages with your co-participant.
 Last, you will be given 4 minutes to convert letters into numbers. Reading books or magazines or
surfing on the Internet is allowed during this time.
After this part has been completed, you will have to answer a few last questions and your screen will give
you a feedback on your payments in the preliminary part and in the part between 1 and 6 that has been
drawn randomly. If you have any questions, please raise your hand.
Exit questionnaire (Displayed on the computer screen at the very end of the session before feedback on
payoffs. Starting with the EA treatments, the same questionnaire was displayed regarding choices in Part
5, except that we added an item, mentioned in italics in the following list))
In Part 1, you were paid under an individual payment scheme; in Part 2, you were paid under a team
payment scheme. At the beginning of Part 3, you chose between being paid under an individual or a team
payment scheme. Could you explain why you chose/avoided the team payment scheme at that time?
I chose not to work on a team because (choose all that apply):
-I was concerned that my partner might not be very good at this task.
-I was concerned that my partner might not like to work very hard at this task.
-I was concerned that being on a team would give my partner a chance to be paid without working very
hard
-I thought that working on my own would motivate me more
-I prefer to work on my own rather than working on a team
-I did not want to ‘compete’ with my co-participant to know which would have the best performance
- I did not want to be embarrassed if I chose team compensation but may partner did not
-Other (please describe)

46

I chose to work on a team because (choose all that apply):
-I thought my partner might be quite good at this task
-I thought my partner might like to work quite hard at this task
-Being on a team gives me an opportunity to be paid even if I don’t work very hard
-I thought that being on a team might motivate me more
-I thought that being on a team might motivate my partner more
-I prefer to be part of a team rather than just working on my own
-I thought it would be fun to ‘compete’ with my co-participant for the best performance
-I did not want to disappoint my partner in case he/she wanted to form a team
-Other (please describe)

47

Online Appendix 2. Supplementary Tables
Table O-1: Task Performance and Beliefs by Partner’s Gender,
B and EA Treatments Combined

A. Own, Actual Performance
Women, female partner
Women, male partner
p-value for partner gender effect
Men, female partner
Men, male partner
p-value for partner gender effect
B. Beliefs re Partner’s Performance
Women, female partner
Women, male partner
p-value for partner gender effect
Men, female partner
Men, male partner
p-value for partner gender effect

(1)

(2)

Part 1:
Individual
Compensation

Part 2:
Team
Compensation

56.21
55.69
.669
55.27
55.05
.870

57.32
56.59
.523
56.49
54.50
.189

.041
.109

38
49

.041
.560

49
38

53.63
55.20
.187
50.63
51.21
.558

54.92
56.45
.231
51.71
53.39
.149

.005
.046

38
49

.012
.000

49
38

(3)
p-value for
difference
between
Parts 1 and 2

(4)
Sample
Size

48

Table O-2: Regressions for the Probability of Choosing Team Pay, Parts 4 and 6

Female
Own Part 1 output
Holt-Laury switch point
Multiple switches
Beliefs re partner’s Part 1 output

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.0819
(0.0704)
0.1750**
(0.0495)
0.2410**
(0.0541)
0.4203**
(0.0788)
0.4137**
(0.0801)

0.1151
(0.0658)
0.1775**
(0.0490)
0.2407**
(0.0542)
0.4285**
(0.0741)
0.3802**
(0.0814)

0.1086
(0.0664)
0.1780**
(0.0487)
0.2396**
(0.0544)
0.4213**
(0.0749)
0.3815**
(0.0811)

0.0057
(0.0681)
0.1787**
(0.0488)
0.2427**
(0.0546)
0.3974**
(0.0757)
0.3861**
(0.0740)

-0.0165**
(0.0050)

-0.0160**
(0.0050)
-0.0232
(0.0210)
-0.0129
(0.1370)

0.238

0.275

0.278

-0.0291**
(0.0057)
-0.0219
(0.0195)
-0.0341
(0.1323)
0.0270**
(0.0060)
0.330

.370
.953

.389
.660

.400
.717

.384
.914

Part6 * Male
Part6 * Female
EA * Male
EA * Female
R-squared
p-values for:
Part6 * Male = Part6 * Female
EA * Male = EA * Female

Note: ** p<0.01, * p<0.05. Standard errors, clustered on participants, in parentheses. N=338 in all
columns.

49

Table O-3: Effects of Team Gender Mix on the Probability of Choosing Team Pay, without
covariates

A. Baseline Treatment
MF
FM
FF
R-squared
B. EA Treatment
MF
FM
FF
R-squared

(1)
Part 3

(2)
Part 4

(3)
Part 5

(4)
Part 6

-.1071
(.1165)
.0714
(.1165)
.1071
(.1303)
.058

.0357
(.1100)
.1429
(.1100)
-.0089
(.1230)
.035

-.0867
(.1485)
.2733*
(.1485)
.1905
(.1664)
.126

-.0500
(.1628)
.1500
(.1628)
.1071
(.1823)
.036

-.0595
(.1519)
-.0119
(.1519)
-.0833
(.1501)
.005

.1071
(.1516)
.1071
(.1516)
.1742
(.1498)
.016

.1369
(.1348)
.1369
(.1348)
.1477
(.1332)
.020

.0476
(.1296)
.2381*
(.1296)
.0606
(.1280)
.043

Note: *** p<.01, ** p<.05, * p<.1. Table shows OLS regression coefficients of team choice on indicators for the
gender mix of the prospective team, without covariates. “MF” denotes a male participant with a female partner;
MM is the omitted category. Standard errors are in parentheses. N=86 in columns (1) and (2), and 76 in columns (3)
and (4).

50

Table O-4: Effects of Gender Mix on the the Probability of Choosing Team Pay,
Regression Estimates for Parts 3 and 5

MF
FM
FF

(1)
-.0212
(.0821)
.1631
(.1004)
.1378
(.1153)

(2)
-.0181
(.0774)
.1909
(.0968)
.1781
(.1095)
-.0151**
(.0051)

(3)
-.0173
(.0763)
.1717
(.0966)
.1802
(.1087)
-.0143**
(.0050)
-.0366
(.0206)
.1409
(.1215)

(4)
.0035
(.0777)
.0463
(.0940)
.1135
(.1110)
-.0294**
(.0053)
-.0374
(.0191)
.1151
(.1171)
.0309**
(.0063)

.0883
(.0454)
.2082**
(.0545)
.5265**
(.0779)
.3354**
(.0883)
.242

.0906*
(.0453)
.2080**
(.0545)
.5346**
(.0722)
.3030**
(.0898)
.272

.0949*
(.0448)
.2058**
(.0546)
.5166**
(.0724)
.2983**
(.0882)
.288

.0957*
(.0450)
.2094**
(.0544)
.4929**
(.0739)
.2945**
(.0793)
.352

Own Part 1 output
Holt-Laury switch point
Multiple switches
Beliefs re partner’s Part 1 output

Part5 * Male
Part5 * Female
EA * Male
EA * Female
R-squared

Note: ** p<0.01, * p<0.05. Standard errors, clustered on participants, in parentheses. N=338 in all
columns. “MF” denotes a male participant with a female partner; MM is the omitted category.

