NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SMART AND ILLICIT:
WHO BECOMES AN ENTREPRENEUR AND DO THEY EARN MORE?
Ross Levine
Yona Rubinstein
Working Paper 19276
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19276
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

Previously circulated as "Smart and Illicit: Who Becomes an Entrepreneur and Does it Pay?" We thank
Gary Becker, Moshe Buchinsky, David De Meza, Stephen Durlauf, Christian Dustmann, Luis Garicano,
Naomi Hausman, Erik Hurst, Chinhui Juhn, Ed Lazear, Gustavo Manso, Casey Mulligan, Raman Nanda,
Ignacio Palacios-Huerta, Steve Pischke, Luis Rayo, Andrei Shleifer, Chris Stanton, John Sutton, Ivo
Welch, Noam Yuchtman, and seminar participants at the American Economic Association meetings,
Asia Bureau of Financial and Economic Research, Harvard Business School, IDC, London School
of Economics, NBER Summer Institute, NYU, Simon Fraser University, University of California-Berkeley,
University of Chicago, University College-London, UCLA, University of Minnesota, and Victoria
University of Wellington for helpful comments. Rubinstein thanks STICERD for financial support.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Ross Levine and Yona Rubinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Smart and Illicit: Who Becomes an Entrepreneur and Do They Earn More?
Ross Levine and Yona Rubinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 19276
August 2013,Revised September 2015
JEL No. G32,J24,J3,L26
ABSTRACT
We disaggregate the self-employed into incorporated and unincorporated to distinguish between "entrepreneurs"
and other business owners. We show that the incorporated self-employed and their businesses engage
in activities that demand comparatively strong nonroutine cognitive abilities, while the unincorporated
and their firms perform tasks demanding relatively strong manual skills. The incorporated selfemployed
have distinct cognitive and noncognitive traits. Besides tending to be white, male, and come from
higher-income families, the incorporated—as teenagers—typically scored higher on learning aptitude
tests, had greater self-esteem, and engaged in more disruptive, illicit activities. The combination of
"smart" and "illicit" tendencies as youths accounts for both entry into entrepreneurship and the comparative
earnings of entrepreneurs. In contrast to past research, we find that entrepreneurs earn more per hour
and work more hours than their salaried and unincorporated counterparts.
Ross Levine
Haas School of Business
University of California at Berkeley
545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685)
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu
Yona Rubinstein
Department of Management
London School of Economics
London
United Kingdom
y.rubinstein@lse.ac.uk

1

I.

Introduction
Economists since Adam Smith (1776) have emphasized that entrepreneurs spur

improvements in living standards. For example, Schumpeter (1911) argued that entrepreneurs
drive economic growth by creating and introducing new goods, services, and production processes
that displace old businesses. And, in models of the allocation of talent by Lucas (1978), Baumol
(1990), Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny (1991), and Gennaioli et al. (2013), entrepreneurs play a
unique role in shaping the productivity of firms and hence the growth rate of entire economies.
Yet, a substantial body of research—using data on the self-employed to draw inferences
about entrepreneurship—concludes that entrepreneurs do not earn more than their salaried
counterparts (e.g., Borjas and Bronars (1989), Evans and Leighton (1989), and Moskowitz and
Vissing-Jorgensen (2002)). For example, Hamilton (2000) finds that the median self-employed
individual has lower initial earnings and slower earnings growth than those of a salaried worker
with the same observed traits. To account for entry into self-employment, therefore, research
points to (a) the non-pecuniary benefits of self-employment, such as being “one’s own boss”
(Hurst and Pugsley 2011), (b) the fat right tail of the self-employment earnings distribution, and
(c) the “over confidence” of entrepreneurs, as stressed by Bernardo and Welch (2001) and De
Meza and Southey (1996).
Beyond earnings, little is known about who becomes an entrepreneur and what is known is
puzzling. For Schumpeter (1911), entrepreneurs are “disruptive” economic leaders who take risks
and break from routine. For Lucas (1978), Baumol (1990), Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny (1991),
and Gennaioli et al. (2013), entrepreneurs have unique skills that influence productivity,
innovation, and growth. Yet, as we document below, the self-employed look ordinary. The
average self-employed business owner and salaried worker have similar education, aptitude scores,
and family backgrounds. If the self-employed are a good proxy for “growth-creating
entrepreneurs,” it is puzzling that their cognitive and noncognitive traits are similar to those of
salaried workers and that they earn less.
Perhaps, self-employment is not a good proxy for entrepreneurship. Glaeser (2007) argues
that self-employment aggregates together different types of activities and individuals, making
“little distinction between Michael Bloomberg and a hot dog vendor.” While some of the self-

2

employed are creative economic leaders who mobilize resources for distinctive ventures, others
engage in qualitatively different business activities that deliver routine services. For instance,
Evans and Leighton (1989) argue that in the United States many self-employed are one-person
retail business owners who did not succeed as salaried workers. Gennaioli et al (2013) and La
Porta and Shleifer (2008) find in a large cross-section of countries that many of the self-employed
run low-productivity, commonplace businesses. They are not Schumpeterian entrepreneurs. Thus,
studying the self-employed in general might yield misguided inferences about entrepreneurs in
particular.
In light of these concerns about the gap between the conception and measurement of
entrepreneurship, we first offer a new empirical proxy for entrepreneurship and show that it is
closely aligned with the Schumpeterian view of entrepreneurship. Specifically, we disaggregate
the self-employed into the incorporated and unincorporated and discover that on average (a) the
incorporated engage in the types of entrepreneurial activities emphasized by Schumpeter, while
the unincorporated do not and (b) the incorporated open different types of businesses from those
owned by the unincorporated self-employed. To do this, we use the U.S. Department of Labor’s
Dictionary of Occupational Titles to document that the incorporated self-employed and their
businesses engage in activities demanding a high degree of nonroutine cognitive skills, such as (a)
creativity, analytical flexibility, and generalized problem-solving and (b) complex interpersonal
communications such as persuading, selling, and managing others. We view these skills as closely
aligned with the Schumpeterian conception of entrepreneurship. In contrast, we find that
unincorporated business owners engage in activities, and open businesses, that demand notably
low-levels of these cognitive skills and instead demand high-levels of eye, hand, and foot
coordination, e.g., landscaping, truck driving, and carpentry. Strong manual skills are not defining
features of the Schumpeterian view of entrepreneurship.
Our finding that business owners engaged in nonroutine, innovative activities tend to select
the incorporated business form is consistent with the history and legal characteristics of
corporations. Over several centuries, people created and honed the two defining legal
characteristics of the incorporated business—limited liability and a separate legal identity (Harris
2000). Limited liability increases the appeal of purchasing equity in higher-risk projects. The

3

separate legal identity reduces the likelihood that shocks to individual owners will disrupt the
firm’s activities, because it is the corporation that owns property and enters into contracts with
workers, suppliers, and clients, not the individual owners. Not all businesses, however, will choose
to incorporate. There are direct costs of incorporation, such as annual fees and the preparation of
more elaborate financial statements, and indirect agency costs associated with the separation of
ownership and control. Therefore, when people start businesses engaged in more routine activities
that do not benefit much from limited liability or having a separate legal identity, they are more
likely to select the unincorporated business form; and, when people start businesses engaged in
more novel, innovative, and risky endeavors—for which limited liability and the separate legal
identity can play more supportive roles—the incorporated business form will tend to be more
appropriate. From this perspective, the choice of the legal form of the business reflects the nature
of the planned business activity.
Consistent with this view, we find that businesses seldom change their legal form:
Unincorporated businesses rarely incorporate and incorporated businesses rarely become
unincorporated sole proprietorships or partnerships. Although there might be concerns that
successful unincorporated businesses eventually incorporate, this happens infrequently. In our
sample, we find that only 15% of the incorporated self-employed switched the legal form of their
business from unincorporated to incorporated. The evidence suggests that the choice of creating an
incorporated or unincorporated business generally reflects the planned business activity, not it’s ex
post performance.
Using our proxy of entrepreneurship, we then ask: who becomes an entrepreneur and do
they earn more? We use the March Supplements of the Current Population Survey (CPS) and the
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979 (NLSY79). Although the CPS was not designed as a
longitudinal study, we match individuals across time to create a two-year panel. This allows us to
control for individual effects in assessing the change in earnings associated with a person who
switches into or out of entrepreneurship. Although the NLSY79 surveys fewer individuals than the
CPS, it has two advantages. First, it traces individuals from when they were teenagers or young
adults in 1979 through 2012. Second, the NLSY79 has information on cognitive and noncognitive
traits before individuals become prime age workers, including data on learning aptitude,

4

personality traits, and the degree to which the individual engages in illicit activities. This provides
insights on who becomes an entrepreneur—and who succeeds as one.
We find strong sorting into employment types based on cognitive and noncognitive traits.
The incorporated tend to be white, male, more educated, and more likely to come from highearning, well-educated, two-parent families than salaried workers. Even as teenagers, those who
incorporate later in life tend to score higher on learning aptitude tests, exhibit greater self-esteem,
and engage in more illicit activities than other people. The unincorporated are very different.
Although those who become unincorporated business owners also tend to engage in more illicit
activities as youths than salaried workers, the unincorporated do not score higher on learning
aptitude tests.
Moreover, it is a particular mixture of pre-labor market traits that is most powerfully
associated with entrepreneurship. People who both engage in illicit activities as teenagers and
score highly on learning aptitude tests have a much greater tendency to become incorporated selfemployed business owners than others. It is the particular mixture of “smart” and “illicit”
characteristics that accounts for sorting into incorporated self-employment. Taken together, these
findings on who becomes an entrepreneur are very consistent with the Schumpeterian conception
of entrepreneurship. To create and introduce novel products under risky and uncertain conditions
and “destroy” the positions of incumbent firms, it is unsurprising that the Schumpeterian
entrepreneur is self-confident, smart, and prone to challenging convention.
These findings on the self-sorting of individuals into different employment types based on
pre-labor market traits further highlight the usefulness of disaggregating the self-employed into
incorporated and unincorporated business owners. We find that people with smart and illicit traits
as youths who later run incorporated businesses are more likely to run businesses in industries
demanding workers with high levels of creative thinking, analytically advanced problem solving,
and strong communication skills. But, people with smart and illicit traits as youths who instead run
unincorporated businesses are not more likely to run firms in industries that demand such strong
nonroutine cognitive from their workers. Thus, even among “smart and illicit” business owners,
the choice of the legal form of the business provides information about the nature of their business.

5

We next examine earnings. Previous studies show that the typical self-employed business
owner earns less than the typical salaried worker and conclude that entrepreneurship is associated
with lower earnings. We make two contributions. First, rather than studying the aggregate group
of self-employed, we distinguish between the incorporated—who are a better proxy for
Schumpeterian entrepreneurs—and other business owners. Second, we use panel data to address
key selection challenges associated with determining whether an individual earns more when
becoming an incorporated or unincorporated business owner. In our examination of earnings, we
do not evaluate the impact of randomly making somebody a business owner. We examine what
happens to earnings when a person chooses to become self-employed.
Using data from both the CPS and the NLSY79, we find both that (a) the incorporated selfemployed earn much more per hour and work many more hours than comparable salaried workers
and (b) the unincorporated self-employed earn much less. Consistent with our findings on who
becomes an entrepreneur, much of the earnings gap, especially between incorporated business
owners and salaried workers, reflects person-specific influences. Nonetheless, there is a large,
additional boost in earnings when individuals switch into incorporated self-employment. For
example, the mean residual annual earnings of an individual who switches from a salaried job to
become an incorporated business owner rise by 18% (relative to salaried workers) after accounting
for individual effects. Comparing this estimate with the estimated earnings gap without fixed
effects (52%), the results show that people who become incorporated business owners were very
successful salaried workers i.e., they were earning about 34% more as salaried workers than other
salaried workers with the same observable traits who do not become incorporated business owners.
The results are very different for the unincorporated self-employed, who tend to be comparatively
unsuccessful salaried workers. We believe this is the first paper to show that (a) unincorporated
business owners tend to be comparatively unsuccessful salaried workers, (b) entrepreneurs tend to
be relatively successful salaried workers, and (c) people who choose to become entrepreneurs tend
to enjoy a sizeable increase in earnings beyond their high incomes as salaried workers.
Since people can select into and out of incorporated self-employment, this might raise
concerns with these results. For example, if people choose to establish incorporated businesses
when they have a very promising business idea and become unincorporated business owners when

6

the expected gains are smaller, then the change in earnings might not reflect the entrepreneurial
nature of the planned business activity. Similarly, if people try out their business idea in the form
of an unincorporated enterprise and then incorporate if the business succeeds, then the estimated
change in earnings will not accurately measure the change in earnings from becoming an
entrepreneur. Our findings, summarized above, that incorporated business owners and their
workers engage in qualitatively different activities (nonroutine cognitive) from those of
unincorporated businesses (manual dexterity) suggest that such selection issues are not large.
Nevertheless, we directly analyze switching across self-employment types.
We examine selection into and out of incorporated self-employment by exploiting the
panel nature of the NLSY79. We study self-employment spells, where a self-employment spell is
the full set of consecutive years that a person is self-employed. We find that there is some positive
selection into incorporated self-employment based on success as an unincorporated business
owner. As reported above, only 15% of people who complete a self-employment spell as an
incorporated business owner began the spell as unincorporated. Furthermore, although these
switchers tend to be the successful unincorporated business owners, they do not materially affect
the estimated increase in earnings associated with an individual becoming an incorporated selfemployed business owner. We also find very little switching across self-employment spells. About
half of the people in the NLSY79 sample have multiple self-employment spells. Of these, 84% are
either incorporated or unincorporated in all of their spells. Moreover, when we classify all of an
individual’s self-employment observations as either incorporated or unincorporated using the first
year of the first self-employment spell, all of the results hold. Finally we find evidence that
business owners exercise the option to quit when the business is unsuccessful. Yet, the effect on
the estimated increases in earnings is small. In sum, our results on earnings help account for the
puzzle concerning the negative returns to self-employment: the incorporated earn more than
salaried workers, the unincorporated earn less, and there are more unincorporated than
incorporated individuals.
We next link these results on earnings with the earlier examination of who becomes an
entrepreneur and discover that many of the same cognitive and noncognitive traits that explain
selection into entrepreneurship also account for success as an entrepreneur. People with both high

7

AFQT and high illicit scores as youths tend to experience much larger increases in earnings when
they become incorporated self-employed business owners than people without that combination of
traits. Yet, this combination of “smart and illicit” traits is associated with smaller earnings for
unincorporated business owners. While past research shows the importance of noncognitive traits
for labor market outcomes (Bowles et al. 2001; Heckman and Rubinstein, 2001; Heckman et al.
2006; Heckman, 2000), we document that some mixtures of traits receive positive or negative
remuneration depending on the activity.
We close the paper with an examination of the distribution of earnings. Previous works
shows that the self-employed have a much wider dispersion of earnings than salaried workers,
suggesting that self-employment is risker. We first confirm that this result holds when separately
examining incorporated and unincorporated self-employed: both have a wider dispersion of
earnings than salaried employees. For example, the quantile analyses indicate that exceptionally
successful incorporated business owners (90th percentile) tend to earn almost $95,000 more per
annum than exceptionally successful salaried workers. Second, we show that much of this extra
dispersion reflects person specific effects, not the extra gains and losses associated with business
ownership. Third, after accounting for individual effects, the estimated earnings of the
incorporated self-employed are greater than those of comparable salaried workers at each decile of
the earnings distribution. Finally, our estimates indicate that the coefficient of variation in earnings
is 60% greater when a person is an incorporated business owner than when he is a salaried worker.
This is smaller than a similar comparison of the coefficient of variation on the S&P 500 and
Treasury Bills.
The paper is organized as following. Section II presents that data and summary statistics.
Section III relates the Schumpeterian conception of entrepreneurship to the different tasks
performed by incorporated and unincorporated business owners and their employees. We study
who becomes an entrepreneur and whether they earn more in Sections IV and V respectively.
Section VI concludes.

8

II.

Data and Summary Statistics Across Employment Types
We use three sets of data to (1) assess whether the incorporated self-employed perform

activities—and run businesses—that fit the Schumpeterian conception of entrepreneurship while
the unincorporated self-employed perform tasks and open businesses that are qualitatively
different, (2) examine the sorting of individuals based cognitive and noncognitive traits into
different employment types—as measured by salaried, unincorporated self-employed, and
incorporated self-employed types—and different business activities—as measured by routine and
nonroutine activities, and (3) evaluate earnings following the self-sorting of people into
employment types.

A. CPS: Data and summary statistics on labor market outcomes and demographics
We use the March Annual Demographic Survey files of the CPS for the work years 1995
through 2012. We start in 1995 because (a) the measure of incorporation changed following the
redesign of the CPS in 1994 (Hipple 2010), (b) the CPS improved its top-coding in work year
1995 by allowing for differences across classes of workers and demographics, and (c) the post1995 period corresponds closely to the relevant years from the NLSY79. For the summary
statistics, we include prime age workers (25 - 55 years old) who do not live within group quarters,
have missing data on relevant demographics, or work in agriculture or the military.
The CPS classifies all workers in each year as either salaried or self-employed, and among
the self-employed, indicates whether individuals are incorporated or unincorporated. Specifically,
individuals are asked about their employment class for their main job: “Were you employed by a
government, by a private company, a nonprofit organization, or were you self-employed (or
working in a family business)?” Those responding that they are self-employed are further asked,
“Is this business incorporated?” 1 In terms of occupation, about half of the incorporated selfemployed are managers and no other three digit occupation accounts for more than 3.5% of the
1

The core distinction in the survey is between unincorporated businesses, such as sole proprietorships and
partnerships, and incorporated businesses. The CPS and NLSY79 provide self-reported classifications based on this
coarse distinction. With respect to legal and tax definitions, there are many types of corporations and hybrid
institutions. Most typically, C corporations are taxed separately from their owners. S corporations have no more than
100 shareholders and all income is passed through to shareholders for tax purposes. In terms of hybrid institutions,
there are limited liability limited partnerships, limited liability partnerships, limited partnerships, etc.

9

incorporated self-employed. Physicians and surgeons (3.3%), lawyers (3.3%), and accountants
(1.3%) combine to account for less than 8% of incorporated self-employment. With respect to the
unincorporated, about 25% are managers. Carpenters (9.2%), truck drivers (4.6%), and automobile
mechanics (3.5%) combine to account for about 17% of unincorporated self-employment.
We also construct a two-year matched panel. The CPS interviews a household for four
consecutive months. The next year, the CPS returns to the same location. In most cases, the
second interview involves the same household as the first interview. We follow the guidelines in
Madrian and Lefren (2000) for matching CPS households across time. This involves checking the
age, race, gender, education, etc. of those interviewed.
Panel A of Table 1 provides summary statistics from the CPS on the age, race, gender,
education, and labor market outcomes of individuals reported as working while distinguishing
among salaried workers, all self-employed workers, the unincorporated self-employed, and the
incorporated self-employed. Hourly earnings are defined as real annual earnings divided by the
product of weekly working hours and annual working weeks, where the Consumer Price Index is
used to deflate earnings to 2010 dollars. All CPS calculations are weighted using the March
supplement weights.
Compared to the median self-employed individual, the median salaried worker earns more
per hour and has similar educational attainment. For example, salaried workers have on average
13.7 years of education, while the self-employed have 13.9. These summary statistics confirm the
puzzle emerging from the extant literature: If entrepreneurship drives technological innovation and
growth, it is odd that the self-employed, which are often used to draw inferences about
entrepreneurship, earn less and have similar levels of education as salaried workers.
In contrast to past work, our demarcation between incorporated and unincorporated selfemployment highlights two differences. First, the median incorporated self-employed worker
earns much more per hour—and works many more hours—than the median salaried and
unincorporated individual. Indeed, median hourly earnings of the incorporated are about 80
percent greater than that of the unincorporated self-employed and 35 percent more than salaried
employees.

10

Second, the incorporated self-employed have distinct demographic and educational traits.
The incorporated tend to be disproportionately white, male, and highly educated. For example,
women account for 48 percent of the sample of workers, but only 28 percent of the incorporated
self-employed. As another example, while 33 percent of salaried workers graduate from college,
46 percent of the incorporated self-employed have a college degree. Simply comparing salaried
and self-employed workers conceals huge differences across employment types.

B. NLSY79: Data and summary statistics on labor market outcomes and demographics
The NLSY79 is a representative survey of 12,686 individuals who were 15-22 years old
when they were first surveyed in 1979. 2 Individuals were surveyed annually through 1994 and
have since been surveyed biennially. We use survey years 1979 through 2012. Since nobody in
our sample is above the age of 55, the NLSY79 sample corresponds to that of the CPS analyses. 3
The NLSY79 survey is conducted every other year starting in 1994.
Although the NLSY79 surveys a smaller cross section of people than the CPS, it has two
advantages. First, the NLSY79 is an extensive panel that traces individuals from when they were
15-22 years old through the age of 48-55. Thus, we follow virtually the entire career path of
individuals. Second, the NLSY79 provides detailed information about the cognitive and
noncognitive traits of individuals before they become prime age workers. Thus, we can examine
how the traits of individuals when they were teenagers account for career choices later in life. We
wait to describe these unique traits when we focus our examination on the sorting of individuals
into different employment types based on these pre-labor market traits.
As shown in Table 1, the summary statistics from the NLSY79 and CPS provide very
similar messages about labor market outcomes and basic demographics across employment types. 4
First, the median earnings of salaried workers are greater than those of the self-employed. Second,
2

We use the cross-sectional sample (6,111 individuals), the supplemental samples (5,295 individuals), and the
military sample (1,280 individuals).
3
Although Fairlie (2005) and Fairlie and Meyer (1996) document the similarities between CPS and NLSY samples,
we note that the NLSY draws on a younger sample of individuals. Since the incorporated self-employed are older than
other employment types, a smaller percentage of the NLSY sample is incorporated than the CPS sample.
4
Since the basic unit of analysis is an individual-year observation and some people work in different employment
types during their careers, we weight by the number of years the person worked in each type when providing summary
statistics about fixed characteristics by employment type.

11

this conceals enormous differences between the incorporated and unincorporated self-employed.
The median incorporated self-employed individual earns about 50 percent more per hour and
works about 25 percent more hours than the median salaried worker. In contrast, the median
unincorporated business owner earns about 15 percent less per hour than the median salaried
worker. Third, the incorporated self-employed are disproportionately white, male, and highly
educated, while the unincorporated tend to be less educated than salaried workers. The
incorporated are notably different from the unincorporated self-employed. Hurst, Li, and Pugsley
(2014) show that the self-employed underreport their incomes, which might account for some of
the lower median reported earnings of the unincorporated self-employed.

C. Job task requirements—DOT: Data and summary statistics
To assess whether the incorporated self-employed perform different tasks and run different
types of businesses from the unincorporated, we use the U.S. Department of Labor’s Dictionary of
Occupational Titles (DOT) to measure the routine and nonroutine skills demanded of each
occupation. The DOT was constructed in 1939 to help employment offices match job seekers with
job openings. It provides information on the skills demanded of over 12,000 occupations. The
DOT was updated in 1949, 1964, 1977, and 1991, and replaced by the O*NET in 1998. Given the
timing of our study, we use the 1991 DOT, and confirm the results with the 1977 DOT.
The DOT aggregates information into five skill categories that are relevant for our study of
entrepreneurship. For each category, it assigns a value between zero and ten, where higher values
signify that the job requires more of that skill. The first two skill categories measure the
nonroutine cognitive skills demanded by particular jobs.
•

Nonroutine Analytical indicates the degree to which the task demands analytical
flexibility, creativity, reasoning, and generalized problem-solving.

•

Nonroutine Direction, Control, Planning indicates the degree to which the task
demands complex interpersonal communications such as persuading, selling, and
managing others.

We view these nonroutine cognitive skill categories as closely aligned with “entrepreneurial”
activities, such as creating and commercializing a distinctive product, analyzing risks and market

12

opportunities, coordinating the work of others, addressing an assortment of financial,
organizational, and strategic challenges, and convincing others of the value of the endeavor.
The DOT also provides data on three categories of skills that align less directly with
influential conceptions of entrepreneurship (e.g., Schumpeter (1911), Knight (1921), Baumol
(1968, 1990), Lucas (1978), Murphy et al (1991), and Gennaioli et al. (2013).
•

Nonroutine Manual measures the degree to which the task demands eye, hand, and
foot coordination, which is high in such activities as landscaping, truck driving,
carpentry, plumbing, and piloting an airline.

•

Routine Analytical measures the degree to which the task requires the precise
attainment of set standards, such as record-keeping or repetitive customer service (e.g.,
bank teller);

•

Routine Manual measures the degree to which the task requires repetitive manual
tasks, such as picking or sorting fruit or repetitive assembly.

To link the DOT measures to the CPS and NLSY79 data, we follow Autor, Levy, and
Murnane (2003) and use the codes provided on David Autor’s website. We use the DOT to
examine cross-sectional differences in the skill requirements of the incorporated and
unincorporated self-employed and to measure differences in the types of businesses run by
incorporated and unincorporated business owners.
Table 2 provides summary statistics of the job task requirements across employment types.
Panel A reports results for the CPS sample and Panel B reports summary statistics for the
NLSY79 sample. In each panel, we present summary statistics on (1) the full sample of
individuals and (2) the job task requirements of individuals last year if they were salaried workers
last year. That is, we provide information on the job task requirements of their salaried jobs last
year while differentiating by employment type this year.
Table 2 illustrates that (1) the incorporated self-employed engage in activities that demand
greater nonroutine analytical skills than the unincorporated self-employed and salaried workers
and (2) the unincorporated self-employed engage in jobs that demand greater manual skills than
the incorporated self-employed and salaried workers. In both the CPS and NLSY79 samples, the
incorporated self-employed have greater (a) Nonroutine Analytical and (b) Nonroutine Direction,

13

Control, and Planning values than the unincorporated. In contrast, the unincorporated have larger
Nonroutine Manual values. Aggregating the incorporated and unincorporated into a composite
group of self-employed individuals blurs differences in the job task requirements of the activities
associated with these distinct self-employment types.
The data in Table 2 also show that the sharp differences in the skills demanded of people
who sort into incorporated and unincorporated self-employment exist before they become business
owners. Individuals who become incorporated self-employed tend to have worked in salaried jobs
demanding more nonroutine cognitive skills than those who become unincorporated business
owners or those who remain as salaried employees. In contrast, people who become
unincorporated self-employed tend to have worked in salaried jobs demanding a higher-level of
manual skills. To the extent that one associates entrepreneurship with nonroutine cognitive
activities, the summary statistics suggest that the incorporated self-employed engage (and
engaged) in more quintessentially entrepreneurial activities than individuals opening
unincorporated businesses.

III. The Schumpeterian Entrepreneur and Other Self-employed Business Owners
As stressed in the Introduction, we adopt a Schumpeterian conception of entrepreneurship
in which entrepreneurs are creative economic leaders who disrupt existing market conditions and
introduce new goods, services, and production processes. From this perspective, entrepreneurship
is not primarily about efficiently coordinating the operation of a firm; it is primarily about
breaking from the normal, identifying new opportunities, overturning existing structures, taking
risk, and adding something novel to the market. 5
Based on this view, we expect that entrepreneurs will engage in activities that demand
comparatively high-levels of particular skills measured in the DOT. We expect that entrepreneurs
will perform activities that demand disproportionately high-levels of Nonroutine Analytical and
Nonroutine Direction, Control, and Planning skills, such as creative thinking, analytical flexibility,
deft problem solving, and the ability to persuade others of the value of a new endeavor. In contrast,
5

Bertrand and Schoar (2003), Bloom and Van Reenen (2007), and Malmendier and Tate (2009) examine the impact
of middle- and upper-management on firm performance. Our focus is on the traits of entrepreneurs.

14

the Schumpeterian conception of entrepreneurship does not stress other skills measured in the
DOT, such as Nonroutine Manual and Routine Analytical skills. Of course, the link between the
Schumpeterian concept of entrepreneurship and the measures of job skill requirements in the DOT
is imperfect. But, Schumpeter’s focus on creative destruction is more closely aligned with
nonroutine cognitive skills than it is with sound eye-hand coordination.
Combining the Schumpeterian conception of entrepreneurship and the DOT’s measures of
job skill requirements provides testable implications about our empirical proxy of
entrepreneurship: the incorporated self-employed. If entrepreneurs engage in activities that
demand high-levels of nonroutine cognitive skills and if entrepreneurs favor the incorporated
business form, then we should find that the incorporated self-employed perform activities that
demand high-levels of expertise in creative thinking, analytical flexibility, adept problem solving,
and the ability to motivate and persuade others. As noted in the Introduction, we expect
entrepreneurs to favor the incorporated business form to the extent that limited liability and its
separate legal identify facilitate novel, risky endeavors. In turn, we expect people opening more
routine businesses that will benefit less from these legal characteristics to select the
unincorporated business form given the additional reporting and organizational costs associated
with incorporation. Based on this conceptual view of entrepreneurship, we now use the job task
requirement data in the DOT to assess whether the incorporated self-employed perform different
tasks and run different types of business from the unincorporated self-employed.

A. Do the incorporated and unincorporated self-employed perform different activities?
We use multinomial logit regressions to assess whether people who perform jobs that
demand a high-level of Nonroutine Analytical, Nonroutine Direction, Control, and Planning
(DCP), or Nonroutine Manual skills are more likely to become incorporated business owners. We
examine the sorting into employment types based on the job task requirements of the individual as
a salaried worker in year t-1 using the two-year matched panel of the CPS for work years 1995
through 2012, and further restrict the sample to individuals who were salaried workers in t-1.
Specifically we estimate a multinomial logit model assuming that the log-odds of each
worker follow the following linear model:

15

3

𝑃𝑖𝑖𝑖
𝑙𝑙𝑙
= 𝛼𝑗 + � 𝛼𝑗,𝑁𝑁,𝑘 𝑁𝑁𝑘,𝑖𝑖−1 + 𝛼𝑗,𝑋 𝑋𝑖𝑖−1 .
𝑃𝑖𝑖𝑖
𝑘=1

(1)

The dependent variable is the log-odds ratio of being an incorporated (unincorporated) business
owner rather than a salaried worker, where 𝑃𝑖𝑖𝑖 stands for the probability that person i is

incorporated (j=1) or unincorporated self-employed (j=2) in time t and 𝑃𝑖𝑖𝑖 denotes the probability
that the person is a salaried worker in time t. 𝑁𝑁𝑘,𝑖𝑖−1 is a vector of k=3 nonroutine job specific

skill requirements (Analytical, DCP, and Manual) of person’s i salaried job in year t-1. 𝑋𝑖𝑖−1 is a

vector of regressors that includes demographics (race, gender), schooling, potential experience

(quartic), the number of hours worked in year t-1, as well as state and year fixed effects. 𝛼𝑗 is a

constant and 𝛼𝑁𝑅,𝑘,𝑗 is a vector of regression coefficients for the incorporated and unincorporated.
The estimates reported in Table 3 provide four messages about the sorting of people into

incorporated and unincorporated self-employment based on the job task requirements of their
previous jobs. First, people who open incorporated businesses were more likely to have been
working in salaried jobs that demand greater nonroutine cognitive abilities than people who
remained in salaried jobs. Second, the opposite is true of the unincorporated: people who open
unincorporated businesses were less likely to have been working in salaried jobs demanding
strong Nonroutine Analytical abilities than people who remained in salaried jobs. Third, people
who open incorporated businesses were less likely to have been working in salaried jobs that
required a high degree of Nonroutine Manual skills than people who remained in salaried jobs.
Fourth, the results on the unincorporated are different: people who start unincorporated businesses
tend to have worked in jobs requiring greater Nonroutine Manual skills than those that remained
salaried workers.
Table 3 offers additional information on who sorts into employment types. While
individuals who worked more hours as salaried workers have a greater probability of becoming
incorporated self-employed, the opposite is true for the unincorporated self-employed.
Furthermore, consistent with the summary statistics, the multinomial logit regressions indicate that
women are less likely to become self-employed, especially incorporated self-employed, and more
educated people are more likely to become incorporated self-employed.

16

B. Do the incorporated and unincorporated open different types of businesses?
Turning from the individual to the firm, we now examine whether incorporated businesses
are different from unincorporated ones. We use the skills demanded of a firm’s employees to
characterize the nature of the business. That is, we assume that the tasks performed by a firm’s
workers provide information about the business and assess whether the skills demanded of the
workers in incorporated firms differ materially from those in unincorporated businesses.
To do this, we construct two measures of the job task requirements of each business. First,
we compute the hours-weighted job task requirements of all workers in each industry over the
work years 1995 through 2012 for each of three categories of skills: (1) Nonroutine Analytical
skills, (2) Nonroutine Direction, Control, and Planning skills, and (3) Nonroutine Manual skills. In
Table 4, we list the top-5 and bottom-5 industries of these three categories of the hours-weighted
job task requirements of industries. The rankings seem intuitively plausible. As shown, taxicab
service, trucking service, and logging are top-5 industries with respect to demanding high-levels of
manual skills from their workers, but they are bottom-5 industries in terms of demanding
nonroutine analytical skills from those same employees. In turn, engineering and architectural
services demand high-levels of analytical skills from workers, while the legal services and
accounting industries do not requirement much in the way of nonroutine manual skills from their
workers. These industry-level data allow us to assess whether the incorporated self-employed are
more likely to run businesses in industries that demand high levels of nonroutine cognitive skills
than the unincorporated self-employed.
The second measure of the job task requirements of businesses further differentiates by
firm size. Ideally, we would like to measure the job task requirements at the firm level since the
average firm might differ from recently established businesses. To the extent that smaller firms in
an industry serve as a better proxy for recently established businesses, the average by industry and
firm size provides a more accurate measure of the job task requirements in new businesses.
Specifically, the CPS places firms into different bins based on the number of employees. We
compute the hours-weighted job task requirements of all workers in each firm-size bin in each
industry over the work years 1995 through 2012. We do this for Nonroutine Analytical skills,

17

Nonroutine Direction, Control, and Planning skills, and Nonroutine Manual skills. Thus, for each
firm, we categorize its job task requirements based on its industry and size. With these industrysize-level data, we can evaluate whether the incorporated self-employed are more likely to run
businesses—of the same size as owners of unincorporated firms—in industries that demand high
levels of nonroutine cognitive skills.
Given these measures of the job task requirements of businesses, we assess whether people
starting to run incorporated firms are more likely to do so in industries demanding stronger
analytical skills than those starting to run unincorporated businesses. The sample includes
individuals from the matched two-year CPS panel who were not self-employed in year t-1 but are
self-employed in year t. The dependent variables in the odd numbered regressions of Table 5 are
the hours-weighted values for Nonroutine Analytical, Nonroutine Direction, Control, and Planning,
and Nonroutine Manual skills respectively demanded of workers in the industries run by the selfemployed business owner in year t. For the even number regressions, the dependent variables is
the job task requirement of workers in the industry-size bin run by the self-employed business
owner in year t. The regressor of interest is a dummy variable that equals one if the new business
is incorporated and zero if the new business is unincorporated. In the odd number regressions, the
incorporated dummy variable is the only regressor. The even numbered regressions include firm
size, state, and year fixed effects, along with education (six categories) and experience (quartic).
The results in Table 5 show that incorporated and unincorporated businesses are very
different. As shown in the odd numbered regressions, new incorporated businesses are (1) more
concentrated in industries that demand stronger nonroutine cognitive skills from its workers and
(2) less concentrated in industries that require stronger manual skills from workers than
unincorporated businesses. The findings hold when differentiating businesses by industry and size.
The results indicate that when an individual switches employment types to run an incorporated
business, the business is more likely to be in an industry that demands a high degree of analytical
skills from its workers than when an individual opens an unincorporated firm. In contrast, when an
individual switches employment types to run an unincorporated business, it tends to be in an
industry-firm size category that demands a comparatively high degree of manual skills. Mashing
together the incorporated and unincorporated aggregates away striking differences these

18

businesses. Taken together, the results reported in Tables 3, 4, and 5 suggest that the incorporated
self-employed are more engaged in analytically demanding businesses, while the unincorporated
self-employed are more engaged in providing manual services.

C. Does incorporation reflect ex post sorting on business success?
Using incorporation as an empirical proxy for “Schumpeterian entrepreneurship” requires
that the legal form of the business reflects the entrepreneurial nature of the planned business
activity and not simply (a) the ex post success of the business or (b) the expected success of the
enterprise. With respect to ex post selection into incorporated self-employment based on the
success of the business, the concern is that businesses start as unincorporated firms and then
incorporate if they are successful. With respect to expected success, the concern is that individuals
choose to establish incorporated businesses when they have a particularly promising business
opportunity and become unincorporated business owners at other times. Under these conditions,
incorporated self-employment might not reflect the entrepreneurial nature of the planned business
activity. The evidence presented above indicates that incorporated businesses owners and their
workers engage in activities demanding more nonroutine cognitive skills than those in
unincorporated businesses, while unincorporated business owners and their workers tend to
perform tasks demanding more manual skills. Nevertheless, we can also provide direct evidence
on the degree to which individuals switch the legal form of their businesses and choose different
legal forms for their different businesses throughout their careers.
To assess the concern that individuals incorporate when their unincorporated businesses
are successful, we exploit the long-term panel nature of the NLSY79 and examine selfemployment spells. We define a self-employment spell as the full set of consecutive years in
which a person is self-employed (either incorporated or unincorporated). For example, if a person
is self-employed in 1991 and 1992, salaried in 1993, self-employed in 1994, and salaried in 1995,
we define this person as having two self-employment spells. We examine all such spells in the
NLSY79 sample, where some individuals experience more than one self-employment spell. If at
the end of a self-employment spell the individual is an incorporated business owner, we determine
how many years the individual was unincorporated self-employed before incorporating. Figure 1

19

depicts these results for different groups of individuals: all, males, whites, and white-males.
Similarly, if at the conclusion of a self-employment spell the individual is an unincorporated
business owner, we determine how many years the individual was incorporated before becoming
unincorporated self-employed. Figure 2 provides these results.
Figures 1 and 2 show that few people switch the legal forms of their businesses: people
choose the legal form of the business when they choose to run it and rarely change afterwards.
Figure 1 shows that in those cases when an individual ends a self-employment spell as an
incorporated business owner, 85% of the time the person also started the spell as an incorporated
business owner. Most of the others switch in the first two years. Figure 2 indicates that 98% of
those that end a self-employment spell as an unincorporated business owner also began the spell as
unincorporated self-employed. The figures are consistent with the view that individuals select the
legal form of their businesses ex ante, not based on the ex post success of the endeavor.
To evaluate the concern that individuals tend to select the incorporated business form when
expected earnings from the business are especially high—regardless of the entrepreneurial nature
of the business, we examine individuals with multiple self-employment spells. About half of the
people in our NLSY79 sample experience more than one self-employment spell. Of these, 84% are
either incorporated or unincorporated in all of their spells. There is very little variation in the legal
form of businesses across an individual’s self-employment spells. This observation is both
consistent with this Section’s findings that the incorporated business owner engages in different
types of activities and runs different types of businesses from the unincorporated and with the next
Section’s findings on the unique attributes of those who select into incorporated self-employed.

IV. Who Becomes an Entrepreneur? Evidence from the NLSY79
Having established that the incorporated self-employed engage in activities and own firms
that demand a comparatively high-level of nonroutine cognitive skills, we now focus on
uncovering the cognitive and noncognitive traits associated with the self-sorting of individuals
into different employment types. In particular, we use the unique attributes of the NLSY79 data to
examine how the traits of individuals before they enter the prime age labor market account for
subsequent career choices. Above, we focused on the skills demanded by particular jobs and

20

industries. We now focus on the pre-labor market “supply” of cognitive and noncognitive traits.
This section first provides definitions and summary statistics of the unique traits measured by the
NLSY79. We then examine the self-sorting of individuals into incorporated and unincorporated
self-employment based on these traits using multinomial logit regressions.

A. Cognitive and Noncognitive Traits
Besides the standard labor market statistics and demographics summarized in Table 1, the
NLSY79 provides the following unique information on individual and family traits.
AFQT score (Armed Forces Qualifications Test score) measures the aptitude and
trainability of each individual. Collected during the 1980 NLSY79 survey, the AFQT score is
based on arithmetic reasoning, world knowledge, paragraph comprehension, and numerical
operations. It is frequently employed as a general indicator of cognitive skills. This AFQT score is
measured as a percentile of the NLSY79 survey, with a median value of 50.
Rosenberg Self-Esteem score, which is based on a ten-part questionnaire given to all
NLSY79 participants in 1980, measures the degree of approval or disapproval of one’s self and
has been widely used in psychology and economics (Bowles et al., 2001; Heckman et al., 2006).
The values range from six to 30, where higher values signify greater self-approval.
Rotter Locus of Control measures the degree to which individuals believe they have
internal control of their lives through self-determination relative to the degree that external factors,
such as chance, fate, and luck, shape their lives. It was collected as part of a psychometric test in
the 1979 NLSY79 survey. The Rotter Locus of Control ranges from four to 16, where higher
values signify less internal control and more external control.
Illicit Activity Index measures the aggressive, risk taking, disruptive, “break-the-rules,”
behavior of individuals based on the 1980 survey. We construct this index from 23 questions
covering themes associated with skipping school, use of alcohol and marijuana, vandalism,
shoplifting, drug dealing, robbery, assault, and gambling. For each question, we assign the value
one if the person ever engaged in that activity and zero otherwise. To obtain the index, we simply
add these values and divide by 23. Thus, the Illicit Activity Index ranges from 0 to 1, with higher
values signifying more illicit behaviors. We also report results using the answers to some of the

21

individual questions, such as whether the person ever used force to obtain things (Force), stole
something of $50 or less (Steal 50 or less), and whether the person was Stopped by the Police.
While some might view the Illicit Activity Index as only proxying (inversely) for risk
aversion, our analyses caution against this presumption and hence highlight the degree to which
the Illicit Activity Index measures the aggressive, disruptive activities of individuals as youths.
After controlling for other traits, there is not a strong association between the Illicit Activity Index
(measured in 1980) and the NLSY79’s risk aversion indicator that assesses how much a person
would sell an item with an expected, though risky, future value of $5,000 (measured in 2006).
We use additional information on each individual’s pre-labor market family traits,
including data on parental education, whether the individual lived in a two-parent family at the age
of 14, and family income in 1979, measured in 2010 dollars.
The NLSY79 also posed new questions in 2010 that provide helpful information in
assessing the validity of using the unincorporated and incorporated self-employed as indicators of
the ex ante nature of the business venture. To measure the degree to which an individual consider
himself to be an entrepreneur, we use Entrepreneur, which equals one if the respondent in 2010
answers "yes" to the question, "Do you consider yourself to be an entrepreneur?” In posing the
question, the NLSY79 defines an entrepreneur as “someone who launches a business enterprise,
usually with considerable initiative and risk." To provide some information on the degree to which
the individual is engaged in an innovative activity, we use Applied for Patent, which equals one
if the respondent in 2010 answered, "yes" to the question, "Has anyone, including yourself, ever
applied for a patent for work that you significantly contributed to?"

B. Summary statistics on traits
Individuals who become incorporated self-employed have distinct family backgrounds, as
shown in Panel A of Table 6. The incorporated self-employed come from comparatively (1) highincome families as measured by family income in 1979, (2) well-educated families as measured by
the education of the individual’s parents, and (3) “stable” families as measured by whether the
individual lived in a two parent family at the age of 14.

22

Moreover, individuals who become incorporated self-employed display striking cognitive
and noncognitive characteristics before they enter the labor market (Table 6, Panel B). 6 First,
people who become incorporated self-employed had (1) higher “ability” as measured by AFQT
values, (2) stronger self-esteem as measured by Rosenberg scores, and (3) stronger senses of
controlling their futures, rather than having their futures determined by fate or luck, as measured
by low Rotter Locus of Control scores. Second, people who spend more of their prime age
working years as incorporated self-employed engaged in more illicit activities as youths. For
example, the incorporated self-employed are twice as likely as salaried workers to report having
taken something by force as youths; they are almost 40 percent more likely to have been stopped
by the police; and, the incorporated self-employed have an overall illicit activity index
(standardized for the full sample), which is measured when they were between the ages of 15 and
22, that is 21 percent greater than the index for salaried workers. Furthermore, while the
unincorporated self-employed also tended to engage in more illicit activities as youths than
salaried workers, the incorporated engaged in still more. 7 All of these differences are statistically
significant when using simple cross group t-tests.
In terms of these characteristics that are measured before people enter the prime age labor
market, it is perhaps unsurprising that entrepreneurship is associated with stronger cognitive
aptitude abilities and exceptional confidence in one’s abilities, but it is perhaps more surprising
entrepreneurs tend to engage in more illicit activities as youths than those who never become
incorporated self-employed. As noted by Steve Wozniak, the co-founder of Apple, who hacked
telephone systems early in his career, "... I think that misbehavior is very strongly correlated with
and responsible for creative thought.”(Kushner, 2012) Our findings are also consistent with the
work of Horvath and Zuckerman (1993), Zukerman (1994), and Nicolaou, Shane, Cherkas, and
Spector (2008), who argue that personality traits influence sorting into entrepreneurship.
Furthermore, after working for a couple of decades, the incorporated self-employed are
more likely to describe themselves as “entrepreneurs” and more likely to have contributed to a

6

We report standardized values, so Rotter Locus of Control (standardized), Rosenberg Self-Esteem (standardized),
and Illicit Activity Index (standardized) each has a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one.
7
For the aggregate group of self-employed, Fairlie (2002) shows that people who engaged in drug dealing as youths
are more likely to become self-employed later in life.

23

patent. The variable Entrepreneur equals one if the individual responds “yes” to the question in the
2012 survey: "Do you consider yourself to be an entrepreneur (where an entrepreneur is defined
by the questioner as someone who launches a business enterprise, usually with considerable
initiative and risk)?" Since Entrepreneur is obtained decades after a person becomes prime age, we
calculate the residuals from a regression of Entrepreneur on education, AFQT, Rosenberg SelfEsteem, Rotter Locus of Control, the Illicit Index, and year of birth. We then standardize these
residuals to obtain Entrepreneur (residual standardized), which has a mean of zero and a standard
deviation of one. We follow the same procedure to calculate Applied for Patent (residual
standardized). As shown in Panel C of Table 6, Entrepreneur (residual standardized) equals 1.2 for
the incorporated and 0.69 for the unincorporated. The difference is even larger when examining
patents. Applied for Patent (residual standardized) is 0.28 for the unincorporated self-employed
and only 0.03 for the unincorporated. The findings that the incorporated are more likely to classify
themselves as entrepreneurs—and much more likely to have contributed to a patent—than other
self-employed individuals are consistent with our strategy of using the incorporated as a better
proxy for those engaged in entrepreneurial activities than the aggregate group of self-employed.

C. Selection on cognitive and noncognitive traits
To further assess the association between pre-labor market measures of cognitive and
noncognitive traits and subsequent employment choices, we estimate a multinomial logit model
assuming that the log-odds of each response follow the following linear model:
𝑙𝑙𝑙

𝑃𝑖𝑖𝑖
= 𝛼𝑗 + 𝛼𝑗,𝐴 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑖 + 𝛼𝑗,𝐼 𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖 + 𝛼𝑗,𝐴𝐴 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑖 ∙ 𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝑖 + 𝛼𝑗,𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝑁𝑁𝑖 + 𝛼𝑗,𝑋 𝑋𝑖 .
𝑃𝑖𝑖𝑖

(2)

The dependent variable is the log-odds ratio of being an incorporated (unincorporated) business

owner rather than a salaried worker, where 𝑃𝑖𝑖𝑖 is the probability that person i is incorporated (j=1)

or unincorporated self-employed (j=2) in time t and 𝑃𝑖𝑖𝑖 denotes the probability that the person is a
salaried worker. We focus on cognitive ability (𝐴𝐹𝑄𝑄) and noncognitive (NC) traits: the Rotter
locus of control indicator, the Rosenberg self-esteem measure, and Illicit. We also include an
interaction between AFQT and Illicit. All specifications control for gender, race, and year-of-birth.
In several specifications, we control for the education of the parents and family income (in 1979)

24

to the estimate model. The vector (𝑋𝑖 ) in equation (2) represents these variables. By examining
person-year observations, each person’s “employment type” is defined by the number of years
spent in each employment type. The errors are clustered at the individual level.
We report our findings in Table 7. In column (1), the Logit model assesses the probability
of self-employment versus salaried; in columns (2) - (4), the comparison is between
unincorporated self-employment and salaried; and in columns (5) - (6), the regression provides
estimates of the impact of each trait on the probability that the person is incorporated relative to
being a salaried worker.
Several findings emerge. First, the incorporated self-employed tend to be white, male,
people with high self-esteem, individuals with a strong sense of controlling one’s future (i.e., a
low Rotter locus of control score), individuals with high AFQT scores, those who engage in more
illicit activities as youths, children of high-income parents, and people with well-educated mothers.
The economic magnitudes in Table 7 are large. For example, holding other things constant, the
odds of a woman becoming an incorporated business owner rather than a salaried employee are
more than 70% less than for a similar male. As another example, the odds of becoming
incorporated self-employed rather than a salaried employee for a person with an AFQT score in
the 60th percentile are 6.4% higher than for a person with the median AFQT score. 8
Second, family income predicts of entrepreneurship. The coefficient estimates indicate that
a $100,000 increase in family income—which is enough to boost somebody from the 10th to the
90th percentile—is associated with a more than 50% increase in the odds of becoming incorporated
self-employed relative to those of becoming a salaried employee, after controlling for the person’s
cognitive and noncognitive traits, and other characteristics of the person’s family environment. To
the extent that one views family income as a proxy for credit constraints after controlling for other
factors, these results indicate that difficulties in obtaining finance materially influence
incorporated self-employment but not unincorporated self-employment. 9
Third, people who have both high AFQT scores and high Illicit Activity Index values are
much more likely to become incorporated business owners. For example, compare two people
8

AFQT was divided by 100 for the calculations in Table 7, so 1.0637=exp{0.618*0.1}.
For research on liquidity constraints and entrepreneurship, see, for example, the influential research by Blanchflower
and Oswald (1998), Evans and Jovanovic (1989), and Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian, and Rosen (1994).

9

25

who are the same except for their AFQT and Illicit values. The first has the sample average value
of Illicit (0) and the median value of AFQT (0.50), so that AFQT*Illicit equals zero. The second
person, the “smart and illicit” person for this example, has one-quarter of one standard deviation
above the mean value of Illicit (0.25) and is at the 75th percentile of the AFQT distribution (0.75),
so that AFQT*Illicit is about 0.1875 (=0.25*0.75). Then the odds of the smart and illicit person
becoming an incorporated self-employed business owners rather than a salaried employee are
6.3% greater (exp {0.327*0.1875)}) than the first person. The mixture of high learning aptitude
and disruptive, “break-the-rules” behavior is tightly linked with entrepreneurship.
Fourth, Table 7 again emphasizes the differences in the pre-labor market characteristics of
people who become incorporated and unincorporated self-employed business owners. While the
unincorporated also tend to engage in more illicit activities as youths than salaried workers, they
do not have higher AFQT scores or self-esteem values; and, they do not come from particularly
high-income or well-educated families. Table 7 also shows that the combination of “smart” and
“illicit” traits only boosts the probability of becoming incorporated self-employed.

D. Selection on labor market productivity
The NLSY79 data provide a unique opportunity to quantify the role of sorting on typically
unobserved labor market skills. Almost all people—about 90% in our sample of full-time, fullyear working adults—are salaried workers at some point in their careers, so we observe almost all
people in a common employment type. Thus, we can study the linkages between comparative
success as a salaried worker and sorting into incorporated and unincorporated self-employment.
To do this, we proceed as follows. We compute each individual’s adjusted hourly wages
(Adjusted wages) as a full-time, full-year salaried employee by running run a wage regression that
controls for experience as well as year and individual effects and use the estimated individual
effects as Adjusted wages. We then run a new battery of multinomial logit regressions to assess
whether productivity as a salaried worker—as measured by Adjusted wages—explains sorting into
employment types and reports the results in Table 8. Moreover, and critically, we include the
interaction between Adjusted wages and the Illicit Activity Index to assess whether the mixture of
“productive” and illicit characteristics shapes employment decisions. The regressions also control

26

for education and experience, as well as AFQT, the Rotter and Rosenberg Scores, Family income
in 1979, and the education of each parent. To focus on a more homogeneous group of individuals,
we only examine full-time, full year white males for the remainder of our analyses.
Table 8 reports two key results. First, although there is negative sorting into the aggregate
category of self-employment on Adjusted wages, this reflects positive sorting into incorporated
self-employment and negative sorting into unincorporated self-employment on Adjusted wages.
We believe that this is the first paper to show that successful salaried workers are more likely to
become entrepreneurs, while unsuccessful salaried workers are more likely to become
unincorporated business owners. Second, comparatively successful salaried workers who were
also heavily engaged in disruptive activities as youths have higher propensities to become
incorporated business owners later in life. This is reflected in the positive, significant coefficient
on the interaction term Adjusted wages*Illicit. Apparently, to the extent that Adjusted wages
reflect productivity, it is a combination of comparatively high labor market productivity and a
tendency to bend, if not break, the rules that influences who becomes an entrepreneur.

E. Traits, employment types, and job task requirements
We now examine the sorting into different types of business activities on both the legal
form of the business and the underlying traits of the business owner. With the CPS data, we
showed that incorporated and unincorporated business activities are different. Incorporated
businesses tend to be in industries that demand a comparatively high degree of nonroutine
cognitive skills from workers and a low degree of manual skills. But, unincorporated businesses
tend to be in industries that demand a comparatively high degree of manual skills from their
workers but a relatively low degree of nonroutine cognitive skills.
With the NLSY79, we can now match the cognitive and noncognitive traits of the
individual business owner with the nature of his business. That is, we can examine the matching
between the traits of individuals before they enter the labor market with the nature of the
businesses, if any, that they later run. We measure the nature of the business by the job task
requirements of the people employed by the business’s industry.

27

Table 9 provides regressions in which the dependent variable is a measure of the job task
requirements of the industry in which each individual works. The reported explanatory variables
are dummy variables of whether the individual is an incorporated or unincorporated business
owner, where salaried employment is the excluded group. To measure the job task requirements of
an industry, we again use the hours-weighted measure of the skills required of workers in each
industry and we again examine three categories of skills: nonroutine analytical, nonroutine
direction, control and planning, and nonroutine manual. The NLSY79 survey is conducted every
other year starting in 1994. We further restrict the sample to individuals who were salaried in the
last NLSY79 survey, i.e., in year t-2. Thus, we compare people who remain salaried with those
who switch into incorporated or unincorporated self-employment. The regressions also control for
individual and year fixed effects, and a quartic in experience. To work with a more homogeneous
group, we restrict the sample to white males.
For each category of job task requirements, we examine four subsamples of individuals:
(1) individuals with below (or equal to) the median values of either AFQT or Illicit (AFQT<=50
or Illicit<=0); (2) “smart and illicit” individuals with above the median values of both AFQT and
Illicit (AFQT>50 and Illicit>0); (3) “very smart and illicit” individuals with above the 75th
percentile AFQT scores and an Illicit index value greater than the median (AFQT>75 and
Illicit>0); and (4) “very smart but not illicit” individuals who have above the 75th percentile AFQT
scores but below (or equal to) the median values of the Illicit index (AFQT>75 and Illicit<=0).
We find that when “smart and illicit” individuals run incorporated businesses, they tend to
be in industries that demand comparatively high-levels of creative thinking, analytically advanced
problem solving, and communication skills from workers. This tendency is even stronger for the
“very smart and illicit.” By comparing regressions (2) and (3) and (6) and (7), notice that the
estimated coefficient on Incorporated is more than twice as large for the sample of individuals
with AFQT > 75 and Illicit >0 than for the sample of individuals with AFQT >50 and Illicit>0.
Also, notice that the “very smart but not illicit” group of individuals who become incorporated
business owners do not have a stronger tendency to open these types of businesses. The nature of
the individual as a youth helps account for the type of incorporated business he runs later in life.

28

Table 9 also provides insights on unincorporated businesses. When “smart and illicit”
individuals become unincorporated business owners, the businesses are not disproportionately in
industries demanding strong analytical skills from workers. Rather, when most types of people
open unincorporated businesses, they tend to be in industries that demand strong manual skills.
Even among people with smart and illicit traits as youths, those who run unincorporated
businesses are not more likely to run analytically demanding businesses.
These analyses further advertise the value of disaggregating the self-employed into
incorporated and unincorporated business owners. People with smart and illicit traits as youths are
more likely to own incorporated businesses that demand highs levels of creative thinking,
analytically advanced problem solving, and communication skills from their workers. In contrast,
the unincorporated self-employed, even those with smart and illicit traits as teenagers, do not tend
to run businesses with such demanding analytical skills. These findings are consistent with the
view that the choice of the legal form of the business signals the nature of the planned business
activity and suggest that when people start businesses engaged in more nonroutine activities—for
which limited liability and the separate legal identity were created—they are more likely to select
the incorporated business form.

V. Entrepreneurs: Do They Earn More?
In this section, we examine whether individuals earn more when they run incorporated
businesses than when they work as salaried employees or as unincorporated business owners.
Previous studies find that the typical self-employed business owner earns less than the typical
salaried employee and conclude that entrepreneurship is associated with lower earnings.
In readdressing this question, we make two core contributions. First, we differentiate
between incorporated business owners—who are closely aligned with the Schumpeterian
conception of entrepreneurship—and other self-employed individuals.
Second, we use panel data to address four challenges with determining whether individuals
earn more as entrepreneurs. First, people might select into incorporated self-employment based on
their earnings as salaried workers. If successful salaried workers are more likely to incorporate
then the estimated earnings gap between salaried and incorporated individuals could reflect person

29

effects and not the gains or losses associated with incorporated self-employment. Since the results
above demonstrate that the typical incorporated business owner has very different cognitive and
noncognitive traits from his salaried and unincorporated counterparts, person-specific influences
are likely to represent a key challenge to assessing the comparative earnings of entrepreneurs.
Second, people might start an unincorporated business and then incorporate if the business
succeeds. The concern is that the higher earnings of the incorporated self-employed reflect
selection on business success, rather than differences associated with the entrepreneurial nature of
the business. Third, people might choose the incorporated business form when they expect high
earnings—regardless of the entrepreneurial nature of the business—and the unincorporated legal
form when the business seems less promising. The concern is that the estimated change in
earnings associated with becoming an incorporated business owner might reflect this positive
selection on expected earnings and not the change in earnings associated with entrepreneurship.
Fourth, the estimated relationship between earnings and incorporated self-employment might
reflect selective survivorship on ex-post success rather than a boost in earnings from
entrepreneurship if unsuccessful incorporated business owners quickly select out of selfemployment and return to salaried work. We address each of these selection issues below.
We close this section on earnings by extending the analyses along two dimensions. First,
we assess whether the same traits that account for who becomes an entrepreneur also explain
comparative success as an entrepreneur. That is, are the same “smart and illicit” characteristics
associated with selection into entrepreneurship also associated with larger increases in earnings
when an individual becomes an incorporated business owner? As an external validity test, we also
examine whether people with smart and illicit traits experience a larger increase in earnings when
they become self-employed in industries that demand high levels of nonroutine cognitive skills
from workers. Second, we examine the full distribution of earnings, not just the mean and median,
and shed light on the risk to earnings associated with incorporated and unincorporated selfemployment.

30

A. Baseline earnings specification
To frame the analyses, consider the following linear earnings equation:
𝐸𝑖𝑖 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽𝐼 𝐼𝑖𝑖 + 𝛽𝑈 𝑈𝑖𝑖 + 𝛽𝑋 𝑋𝑖𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖𝑖 ,

(3)

where 𝐸𝑖𝑖 equals the earnings of individual i in time t. To allow for nonpositive self-employment

earnings, we examine earnings, not the log of earnings. 𝐼𝑖𝑖 equals one if individual i is

incorporated self-employed in period t and zero otherwise, and 𝑈𝑖𝑖 is a similarly defined dummy

variable for when individual i is an unincorporated business owner. 𝛽𝐼 and 𝛽𝑈 are the gains in

earnings associated with incorporated and unincorporated self-employment respectively relative to

salaried earnings. 𝑋𝑖𝑖 includes Mincerian characteristics (a quartic expression for potential work
experience and dummy variables for six education categories) and year fixed effects. 10 𝜀𝑖𝑖 is the
error term that can be decomposed into time-invariant individual fixed effects (𝜃𝑖 ) and time-

varying individual influences (𝑎𝑖 (𝑡)), along with a person-time shock to earnings (𝜗𝑖𝑖 ):
𝜀𝑖𝑖 = 𝜃𝑖 + 𝑎𝑖 (𝑡) + 𝜗𝑖𝑖 .

(4)

When excluding such individual effects from the estimation, the estimated 𝛽𝐼 and 𝛽𝑈 parameters
provide unbiased measures of the differences in residual earnings for individuals who run

incorporated or unincorporated businesses respectively relative to salaried employees with similar
Mincerian traits. When including individual effects in the estimation of equation (3), the estimates
for 𝛽𝐼 and 𝛽𝑈 yield unbiased estimates of the differences in residual earnings for individuals who

run incorporated and unincorporated businesses respectively relative to when they work as salaried
employees.
Using data from the CPS and NLSY79, we examine annual and hourly earnings. We
examine both annual and hourly earnings because the self-employed might have greater flexibility
than salaried workers in choosing the number of work hours, as emphasized by Hurst and Pugsley
(2011).

10

Potential work experience (pwe) equals age minus years of schooling minus seven (or zero if this computation is
negative). The quartic expression includes pwe, pwe2, pwe3, and pwe4, which are included in the annual and hourly
wage regressions. The education categories are: (i) completed less than 9th grade, (ii) completed between 9th and
11th grade, (iii) graduated from high school, (iv) had some college education, (v) graduated from college, and (vi)
obtained an advanced degree.

31

B. Evidence from the CPS
Table 10 presents regression results on earnings based on the sample of white, prime age
(25-55) males, who work full-time, full-year, while using the subsample of CPS observations for
which we have a matched, two-year panel. The dependent variable is annual earnings in four of
the eight regressions and hourly earnings in the other four. We provide OLS and median
regressions. Using the matched, two-year panel allows us to conduct the CPS analyses both in
levels and in first differences, which controls for individual fixed effects. 11 With only a two-year
panel, we cannot examine the potential impact of time-varying person-specific influences (𝑎𝑖 (𝑡))

on earnings. Below, we exploit the longer time-series dimension of the NLSY79 to address this
and other limitations with the CPS
The results reported in Table 10 indicate that on average and at the median, the
incorporated business owner earns more per hour and works more hours than his salaried and
unincorporated full-time full-year counterparts, while the unincorporated business owner earns

less. The coefficient estimates reported in regression (1) indicate that the mean residual earnings
of the incorporated business owner are about $32,402 more per annum than a salaried worker with
the same observable characteristics. All values are in 2010 constant dollars. In contrast, the mean
residual annual earnings of the unincorporated business owner are about $5,700 less than those of
a comparable salaried worker. Similar patterns emerge when examining hourly earnings, as shown
in regression (5). On average, the residual hourly earnings of the incorporated self-employed are
$10.30 larger than those of a salaried worker with similar observable traits, while the estimated
mean residual hourly earnings of the unincorporated self-employed are $4.10 smaller than a
comparable salaried employee. The median annual and hourly regressions (reported in columns
(2) and (6) respectively) yield similar conclusions, though the estimated gaps in medians are
smaller than the gaps in means.
To provide additional information on the sizes of these estimated differences in earnings,
we compare the estimated dollar values of those differences to those of a comparator salaried
worker and provide the percentage difference in the row labeled “% Difference from Salaried

11

The levels regressions (regression 1, 2, 5, and 6) can be run based on the full CPS sample. This yields coefficient
estimates that statistically indistinguishable from those reported in Table 10.

32

Worker. When we conduct the analyses using OLS, the comparator salaried worker is the average
salaried worker in our sample of full-time, full year prime age white males. When conducting the
analyses in medians, the comparator is the median salaried worker in our sample. Thus, the
regression (1) estimates in Table 10 indicate that the mean residual annual earnings of the
incorporated business owner are about 47.5% greater than those of the average salaried worker in
our sample (i.e., 0.475 = $32,402/$68,158). In terms of hourly earnings, the estimates in
regression (5) imply that that mean residual hourly earnings of the incorporated self-employed are
35.8% larger than the hourly earnings of the average salaried worker in the regression sample.
Among full-time, full-year workers, the 11.7% percent difference between the annual and hourly
earnings gains suggests that, on average, the incorporated self-employed work many more hours
than salaried employees.
To account for individual effects, Table 10 presents regressions in first differences. In
these regressions, the dependent variable is the change in annual earnings (regression 3 and 4) or
the change in hourly earnings (regressions 7 and 8). They explanatory variables are differenced.
Thus, ΔIncorporated equals the change in the incorporated self-employment status of the person
between period t and t-1. If somebody switches from salaried to incorporated self-employment,
ΔIncorporated equals one; if somebody switches from incorporated self-employment to salaried
work, it equals negative one; and if somebody does not switch his incorporated self-employment
statues during the two-year period, then ΔIncorporated equals zero. ΔUnincorporated is similarly
defined as the change in the unincorporated self-employment status. 12
The first difference analyses indicate that individuals who become incorporated business
owners tend to experience an increase in earnings relative to their own salaried earnings in the
previous year. For example, the mean residual earnings of an individual who switches from a
salaried job to become an incorporated self-employed business owner rise, on average, by $7,906
per annum (regression 3) and $2.70 per hour (regression 7). When comparing these estimated

12

When we do not impose symmetry and allow the absolute value of the estimated change in earnings to differ when
somebody switches from salaried work to incorporated self-employment from the estimated change when somebody
switches from incorporated self-employment to salaried work, all of the reported results hold. Indeed, we find that
when somebody returns to salaried work after incorporated self-employment, he returns to a wage rate that is very
similar (in real terms) to the salary he had before becoming self-employed.

33

dollar values to those of an average salaried work, we find that annual and hourly residual
earnings rise by 11.6% and 9.4% respectively after accounting for time-invariant individual effects.
Our results also indicate that people who become incorporated business owners were
earning much more as salaried workers than people with the same Mincerian traits who remained
as salaried employees. To see this, compare the levels and first difference regressions. The first
difference regressions account for individual effects, the levels regressions do not. Thus, the
difference in these estimates provides information on the comparative earnings of people who
become incorporated business owners when they were salaried workers and salaried workers with
similar observable characteristics who do not become incorporated self-employed. The estimates
in regressions (1) and (3) indicate that, on average, the person who incorporates in year t enjoyed
residual annual earnings of about $24,496 (=$32,402 - $7,906) greater in year t-1 as a salaried
worker than those of salaried workers in year t-1 with similar Mincerian traits who remain salaried.
This difference is large. It implies that on average, the person who incorporates in year t enjoyed
residual earnings in t-1 that were 36% greater than those of the average salaried worker’s annual
earnings. Nevertheless, even after accounting for these individual effects, earnings tend to rise
materially when a person becomes an incorporated business owner.
The results on the unincorporated are different, except when it comes to the change in the
number of hours that individuals work. After controlling for individual effects and when
comparing the estimated change in earning to the average and median salaried worker in the
sample, regression (3) and (4) indicate that average and median residual earnings drop by 16.5%
and 14.9% respectively when a person switches from a salaried job to unincorporated selfemployment; while average and median residual hourly earnings drop by about 17% (columns 7
and 8). The contrast with the incorporated self-employed is stark: while the incorporated earn
more per annum and per hour, the unincorporated earn less. However, both the incorporated and
unincorporated work more hours than they did as salaried workers. To see this, note that the
hourly earnings of those who switch from salaried work into unincorporated self-employment fall
by more than their annual earnings, suggesting an increase in the number of hours worked. 13

13

In unreported examinations, we directly test and confirm that annual hours worked rises when individuals switch
into either incorporated or unincorporated self-employment.

34

These results on hours provide a new perspective on self-employment. Hurst and Pugsley (2011)
stress the nonpecuniary benefits of being one’s own boss. Our findings suggest that people exploit
the flexibility of self-employment to work more hours, even among full-time full-year workers.

C. Evidence from the NLSY79
We now assess whether entrepreneurs earn more using data from the NLSY79. Although
the NLSY79 includes a smaller cross-section of individuals than the CPS, we exploit the
NLSY79’s extensive panel to allow for time-varying person-specific influences (𝑎𝑖 (𝑡)) and

address potential biases from selection into and out of employment types in estimating the

expected gains relative to their earnings as salaried workers. In moving from the CPS to the
NLSY79, we continue to use the same sample criteria (white males, who are full-time workers
between the ages of 25 and 55). In addition to the 𝑋𝑖𝑖 variables defined above, we also control for
AFQT, Rosenberg self-esteem, Rotter Locus of Control, and the Illicit Activity Index in the
NLS79 analyses. Since the NLSY79 survey is conducted every other year since 1994, the
differencing is done between t and t-2 for all years.
Table 11 confirms the four core messages emerging from the CPS regressions. First, on
average and at the median, the incorporated business owner earns more per annum and per hour
than his salaried and unincorporated counterparts. For example, consider the median analyses
conducted in levels and without conditioning on individual fixed effects (columns 5 and 13). The
coefficient estimates indicate that the median incorporated business owner’s annual residual
earnings are $23,941 greater than those of the median salaried worker with the same observable
characteristics and median residual hourly earnings are $5.32 greater. These estimates are large,
when compared to the median earnings of salaried workers. As shown in the row labeled “%
Difference from Salaried Worker,” our estimates indicate that the median residual annual earnings
of incorporated self-employed are 49% greater—and hourly earnings are 26% greater—than those
of the median salaried worker. The corresponding OLS estimates (columns 1 and 9) are much
greater. For example, the estimated annual residual earnings of the self-employed are $45,926
larger than those of the average salaried worker.

35

Second, after controlling for individual fixed effects, people who become incorporated
business owners, on average and at the median, experience a material increase in annual and
hourly earnings. For example, regressions (2) and (10) indicate that mean residual annual earnings
of an individual increases by 29% when he becomes an incorporated business owner and his
hourly earnings rise by 18%, relative to the earnings of an average salaried worker. Thus, he earns
more per hour, works more hours, and earns much more per annum after switching into
incorporated self-employment. The results also hold when examining median earnings (columns 6
and 14), though the estimated relationships at the median are about one-third of the mean
estimates, emphasizing the skewed distribution of incorporated self-employed earnings relative to
salaried employment.
Third, there is positive selection into incorporated self-employment on salaried earnings.
To see this, compare the OLS regression estimates in columns (1), which do not include individual
fixed effects, with those in column (2), which condition on individual effects. The estimates
suggest that on average, the person who runs an incorporated business earned $28,480 more per
annum as a salaried worker than a person with the same observable characteristics who did not
become an incorporated business owner. This gap is large, as it equals 46% of the earnings of an
average salaried worker in our sample. This is also reflected in median hourly earnings, where the
estimated increase in median hourly earnings associated with incorporated self-employment is 5%
when accounting for individual fixed effects and 26% when not conditioning out individual effects
as shown in columns (13) and (14).
Fourth, the results on the unincorporated self-employed are distinct. The median residual
hourly earnings of somebody who switches from salaried work to unincorporated self-employment
tends to fall by $0.85 (column 14 of Table 11) relative to his hourly earnings as a salaried worker.
However, the individual tends to work more hours, so his median residual annual earnings do not
fall significantly (column 6). Even though these analyses are limited to full-time, full-year workers,
the self-employed work still more hours than they were working as salaried employees.
Furthermore, there is evidence of negative selection into unincorporated self-employment on
salaried earnings. For example, the estimated drop in median hourly earnings from unincorporated

36

self-employment is much lower in absolute terms when accounting for individual fixed effects, as
shown in columns (13) and (14). 14
The NLSY79 allows us to control for, and assess the importance of, time-varying personspecific influences (𝑎𝑖 (𝑡)). The concern is that people might select into incorporated self-

employment based on trends in their earnings. If people with steeper earnings profiles have a
greater propensity to become incorporated business owners, then some of the estimated increase in
earnings associated with switching from salaried work to incorporated self-employment could
reflect this trend rather than a change in earnings associated with entrepreneurship. Formally, we
control for both an individual fixed effect and an individual-specific linear time trend.
The results hold, with only minor changes in the estimated parameters, when controlling
for person-specific linear trends. This can be seen by comparing regression (3) and (4), (7) and (8),
(11) and (12), and (15) and (16) in Table 11. When allowing for individual fixed effects and linear
individual time-trends, we continue to find that the earnings of an individual tend to rise—relative
to the individual’s trend line—when he switches from salaried work to incorporated selfemployment as reported in columns (4), (8), (12), and (16). Again, the estimated effects are
slightly smaller for hourly earnings, indicating that people tend to work more hours when they
become self-employed, even among this sample of full-time, full-year workers. 15

14

As demonstrated below when we examine the full distribution of earnings, the positive selection into incorporated
self-employment holds across virtually all percentiles, but selection into unincorporated is more nuanced.
15
These results on earnings are robust to several additional tests. First, we were concerned that something odd could
be happening during the year of incorporation. Thus, we omitted the two years before and the two years after
incorporation and confirm the findings. Second, we were concerned that the results were driven by individuals buying
into businesses in which they were working as salaried workers, rather than starting their own business. This is not the
case. Virtually all of the switches into incorporation involve a change of firms. When we limit incorporation to
situations in which a person changes firms, we get virtually identical results. Third, we were concerned that earnings
growth might predict changes in employment type. Consequently, we examined the relationship between the change
in hourly earnings between period t-2 and t-4 and the change in employment type from period t to t-2. If the change in
earnings is associated only with a contemporaneous change in employment type, then we expect this regression to
yield an insignificant coefficient. If, however, increases in earnings tend to precede transitions into incorporated, then
we would expect to find a positive coefficient. There is not a statistically significant relationship between a change in
earnings and subsequent shifts into incorporated self-employment. While earlier results document the positive sorting
into entrepreneurship on earnings, the evidence does not indicate that jumps in earnings are good predictors of
subsequent shifts into incorporation; rather, earnings jump when people become incorporated business owners.

37

D. Selection into incorporated self-employment
We next use self-employment spells to assess the degree to which the estimated positive
relationship between entrepreneurship and earnings is influenced by positive selection into
incorporated self-employment. The concern is that if many businesses start as unincorporated
enterprises and then the successful ones incorporate—or if people select the incorporated business
form when they expect relatively high earnings from the business, then the results presented above
could reflect such positive selection on ex post or expected earnings and not an increase in
earnings associated with entrepreneurship.
We already showed in Figures 1 and 2 that few people switch the legal form of their
businesses within a self-employment spell, where a self-employment spell is the full set of
consecutive years in which a person is self-employed. Figure 1 shows that 15% of selfemployment spells involve the individual switching from unincorporated to incorporated selfemployment. As noted, almost all of these switches occur within the first years of the spell. Figure
2 shows that almost no individuals switch from incorporated to unincorporated self-employment.
Some of the switchers might be measurement error associated with people erroneously coding the
legal form of their businesses in some years; but some might reflect selection on ex post success.
We now evaluate the degree to which these switchers within self-employment spells
influence the estimated relationship between earnings and incorporated self-employment. To
frame the issue we incorporate information on each individual’s employment spells and rewrite
the earnings equation (3) as follows:
𝐸𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽𝐼 𝐼𝑖𝑖𝑖 + 𝛽𝑈 𝑈𝑖𝑖𝑖 + 𝛽𝑋 𝑋𝑖𝑖𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖𝑖𝑖 .

(5)

𝐸𝑖𝑖𝑖 equals the earnings of individual i in time t in employment spell s. An employment spell is the

full set of consecutive years as either a salaried or self-employed worker. Since we only consider

full-time, full-year workers, individuals are either salaried or self-employed in each period. Thus,
if somebody is always salaried, the person will experience just one employment spell. If a person
is salaried for ten years, self-employed for one, and then salaried for 5 more years, the person
experiences three employment spells. 𝐼𝑖𝑖𝑖 equals one if individual i in spell s during period t is

incorporated self-employed and zero otherwise. Thus, 𝐼𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 0 in all salaried employment spells.

38

𝑈𝑖𝑖𝑖 is a similarly defined dummy variable for when individual i, in period t, and spell s is an

unincorporated business owner. All of the variables and parameters in equation (5) are the same as
those in equation (3). We simply acknowledge formally in equation (5) that some people change
between incorporated and unincorporated self-employment during a single self-employment spell.
The error term (𝜀𝑖𝑖𝑖 ) can be decomposed into time-invariant and time-varying person-specific

effects (𝜃𝑖 and 𝜃𝑡 (𝑖)), a person-spell specific shock to earnings (𝜂𝑖𝑖 ) and a zero-mean person-time

shock to earnings (𝜗𝑖𝑖𝑖 ):

𝜀𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 𝜃𝑖 + 𝜃𝑡 (𝑖) + 𝜂𝑖𝑖 + 𝜗𝑖𝑖𝑖 .

(6)

To address the concern that selection into incorporated self-employment based on success
as an unincorporated business owner within a self-employment spell influences the estimated
relationship between earnings and entrepreneurship, we eliminate within self-employment spell

variation. We do this by defining a self-employment spell as incorporated or unincorporated based
on the legal form of the business in the first year of the spell. In particular, we estimate the
following earnings equation:
𝐸𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽𝐼 𝐼𝑖𝑖 + 𝛽𝑈 𝑈𝑖𝑖 + 𝛽𝑋 𝑋𝑖𝑖𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖𝑖𝑖 ,

(7)

where 𝐼𝑖𝑖 equals one for all years of individual i’s self-employment spell s if the individual started

the spell as incorporated self-employed and zero otherwise. Note that 𝐼𝑖𝑖 = 1 for all years of the

self-employment spell s when the individual starts the spell as incorporated self-employed

regardless of whether he switches to unincorporated self-employment later in the spell. In Table
12, we refer to 𝐼𝑖𝑖 as “Spell starts as incorporated.” Similarly, 𝑈𝑖𝑖 = 1 for all years of individual i’s
self-employment spell s if the individual started the spell as an unincorporated self-employed

business owner regardless of whether he switches to incorporated self-employment later in the
spell. For individuals who do not switch from unincorporated to incorporated self-employment
within an employment spell, 𝐼𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 𝐼𝑖𝑖 for all t in the spell. However, for individuals who start a

self-employment spell as an unincorporated business owner (𝐼𝑖𝑖 = 0) and then incorporate later,
then 𝐼𝑖𝑖𝑖 − 𝐼𝑖𝑖 = 1 for some periods within spell s. Thus, the results reported earlier based on

equation (5) might reflect selection into incorporated self-employment from unincorporated selfemployment on the success of the business during spell s (𝜂𝑖𝑖 ) rather than the gains from running

39

an entrepreneurial business. To address this concern, Table 12, provides estimates based on
equation (7).
The results are clear: Although Table 12 indicates positive selection into incorporated selfemployment on success as an unincorporated business owner, the earlier results hold. That is,
there is a large increase in earnings when an individual becomes an incorporated self-employed
business owner relative to his earnings as a salaried employee even after eliminating within selfemployment spell variation. For example, consider the OLS regressions on annual earnings.
Regression (1) replicates the findings from Table 11 on Incorporated, which equals one in years
when an individual is incorporated self-employed and zero otherwise. When controlling for
individual fixed effects, the estimated increase in earnings from an individual switching from
salaried work into incorporated self-employment is $17,446. In regression (2), we do not examine
Incorporated (𝐼𝑖𝑖𝑖 ). Rather, we examine Spell starts as incorporated (𝐼𝑖𝑖 ). The estimated increase in
earnings from an individual switching from salaried work into a self-employment spell in which

the individual is incorporated self-employed in the first year is $14,064. This suggests that some of
the increase in earnings associated with becoming incorporated self-employed is that successful
unincorporated business incorporate during the self-employment spell. But, the results further
emphasize that even when eliminating this positive selection, there is still a material boost in
annual income of 23% relative to the average salaried worker in the sample when somebody
switches from salaried employment to run an incorporated business. It is also worth noticing that
at the median, the point estimates are almost identical when we account for selection in (columns
5 and 6). This indicates there are only a few individuals who make it big as unincorporated
business owners and then switch to incorporated self-employment.
Besides considering the potential influences of variation in the legal form of businesses
within self-employment spells on the estimated change in earnings associated with incorporated
self-employment, we were also concerned about variation across an individual’s self-employment
spells. As discussed above, half of individuals who become self-employed have two or more selfemployment spells. We were concerned that perhaps individuals choose to incorporate when they
identify a particularly promising business opportunity and start unincorporated businesses when
that is not the case. Under these conditions, the increase in earnings associated with incorporated

40

self-employment might reflect this selection on expected success and not a boost in earnings
associated with the entrepreneurial nature of the underlying business.
But, this concern does not materialize in the data. Specifically, we find that 84% of
individuals with multiple self-employment spells choose to be either incorporated or
unincorporated in all of their self-employment spells. There is very little variation in the legal form
of businesses between an individual’s self-employment spells. Moreover, when we categorize all
of an individual’s self-employment observations by the first year of his first self-employment spell
and redo the analyses, all of the results hold. We include these analyses in Table 12. Specifically,
we define the variable “1st year of 1st spell incorporated” as equal to one for each year of all of
the years that an individual is self-employed if in the first year of his first employment spell the
individual is incorporated self-employed and zero otherwise, and we set the variable “1st year of
1st spell unincorporated” equal to one for each year of all of the years that an individual is selfemployed if in the first year of his first employment spell the individual is unincorporated selfemployed and zero otherwise. We then use these definitions of incorporated and unincorporated
re-estimate the earnings regressions. The results are provided in columns (4), (8), (12), and (16) of
Table 12. We continue to find that an individual’s earnings rise appreciably when he becomes
incorporated self-employed—even after removing the potential effects of individuals choosing
different legal forms for their businesses across self-employment spells. These findings are
unsurprising given our early results that incorporated business owners engage in different types of
activities and run different types of businesses from unincorporated business owners.

E. Selection out of self-employment
Another possible challenge to assessing whether entrepreneurs earn more is selection out
of self-employment when the business is unsuccessful. Such “survivorship bias” would bias
upwards the estimated relationship between earnings and self-employment by giving more weight
(in the form of systemically more observations) to successful self-employment spells than
unsuccessful ones. Using 𝐼𝑖𝑖 and 𝑈𝑖𝑖 in equation (7) addresses selection within self-employment

but not selection out of self-employment.

41

To evaluate the empirical importance of selection out of self-employment, we weight the
observations in the earnings regressions by the inverse of the number of observations in each
employment spell. An incorporated, unincorporated, or salaried employment spell includes the full
set of consecutive observations of that employment type. Thus, if the person is incorporated for
five consecutive observations, we weight each observation in that spell by one-fifth. If the person
is salaried for six consecutive surveys, we weight each observation by one-sixth. In this way, we
give equal weight to each employment spell. We report these results in regressions (3), (6), (9),
and (12) of Table 12, where we continue to (a) include individual fixed effects and (b) use 𝐼𝑖𝑖 and

𝑈𝑖𝑖 to control for selection in.

We find that the self-employed exercise the option to dropout and return to salaried work

when the business does not succeed, but the main findings hold after accounting for selection out.
To see this compare the coefficient estimates between columns (3) and (4) for the OLS estimates
and columns (7) and (8) for the median results. The point estimates are slightly lower and
statistically indistinguishable. 16

F. Smart and illicit in entrepreneurial businesses
We now use the earlier analyses on who becomes an entrepreneur to examine whether the
same traits associated with selection into entrepreneurship are also associated with larger increases
in earnings when an individual becomes an entrepreneur. To do this, we differentiate individuals
by whether they are “smart and illicit” or not, using the same definitions that we used to examine
the self-sorting of individuals into different employment types. In particular, we compare
individuals with both high AFQT scores and strong tendencies to break the rules as youths
(AFQT>50 and Illicit >0) to other individuals.
That is, we take the first difference of equation (7) and conduct the analyses while
separately examining the samples of smart and illicit individuals and all others:

16

The panel nature of the NLSY79 data also provides an opportunity to provide greater insights on the earnings
profiles of individuals who try self-employment and then return to salaried work. First, we discover that individuals
who experiment with entrepreneurship and then return to salaried employment on average return to higher paying
salaried jobs (hourly earnings) than they had before becoming incorporated business owners. Second, the results on
unincorporated self-employment are different. After an individual becomes an unincorporated self-employed business
owner, his future hourly earnings fall regardless of whether he returns to salaried employment.

42

∆𝐸𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 𝛿0 + 𝛿1 ∆𝐼𝑖𝑖 + 𝛿2 ∆𝑈𝑖𝑖 + 𝛿3 ∆𝑋𝑖𝑖𝑖 + 𝑢𝑖𝑖𝑖 .

The change in individual i’s incorporated self-employment status is 𝛥𝛥𝑖𝑖 and the change in

(8)

individual i’s unincorporated self-employment status is 𝛥𝛥𝑖𝑖 , where incorporated and

unincorporated self-employment status are defined by the first year of the self-employment spell.
Table 13 provides estimates of the change in median residual annual and hourly earnings
associated with switching into or out of incorporated and unincorporated self-employment. To
control for positive selection into incorporated self-employment from unincorporated selfemployment, we continue to define a person’s employment type by the first year of the
employment spell. By conducting the earnings analyses in first differences and defining selfemployment type by the first year of the spell, the Table 13 analyses control for both selection in
and out.
Table 13 indicates that “smart and illicit” individuals who become incorporated business
owners enjoy much larger increases in annual and hourly earnings than (a) individuals who do not
have these particular combinations of cognitive and noncognitive traits and become incorporated
business owners and (b) smart and illicit individuals who become unincorporated business owners.
That is, the same traits associated with selection into incorporated self-employment also account
for the magnitude of the increase in earnings when an individual becomes an entrepreneur. For
example, while the smart and illicit enjoy an almost $7,000 increase in median residual annual
earnings when they become incorporated business owners relative to their earnings as salaried
workers (regression 2), others experience only a $716 increase (regressions 1). The changes
associated with the smart and illicit becoming incorporated self-employed are economically large.
For example, the $7,000 increase in median annual residual earnings associated with a smart and
illicit individual becoming an incorporated business owner is 12% of the median residual earnings
of their salaried smart and illicit counterparts. The smart and illicit experience much bigger
increases in earnings when they become incorporated business owners, in absolute and relative
terms, than people with different cognitive and noncognitive traits.
The results on the unincorporated self-employed are very different and emphasize (a) the
sharp distinction between entrepreneurship and other self-employment activities and (b) the degree

43

to which different combinations of traits are differentially valuable in different activities. In
contrast to the findings on those who become incorporated business owners, Table 13 indicates
that smart and illicit individuals who become unincorporated self-employed experience a larger
drop in hourly earnings than individuals with different traits who become unincorporated business
owners. The combination of smart and illicit traits is positively associated with success as an
entrepreneur, but negatively associated with success in other self-employment activities.
There is, however, a concern that smart and illicit individuals are more likely than others to
start incorporated businesses when they expect earnings to be especially high and not simply when
they start an entrepreneurial business. To assess the robustness of our interpretation that the smart
and illicit experience larger increases in income when they become entrepreneurs than individuals
with other traits who open such businesses or than when the smart and illicit open noneentrepreneurial businesses, we assess whether the results hold without conditioning on the legal
form of the business.
Using the same sample of people, we evaluate whether smart and illicit people experience
especially large boosts in earnings when they become self-employed in “Schumpeterian industries,”
industries that demand high levels of nonroutine cognitive skills from workers. For simplicity, we
divide industries by whether they are “Nonroutine cognitive industries” or not. Nonroutine
cognitive industries are those that demand above average values of both (a) Nonroutine Analytical
skills (analytical flexibility, creativity, reasoning, and generalized problem-solving) and (b)
Nonroutine Direction, Control, Planning skills (complex interpersonal communications such as
persuading, selling, and managing others) from its workers. Thus, “Nonroutine Cognitive Industry”
equals one if the industry satisfies these criteria and zero otherwise As discussed above, we
calculate the Nonroutine Analytical and Nonroutine Direction, Control, and Planning skills of an
industry as the hours-weighted job task requirements of all workers in the industry over the work
years 1995 through 2012 respectively in the CPS.
The focus on nonroutine cognitive industries reflects our earlier argument that nonroutine
cognitive activities are closely aligned with the Schumpeterian conception of entrepreneurship,
while industries that demand comparatively strong manual skills are less reflective of this
conception. A key shortcoming with using this industry-level variation to assess gains in earnings

44

associated with entrepreneurship is that the extra earnings from becoming self-employed in a
nonroutine cognitive industry might reflect an industry effect rather than an “entrepreneurship”
effect. By comparing smart and illicit individuals to others within and between industries our
“differences-in-differences” external validity setting allows us to account for both the type of
person and the type of industry effects on the change in earnings.
In regressions (3) and (4) of Table 13, the dependent variable remains the change in
median annual earnings, but we no longer include 𝛥𝛥𝑖𝑖 and 𝛥𝛥𝑖𝑖 as regressors. Instead, we include:

(1) ∆ Self-Employed x Nonroutine Cognitive Industry, which is the interaction between the

change in the individual’s self-employment status and whether the business is in a Nonroutine
Cognitive Industry or not; (2) ∆ Self-Employed, which is the change in the individual’s selfemployment status; and (3) Nonroutine Cognitive Industry, which equals one if the person works,
either as a salaried worker or as a self-employed business owner, in a Nonroutine Cognitive
Industry. As with columns (1) and (2), columns (3) and (4) provide estimates for the sample of
people who are not both smart and illicit and the sample of smart and illicit individuals
respectively.
The results indicate that smart and illicit individuals who become self-employed business
owners in Schumpeterian industries tend to experience large increases in annual earnings, but
individuals without those traits actually tend to experience a drop in earnings when they become
self-employed in nonroutine cognitive industries. That is, the same smart and illicit traits that are
positively associated with (a) selection into incorporated self-employment, (b) selection into
business ownership in nonroutine industries, and (c) increases in earnings when a person becomes
an incorporated business owner are also positively associated with the increase in earnings
associated with individuals becoming self-employed in industries that demand high levels of
nonroutine cognitive skills from their workers. Indeed, as shown in regression (2), smart and illicit
individuals earn more as self-employed only when they open businesses in nonroutine cognitive
industry. The median gain in earnings from self-employment is approximately $6,613 ($8,163 $1,550), which is remarkably similar to those from incorporated self-employment. This cannot be
attributed to a common industry self-employment effect (as the coefficient estimate on ∆SelfEmployed x Nonroutine Cognitive Industry in column 3 is actually negative). While selection into

45

self-employment in routine and nonroutine industries is neither random nor exogenous to person
characteristics, it is not contaminated by any ex ante or ex post selection into or out of
incorporated self-employment vis-à-vis unincorporated self-employment. This robustness test
provides additional evidence consistent with the view that a particular mixture of smart and illicit
traits matters for success as an entrepreneur.
These findings on who succeeds as an entrepreneur contribute to existing research.
Research indicates that self-esteem, optimism, and a taste for novelty are associated with a
propensity for individuals to try self-employment (Horvath and Zuckerman 1993; Zukerman 1994;
Nicolaou, Shane, Cherkas, and Spector 2008). 17 Lazear (2004, 2005) stresses that entrepreneurs
must be “jacks-of-all-trades” to coordinate factor inputs successfully. Our work demonstrates that
a special mixture of cognitive and noncognitive skills—the combination of outstanding abilities
and disruptive tendencies—is strongly associated with entrepreneurial success.

H. Risk: The Distribution of Earnings and the Coefficient of Variation
Previous work shows that the self-employed have a wider dispersion of earnings than
salaried workers, suggesting that self-employment is much riskier than salaried employment (e.g.,
Hamilton 2000, and Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen 2002). One explanation is that past work
mixes together two very heterogeneous groups of self-employed—incorporated and
unincorporated business owners—and the between group differences account for the wider
dispersion of earnings among the self-employed. Another possible, not mutually exclusive,
explanation is that the wider dispersion reflects the heterogeneity among the incorporated and
unincorporated self-employed and not the gains and losses associated with self-employment. In
this subsection, we first examine these possible explanations of the comparative dispersion of selfemployment earnings and then estimate the coefficient of variation of earnings in self-employment
and salaried work to assess risk.

17

Hartog, Praag, and Sluis (2010) do not find differences in the traits of the self-employed relative to salaried workers.

46

Figures 3a and 3b report the quantile regression coefficient estimates from equation (7) for
annual earnings for the incorporated and unincorporated respectively. 18 We weight observations
by the inverse number of observations in each employment spell. The blue bars provide the
estimates without individual effects. Thus, for example, we compare the difference between
residual earnings of the incorporated self-employed at the 90th percentile of their earnings
distribution with those of salaried workers at the 90th percentile of their distribution in Figure 3a.
As demonstrated by the findings in Tables 10 and 11, however, much of this gap, on average and
at the median, reflects person specific factors. Thus, we also provide the quantile regression
coefficient estimates when controlling for individual fixed effects in the red bars in Figures 3a and
3b. When conducting quantile analyses with individual fixed effects, we focus on individuals who
change between salaried work and self-employment. In other words, after computing the gap
between the residual earnings of a person when he is incorporated self-employed and those when
he is salaried, the red bars in Figure 3a depict the quantiles of this gap.
Figures 3a and 3b show that both the incorporated and unincorporated self-employed have
wider dispersions of earnings than the earnings distribution of salaried workers with comparable
observable traits. To see this, consider the blue bars. Figure 3a indicates that exceptionally
successful incorporated business owners (90th percentile) tend to earn almost $95,000 more per
annum than exceptionally successful salaried workers. Furthermore, notice that the estimated gap
in residual annual earnings is positive from the 20th percentile onwards. Most people who run
incorporated businesses earn more, and for much of the distribution much more, than comparable
salaried workers. But, this is not true for the unincorporated; most people who run unincorporated
businesses earn less, and some earn much less.
Figures 3a and 3b also show that individual effects account for much of the wider
dispersion of the earnings for both the incorporated and unincorporated self-employed relative to
salaried workers. For example, when we examine the gap in residual earnings of people when they
are incorporated or salaried (red bars) at the different deciles of this gap, the dispersion is much
flatter. For the incorporated self-employed (Figure 3a), the estimated gap is positive at each decile,
18

When conducting the same exercise on hourly earnings, the figures are similar except that the absolute values of the
estimates are smaller at each quantile. This reflects the earlier finding that people tend to work more hours when they
are self-employed.

47

indicating that earnings tend rise when individuals become incorporated self-employed across
virtually the entire distribution. At the 90th percentile of the gap, people tend to enjoy an almost
$20,000 increase in earnings when they become incorporated self-employed. For those who
become unincorporated self-employed, the results are more nuanced. As discussed earlier, there is
little change at the median. However, the estimated gap in residual earnings between a person’s
income as an unincorporated self-employed business owner and a salaried worker is negative for
more than half of the distribution. At the upper end, however, the gap is large. At the 90th
percentile of the gap between unincorporated and salaried income, people tend to enjoy an almost
$9,000 increase in earnings when they become unincorporated self-employed. 19
We further assess the relationship between risk and employment type by examining the
coefficient of variation of earnings. For the NLSY79 sample, we compute the coefficient of
variation over employment spells. For the matched, two-year CPS panel, we measure the
coefficient of variation for observations in which the individual is in the same employment type
for both years that we observe the individual. Thus, for these analyses, the CPS sample omits
people who switch employment types during the two-year panel. In Table 14, we present
regression results where the dependent variable is the coefficient of variation and the explanatory
variables of interest are dummy variables for whether the person is incorporated or unincorporated
self-employed, where salaried employment is the omitted category. For the NLSY79 regressions,
we control for the number years in the employment spell, along with experience and year effects. 20
Table 14 indicates that the coefficient of variation in earnings is greater when a person is
an incorporated business owner than when the person is a salaried worker. Consider the NLSY79
results, which are very similar to those from the CPS. The estimated coefficient of variation for the
average salaried worker is 0.30, as indicated by the estimated constant, while the estimated
coefficient of variation for incorporated business owners is 0.48 (=0.30 + 0.18). As noted above,
19

Figures 3a and 3b also provide additional evidence on selection into self-employment on earnings as a salaried
worker, building on the OLS and median estimates in Tables 10 and 11. Figure 3a demonstrates that there is positive
selection into incorporated self-employment from at least the 20th percentile upward. The results for the
unincorporated are again more nuanced as shown in Figure 3b. While there is small, negative selection at the median,
this selection becomes much more negative at lower quantiles, indicating that many of the unsuccessful
unincorporated self-employed were unsuccessful salaried workers. However, there is positive selection into
unincorporated self-employment from the 60th percentile upward.
20
In unreported regressions, we control for experience and education (as well as cognitive and noncognitive traits in
the NSLY79 sample) and obtain virtually the same coefficient estimates and standard errors as those in Table 14.

48

the estimated increase in annual earnings for an individual show chooses to become an
incorporated business owner is 12%. For comparison purposes, the coefficient of variation for the
S&P500 over 1926-2002 period is about 1.8 and the average annual return is about 12%. 21 Taken
together, the results provided in Table 14 and Figures 3a and 3b are consistent with the
Schumpeterian conception that entrepreneurs undertake risky endeavors that offer the possibility
of enormous boosts in earnings.

VI.

Conclusions
We disaggregate the self-employed into the incorporated and unincorporated to distinguish

between “entrepreneurs” and other business owners. We show that incorporated business owners
tend to engage in jobs that demand stronger nonroutine cognitive skills than either unincorporated
business owners or salaried workers. In contrast, unincorporated business owners tend to perform
tasks that demand manual skills. To the extent that one associates entrepreneurship with analytical
reasoning, creativity, and complex interpersonal communications rather than with eye, hand, and
foot coordination, the data suggest that on average the incorporated self-employed engage in
entrepreneurial activities while the unincorporated do not. Thus, there are material problems with
using the aggregate group of self-employed as an empirical proxy of entrepreneurship.
We discover that entrepreneurs—as proxied by the incorporated self-employed—earn
more and have a very distinct mixture of cognitive and non-cognitive traits than salaried workers
and other business owners. The incorporated tend to be male, white, better-educated, and more
likely to come from high-earning, two-parent families. Furthermore, as teenagers, the incorporated
tend to have higher learning aptitude and self-esteem scores. But, apparently it takes more to be a
successful entrepreneur than having these strong labor market skills: the incorporated selfemployed also tend to engage in more illicit activities as youths than other people who succeed as

21

Over the period from 1926-2002, Ibbotson EnCorr Analyzer indicates that the coefficient of variation (CV) on the
S&P 500 is 1.78, with a standard deviation of 21.9% and an arithmetic mean return of 12.3%. Over the same period,
the CV on 30-day T-bills is 0.237, with a standard deviation of 0.9% and mean of 3.8%, and the CV for long-term
government bonds is 1.414, with standard deviation of 8.2% and mean returns of 5.8%. .

49

salaried workers. It is a particular mixture of traits that seems to matter for both becoming an
entrepreneur and succeeding as an entrepreneur. It is the high-ability person who tends to “breakthe-rules” as a youth who is especially likely to become a successful entrepreneur.

50

References
Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane. 2003. The skill content of recent
Technological change: An empirical investigation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118
(4): 1279-1333.
Baumol, William J. 1968. Entrepreneurship in economic theory. American Economic Review
58(2): 64-71.
Baumol, William J. 1990. Entrepreneurship: Productive, unproductive, and destructive. Journal of
Political Economy 98(5): 893-921.
Bernardo, Antonio E., and Ivo Welch. 2001. On the evolution of overconfidence and entrepreneurs.
Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 10 (3): 301-330.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Antoinette Schoar. 2003. Managing with style: the effect of managers on
firm policies. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4): 1169-1208.
Blanchflower, David G., and Andrew J. Oswald. 1998. What makes and entrepreneur? Journal of
Labor Economics 16 (1): 26-60.
Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen. 2007. Measuring and explaining management practices
across firms and countries. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(4): 1351-1408.
Borjas, George J., Stephen G. Bronars. 1989. Consumer discrimination and self-employment.
Journal of Political Economy 97 (June): 581-605.
Bowles, Samuel, Herbert Gintis, and Melissa Osborne. 2001. The determinants of earnings: A
behavioral approach. Journal of Economic Literature 39 (4): 1137-1176.
Dawson, Christopher, David de Meza, Andrew Henley, and G. Reza Arabsheibani. 2011.
Entrepreneurship, cause or consequence of financial optimism. LSE mimeo.
De Meza, David, and C. Southey. 1996. The borrower’s curse: Optimism, finance, and
entrepreneurship. Economic Journal 106: 375-386.
Evans, David S., and Boyan Jovanovic. 1989. An estimated model of entrepreneurial choice under
liquidity constraints. Journal of Political Economy 97 (4): 808-27.
Evans, David S., and Linda S. Leighton. 1989. Some empirical aspects of entrepreneurship.
American Economic Review 79 (June): 519-35.
Fairlie, Robert W. 2002. Drug dealing and legitimate self-employment. Journal of Labor
Economics 20(3): 538-567.
Fairlie, Robert W. 2005. Self-employment, entrepreneurship, and the NLSY79. Monthly Labor
Review 128 (February): 40-47.
Fairlie, Robert W., and Bruce D. Meyer. 1996. Ethnic and racial self-employment differences and
possible explanations. Journal of Human Resources 31 (Autumn): 757-793.
Garicano, Luis, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2006. Organization and inequality in a knowledge
economy. Quarterly Journal of Economics (November): 1383-1435.

51

Glaeser, Edward L. 2007. Entrepreneurship and the city. NBER Working Paper 13551.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2013.
Human capital and regional development. Quarterly Journal of Economics 128: 105-164.
Hamilton, Barton H. 2000. Does entrepreneurship pay? An empirical analysis of the returns to
self-employment. Journal of Political Economy 108 (3): 604-631.
Harris, Ron. 2000. Industrializing English Law: Entrepreneurship and Business Organization,
1720-1844. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hartog, Joop, Mirjam van Praag, and Justin van der Sluis. 2010. If you are so smart, why aren’t
you an entrepreneur? Returns to cognitive and social ability: Entrepreneurs versus
employees. Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 19(4): 947-989
Heckman, James J., 2000. Policies to foster human capital. Research in Economics, Elsevier, vol.
54(1): 3-56.
Heckman, James J., and Yona Rubinstein. The importance of noncognitive skills: Lessons from
the GED testing program. American Economic Review 91(May): 145-149.
Heckman, James J., N. Stixrud, and S. Urzua. 2006. The effects of cognitive and noncognitive
abilities on labor market outcomes and social behavior. Journal of Labor Economics 24
(3): 411-482.
Hipple, Steven F. 2010. Self-employment in the United States. Monthly Labor Review 113
(November): 17-32.
Holmes, Thomas J., and James A. Schmitz, Jr. 1990. A theory of entrepreneurship and its
application to the study of business transfers. Journal of Political Economy 98 (April):
265-94.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen. 1994. Sticking it out:
Entrepreneurial survival and liquidity constraints. Journal of Political Economy 102
(February): 53-75.
Horvath, Paula, and Marvin Zuckerman. 1993. Sensation seeking, risk appraisal, and risky
behavior. Personality and Individual Differences 14 (January): 41-52.
Hurst, Erik, Geng Li, and Benjamin W. Pugsley. 2014. Are household surveys like tax forms:
Evidence from income underreporting of the self-employed. Review of Economics and
Statistics 96 (March): 19-33.
Hurst, Erik, and Benjamin W. Pugsley. 2011. What do small businesses do? Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity (Fall 2011): 73-118.
Kihlstrom, Richard, and Jean-Jaques Laffont. 1979. A general equilibrium entrepreneurial theory
of firm formation based on risk aversion. Journal of Political Economy 87 (August): 71948.
Knight, Frank H. 1921. Risk, Uncertainty and Profit. New York: Harper and Row.

52

Kushner, David. 2012. Machine Politics: The Man Who Started the Hacker Wars. The New
Yorker, May 7.
La Porta, Rafael and Andrei Shleifer. 2008. The unofficial economy and economic development.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 275-352.
Lazear, Edward P. 2004. Balanced skills and entrepreneurship. American Economic Review,
94(2): 208-211.
Lazear, Edward P. 2005. Entrepreneurship. Journal of Labor Economics 23 (4): 649-680.
Lerner, Josh, Ann Leamon, and Felda Hardymon. 2012. Venture Capital, Private Equity, and the
Financing of Entrepreneurship. New York: Wiley.
Lucas, Robert E. 1978. On the size distribution of business firms. The Bell Journal of Economics
9(2): 508-523.
Madrian, Bridgette C., and Lars John Lefgren. 2000. An approach to longitudinally matching
Current Population Survey (CPS) respondents. Journal of Economic and Social
Measurement 26(1): 31-62.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffrey Tate. 2009. Superstar CEOs. Quarterly Journal of Economics
124(4): 1593-1638.
Manso, Gustavo. 2015. Experimentation and the returns to entrepreneurship. University of
California, Berkeley, mimeo.
Moskowitz, Tobias, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2002. The returns to entrepreneurial
investment: A private equity premium puzzle? American Economic Review 92 (4): 745778.
Mulligan Casey, B. and Yona Rubinstein. 2008. Selection, investment, and women’s relative
wages. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(3): 1061–1110.
Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1991. The allocation of talent:
Implications for growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(2): 503-530.
Nicolaou, Nicos, Scott Shane, Lynn Cherkas, and Tim D. Spector. 2008. The influence of
sensation seeking in the heritability of entrepreneurship. Strategic Entrepreneurship
Journal 2 (March): 7–21.
Schumpeter, Joseph A. 1911. Theorie Der Wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung. Leipzig: Duncker &
Humblot.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny. 1997. A survey of corporate governance. Journal of
Finance 52(2): 737-83.
Smith, Adam. 1776. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. London:
Methuen and Co.
Zuckerman, Marvin 1994. Behavioral Expressions and Biosocial Bases of Sensation Seeking.
New York: Cambridge University Press.

53

Table	  1:	  Demographics	  and	  Labor	  Market	  Outcomes	  by	  Employment	  Type,	  CPS	  and	  NLSY79
All

Salaried
All

Self-­‐Employed
Uninc.

Inc.

Panel	  A:	  CPS	  1996	  -­‐	  2012
Observations

A.	  Labor	  Market	  Outomes
Mean	  Earnings
Median	  Earnings
Median	  Hourly	  Earnings
Annual	  Hours	  Worked
Full-­‐Time,	  Full-­‐Year
B.	  Demographics
Age
White
Female
Years	  of	  Schooling
College	  Graduate	  (or	  more)

1,225,886
100.0%

1,108,591
90.4%

117,295
9.6%

75,476
6.2%

41,819
3.4%

$	  47,515
$	  36,090
$	  18.0
1985
0.69

$	  46,421
$	  36,363
$	  18.0
1976
0.70

$	  58,174
$	  34,190
$	  17.4
2078
0.64

$	  40,820
$	  24,625
$	  13.8
1936
0.57

$	  89,169
$	  55,591
$	  24.6
2331
0.78

40.2
0.70
0.48
13.7
0.33

40.0
0.69
0.49
13.7
0.33

42.9
0.79
0.36
13.9
0.36

42.4
0.76
0.40
13.6
0.31

43.6
0.83
0.28
14.5
0.46

Panel	  B:	  NLSY79	  1982-­‐2012
Observations

A.	  Labor	  Market	  Outomes
Mean	  Earnings
Median	  Earnings
Median	  Hourly	  Earnings
Annual	  Hours	  Worked
Full-­‐Time,	  Full-­‐Year
B.	  Demographics
Age
White
Female
Years	  of	  Schooling
College	  Graduate	  (or	  more)

132,681
100.0%

121,782
91.8%

10,899
8.2%

8,963
6.8%

1,936
1.5%

$	  35,170
$	  17.2
1966
0.59

$	  43,605
$	  35,222
$	  17.2
1953
0.59

$	  55,785
$	  33,965
$	  16.8
2088
0.53

$	  45,713
$	  28,672
$	  14.7
1991
0.48

$	  93,411
$	  61,424
$	  26.2
2461
0.72

36.2
0.81
0.47
13.8
0.30

36.0
0.80
0.48
13.8
0.30

38.1
0.87
0.38
13.6
0.26

37.5
0.86
0.41
13.4
0.23

40.1
0.90
0.28
14.2
0.36

Notes:	  The	  table	  presents	  summary	  statistics	  from	  the	  March	  Annual	  Demographic	  Survey	  files	  of	  the	  
Census	  Bureau’s	  CPS	  for	  the	  work	  years	  1995	  through	  2012,	  for	  prime	  age	  workers	  (25	  through	  55	  years	  
old),	  and	  from	  the	  Bureau	  Labor	  of	  Statistics’	  National	  Longitudinal	  Survey	  of	  Youth	  1979	  (NLSY79)	  for	  
workers	  who	  are	  least	  25	  years	  old	  between	  1982	  and	  2012.	  The	  CPS	  and	  the	  NLSY79	  classify	  all	  workers	  
in	  each	  year	  as	  either	  salaried	  or	  self-­‐employed,	  and	  among	  the	  self-­‐employed,	  they	  indicate	  whether	  
the	  person	  is	  incorporated	  or	  unincorporated	  self-­‐employed.	  The	  sample	  excludes	  people	  who	  do	  not	  
work	  either	  as	  salaried	  or	  self-­‐employed,	  people	  with	  missing	  data	  on	  relevant	  demographics	  and	  labor	  
market	  outcomes,	  and	  people	  living	  within	  group	  quarters.	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  

54

Table	  2:	  Job	  Task	  Requirements	  by	  Employment	  Type,	  CPS	  and	  NLSY79
All

Salaried
All

Self-­‐Employed
Uninc.
Inc.

Panel	  A:	  CPS	  1996	  -­‐	  2012
1.	  Job	  Task	  Requirements
Nonroutine	  Analytical
Nonroutine	  Direction,	  Control,	  Planning
Nonroutine	  Manual

3.91
3.00
0.99

3.87
2.92
0.99

4.27
3.87
0.98

3.93
3.19
1.08

4.89
5.10
0.80

2.	  Job	  Task	  Requirements	  Last	  Year	  (if	  salaried)
Nonroutine	  Analytical
4.04
Nonroutine	  Direction,	  Control,	  Planning
3.15
Nonroutine	  Manual
0.95

4.01
3.11
0.96

4.15
3.46
0.97

3.79
2.79
1.10

4.66
4.41
0.78

Panel	  B:	  NLSY79	  1982-­‐2012
1.	  Job	  Task	  Requirements
Nonroutine	  Analytical
Nonroutine	  Direction,	  Control,	  Planning
Nonroutine	  Manual

3.72
2.73
1.05

3.73
2.69
1.03

3.65
3.12
1.19

3.43
2.80
1.25

4.51
4.33
0.95

2.	  Job	  Task	  Requirements	  Last	  Year	  (if	  salaried)
Nonroutine	  Analytical
3.72
Nonroutine	  Direction,	  Control,	  Planning
2.67
Nonroutine	  Manual
1.05

3.73
2.67
1.03

3.69
2.69
1.17

3.53
2.41
1.23

4.30
3.70
0.97

Notes:	  The	  table	  presents	  summary	  statistics	  from	  the	  March	  Annual	  Demographic	  Survey	  files	  of	  the	  Census	  
Bureau’s	  CPS	  for	  the	  work	  years	  1995	  through	  2012,	  for	  prime	  age	  workers	  (25	  through	  55	  years	  old),	  and	  
from	  the	  Bureau	  Labor	  of	  Statistics’	  National	  Longitudinal	  Survey	  of	  Youth	  1979	  (NLSY79)	  for	  workers	  who	  are	  
least	  25	  years	  old	  between	  1982	  and	  2012.	  For	  Panels	  A	  and	  B,	  we	  use	  data	  on	  job	  task	  requirements	  from	  
Autor,	  Levy,	  and	  Murnane	  (2003),	  who	  link	  data	  from	  the	  Dictionary	  of	  Occupational	  Titles	  with	  the	  
occupational	  categories	  in	  the	  CPS.	  Nonroutine	  Analytical	  measures	  the	  degree	  to	  which	  the	  task	  demands	  
analytical	  flexibility,	  creativity,	  and	  generalized	  problem-­‐solving,	  including	  tasks	  such	  as	  forming	  and	  testing	  
hypotheses,	  making	  medical	  diagnoses,	  etc.	  Nonroutine	  Direction,	  Control,	  Planning	  measures	  the	  degree	  to	  
which	  the	  task	  demands	  complex	  interpersonal	  communications	  such	  as	  persuading,	  selling,	  and	  managing	  
others.	  Nonroutine	  Manual	  measures	  the	  degree	  to	  which	  the	  task	  demands	  eye,	  hand,	  and	  foot	  coordination,	  
including	  landscaping,	  truck	  driving,	  carpentry,	  plumbing,	  and	  piloting	  a	  commercial	  airline.	  For	  Panel	  A.2	  we	  
only	  include	  individuals	  who	  (a)	  are	  part	  of	  the	  matched	  CPS	  sample,	  in	  which	  we	  create	  a	  two-­‐year	  panel	  for	  
the	  subset	  of	  individuals	  that	  we	  match	  overtime	  following	  the	  guidelines	  in	  Madrian	  and	  Lefren	  (2000)	  and	  
(b)	  were	  salaried	  workers	  in	  year	  t-­‐1.

55

Table	  3:	  Selection	  into	  Unincorporated	  and	  Incorporated	  Self-­‐Employment,	  CPS	  Panel
Unincorporated
(1)

Incorporated
(2)

-­‐0.038**
(0.019)

0.055***
(0.017)

Nonroutine	  Direction,	  Control,	  Planning

-­‐0.001
(0.006)

0.039***
(0.008)

Nonroutine	  Manual

0.037**
(0.018)

-­‐0.139***
(0.031)

0.011
(0.012)

0.055***
(0.012)

Annual	  Hours	  Worked	  Last	  Year

-­‐0.998***
(0.077)

0.418***
(0.109)

Female

-­‐0.366***
(0.049)

-­‐0.734***
(0.048)

230,330

230,330

0.99

0.99

Job	  Task	  Requirements	  Last	  Year:
Nonroutine	  Analytical

Demographics:
Years	  of	  Schooling

Observations
Psuedo	  R-­‐squared

Notes: This table reports multinomial logit estimates of the probability that a worker between the ages of 25
and 55 is unincorporated or incorporated self-employed. Salaried workers are the excluded category. The
regressions also include state, year, and race fixed effects, as well as a quartic for experience. The sample
excludes people who do not work either as salaried or self-employed, people with missing data on relevant
demographics and labor market outcomes, and people living within group quarters. The analyses include the
sub-sample of CPS observations for which we have a matched, two-year panel over the work years 1995
through 2012. Data on job task requirements are from Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003), who link data from
the Dictionary of Occupational Titles with the occupational categories in the CPS. Nonroutine Analytical
measures the degree to which the task demands analytical flexibility, creativity, and generalized problemsolving, including tasks such as forming and testing hypotheses, making medical diagnoses, etc. Nonroutine
Direction, Control, Planning measures the degree to which the task demands complex interpersonal
communications such as persuading, selling, and managing others. Nonroutine Manual measures the degree
to which the task demands eye, hand, and foot coordination, including landscaping, truck driving, carpentry,
plumbing, and piloting a commercial airline. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the yearlevel are in parentheses, where *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels
respectively.

56

Table	  4:	  Top	  and	  Bottom	  Industries	  by	  Nonroutine	  Job	  Task	  Requirements,	  CPS
Nonroutine	  Analytical	  Industry

Nonroutine	  Direction,	  
Control,	  Planning	  Industry

Nonroutine	  Manual	  Industry

Panel	  A:	  Top	  Industries
Engineering	  and	  architectural	  
services
Accounting,	  auditing,	  and	  
bookkeeping	  services
Miscellaneous	  professional	  and	  
related	  services
Security	  and	  commodity	  brokerage	  
and	  investment	  companies

6.56

5.34

Educational	  services
6.23
Engineering	  and	  architectural	  
6.05
services
Accounting,	  auditing,	  and	  
5.05
bookkeeping	  services

Taxicab	  service

4.26

Trucking	  service

3.52

Street	  railways	  and	  bus	  lines

3.14

5.16

Advertising

Logging

2.66

Aircraft	  and	  parts

5.08

Theaters	  and	  motion	  pictures 4.90

Water	  transportation

2.16

Private	  households

0.99

Panel	  B:	  Bottom	  Industries
Private	  households
0.45

Legal	  services

0.07

Logging

2.07

Taxicab	  service

0.57

0.09

Taxicab	  service

2.18

Postal	  service

0.98

Accounting,	  auditing,	  and	  
bookkeeping	  services
Insurance

Trucking	  service

2.19

Trucking	  service

1.04

0.18

Laundering,	  cleaning,	  and	  dyeing	  
services

Security	  and	  commodity	  
brokerage	  and	  investment	  

2.30
Legal	  services

1.25

Banking	  and	  credit	  agencies

0.21

5.84

4.93

0.16

Notes:	  This	  table	  reports	  the	  top	  and	  the	  bottom	  five	  industries	  in	  each	  of	  three	  categories	  of	  job	  task	  requirements	  from	  the	  Dictionary	  of	  
Occupational	  Titles.	  For	  each	  industry,	  we	  compute	  the	  hours-­‐weighted	  job	  task	  requirements	  of	  people	  working	  in	  the	  industry	  over	  the	  work	  years	  
1995	  through	  2012.	  We	  exclude	  industries	  with	  less	  than	  1000	  observations.	  We	  do	  this	  for	  three	  categories	  of	  skills	  for	  each:	  (1)	  Nonroutine	  Analytical	  
measures	  the	  degree	  to	  which	  the	  task	  demands	  analytical	  flexibility,	  creativity,	  and	  generalized	  problem-­‐solving,	  including	  tasks	  such	  as	  forming	  and	  
testing	  hypotheses,	  making	  medical	  diagnoses,	  etc.;	  (2)	  Nonroutine	  Direction,	  Control,	  Planning	  measures	  the	  degree	  to	  which	  the	  task	  demands	  
complex	  interpersonal	  communications	  such	  as	  persuading,	  selling,	  and	  managing	  others;	  and	  (3)	  Nonroutine	  Manual	  measures	  the	  degree	  to	  which	  
the	  task	  demands	  eye,	  hand,	  and	  foot	  coordination,	  including	  landscaping,	  truck	  driving,	  carpentry,	  plumbing,	  and	  piloting	  a	  commercial	  airline.

57

Table	  5:	  Differences	  in	  Task	  Requirements	  of	  Incorporated	  and	  Unincorporated	  Businesses	  CPS	  Panel

The	  Task	  Requirements	  of	  the	  Industry	  of	  the	  New	  Business:
Nonroutine	  Analytical	   Nonroutine	  Direction,	   Nonroutine	  Manual	  
Industry
Control,	  Planning	  
Industry
by	  
by	  
by	  Industry by	  
by	  
by	  
Industry
(1)
New	  Incorporated	  
Business	  Owner
Other	  regressors:
Education	  &	  experience
Year	  and	  state	  effects
Firm	  size	  effects
Observations
R-­‐square

Industry-­‐
Firm	  Size
(2)

0.094*** 0.062***
(0.013)
(0.013)

Industry
(3)

Industry-­‐
Firm	  Size
(4)

0.157*** 0.161***
(0.022)
(0.027)

Industry
(5)

Industry-­‐
Firm	  Size
(6)

-­‐0.172*** -­‐0.084***
(0.015)
(0.014)

No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

14687
0.004

14687
0.193

14687
0.006

14687
0.112

14687
0.013

14687
0.169

Notes: This table reports regressions of the job task requirements of the businesses of newly self-employed individuals
on whether the business is incorporated or unincorporated. For each industry, we compute the hours-weighted job task
requirements of people working in the industry over the work years 1995 through 2012. We do this for three categories
of skills for each: (1) Nonroutine Analytical measures the degree to which the task demands analytical flexibility,
creativity, and generalized problem-solving, including tasks such as forming and testing hypotheses, making medical
diagnoses, etc.; (2) Nonroutine Direction, Control, Planning measures the degree to which the task demands complex
interpersonal communications such as persuading, selling, and managing others; and (3) Nonroutine Manual measures
the degree to which the task demands eye, hand, and foot coordination, including landscaping, truck driving, carpentry,
plumbing, and piloting a commercial airline. To the businesses of newly self-employed individuals, we assign the
hours-weighted job task requirements of the business’s industry. To examine the newly self-employed, we restrict the
matched two-year CPS panel sample to individuals who were full-time, full-year salaried workers in year t-1 and who
became self-employed in year t. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the year-level are in parentheses,
where *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively.

58

Table	  6:	  Home	  Environment,	  Early	  Personal	  Traits,	  and	  Entrepreneurial-­‐Related	  Activities,	  NLSY79
All

A.	  Family	  background
Mother's	  Education
Father's	  Education
Two	  parents	  family	  (14)
Family	  Income	  in	  1979

Salaried
All

Self-­‐Employed
Uninc.

Inc.

11.7
11.9
0.76
$	  57,431

11.7
11.9
0.76
$	  57,140

12.0
12.2
0.77
$	  60,182

11.8
12.1
0.76
$	  57,567

12.6
12.7
0.83
$	  70,317

B.	  Cognitive	  and	  non-­‐cognitive	  traits
AFQT
Rotter	  Locus	  of	  Control	  	  (standardized)
Rosenberg	  Self-­‐Esteem	  (standardized)
Illicit	  Activity	  Index	  (standardized)
	  	  Force	  (raw)
	  	  Steal	  50	  or	  less	  (raw)
	  	  Stopped	  by	  Police	  (raw)

50.1
-­‐0.10
0.08
0.01
0.04
0.21
0.19

50.0
-­‐0.09
0.07
0.00
0.04
0.21
0.18

51.4
-­‐0.18
0.10
0.12
0.06
0.24
0.22

50.4
-­‐0.16
0.06
0.10
0.06
0.23
0.21

55.2
-­‐0.28
0.27
0.20
0.08
0.26
0.26

C.	  Self-­‐designation	  and	  invention	  (2010)
Entrepreneur	  (residual	  standardized)
Applied	  for	  Patent	  (residual	  standardized)

0.00
0.00

-­‐0.08
-­‐0.01

0.80
0.08

0.69
0.03

1.20
0.28

Notes: This table provides summary statistics from the NLSY79 on people who are at least 25 years old and in the work force. This
covers work years 1982 through 2012. Family background and data on cognitive and non-cognitive traits are measured in 1979 and in
1980, which is before anyone in the sample enters prime age. Mother’s Education and Father’s Education are the number of years of
education of the person’s mother and father. Two-Parents Family (14) equals one if the person at the age of 14 had two parents living at
home and zero otherwise. Family Income in 1979 is the income of the person’s family in 1979. AFQT is a measure of cognitive ability;
Rotter Locus of Control measures the degree to which a person feels luck, fate, and external factors control events relative to the extent
that internal factors give the person self-determination over his or life, such that negative values imply a greater sense of internal
control; and Rosenberg Self-Esteem measures the self-esteem of the individual based on a psychometric test. The Illicit Index, which is
computed in 1980, measures the degree to which an individual engaged in an array of disruptive, aggressive, risk-taking, and illicit
activities, including taking things by force (Force), stealing, including items less that $50 (Steal 50 or less), and whether the person was
stopped by the police (Stopped by Police). Entrepreneur is based on the 2010 survey question, "Do you consider yourself to be an
entrepreneur (where an entrepreneur is defined by the questioner as someone who launches a business enterprise, usually with
considerable initiative and risk)?" We obtain the residuals of a regression of Entrepreneur on education AFQT, Rosenberg Self-Esteem,
Rotter Locus of Control, the Illicit Index, and year of birth and then standardizing these residuals to have zero mean and a standard
deviation of one. Applied for Patent is similarly calculated based on the 2010 survey question, "Has anyone, including yourself, ever
applied for a patent for work that you significantly contributed to?

59

Table	  7:	  Selection	  into	  Employment	  Types	  on	  Cognitive,	  Noncognitive,	  and	  Family	  Traits,	  NLSY79
Self-­‐Employment	  by	  Type:

All	  (vs	  
Salaried)
(1)

By	  Type	  (vs	  Salaried)
(2)

Unincorporated
(3)

(4)

(5)

Incorporated
(6)

(7)

Cognitive	  and	  Non-­‐cognitive	  Traits
AFQT

0.076
(0.115)

-­‐0.046
(0.124)

-­‐0.042
(0.124)

-­‐0.115
(0.132)

0.618***
(0.235)

0.576**
(0.237)

0.069
(0.261)

Illicit

0.078***
(0.027)

0.070**
(0.029)

0.133***
(0.048)

0.122**
(0.048)

0.122**
(0.055)

-­‐0.023
(0.093)

-­‐0.042
(0.097)

0.031
(0.029)

-­‐0.007
(0.031)

-­‐0.009
(0.031)

-­‐0.014
(0.031)

0.211***
(0.059)

0.216***
(0.059)

0.192***
(0.060)

-­‐0.097***
(0.028)

-­‐0.089***
(0.030)

-­‐0.087***
(0.030)

-­‐0.085***
(0.030)

-­‐0.141**
(0.056)

-­‐0.144***
(0.056)

-­‐0.131**
(0.056)

-­‐0.163
(0.104)

-­‐0.151
(0.104)

0.306*
(0.157)

0.327**
(0.163)

Rosenberg	  Score
Rotter	  Score

AFQT*Illicit

Demographics
Black

-­‐0.560***
(0.072)

-­‐0.504***
(0.075)

-­‐0.501***
(0.075)

-­‐0.537***
(0.077)

-­‐0.887***
(0.164)

-­‐0.898***
(0.165)

-­‐0.777***
(0.168)

Hispanic

-­‐0.318***
(0.076)

-­‐0.332***
(0.079)

-­‐0.328***
(0.079)

-­‐0.273***
(0.085)

-­‐0.253
(0.166)

-­‐0.260
(0.167)

0.043
(0.176)

Female

-­‐0.340***
(0.055)

-­‐0.260***
(0.059)

-­‐0.261***
(0.059)

-­‐0.266***
(0.059)

-­‐0.727***
(0.119)

-­‐0.724***
(0.119)

-­‐0.708***
(0.119)

Family	  Traits
Family	  Income

-­‐0.070
(0.099)

0.449***
(0.161)

Mother	  Education

0.017
(0.014)

0.086***
(0.027)

Father	  Education

0.010
(0.011)

0.010
(0.021)

Observations
Pseudo	  R-­‐Square

125166
0.0276

125166
0.0302

125166
0.0306

125166
0.0340

125166
0.0302

125166
0.0306

125166
0.0340

Note: This table reports multinomial logit estimates of the probability that an individual, 25 years of age or older, is self-employed, incorporated selfemployed, or unincorporated self-employed, where salaried employment is the excluded category. All dummy variables are defined exclusively. AFQT
is a measure of cognitive ability, which ranges from 1 to 100, and is divided by 100 in these analyses. The Illicit Index, which was computed in 1980,
measures the degree to which an individual engaged in an array of aggressive, risk-taking, and disruptive activities. It is standardized to equal zero for
the NLSY79 population. Rotter Locus of Control measures the degree to which a person feels luck, fate, and external factors control events relative to
the extent that internal factors give the person self-determination over his or life, such that negative values imply a greater sense of internal control; and
Rosenberg Self-Esteem measures the self-esteem of the individual based on a psychometric test. Family Income in 1979 is the income of the person’s
family in 1979, divided by $100,000. Though unreported in the table, all regressions control for year of birth, a dummy variable of whether both parents
were living at the home of the individual at the age of 14, and dummy variables for individuals with missing family income (for which we impute the
average value in the sample) and missing parental education (for which we impute values based on the other parent’s education and the average for the
sample if no parental education is reported). We exclude observations in which the person is neither salaried nor self-employed and observations with
missing demographics (gender, race and ethnicity, schooling) or missing values for AFQT, Rosenberg Self-Esteem, Rotter Locus of Control, and Illicit.
Reported standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for heteroskedasticity and clustered by individual. The symbols ***, **, and * signify
significance at the one, five, and ten percent levels respectively.

Table	  8:	  Selection	  of	  Salaried	  Workers	  into	  Different	  Self-­‐Employment,	  NLSY79
Self-­‐Employment	  by	  Type:

Self-­‐
Employed	  
(1)

Adjusted	  wages
Illicit

-­‐0.359***
(0.123)
0.083*
(0.043)

60

Unincorporated
(2)

(3)

Incorporated
(4)

-­‐0.648*** -­‐0.662*** -­‐0.843***
(0.122)
(0.135)
(0.173)
0.069
(0.049)

Adjusted	  wages	  *	  Illicit

0.074
(0.054)

0.069
(0.069)

0.021
(0.074)

-­‐0.053
(0.109)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.691**
(0.285)

0.559**
(0.277)

0.426
(0.318)

0.132*
(0.072)

0.103
(0.074)

0.118
(0.085)

0.398**
(0.164)

0.429**
(0.194)

Controlling	  for
AFQT,	  Rotter	  and	  
Rosenberg	  scores

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Family	  income	  and	  
parents'	  education

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Education	  and	  
experinece

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Sample

All

All

All

FTFY

All

All

FTFY

33405
0.0291

33405
0.0451

33405
0.0465

23957
0.0530

33405
0.0451

33405
0.0465

23957
0.0530

Observations
Pseudo	  R-­‐Square

Note: This table reports multinomial logit estimates of the probability that an individual, 25 years of age or older, is self-employed,
incorporated self-employed, or unincorporated self-employed, where salaried employment is the excluded category. All dummy
variables are defined exclusively. Adjusted Wages are computed as the person fixed effect from a Mincerian log wage regression when
people work as full-time, full-year salaried workers, where the wage regression is estimated over the full sample period. The Illicit
Index, which was computed in 1980, measures the degree to which an individual engaged in an array of aggressive, risk-taking, and
disruptive activities. It is standardized to equal zero for the NLSY79 population. Rotter Locus of Control measures the degree to which
a person feels luck, fate, and external factors control events relative to the extent that internal factors give the person self-determination
over his or life, such that negative values imply a greater sense of internal control; and Rosenberg Self-Esteem measures the self-esteem
of the individual based on a psychometric test. Family Income in 1979 is the income of the person’s family in 1979, divided by
$100,000. Though unreported in the table, all regressions control for year of birth, the year of the survey, a dummy variable of whether
both parents were living at the home of the individual at the age of 14, educational attainment (six categories), a quartic for potential
experience and dummy variables for individuals with missing family income (for which we impute the average value in the sample) and
missing parental education (for which we impute values based on the other parent’s education and the average for the sample if no
parental education is reported). We exclude observations in which the person is neither salaried nor self-employed and observations with
missing demographics (gender, race and ethnicity, schooling) or missing values for AFQT, Rosenberg Self-Esteem, Rotter Locus of
Control, and Illicit. These regressions only include white (non-Hispanic) males who are at least 25 years old. Reported standard errors
(in parentheses) are corrected for heteroskedasticity and clustered by individual. The symbols ***, **, and * signify significance at the
one, five, and ten percent levels respectively.

61

Table	  9:	  Differences	  in	  Job	  Task	  Requirements	  of	  Businesses	  by	  Individual	  Traits,	  NLSY79
The	  Task	  Requirements	  of	  the	  Industry	  of	  the	  New	  Business
Nonroutine	  Direction,	  Control,	  Planning	  
Industry
Nonroutine	  Manual	  Industry
Nonroutine	  Analytical	  Industry
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
Incorporated
Unincorporated

0.033
(0.035)

0.106*
(0.065)

-­‐0.079*** 0.053
(0.023)
(0.053)

0.300***
(0.079)

0.114
(0.113)

0.075
(0.082)

0.065
(0.079)

-­‐0.034
(0.093)

0.222** 0.552***
(0.101)
(0.138)

0.026
(0.146)

-­‐0.233*** -­‐0.141** -­‐0.236**
(0.045)
(0.070)
(0.096)

-­‐0.213*
(0.119)

0.030
(0.056)

-­‐0.036
(0.049)

-­‐0.129*
(0.067)

-­‐0.083
(0.079)

0.224*** 0.099**
(0.027)
(0.042)

0.074
(0.065)

0.114**
(0.055)

Sample
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  AFQT
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Illicit	  Index

<	  =	  50
or	  <=	  0

>	  50
and	  >0

>	  75
and	  >0

>	  75
and	  <=0

<	  =	  50
or	  <=	  0

>	  50
and	  >0

>	  75
and	  >0

>	  75
and	  <=0

<	  =	  50
or	  <=	  0

>	  50
and	  >0

>	  75
and	  >0

>	  75
and	  <=0

Observations
R-­‐square

25480
0.574

7263
0.603

3897
0.635

5988
0.591

23047
0.558

7263
0.581

3897
0.591

5988
0.606

23047
0.604

7263
0.585

3897
0.615

5988
0.607

Notes:	  The	  dependent	  variable	  is	  the	  job	  task	  requirements	  of	  the	  industry	  in	  which	  the	  individual	  works,	  either	  as	  a	  business	  owner	  or	  as	  an	  employee.	  For	  each	  industry,	  we	  
compute	  the	  hours-­‐weighted	  job	  task	  requirements	  of	  people	  working	  in	  the	  industry	  over	  the	  work	  years	  1995	  through	  2012.	  We	  do	  this	  for	  three	  categories	  of	  job	  task	  
requirements:	  (1)	  Nonroutine	  Analytical	  measures	  the	  degree	  to	  which	  the	  task	  demands	  analytical	  flexibility,	  creativity,	  and	  generalized	  problem-­‐solving,	  including	  tasks	  such	  as	  
forming	  and	  testing	  hypotheses,	  making	  medical	  diagnoses,	  etc.;	  (2)	  Nonroutine	  Direction,	  Control,	  Planning	  measures	  the	  degree	  to	  which	  the	  task	  demands	  complex	  interpersonal	  
communications	  such	  as	  persuading,	  selling,	  and	  managing	  others;	  and	  (3)	  Nonroutine	  Manual	  measures	  the	  degree	  to	  which	  the	  task	  demands	  eye,	  hand,	  and	  foot	  coordination,	  
including	  landscaping,	  truck	  driving,	  carpentry,	  plumbing,	  and	  piloting	  a	  commercial	  airline.	  Data	  on	  job	  task	  requirements	  are	  from	  Autor,	  Levy,	  and	  Murnane	  (2003),	  who	  link	  data	  
on	  the	  Dictionary	  of	  Occupational	  Titles	  with	  occupational	  categories.	  The	  sample	  includes	  prime	  age	  white	  males,	  who	  were	  salaried	  workers	  in	  year	  t-­‐2.	  The	  regressions	  include	  
Incorporated	  and	  Unincorporated,	  which	  equal	  one	  if	  the	  individual	  is	  incorporated	  self-­‐employed	  or	  unincorporated	  self-­‐employed	  respectively	  in	  year	  t	  and	  zero	  otherwise.	  	  The	  
regressions	  are	  also	  divided	  by	  whether	  individuals	  have	  above	  or	  below	  the	  average	  values	  of	  illicit	  and	  by	  different	  AFQT	  scores.	  The	  regressions	  control	  for	  individual	  effects,	  a	  
quartic	  in	  experience,	  and	  year	  fixed	  effects.	  Heteroskedasticity	  robust	  standard	  errors	  clustered	  at	  the	  year-­‐level	  are	  in	  parentheses,	  where	  *,	  **,	  and	  ***	  indicate	  significance	  at	  the	  
10%,	  5%,	  and	  1%	  levels	  respectively.

62

Table	  10:	  Earnings	  and	  Individual	  Effects,	  CPS
Annual	  Earnings
Levels
1st	  Difference
OLS
Median
OLS
Median
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Incorporated

32402*** 11248***
(1860)
(732)

ΔIncorporated
Unincorporated

R-­‐square	  (Pseudo	  R2)
Observations

10.3***
(0.759)
7906***
(2246)

2.1***
(0.292)

2562***
(243)

-­‐5700*** -­‐10874***
(1178)
(563)

ΔUnincorporated

Hourly	  Earnings
Levels
1st	  Difference
OLS
Median
OLS
Median
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

-­‐4.1***
(0.466)

%	  Difference	  from	  Salaried	  Worker
Incorporated
47.5%
Unincorporated
-­‐8.4%

0.6***
(0.136)

-­‐5.0***
(1.046)

-­‐4.0***
(0.149)

-­‐6.0***
(0.228)

-­‐11273*** -­‐7955***
(2679)
(273)
0.177
144930

2.7***
(0.885)

0.1198
144930

0.003
72465

0.0032
72465

0.163
144930

0.1152
144930

0.003
72465

0.0030
72465

21.0%
-­‐20.3%

11.6%
-­‐16.5%

4.8%
-­‐14.9%

35.8%
-­‐14.2%

9.0%
-­‐25.8%

9.4%
-­‐17.4%

2.6%
-­‐17.2%

Notes:	  This	  table	  reports	  regression	  results	  of	  both	  annual	  earnings	  and	  hourly	  earnings	  on	  employment	  type	  using	  data	  from	  the	  CPS	  for	  the	  
subsample	  of	  observations	  for	  which	  we	  have	  a	  matched,	  two-­‐year	  panel.	  The	  sample	  covers	  work	  years	  1995	  through	  2012.	  The	  table	  provides	  
estimated	  coefficients	  from	  earnings	  regressions	  in	  levels	  and	  and	  first-­‐differences,	  using	  both	  OLS	  and	  median	  regressions.	  	  In	  the	  levels	  regression,	  
there	  are	  two	  key,	  reported	  explanatory	  variables:	  Incorporated	  equals	  one	  if	  the	  person	  is	  incorporated	  self-­‐employed	  and	  zero	  otherwise;	  
Unincorporated	  equals	  one	  if	  the	  person	  is	  unincorporated	  self-­‐employed	  and	  zero	  otherwise.	  In	  the	  first-­‐differences	  regressions,	  we	  examine	  the	  
change	  in	  earnings	  and	  focus	  on	  two	  explanatory	  variables:	  ΔIncorporated	  equals	  the	  change	  in	  incorporated	  self-­‐employment	  status;	  
ΔUnincorporated	  equals	  the	  change	  in	  the	  unincorporated	  self-­‐employment	  status.	  All	  of	  the	  the	  regressions	  control	  for	  year	  and	  state	  fixed	  effects,	  
as	  well	  as	  standard	  Mincerian	  characteristics:	  dummy	  variables	  for	  six	  education	  categories	  and	  a	  quartic	  expression	  for	  potential	  work	  experience.	  
The	  sample	  includes	  white	  males,	  who	  are	  full-­‐time	  workers	  between	  the	  ages	  of	  25	  and	  55,	  and	  excludes	  persons	  who	  do	  not	  work	  either	  as	  salaried	  
or	  self-­‐employed	  and	  people	  with	  missing	  data	  on	  relevant	  demographics.	  Heteroskedasticity	  robust	  standard	  errors	  clustered	  at	  the	  year-­‐level	  are	  in	  
parentheses,	  where	  *,	  **,	  and	  ***	  indicate	  significance	  at	  the	  10%,	  5%,	  and	  1%	  levels	  respectively.

63

Table	  11:	  Earnings	  and	  Individual	  Effects,	  NLSY79
Panel	  A:	  Annual	  Earnings

OLS
Levels
(1)

Incorporated

(2)

(3)

(4)

45926*** 17446***
(6546)
(3885)

ΔIncorporated
Unincorporated

MEDIAN
1st	  Difference

Levels
(5)

1st	  Difference
(6)

(7)

23941*** 5378***
(3459)
(621)
12592** 11219**
(5748) (5201)

8893***
(2961)

5417***
(1809)

ΔUnincorporated

(8)

3953*** 3351***
(519)
(364)
-­‐687
(1042)

2580
(2183)

2563
(2473)

-­‐367
(478)
-­‐728*
(393)

-­‐399
(327)

%	  Difference	  from	  Salaried	  Worker
	  	  	  Incorporated
	  	  	  Unincorporated

75%
15%

29%
9%

21%
4%

18%
4%

49%
-­‐1%

11%
-­‐1%

8%
-­‐1%

7%
-­‐1%

Individual	  Fixed	  Effects

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

23657
0.253

23657
0.631

17479
0.011

17479
0.082

23657
0.132

23657
0.111

17479
0.016

17479
0.010

Observations
R-­‐square

OLS

Panel	  B:	  Hourly	  Earnings
Levels
(9)
Incorporated

(10)

(11)

(12)

13.141*** 4.384***
(2.250)
(1.407)

ΔIncorporated
Unincorporated

MEDIAN
1st	  Difference

Levels
(13)

1st	  Difference
(14)

0.739
(0.665)

ΔUnincorporated

(16)

5.317*** 0.978***
(1.094)
(0.311)
4.168** 3.846**
(1.975) (1.825)

0.376
(1.062)

(15)

1.350*** 0.928***
(0.225)
(0.222)
-­‐2.737*** -­‐0.849***
(0.356)
(0.224)

0.013
(0.808)

0.004
(0.893)

-­‐0.739*** -­‐0.554***
(0.185)
(0.175)

%	  Difference	  from	  Salaried	  Worker
	  	  	  Incorporated
	  	  	  Unincorporated

52%
2%

18%
3%

17%
0%

15%
0%

26%
-­‐13%

5%
-­‐4%

7%
-­‐4%

5%
-­‐3%

Individual	  Fixed	  Effects

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

23657
0.255

23657
0.625

17479
0.011

17479
0.078

23657
0.136

23657
0.110

17479
0.012

17479
0.006

Observations
R-­‐square

Notes:	  This	  table	  reports	  regression	  results	  of	  both	  annual	  earnings	  and	  hourly	  earnings	  on	  employment	  type	  using	  data	  from	  the	  NLSY79	  for	  years	  
1982	  through	  2012.	  The	  table	  provides	  estimated	  coefficients	  from	  earnings	  regressions	  in	  levels	  and	  and	  first-­‐differences,	  using	  both	  OLS	  and	  median	  
regressions,	  and	  both	  including	  and	  excluding	  individual	  fixed	  effects.	  	  In	  the	  levels	  regression,	  there	  are	  two	  key,	  reported	  explanatory	  variables:	  
Incorporated	  equals	  one	  if	  the	  person	  is	  incorporated	  self-­‐employed	  and	  zero	  otherwise;	  Unincorporated	  equals	  one	  if	  the	  person	  is	  unincorporated	  
self-­‐employed	  and	  zero	  otherwise.	  In	  the	  first-­‐differences	  regressions,	  we	  examine	  the	  change	  in	  earnings	  and	  focus	  on	  two	  explanatory	  variables:	  
ΔIncorporated	  equals	  the	  change	  in	  incorporated	  self-­‐employment	  status;	  ΔUnincorporated	  equals	  the	  change	  in	  the	  unincorporated	  self-­‐employment	  
status.	  All	  of	  the	  the	  regressions	  control	  for	  year	  fixed	  effects	  as	  well	  as	  standard	  Mincerian	  characteristics:	  dummy	  variables	  for	  six	  education	  
categories	  and	  a	  quartic	  expression	  for	  potential	  work	  experience.	  The	  sample	  includes	  white	  males,	  who	  are	  full-­‐time	  workers	  between	  the	  ages	  of	  25	  
and	  55,	  and	  excludes	  persons	  who	  do	  not	  work	  either	  as	  salaried	  or	  self-­‐employed	  and	  people	  with	  missing	  data	  on	  relevant	  demographics.	  When	  
examining	  %	  differences	  from	  salaried	  workers,	  the	  statistics	  are	  based	  on	  the	  means	  for	  salaried	  workers	  for	  the	  OLS	  regressions	  and	  the	  medians	  for	  
salaried	  workers	  in	  the	  median	  regressions.	  Heteroskedasticity	  robust	  standard	  errors	  clustered	  at	  the	  year-­‐level	  are	  in	  parentheses,	  where	  *,	  **,	  and	  
***	  indicate	  significance	  at	  the	  10%,	  5%,	  and	  1%	  levels	  respectively.	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

64

Table	  12:	  Earnings	  and	  the	  Selection	  In	  and	  Out	  of	  Self-­‐Employment,	  NLSY79
Panel	  A:	  Annual	  Earnings

OLS
(1)

(2)

MEDIAN
(3)

(4)

(5)

Incorporated

17446***
(3885)

5378***
(621)

Unincorporated

5417***
(1809)

-­‐367
(478)

(6)

(7)

Spell	  starts	  as	  incorporated

14064***12309***
(4112) (3271)

5339*** 4604***
(564)
(691)

Spell	  starts	  as	  unincorporated

7194*** 4995***
(1831) (1620)

-­‐326
(435)

1st	  year	  of	  1st	  spell	  incorporated
1st	  year	  of	  1st	  spell	  unincorporated

(8)

-­‐78
(464)

11186***
(2961)

4334***
(399)

1846
(1655)

-­‐1467***
(356)

%	  Difference	  from	  Salaried	  Worker
	  	  	  	  	  Incorporated
	  	  	  	  	  Unincorporated	  

29%
9%

23%
12%

20%
8%

18%
3%

11%
-­‐1%

11%
-­‐1%

9%
0%

9%
-­‐3%

Individual	  effects
Weighted	  by	  inverse	  of	  years	  in	  spell

Yes
No

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

23657
3553
0.63

23657
3553
0.63

23657
3553
0.63

23657
3553
0.63

23657
3553
0.111

23657
3553
0.111

23657
3553
0.111

23657
3553
0.080

Observations
Spells
R-­‐square	  (	  Pseudo	  R2)
Panel	  B:	  Hourly	  Earnings

OLS
(9)

Incorporated
Unincorporated

(10)

MEDIAN
(11)

(12)

(13)

4.384***
(1.407)

0.978***
(0.311)

0.739
(0.665)

-­‐0.849***
(0.224)

(14)

(15)

(16)

Spell	  starts	  as	  incorporated

3.520** 3.655***
(1.527) (1.194)

1.097*** 0.925***
(0.311) (0.335)

Spell	  starts	  as	  unincorporated

1.213*
(0.670)

-­‐0.905***-­‐0.844***
(0.228) (0.225)

0.691
(0.611)

1st	  year	  of	  1st	  spell	  incorporated
1st	  year	  of	  1st	  spell	  unincorporated

3.612***
(1.072)

0.667***
(0.233)

-­‐0.300
(0.623)

-­‐0.858***
(0.143)

%	  Difference	  from	  Salaried	  Worker
	  	  	  	  	  Incorporated
	  	  	  	  	  Unincorporated	  

18%
3%

14%
5%

15%
3%

14%
-­‐1%

5%
-­‐4%

5%
-­‐4%

5%
-­‐4%

3%
-­‐4%

Individual	  effects
Weighted	  by	  inverse	  of	  years	  in	  spell

Yes
No

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

23657
3553
0.625

23657
3553
0.625

23657
3553
0.623

23657
3553
0.623

23657
3553
0.110

23657
3553
0.110

23657
3553
0.110

23657
3553
0.077

Observations
Spells
R-­‐square	  (	  Pseudo	  R2)

65

Notes:	  This	  table	  reports	  regression	  results	  of	  both	  annual	  earnings	  and	  hourly	  earnings	  on	  employment	  type	  using	  data	  from	  the	  NLSY79	  for	  
years	  1982	  through	  2012.	  Panel	  A	  provides	  results	  on	  annual	  earning,	  while	  Panel	  B	  examines	  hourly	  earnings.	  	  Incorporated	  equals	  one	  if	  the	  
person	  is	  incorporated	  self-­‐employed	  and	  zero	  otherwise.	  Unincorporated	  equals	  one	  if	  the	  person	  is	  unincorporated	  self-­‐employed	  and	  zero	  
otherwise.	  An	  employment	  spell	  is	  the	  full	  set	  of	  consecutive	  years	  as	  either	  a	  salaried	  or	  self-­‐employed	  worker.	  Since	  we	  only	  consider	  full-­‐
time,	  full-­‐year	  workers,	  individuals	  are	  either	  salaried	  or	  a	  self-­‐employed	  in	  each	  period.	  A	  self-­‐employment	  spell	  is	  the	  full	  set	  of	  consecutive	  
years	  in	  which	  a	  person	  is	  self-­‐employed	  (either	  incorporated	  or	  unincorporated).	  Spell	  starts	  incorporated	  equals	  one	  for	  each	  year	  of	  a	  self-­‐
employment	  spell	  if	  the	  person	  starts	  the	  self-­‐employment	  spell	  as	  an	  incorporated	  business	  owner	  and	  zero	  otherwise.	  Spell	  starts	  
unincorporated	  is	  defined	  analogously.	  1st	  year	  of	  1st	  spell	  incoporated	  equals	  one	  for	  each	  year	  of	  all	  of	  the	  years	  an	  individual	  is	  self-­‐
employed	  if	  in	  the	  first	  year	  of	  the	  first	  employment	  spell	  the	  individual	  is	  incoprorated	  self-­‐employed	  and	  zero	  otherwise.	  1st	  year	  of	  1st	  spell	  
unincoporated	  equals	  one	  for	  each	  year	  of	  all	  of	  the	  years	  an	  individual	  is	  self-­‐employed	  if	  in	  the	  first	  year	  of	  the	  first	  employment	  spell	  the	  
individual	  is	  unincoprorated	  self-­‐employed	  and	  zero	  otherwise.	  The	  regressions	  control	  for	  individual	  effects,	  year	  effects,	  and	  experience.	  In	  
the	  indicated	  regressions,	  the	  observations	  are	  weighted	  by	  the	  inverse	  of	  the	  number	  of	  years	  in	  the	  employment	  spell	  to	  give	  equal	  weight	  to	  
each	  spell.	  Heteroskedasticity	  robust	  standard	  errors	  clustered	  at	  the	  year-­‐level	  are	  in	  parentheses,	  where	  *,	  **,	  and	  ***	  indicate	  significance	  
at	  the	  10%,	  5%,	  and	  1%	  levels	  respectively.

66

Table	  13:	  The	  Change	  in	  Median	  Earnings	  Differentiating	  by	  “Smart	  and	  Illicit,”	  NLSY79
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Δ	  Incorporated

716**
(285)

6996***
(547)

Δ	  Unincorporated

105
(426)

-­‐1895**
(807)
-­‐3234***
(955)

8163***
(1052)

Δ	  Self-­‐Employed

1155**
(452)

-­‐1550*
(937)

Nonroutine	  Cognitive	  Industry

1139***
(193)

1563***
(361)

-­‐4%
2%

11%
-­‐3%

Δ	  Self-­‐Employed	  x	  Nonroutine	  Cognitive	  Industry

%	  Difference	  from	  Salaried	  Worker
	  	  	  Incorporated
	  	  	  Unincorporated
	  	  	  Self-­‐Employed	  in	  Nonroutine	  Industry
	  	  	  Self-­‐Employed	  
Sample
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  AFQT
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Illicit	  Index
Pseudo	  R-­‐squared
Observations

1%
0%

12%
-­‐3%

AFQT	  <=50	  or AFQT	  >50	  &
	  Illicit	  <=0
Illicit	  >0
0.016
13269

0.017
4210

AFQT	  <=50	  or AFQT	  >50	  &
	  Illicit	  <=0
Illicit	  >0
0.017
13269

0.018
4210

Note:	  This	  table	  reports	  median	  regressions	  of	  the	  change	  in	  annual	  earnings	  on	  the	  change	  in	  employment	  type	  for	  white	  males	  
working	  full-­‐time,	  full-­‐year	  using	  data	  from	  the	  NLSY79	  for	  years	  1982	  through	  2012.	  In	  regressions	  (1)	  versus	  (2)	  and	  (3)	  versus	  (4),	  
the	  sample	  is	  split	  between	  individuals	  who	  have	  (a)	  AFQT	  <	  50	  or	  Illicit	  	  <	  	  0	  and	  (b)	  the	  smart	  and	  illicit	  with	  AFQT	  >	  50	  and	  >	  	  0.	  The	  
Illicit	  Index,	  which	  was	  computed	  in	  1980,	  measures	  the	  degree	  to	  which	  an	  individual	  engaged	  in	  an	  array	  of	  aggressive,	  risk-­‐taking,	  
and	  disruptive	  activities	  and	  has	  a	  median	  value	  of	  zero.	  AFQT	  is	  a	  measure	  of	  cognitive	  ability	  and	  has	  a	  median	  value	  of	  50.	  In	  
regressions	  (1)	  and	  (2),	  the	  main	  explanatory	  variables	  are	  the	  change	  in	  the	  incorporated	  and	  the	  unincorporated	  status	  over	  the	  
past	  two	  years,	  where	  incorporated	  and	  unincorporated	  employment	  status	  are	  defined	  by	  the	  first	  year	  of	  the	  self-­‐employment	  
spell.	  A	  self-­‐employment	  spell	  is	  the	  full	  set	  of	  consecutive	  years	  in	  which	  a	  person	  is	  self-­‐employed	  (either	  incorporated	  or	  
unincorporated).	  In	  regressions	  (3)	  and	  (4),	  the	  main	  explanatory	  variables	  are	  (a)	  the	  change	  in	  self-­‐employment	  status	  interacted	  
with	  a	  dummy	  variable	  of	  whether	  the	  business	  is	  in	  Nonroutine	  Cognitive	  Industry	  or	  not,	  (b)	  the	  change	  in	  self-­‐employment	  status,	  
and	  (c)	  a	  dummy	  variable	  of	  whether	  the	  person	  works	  in	  a	  Nonroutine	  industry	  or	  not.	  A	  Nonroutine	  Cognitive	  industry	  is	  an	  
industry	  that	  demands	  both	  above	  average	  values	  of	  Nonroutine	  Analytical	  skills	  (analytical	  flexibility,	  creativity,	  reasoning,	  and	  
generalized	  problem-­‐solving)	  and	  Nonroutine	  Direction,	  Control,	  Planning	  skills	  (complex	  interpersonal	  communications	  such	  as	  
persuading,	  selling,	  and	  managing	  others)	  from	  its	  workers.	  The	  change	  in	  self-­‐employment	  status	  equals	  one	  if	  the	  person	  switches	  
from	  salaried	  work	  in	  t-­‐2	  to	  self-­‐employment	  in	  t.	  The	  statistics	  for	  %	  Difference	  from	  salaried	  workers	  are	  calculated	  for	  the	  
corresponding	  group	  of	  salaried	  workers,	  e.g.,	  in	  regression	  (2),	  the	  change	  in	  annual	  earnings	  is	  computed	  relative	  to	  the	  median	  
among	  salaried	  workers	  with	  AFQT>50	  and	  Illicit	  >	  0,	  and	  in	  regression	  (4),	  then	  computations	  are	  done	  relative	  to	  the	  median	  
among	  salaried	  workers	  with	  AFQT>50	  and	  Illicit>0	  in	  Nonroutin	  Cognitive	  Industries.	  All	  specifications	  control	  for	  experience	  and	  
time	  effects.	  Heteroskedasticity	  robust	  standard	  errors	  clustered	  at	  the	  year-­‐level	  are	  in	  parentheses,	  where	  *,	  **,	  and	  ***	  indicate	  
significance	  at	  the	  10%,	  5%,	  and	  1%	  levels	  respectively.	  	  

67

Table	  14:	  The	  Coefficient	  of	  Variation	  in	  Hourly	  Earnings,	  CPS	  and	  NLSY79
Coefficient	  of	  Variation
Incorporated
Unincorporated
Constant

Observations
R-­‐square

CPS	  Panel

NLSY79

0.157***
(0.007)

0.181***
(0.027)

0.176
(0.138)

0.213***
(0.017)

0.197***
(0.001)

0.301***
(0.047)

67533
0.003

3120
0.124

Note:	  This	  table	  reports	  regressions	  of	  the	  coefficient	  of	  variation	  per	  person-­‐employment	  spell	  on	  
employment	  type.	  For	  the	  CPS	  and	  NLSY79	  samples,	  we	  compute	  the	  coefficient	  of	  variation	  over	  
employment	  spells,	  where	  we	  define	  an	  employment	  spell	  as	  an	  individual	  working	  for	  two	  or	  more	  
consecutive	  years	  either	  as	  a	  salaried	  worker	  or	  as	  self-­‐employed.	  We	  define	  a	  self-­‐employment	  spell	  
as	  an	  individual	  being	  self-­‐employed	  (either	  incorporated	  or	  unincorporated)	  for	  one	  or	  more	  
consecutive	  years.	  Thus,	  many	  individuals	  have	  more	  than	  one	  employment	  spell.	  We	  control	  for	  the	  
length	  of	  the	  employment	  spell.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  in	  parentheses,	  corrected	  for	  heteroskedasticity,	  
and	  clustered	  at	  the	  individual	  level	  in	  the	  NLSY79	  regression.	  The	  symbols	  ***,	  **,	  and	  *	  signify	  
significance	  at	  the	  one,	  five,	  and	  ten	  percent	  levels	  respectively.

68

Figure	  1:	  Years	  as	  Unincorporated	  Before	  a	  Business	  Owner	  Incorporates,	  NLSY79	  
100%	  

Note: This figure considers self-employment spells in which a business owner ends the spell as
incorporated self-employed. We define a self-employment spell as an individual being selfemployed (either incorporated or unincorporated) for one or more consecutive years. For
example, the first column shows that for self-employment spells in which an individual ends
the spell as an incorporated business owner, 85% started the spell as an incorporated business
owner.	  
	  	  

90%	  
80%	  
70%	  
60%	  

All	  
50%	  

Males	  
40%	  

Whites	  
30%	  

White	  Males	  
20%	  
10%	  
0%	  

0	  

1	  

2	  

3	  

4	  

5-­‐6	  

Years	  

7-­‐8	  

9-­‐10	  

11-­‐14	  

15-­‐20	  

69

Figure	  2:	  Years	  as	  Incorporated	  Before	  a	  Business	  Owner	  Unincorporates,	  NLSY79	  
100%	  

Note:	  This	  ﬁgures	  considers	  self-­‐employment	  spells	  in	  which	  a	  business	  owner	  ends	  the	  spell	  as	  
unincorporated	  self-­‐employed.	  We	  deﬁne	  a	  self-­‐employment	  spell	  as	  an	  individual	  being	  self-­‐
employed	  (either	  incorporated	  or	  unincorporated)	  for	  one	  or	  more	  consecuMve	  years.	  For	  example,	  
the	  ﬁrst	  column	  shows	  that	  for	  self-­‐employment	  spells	  in	  which	  an	  individual	  ends	  the	  spell	  as	  an	  
unincorporated	  business	  owner,	  98%	  started	  the	  spell	  as	  an	  unincorporated	  business	  owner.	  	  

90%	  
80%	  
70%	  
60%	  

All	  
50%	  

Males	  
40%	  

Whites	  
30%	  

White	  Males	  
20%	  
10%	  
0%	  

0	  

1	  

2	  

3	  

4	  

5-­‐6	  

Years	  

7-­‐8	  

9-­‐10	  

11-­‐14	  

15-­‐20	  

70

Figure	  3a:	  Annual	  Earnings	  Gap	  between	  Incorporated	  and	  Salaried,	  NLSY79	  
	  	  
140000	  
Adjus3ng	  for	  schooling	  experience	  cogni3ve	  and	  non-­‐cogoni3ve	  measures	  
120000	  
Controlling	  for	  person	  ﬁxed	  eﬀects	  
100000	  

80000	  

60000	  

This	  ﬁgure	  depicts	  the	  quan3le	  regression	  coeﬃcient	  es3mates	  of	  annual	  on	  
incorporated	  self-­‐employment	  as	  speciﬁed	  in	  equa3on	  (7).	  The	  blue	  bars	  provide	  
es3mates	  while	  controlling	  for	  educa3on	  (six	  categories),	  poten3al	  experience	  (quar3c),	  
AFQT,	  Rosenberg	  self-­‐esteem,	  RoSer	  Locus	  of	  Control,	  and	  the	  Illicit	  Ac3vity	  Index.	  The	  
red	  bars	  provide	  the	  es3mates	  while	  also	  controlling	  for	  individual	  ﬁxed	  eﬀects.	  
The	  sample	  includes	  white	  males,	  full-­‐3me	  full-­‐year	  workers,	  aged	  25	  years	  or	  older.	  	  	  
	  

40000	  

20000	  

0	  
Q10	  
-­‐20000	  

Q20	  

Q30	  

Q40	  

Q50	  

Q60	  

Q70	  

Q80	  

Q90	  

71

Figure	  3b:	  Annual	  Earnings	  Gap	  between	  Unincorporated	  and	  Salaried,	  NLSY79	  
	  	  
50000	  

40000	  

Adjus3ng	  for	  schooling	  experience	  cogni3ve	  and	  non-­‐cogoni3ve	  measures	  
Controlling	  for	  person	  ﬁxed	  eﬀects	  

30000	  

20000	  

This	  ﬁgure	  depicts	  the	  quan3le	  regression	  coeﬃcient	  es3mates	  of	  annual	  on	  
unincorporated	  self-­‐employment	  as	  speciﬁed	  in	  equa3on	  (7).	  The	  blue	  bars	  provide	  
es3mates	  while	  controlling	  for	  educa3on	  (six	  categories),	  poten3al	  experience	  (quar3c),	  
AFQT,	  Rosenberg	  self-­‐esteem,	  RoSer	  Locus	  of	  Control,	  and	  the	  Illicit	  Ac3vity	  Index.	  The	  
red	  bars	  provide	  the	  es3mates	  while	  also	  controlling	  for	  individual	  ﬁxed	  eﬀects.	  The	  
sample	  includes	  white	  males,	  full-­‐3me	  full-­‐year	  workers,	  aged	  25	  years	  or	  older.	  	  	  
	  

10000	  

0	  
Q10	  
-­‐10000	  

-­‐20000	  

Q20	  

Q30	  

Q40	  

Q50	  

Q60	  

Q70	  

Q80	  

Q90	  

