NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EARLY RETIREMENT INCENTIVES AND STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT
Maria D. Fitzpatrick
Michael F. Lovenheim
Working Paper 19281
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19281
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

We would like to thank Steve Rivkin, Jonah Rockoff and seminar participants at Cornell University,
CESifo, North Carolina State University, the NBER Economics of Education Working Group and
the American Economic Association Annual Meetings for helpful comments and suggestions. Funding
for Fitzpatrick from the National Institute on Aging, through Grant Number T32-AG000186 to the
National Bureau of Economic Research, is gratefully acknowledged. All errors and omissions are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Maria D. Fitzpatrick and Michael F. Lovenheim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Early Retirement Incentives and Student Achievement
Maria D. Fitzpatrick and Michael F. Lovenheim
NBER Working Paper No. 19281
August 2013
JEL No. H75,I21,I28,J26
ABSTRACT
Early retirement incentives (ERIs) are increasingly prevalent in education as districts seek to close
budget gaps by replacing expensive experienced teachers with lower-cost newer teachers. Combined
with the aging of the teacher workforce, these ERIs are likely to change the composition of teachers
dramatically in the coming years. We use exogenous variation from an ERI program in Illinois in
the mid-1990s to provide the first evidence in the literature of the effects of large-scale teacher retirements
on student achievement. We find the program did not reduce test scores; likely, it increased them,
with positive effects most pronounced in lower-SES schools.
Maria D. Fitzpatrick
Department of Policy and Management
Cornell University
103 Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
maria.d.fitzpatrick@cornell.edu
Michael F. Lovenheim
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Cornell University
135 Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
mfl55@cornell.edu

1

Introduction

Early retirement incentives (ERI) for teachers, which offer experienced teachers financial
incentives to retire before they would be eligible for full pension benefits, have become
increasingly prevalent over the past decade as states and school districts seek to reduce
expenditures in light of tightening budgets. While ERI programs have been in existence since the
1970s (Tarter and McCarthy 1989), their popularity has spiked in the past five years, as it has in
previous recessions. For example, in 2010 alone, several large states such as New York,
Michigan, and Minnesota enacted ERI legislation. California, Illinois, and Connecticut have
longer standing programs, while myriad school districts throughout the country have
implemented these programs in recent years. Despite the popularity of ERI programs, especially
in difficult financial climates, little is known about how inducing experienced teachers to retire
early affects student achievement.
The importance of examining how ERI programs influence student learning is
underscored by the aging of the teacher workforce. In 2010, over one-third of teachers were over
the age of fifty.1 Given that retirement rates tend to increase dramatically around 30 years of
experience, when many teachers become eligible for full-retirement benefits based on their age
and experience, in the coming decade we can expect a large proportion of teachers to be on the
margin where an ERI may be particularly attractive.2 Indeed, in the last couple of years, many
states already have seen an exodus of teachers into retirement as retirement incentives have been
offered and uncertainty around collective bargaining and cuts in retirement benefits have induced
teachers to retire earlier than they otherwise would have.3 Furthermore, virtually every state has

1

See Friedberg and Turner (2010) for a wide range of evidence on the aging of the teacher workforce.
For more evidence on retirement hazard rates, see Furgeson, Strauss and Vogt (2006), Hanushek, Kain and Rivkin,
(2004), and Kodel and Podgursky (2011).
3
For example, in 2011, the Wisconsin legislature passed a bill that changed retirement contribution rates and
weakened collective bargaining rights. During the first half of the year, between when the bill passed and when it
would take effect, more than 5,000 public school employees retired, which is approximately equal to the number of
retirees in 2009 and 2010 combined. (http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/08/31/doubled-teacherretiremen_n_943495.html)
2

1

provisions that allow teachers to retire early with an actuarially fair adjustment to their pension
(Auriemma, Cooper and Smith 1992).
The growing literature on teacher retirement focuses largely on the role of the retirement
incentives embedded in pension plans (Furgeson, Strauss and Vogt 2006; Costrell and Podgursky
2009; Costrell and McGee 2010; Brown and Laschever 2012; Brown 2013) and retirement’s
responsiveness to student performance and school demographics (Hanushek, Kain and Rivkin
2004; Mahler 2012). Though these studies provide clear evidence that teacher labor supply is
responsive to pension incentive structures, how these retirement incentives affect student
outcomes is unknown.
Ex ante, it is unclear what the effects of large-scale teacher retirements, such as those
resulting from an ERI, will be. On the one hand, retiring teachers are highly experienced, and
they typically are replaced with much less-experienced teachers or with new teachers. The
evidence of the strong relationship between experience and effectiveness in the classroom
(Wiswall 2013; Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain 2005; Rockoff 2004) suggests teacher retirements
could reduce student achievement. Even among teachers who have the same amount of
experience, teacher quality varies substantially (Goldhaber and Hansen 2010). If teachers with
better job opportunities outside of Illinois Public Schools (IPS) are the most likely to retire, and
if wages outside teaching are positively correlated with teacher quality (Chingos and West 2012),
then the offer of an ERI would negatively affect student test scores.
On the other hand, teachers who are near retirement may put forth less effort than
younger teachers or may be less well-trained in modern, potentially more effective, pedagogical
practices. This may be particularly true for those teachers who desire to retire early.
Alternatively, if productivity is negatively correlated with disutility from teaching, the teachers
who choose to take up the ERI may be those that are least productive. Family and personal
circumstances also influence the labor-leisure decision in ways that lead to ambiguous
2

predictions of the effect of ERIs on achievement. Finally, principals and administrators may
respond to large losses of experienced teachers, e.g. by decreasing class sizes, changing the
assignment of teachers to students or purchasing additional non-teacher resources.
Despite the increasing importance of understanding how student academic achievement
responds to teacher retirement behavior, previous research has not been able to credibly estimate
this relationship. The main difficulty in identifying the effect of teacher retirement on student test
scores is that retirement decisions may be endogenous to student performance. For example,
teachers may retire rather than face a lower-performing cohort of students, or retirement may be
induced by unobserved school-level policies that independently affect achievement. The ability
for teachers to retire early exacerbates such endogeneity, as early retirement programs give
teachers more flexibility in deciding when they leave teaching.
We use a natural experiment brought about by a two-year ERI program in Illinois to
identify the effect of ERIs on student academic achievement. Our analysis is the first to link
changes in the teacher workforce due to ERI programs to student test scores, and thus our main
contribution to the literature is to provide evidence on how ERI policies impact student
achievement.4 Specifically, we exploit a temporary ERI that was offered to all public school
teachers in Illinois. Illinois has a defined benefit pension system for teachers, where eligibility
for benefits and benefit levels are defined by age and years of service in the state. In the 19921993 and 1993-1994 school years, the state offered an ERI, nicknamed “the 5+5,” which allowed
employees to purchase an extra five years of age and experience to be counted as creditable
service for calculating their retirement benefit. Their purchase of these additional creditable
years of service was conditional on their immediate retirement. This plan led to a threefold
increase in the retirement of experienced teachers before the 1993-1994 and 1994-1995 school
4

Mahler (2012) and McGee (2012) examine how the responsiveness of teachers’ retirement to the nonlinearities in
their pension benefit calculation formulas differs by teacher quality, but these studies do not address whether student
achievement is affected by teacher retirement. Neither study finds evidence that higher- or lower-performing
teachers are differentially responsive to pension incentives. Responses to the fixed long-standing benefit system may
be different than responses to a short-lived incentive offer like the ERI, however.

3

years. As a result of this program, the Illinois public school system lost 10 percent of its teachers
over a two year time-span, with experienced teachers making up the vast majority of exits.
Using school-level data from the 1989-1990 to 1996-1997 school years on 3rd, 6th and 8th
grade state standardized math and English exams in a differences-in-differences framework, we
exploit the fact that the increased retirement propensity was concentrated amongst those with the
most experience in order to identify how test scores were affected by retirement. We examine
how test scores changed differentially between the pre- and post-ERI periods among schools that
had more teachers with 15 or more years of experience relative to those that had fewer in the preERI period. We specify the strength of treatment in this manner because the data point to the
program affecting the exit rates of teachers with 15 or more years of experience the most. With
school fixed effects in the model, we control for any cross-sectional differences in test scores that
are related to the pre-ERI experience profile in schools. The main identification assumption we
invoke is that trends in student achievement among schools with fewer experienced teachers are
an accurate counterfactual for trends among schools with more experienced teachers. We present
evidence that this assumption is valid in this context.
Our estimates show that the ERI program had large effects on the composition of teachers
in Illinois schools. For each teacher with 15 or more years of experience at a school in the preERI period, exit rates increased, average experience declined and the number of new teachers
increased substantially post-ERI. However, despite the large literature showing a positive
relationship between teacher experience and student academic achievement (e.g., Rivkin,
Hanushek and Kain 2005; Rockoff 2004; Wiswall 2013), our estimates suggest that the teacher
retirements did little to reduce student math and English test scores. In fact, the point estimates
are positive and in some cases are statistically significantly different from zero.
The effect of teacher retirement on achievement may be heterogeneous across different
types of schools and districts. For example, better funded schools may be more able to replace
4

retiring teachers with experienced teachers from other schools. In addition, due to teacher
sorting over their careers and the value of gaining experience in better educational settings, the
experienced teachers at higher-resource schools may be higher quality (Lankford, Loeb and
Wyckoff 2002; Feng et al. 2012). We explore the role of heterogeneity in responses across
schools by school-average income, percent white and by baseline test scores. There is suggestive
evidence of heterogeneity: in lower SES and lower-performing schools, retirements from the ERI
program led to larger increases in test scores, particularly for reading. Although the differences
are not statistically significant, to the extent that there is a difference, we show that some of it is
driven by how schools were affected by the ERI program. More disadvantaged schools
experienced larger total declines in the size of the teacher workforce and were more likely to
replace retirees with teachers with some prior experience (rather than novices).
It is important to consider what these results contribute to our understanding of the
returns to experience and to the effects of the impending swath of teacher retirements as the
Baby Boomers age. Although we find no evidence that ERI-induced teacher retirements
negatively impact student test scores, the variation used to identify our estimates differs from
previous estimates on teacher experience, which generally has used individual teacher entry and
exit to generate variation in experience. Instead, our estimates are driven by a large change in the
composition of teachers. Furthermore, the previous literature in this area has failed to reach a
consensus on whether there are returns to experience for middle- and end-of-career teachers.5
Our results support the argument that teachers who are very high in the experience distribution,
or who are close to retirement, are less productive. However, our estimates are identified off
teachers who take up the ERI program. If these teachers are of low quality relative to the teachers
who replace them, then inducing these teachers to retire could have positive effects, as we find.
Although previous work has not found that responsiveness to retirement incentives differs by
5

For example, see Papay and Kraft (2011), Wiswall (2013), Clotfelter et al. (2006), Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain
(2005), and Rockoff (2004).

5

teacher quality (Mahler 2012; McGee 2012), any differences between the quality of teachers
retiring due to the ERI program and other teachers of the same experience level would make it
difficult to use our estimates to predict the effect of increased teacher retirement due to the
general aging of the teacher workforce. Our results nonetheless provide valuable information
about teacher retirement and student achievement, particularly given the paucity of information
on teacher retirement effects and the growing popularity of ERI programs in the US.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the ERI in the context
of the pension system for teachers in Illinois. Section 3 provides a description of the data. We
outline our empirical strategy and detail our results in Sections 4 and 5, respectively, before
concluding in Section 6.
2

The Illinois Teacher Retirement System and Early Retirement Incentive
The Teachers Retirement System (TRS) in Illinois is a defined benefit pension plan,

where employee contributions are made annually over the course of employment and benefits are
paid out annually upon retirement. During the period studied, the employee contribution rate was
9 percent of earnings, and the benefits formula was a nonlinear function of the employee’s
accumulated service at the time of retirement. Benefits accumulate as a percent of end-of-career
salary, at a rate of 1.67, 1.9, and 2.1 percent for each year in the first, second and third decades of
service, respectively, and 2.3 percent for any year of service thereafter. The maximum annual
benefit employees could receive was 75 percent of their end-of-career salaries.6
In general, retirement benefits can be claimed by members of the TRS when they
terminate active service with IPS and meet the following age and service requirements: age 55
with 35 years of service, age 60 with 10 years of service, or age 62 with 5 years of service.7 If a
teacher is at least 55 years of age and has at least 20 years of experience, she may start collecting
6

Employees reach this maximum benefit with approximately 38 years of experience, although teachers can count up
to one year of sick leave as creditable service.
7
Teachers can retire or leave teaching prior to these age/experience levels and still receive pension benefits when
they are older. For example, if a 45 year old teacher with 6 years of experience leaves IPS, she can receive the full
pension benefits she has accrued when she turns 62.

6

pension benefits, but they will be discounted by 6 percent for each year below age 60 she is. An
Early Retirement Option (ERO) exists, whereby members who are at least 55 years old and who
have at least 20 years of service can receive their full benefit (without the actuarial discounting
of 6 percent per year) if both the employee and the employer pay a one-time fee.8
In 1992-1993 and 1993-1994, employees were offered an ERI as an alternative to the
ERO. This ERI, called the “5+5,” allowed employees to buy an additional 5 years of age and
service credit. As long as the member was at least 50 years old and had accumulated 5 years of
service credit, she and her employer could pay a one-time fee to increase her retirement benefit
as long as the teacher retired immediately: if the teacher took up the ERI, she needed to retire at
the end of the 1992-1993 or 1993-1994 school years.9 The fee for employees was 4 percent of
the highest annual salary for the past five years for each of the five additional years of age and
service purchased; the fee for employers was 12 percent of the employee's highest annual salary
from the last five years for each additional year purchased.10
Chicago has a separate, but very similar, pension system for its teachers, called the
Chicago Teachers Pension Fund (CTPF). In terms of benefit calculation and the offer of the
ERI, CTPF works exactly like TRS. Moreover, the TRS and CTPF have an agreement of
complete reciprocity, whereby an employee who has spent time working in both systems can
have the creditable service in one transferred to the other. The City of Chicago had to separately
negotiate its own 5+5 agreement with the Chicago Teachers’ Union, but it did so in time for the
ERI program to take place at the same time across the state. Thus, teachers across the entire state
8

The ERO requires a one-time member contribution of 7 percent of salary for each year under the age of 60 or each
year under 35 years of service, whichever is less. It also requires a one-time employer contribution of 20 percent of
salary for each year the member is under the age of 60. Schools must allow a certain number of ERO retirements
each year and pay the ERO fee if requested by the teacher.
9
A third window at the end of the 1994-1995 school year was allowed for the small number of retirements delayed
by employers.
10
Districts had no choice but to allow teachers to retire under ERI and to make the required contribution if a teacher
did. Anecdotally and in the news media, there was concern that some districts could not “afford” to allow their
teachers to retire under ERI because of the direct cost (fee) to the district in doing so. However, we show the ERI
program had a large effect on the exit rate of experienced teachers (see Table 3), which suggests such constraints did
not prohibit retirement.

7

of Illinois were subject to the same ERI eligibility and benefit rules.
Lifetime budget constraints based on observed teacher salaries and the benefits formulas
with and without the ERO and with and without ERI are illustrated in Figure 1.A. We plot the
lifetime consumption for a representative teacher who was age 55 and had 20 years of experience
in 1993. The vertical axis measures the present discounted value of the teacher's lifetime
consumption if she retires with the amount of experience given on the horizontal axis. Lifetime
consumption is defined as income (salary if still working, retirement benefit if retired) minus
fees (if a retirement incentive was purchased). Note that this does not include any potential
income from other sources, such as a job outside of IPS after retiring from teaching. For
simplicity, it is assumed that the teacher has a known age of death at 87.
The teacher's possible lifetime budget constraints before the ERI, both with and without
the ERO, are indicated by the solid gray and black lines, respectively. The rules require an
actuarial discount to be made to the retirement benefit if the teacher is less than age 60 with less
than 35 years of experience. Once this teacher turns 60, this discount is no longer taken since
she has more than 10 years of experience, which causes the kink in her budget constraint.
More relevant for our setting is the budget segment with two circular markers,
representing the budget constraint under the ERI program. The introduction of the ERI altered
the budget constraint considerably by offering the teacher the ability to retire early with higher
lifetime consumption. However, the teacher must retire at the end of the 1992-1993 or 19931994 school years, which is why the change is represented as a budget segment available to her
only if she retires with 20 or 21 years of experience.
The figure shows that the 5+5 program was very generous to experienced teachers.
Depending on how teachers value leisure and consumption, this program could allow for
significantly higher lifetime utility than they could have attained under the existing retirement
system. Although we have drawn the figure for a 55 year old teacher with 20 years of
8

experience, as shown in Figure 1.B, the ERI represented large potential gains in lifetime
consumption for most teachers who were at least 50 years old and who had at least 15 years of
experience. The generosity of the ERI system is probably the reason it generated a significant
increase in teacher exit among experienced teachers. Our identification strategy exploits this
generosity to experienced teachers by using the fact that schools with more experienced teachers
in the pre-ERI period were more affected by the ERI program.
3

Data
In various forms, the state of Illinois collects information on employees and students of

its public school system. The Teacher Service Record (TSR) is an administrative dataset
collecting information about employees of the IPS. The second set of data includes school-level
information on test scores for certain grades and subjects, collected since the early 1990s as part
of Illinois’ ongoing accountability program. Finally, we make use of information on the
demographics of students in schools as reported to the Illinois State Board of Education (ISBE).
We focus on the period from the 1989-1990 to 1996-1997 school years, because the earliest
available data are from the 1989-1990 school year, and in 1998 the Illinois legislature changed
the teacher benefit formula in ways that could influence teacher retirement decisions.11 Note that
henceforth, we will index school years by the calendar year in which a school year ends in order
to be consistent with State of Illinois practices. For example, we will refer to the 1993-1994
academic year as 1994. Below, we describe each of the data sets we use in turn.
3.1

Illinois Teacher Service Record Data

The TSR is collected by the ISBE. Each observation in the TSR is an employee-toschool match in a given school year. The data contain information on the number of years of
creditable experience in the retirement system the employee has. In it, an employee can be
followed across schools and as she enters and exits IPS. In order to focus the analysis on
11

See Fitzpatrick (2013) for a detailed description of the 1998 policy change as well as the extent to which teachers
value these benefits.

9

employees directly involved in teaching students, we subset the data to include only those staff
with position titles such as "instructional staff," who are engaged as regular classroom teachers
or as special education teachers. Overall, there are 852,874 teacher-year observations from
148,274 unique teachers between 1990 and 1997. In what follows, we detail several choices
regarding sample restriction and variable definitions. We test the sensitivity of our results to
these choices in Section 5.5.
Standardized testing in Illinois is focused on 3rd, 6th and 8th grade students, so we restrict
most of our analysis to teachers in those grades. The data include information on the lowest and
highest grade served by a teacher, and we assign a teacher to a particular grade if the given grade
is between the teacher’s highest and lowest reported grade taught. We also observe the teacher’s
position (elementary teacher, middle school teacher, high school teacher) as well as the main
subject she teaches, which includes a designation for teachers of self-contained classrooms. We
assign teachers to 3rd grade if they are elementary teachers and teach a grade range that includes
3rd grade, 6th grade teachers are either elementary or middle school teachers with a grade range
that includes 6th grade, and 8th grade teachers are middle school teachers who report a grade
range including 8th grade. When we split teachers out by subject, we assume math teachers are
those designated as “math” or “self-contained,” while we assume English teachers are designated
as “English/reading,” “self-contained” or “bilingual.”
Approximately 12% of the teacher-year observations (or 14% of teachers) do not have
grade information. The majority of the missing data (90.3%) are from the City of Chicago
School District, with no other single school district containing more than 0.1% of the missing
grade information. Almost 54% of the teacher-year observations in Chicago are missing grade
information. Some of the missing data come from schools that never report grade information for
their teachers: 243 schools (5.3% of all schools in Illinois) fall into this category. We exclude
teachers in these schools from our sample, which eliminates 63,344 teacher-year observations, or
10

11,317 teachers.12
We impute the missing grade information for the remaining observations without grade
information. First, we leverage the longitudinal structure of the data and assign teacher to the
grades they taught in other years when it was reported. This method allows us to assign a grade
to 41% of the remaining missing observations. For the remaining teachers missing grade data, we
assign each teacher a probability of teaching each grade based on the existing proportion of
teachers in their school, year and position.13 Using the empirical distribution of teachers in the
school by position in this way assumes that the teachers with missing information are the same as
those without with respect to grade taught. In our data, the two groups of teachers have nearly
identical experience distributions, which is the only other observable characteristic we have for
the teachers. As shown in Section 5.5, our results and conclusions are robust to excluding all
Chicago schools as well as to excluding all imputed observations.
The final teacher-level data set we use for our analysis contains 253,463 teacher-year
observations from 54,550 teachers in 3rd, 6th and 8th grades. For these teachers, we measure
teacher experience using the reported total years of experience both in IPS and out of Illinois.14
Our main measure of ERI treatment intensity, which we discuss in more detail below, is the
average number of teachers in each grade (and sometimes subject) at a school in the pretreatment period with 15 or more years of experience. The data do not include teacher age, which
is why our treatment measure does not use the age-specific rules embedded in the Illinois
retirement system. We take the average across the whole pre-treatment period, i.e. 1990 to 1993,
to reduce the noise in our measurement of which schools should be most affected by the ERI.

12

Over 99% of these schools are in Chicago, which represent 32% of the schools in that district, and these
observations represent about one half of all of the missing grade observations in the data.
13
For example, if 30 percent of the teachers in a given school and year who are elementary schools teachers teach
3rd grade, all teachers in that school whose position is “elementary school” with missing grade information would be
assigned a likelihood of 0.3 of teaching 3rd grade. When we sum teachers by grade, such teachers would count as 0.3
of a 3rd grade teacher.
14
Including experience outside of Illinois adds little variation to overall experience, as total experience and
experience in Illinois have a correlation of 0.98.

11

Table 1 provides descriptive statistics, overall and by grade, for this variable.15 On
average, schools have 9.4 teachers, 5.2 of which have 15 or more years of experience pre-ERI.
While the number of teachers increases across grades, the proportion of “experienced” teachers
with 15 or more years of experience is similar, at between 52 and 57 percent. We also calculate
the numbers of math and English teachers separately, as these are the subjects in which students
are tested. There are about 1.5 math teachers and 1.8 English teachers on average in these three
grades with 15 or more years of experience pre-ERI, which represent about 56 percent of the
total number of subject-specific teachers. These proportions also are similar across grades, but
the standard deviations make it clear that there is much cross-sectional variation in the
experience composition of teachers across schools prior to the ERI program.
We also use the teacher-level data to calculate exit rates of experienced teachers,16
average experience in all years and the proportion of new teachers (i.e., teachers with no more
than one year of experience) in each school and year. One drawback of our data is that we do not
observe teacher retirement or ERI program takeup directly. However, because we have linked
teacher data over time for the entire state, we can identify the effect of the ERI program on
retirement using differences in exit rates of experienced teachers when the program was
implemented. It is this variation that underlies our identification strategy in which we compare
test score changes in schools with more experienced teachers (that therefore would have been
more affected by the ERI) to those with less experienced teachers.
3.2.

Illinois State Board of Education Data

We combine the administrative teacher data with data on average test scores and
demographics. As part of a statewide accountability system, the IPS administers exams in math
and English in grades 3, 6 and 8. We observe the average score by school, year and grade on
15

While all tabulations in Table 1 are for the entire sample period, the teacher counts are calculated using only pre1994 data. The average over the years 1990-1993 are then applied to every year.
16
We focus on “experienced” teacher exits, as this is one of the treatments of interests. All results and conclusions
regarding exits are unchanged if we use total exits instead. These results are available upon request.

12

each exam, which we scale to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one in each year,
grade and subject. This standardization reduces any bias associated with changes in the content
or difficulty of the exam from year to year.
The ISBE data contain school demographic data as well, including percent of students
who are low income, percent who are white, black, Hispanic, or Asian and Native American, and
the percent limited English proficient (LEP). The school districts also record attendance rates
and grade-specific enrollment for each school and year. The percent low income is defined as the
percent of students receiving free- or reduced-price lunches or other Federal/state assistance.
Variable means and standard deviations, as well as school counts, are included in Table 1.
4

Empirical Methodology
4.1.

Measuring Treatment Status

As discussed in Section 3, we do not observe ERI take-up directly. Even if we did
observe take-up, however, it is likely to be endogenous to trends in student achievement
(Hanushek, Kain and Rivkin, 2004). Therefore, to measure treatment status, we exploit the fact
that, because of the ERI rules, teachers with 15 or more years of experience were the most likely
to take up the early retirement offer. Recall from the discussion in Section 2 that a teacher’s
eligibility to collect a pension benefit is completely determined by her age and experience. The
earliest age at which retirement benefit collection could have taken place before the ERI is 55;
with the ERI, teachers can now retire at age 50 or older. Most teachers aged 50 years or older
have at least 15 years of experience, so we expect the ERI will affect the retirement behavior of
teachers with at least 15 years of experience disproportionately.
The prediction that teachers with at least 15 years of experience were the most likely to
retire is borne out in the data. In Panel A of Table 2, we show exit rates in the pre-treatment
years (1990-1993, in Column (1)), in the treatment years (1994-1995, in Column (2)), and in the

13

post-treatment years (1996-1997, in Column (3)) by experience level.17 In the subsequent
columns, we report the differences in these experience-level-specific exit rates between the
treatment and pre-treatment periods (Column (4)) and the post-treatment and pre-treatment
periods (Column (5)).
The differences in the fourth column are consistent with the largest shifts in exit rates
occurring among those with 15 or more years of experience. For example, for those with 15-19
and 20-24 years of experience, the likelihood of exiting doubles. Among those with 25 to 29
years of experience, the likelihood of exit increases by around 150% relative to the baseline. The
exit rate for the 30-34 years of experience group also increases substantially, from 11.1% to
36.7%. Even the exit rate among those with more than 40 years of experience jumps sharply.
Thus, the amount of retirements a school experienced as a result of ERI should be directly
related to the number of teachers with 15 or more years of experience in the pre-ERI period.
As shown in Column (5), the post-treatment exit rates of teachers return to their pretreatment levels or, for the most senior teachers, fall below their pre-treatment levels. For
example, among teachers with 25 or more years of experience exit rates in the post-treatment
period are less than half as large as exit rates in the pre-treatment period. As we would expect,
the teachers that remain after the ERI-offer-period are those with stronger labor force attachment.
Information in Panel B of Table 2 shows how the ERI program affected the distribution
of experience among teachers exiting. Consistent with the fact that this program increased
retirement among experienced teachers, there was a marked outward shift in the experience of
exiting teachers.
In calculations not reported in Table 2, we also examine the experience distribution of
entering teachers before, during and after the ERI program period. The largest change induced by
17

Note that the exit and experience tabulations in Table 2 show the proportion of teachers with a given experience
level leaving and the distribution of experience among those exiting in the previous school year. Thus, 1993 is a pretreatment year because the ERI induced teachers to retire at the end of this school year, which would then potentially
affect achievement in the 1994 school year.

14

the ERI program was a 10 percentage point (or a 19.6%) increase in the proportion of new
teachers (those with one year or less of experience) among those entering IPS. As expected when
there is a large exodus of teachers, many replacement teachers are hired, and these new teachers
are much more likely to have little to no experience.
Figure 2 presents additional evidence supporting the use of the number of teachers with
15 or more years of experience pre-ERI to measure treatment intensity. The figure shows
probability density functions (PDFs) of teacher experience in the pre-treatment period (19901993) and in the two main treatment years (1994-1995) by quartile of the proportion of teachers
in grades 3, 6 and 8 with experience greater than or equal to 15 in the pre-treatment years. As the
figure demonstrates, the largest declines in experience occur among the schools with the highest
pre-existing experience levels. For the low experience schools, the experience distribution shifts
out slightly (as teachers gain more experience over time), while for the higher-experience
schools, during the treatment period, there is a large increase in the number of inexperienced
teachers and a decline in highly experienced teachers. Figure 2, combined with Table 2, shows
that the proportion of teachers with 15 or more years of experience before the ERI program was
meaningfully related to experience changes and exit rates post-treatment. This evidence suggests
that the pre-existing number of teachers with this high experience level is a strong proxy for the
intensity of treatment by the ERI program.
4.2.

Estimation Strategy

Using the number of teachers with 15 or more years of experience pre-1994 as our
measure of treatment intensity, we estimate difference-in-difference models to examine how the
ERI differentially affected schools with more experienced teachers. We estimate regressions of
the following form:
s
Yigts   0  1 (Teachers  15) ig * Postt   2Teachersig * Postt  X it   ig   tg   igt

(1)

where Yigts is the standardized test score in grade g for subject s in school i and year t. The variable
15

Teachers  15 is the average number of teachers in a given grade with at least 15 years of

experience pre-1994. Teachers is the average total number of teachers in a grade and school in
the pre-ERI period and Post is an indicator variable equal to 1 for school years after 1993. The
vector X contains the set of school-by-year demographic variables discussed in Section 3 as well
as a quadratic in school-grade-year enrollment, and the model includes both school-by-grade (

 ig ) and grade-by-year ( tg ) fixed effects.18 All regressions are weighted by average gradespecific enrollment pre-1994, so that our estimates capture the effects of the ERI on the test
scores of the average student. We report standard errors clustered at the school-grade level to
account for within school and grade serial correlation of the errors and for heteroskedasticity that
typically is present in aggregate data.
The coefficient of interest in equation (1) is 1 , which is the difference-in-difference
estimate of the effect of the ERI program on student achievement. The model is identified by
comparing changes in test scores when the ERI is introduced across school-grades with fewer or
more potentially affected teachers, as measured prior to ERI introduction. This “treatment
intensity” measure does not vary across school-grades over time. Therefore, any fixed
differences across school-grades that are correlated with it are controlled for with the school-bygrade fixed effects. Furthermore, since we fix experience levels using pre-treatment data, the
experience differences are not endogenous responses to the treatment itself.
The main identifying assumption in equation (1) is the following: absent the ERI
program, school-grades with different experience levels would have had the same trends in
student test scores, ceteris paribus. That is, conditional on school-grade fixed effects and timevarying observable characteristics, trends in achievement among school-grades with a low
proportion of experienced teachers provide an accurate counterfactual for trends among school-

18

We take the base unit of observation in this study as the school-grade. About 56% of the schools have two grades,
and 12% of the schools contain 3rd, 6th and 8th grades.

16

grades with a high proportion of experienced teachers.19 As we demonstrate in Section 5.2., there
is no evidence that school-grades with more highly experienced teachers are trending differently
than those with fewer experienced teachers in the pre-treatment period. Because we know of no
other reason test scores would change differentially by the pre-treatment level of experience
when the ERI program comes into effect, we believe 1 provides a credible estimate of how the
teacher retirements that occurred due to the ERI program impacted student achievement.
5

Results
5.1.

The Effect of ERI on Teacher Exits, Experience and Student-Teacher Ratios

Before examining how the ERI affected student academic achievement, it is important to
understand how it impacted schools through changes in retirements, teacher experience and
school resources. In Table 3, we present estimates of equation (1), where the dependent variable
is each of the following in turn: the number of experienced teachers (i.e., teachers with 15 or
more years of experience) in a school-grade who exit in the previous year, average experience in
the school-grade, the proportion of new teachers in the school-grade, and school-grade studentteacher ratios. These estimates describe how the characteristics of the teacher workforce changed
due to ERI as a function of the number of teachers with 15 or more years of experience pre-ERI.
Table 3 shows the results from estimation of equation (1) with these dependent variables
in turn, both pooled across grades as well as by grade. Each cell in the first column comes from a
separate regression, while the estimates in each row of the final three columns come from one
regression that includes interactions between Post* Teachers  15 and grade indicators as well as
Post*Teachers and grade indicator interactions. The table presents the difference-in-difference
estimates only, although all models contain the full set of controls shown in equation (1). Having

19

Recall that we control for the number of teachers, so the model is essentially identified using, in part, crosssectional differences in the proportion of experienced teachers. Models that use this proportion directly yield similar
results, which are shown in Section 5.5. But, we prefer controlling for the number of total teachers and the number
of teachers with at least 15 years of experience separately as it is more flexible than the model that uses the
proportion of experienced teachers.

17

one more teacher with 15 or more years of experience pre-ERI increased the number of
experienced teachers exiting in the ERI period by 0.08 overall, with estimates that vary little
across grades. Relative to the baseline, this represents a 32.6% increase.
The increased exit among more experienced teachers was accompanied by declines in
average teacher experience of 0.41 years, or 2.6%, for every teacher with 15 or more years of
experience pre-ERI. The experience effects are largest in 3rd grade, with a 1.1 year, or 7.1%,
decline in average experience for each teacher with 15 or more years of experience. As predicted
by Figure 2, the drop in average experience was driven in part by an increase in the number of
new teachers. Overall, for each teacher pre-ERI with 15 or more years of experience, the number
of new teachers increases by 0.073, or 19.8% relative to baseline. The effect is largest in levels in
grade 6, at 0.088, but relative to baseline it is largest in 3rd grade, at 48.7% . All of these
estimates are statistically different from zero at the 5 percent level, and they suggest that schoolgrades with more teachers with 15 or more years of experience pre-ERI experienced much larger
changes in teacher turnover and teacher experience when the program was implemented.
Table 4 provides a more complete accounting of how the experience composition of the
teacher workforce changed post-ERI as a function of the number of teachers with 15 or more
years of experience. The table shows estimates from models akin to equation (1) but that use the
number of teachers in each experience group as a dependent variable. As with Table 3, we
estimate average effects across grades as well as separately by grade by including grade
interactions. The estimates point to a downward shift in experience that is driven by an increase
in the number of teachers with less than 15 years of experience and a decrease in the number of
teachers with more than 15 years of experience. The largest increases are in teachers with under
10 years of experience, and the largest declines are in teachers with 15-29 years of experience.
Furthermore, these changes are relatively similar across grades.
Summing all of the estimates across grades in a column gives the impact of having one
18

more experienced teacher pre-ERI on the total number of teachers post-ERI. In the pooled
model, this estimate is -0.289, which suggests that the teacher workforce shrinks slightly in
schools with more experienced teachers due to this program. This average reduction is driven
entirely by the 6th and 8th grades, which shrink by -0.265 and -0.364 teachers, respectively, for
each teacher with more than 14 years of experience pre-ERI. The 3rd grade teacher workforce is
basically unchanged, with a slight increase of 0.02 teachers for each pre-ERI experienced
teacher. None of these results represent sizable changes in the number of teachers.
While retirements under the ERI program occurred rather quickly and unexpectedly, the
possibility remains that administrators altered other education inputs to compensate for the loss
of experienced teachers. Such offsetting behavior would be of interest in its own right, and we
stress that our test score results below are net of any of these endogenous adjustments.
Unfortunately, detailed data on curriculum, resources and expenditures are not reported in ways
that would prove useful for measuring this type of behavior. One potentially important input we
can observe, however, is pupil-teacher ratios. In the last row of Table 3, we estimate equation (1)
using pupil-teacher ratios as the dependent variable. For all grades combined, we find a
statistically insignificant effect of -0.009. The pupil-teacher ratio effects are largest in absolute
value in 3rd grade, at 0.183, but none of the estimates is statistically significant at conventional
levels. Even the 3rd grade estimate is very small relative to baseline (1 percent), much smaller
than the decreases in class sizes that have shown positive effects in the literature.20
Together, Tables 3 and 4 point to large changes in the composition of teacher experience
post-ERI in schools that had more experienced teachers pre-ERI. We now turn to an examination
of how test scores were affected by these changes.
5.2.

The Effect of ERI on Student Achievement

20

There is a large literature on how class sizes affect student achievement, but there is little consensus on whether
they do and on how large any effects are. Studies examining the Tennessee STAR class size experiment (e.g.,
Krueger, 1999) tend to find large effects, while Hoxby (2000) finds no effect of class size on achievement using
class size discontinuities driven by maximum class size rules and population variation. See Hanushek (2003) for a
critical review of this literature.

19

Although equation (1) constitutes our preferred empirical model, we first present “event
study” estimates of the effect of the ERI on student test scores in order to examine whether there
are pre-treatment trends in scores as a function of the pre-treatment experience distribution and
whether there are time-varying treatment effects that our main specification might miss. Figure 3
presents these estimates for the pooled sample using all grade-specific teachers, and Figure 4
presents estimates that use the number of grade and subject-specific teachers. The results come
from models similar to equation (1), except the Post* Teachers  15 and Post*Teachers have been
replaced with year indicators interacted with Teachers  15 and Teachers. The figures show the
Teachers  15 *I(year) coefficients along with 95% confidence intervals that are calculated from

standard errors that are clustered at the school-grade level. The 1993 coefficient is set to zero by
design, so all estimates are relative to this year.
In Figure 3, there is no evidence of any differential trend in test scores as a function of
the number of teachers with 15 or more years of experience prior to the implementation of ERI.
As discussed in Section 4, our difference-in-difference estimates are identified under the
assumption that test scores in schools with different pre-treatment experience levels would have
trended the same, and the estimates in Figure 3 support this assumption. Furthermore, after 1993,
the figure indicates that test scores actually rose. While there is a small decline in math in 1994,
on the order of -0.005 standard deviations, it is not statistically significantly different from
zero.21 Test scores then increase for the next several years with the number of pre-treatment
experienced teachers. For reading, all of the post-ERI estimates are positive, and they are
statistically significantly different from zero at the 5% level for all years except 1995.
Figure 4 presents the same results but using subject-specific teachers. Again, there is no

21

Appendix Figure A-1 contains event study estimates for experienced teacher exits, average experience and the
number of new teachers. For each outcome, there is a sizable shift in 1994 and 1995 that is not predicted by pretreatment trends. Furthermore, the effects on teacher exit and experience are larger in 1995 than in 1994. If the small
decline in math test scores in 1994 were being driven by changes in teacher turnover and experience in that year, we
would expect to see an even larger negative effect in 1995, which is inconsistent with the estimates in Figure 3.

20

evidence of pre-treatment trends, and the post-ERI estimates are mostly positive. However, these
estimates are less precise than the estimates in Figure 3, so the coefficients typically are not
statistically different from zero. Overall, the estimates in Figures 3 and 4 support our
identification strategy and suggest that the changes to schools shown in Tables 3 and 4 brought
about by ERI-induced retirements did not reduce student test scores.
Due to the demanding nature of the event study models, the program effects shown in the
figures are rather imprecise. We now turn to estimates of equation (1) in order to increase the
precision of the results. Baseline estimates of equation (1) are shown in Table 5. Each column
represents a separate regression, with the first two columns showing estimates using all gradespecific teachers and the second two showing results using subject-grade-specific teachers.
The results are consistent with Figures 3 and 4, indicating that test scores increase postERI among school-grades that have more teachers with 15 or more years of experience pre-ERI.
For all but math in the first column, these estimates are statistically significantly different from
zero at the 5% or 10% level and are about 0.01 standard deviations in magnitude. For math in the
first column, the estimate is smaller, at 0.003 standard deviations and is precise enough to rule
out a negative effect smaller than -0.0035 standard deviations at the 5% level. In the third
column, we can rule out an effect smaller than -0.0018 at the 5% level. Thus, despite the fact that
having one more experienced teacher pre-ERI leads to significant declines in the teacher
experience profile and significant increases in exit at the school-grade level, test scores rise, or at
the very least do not decline.
One informative way to scale these results is per exiting teacher. By dividing the
estimates in Table 5 by the experienced teacher exit estimates in Table 3, one can calculate such
an instrumental variables estimate. We caution, however, that the exclusion restriction is unlikely
to be met; as indicated in Table 3, the ERI program affected the teacher composition of schools
along a number of dimensions. Attributing all of the test score effect to any one of these
21

composition outcomes would be incorrect, but it still is helpful to scale these results in terms of
each exiting teacher. Performing this calculation for estimates in the first two columns of Table 4
yields IV estimates of 0.038 and 0.115 for math and reading, respectively. These are schoolgrade-level standard deviations, however. The variance of school-grade test scores is
approximately 15% of the student-level variance in test scores, so one can convert to student –
level standard deviation by diving by 2.6 (the square root of 0.15). Thus, for each teacher who
leaves under the ERI, our estimates indicate test scores increase by 0.01 student-level standard
deviations for math and 0.04 student-level standard deviations for reading. While small in
magnitude, we show in Section 6 that these test score increases are slightly more cost-effective
than comparable effects from class size increases.
Although Table 3 suggests that the ERI program had similar effects on teacher
composition across grades, the impacts on some measures, such as average experience, are larger
in grade 3. In Table 6, we estimate equation (1) including interactions between Post*Number 
15 and grade indicators as well as Post*Teachers and grade indicators. While the estimates
become much less precise, they are, on the whole, qualitatively and quantitatively similar to the
pooled estimates. There are a couple exceptions, however. First, there is now a negative effect
for reading in both specifications for 3rd grade. But, the point estimates still are small in absolute
value and are not statistically significant at conventional levels. Second, using subject-specific
teachers, there are large positive effects in 8th grade in both subjects that are significant at the
10% level. This larger effect could be due to the fact that each 8th grade teacher teaches a larger
proportion of the students, which would increase the impact of any one teacher retiring. While
these estimates are somewhat noisier than the pooled estimates, they still provide little evidence
of a decline in test scores due to the ERI-induced teacher retirements.
Given that the median retiring teacher had 27 years of experience post-ERI and was
replaced by a teacher with less than 3 years of experience, our finding that these retirements had
22

little effect on student achievement is puzzling in light of much of the literature on teacher
experience. For example, Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain (2005) show that new teachers perform
about 0.07 to 0.13 standard deviations worse in math and 0.03 to 0.06 standard deviations worse
in English. Rockoff (2004) presents estimates that generally are of the same magnitude, with
some evidence of a much larger experience impact for reading comprehension. In a review of the
literature, Wiswall (2013) reports a host of previous studies that find new teachers perform
between 0.10 and 0.18 standard deviations worse than experienced teachers. He then estimates
returns to experience that are an order of magnitude larger using non-parametric methods. Since
we find little support for the notion that schools are shifting resources in order to counteract the
potential negative impact of teacher retirements (see Section 5.4), we suspect that the teachers
who took up the ERI were less productive teachers than the ones that replaced them or than the
ones remaining in the school.22
5.3.

Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

Thus far, our estimates suggest that the teacher retirements induced by the ERI program
did not reduce student achievement, and they may have increased test scores, on average.
However, there could be heterogeneous treatment effects driven, at least in part, by the fact that
wealthier or higher-achieving schools may find it easier to replace retiring teachers with
experienced teachers from other schools. If such heterogeneity exists, it suggests any negative
effects of retirement on lower-SES and lower-achieving districts would be larger. On the other
hand, since teachers tend to move to higher-achieving and higher-SES schools as they gain
experience (Lankford et al. 2002), disadvantaged schools may not have had much turnover from
the ERI if their teacher workforce were too young to take advantage of the program.
In Table 7, we estimate equation (1) separately by percent low income, percent white and
22

It also is possible that the previous literature contains upward biases driven by the endogeneity of teacher
turnover, which is the main source of variation used. However, the estimates in Wiswall (2013), which use withinteacher variation in experience to identify its effects on teacher quality, do not suffer from this upward bias and
would have predicted ERI to have large negative effects.

23

pre-treatment average test scores. Across all three margins, the “lowest” group in the table refers
to the bottom quarter of the pre-ERI distribution, while the “other” category is the top 75
percent.23 For all but one estimate in Table 7, the coefficients are positive, and the negative
estimate for math for low income schools is only -0.001. Although the estimates are somewhat
imprecise, especially for the low-resource and low-performing schools, a general pattern
emerges from the table. For reading, the low-income, high-minority and lowest-baseline schools
experience larger increases in test scores post-ERI for each teacher with 15 or more years of
experience pre-ERI than their wealthier, low-minority, higher-performing counterparts. In math,
such a difference only is evident for the lowest versus highest baseline score schools.
Table 7 points to general increases in student achievement from teacher retirement that
are the largest for disadvantaged schools, although it is not possibly to statistically differentiate
between the estimates for advantaged and disadvantaged schools. If there are such differences
across school types, it could be driven by the fact that teachers tend to move to higherperforming and wealthier districts over the course of their careers and that this type of mobility is
easier for better teachers. Alternatively, Feng et al. (2012) shows that the return to experience in
Florida and North Carolina is lower in high-poverty schools, perhaps because of differences in
the quality of the environment in which teachers gain experience. Either story is consistent with
the implication of our finding that teachers who remain in poorer schools at the end of their
careers are lower-performing than the teachers who replace them.
Another reason for the heterogeneity shown in Table 7 is that the ERI may have had
different effects on retirement behavior in different schools. For example, if low-income schools
only were able to hire novice teachers to replace retirees but high-income schools hired midcareer teachers, it would reconcile our results with the previous literature on teacher experience

23

More specifically, we calculate the average of each of these variables by school in the pre-treatment period and
assign schools to low and high groups based on this distribution. Thus, assignment is a fixed characteristic of a
school and does not change over time within school.

24

and teacher quality. In an effort to disentangle what might be driving any differences, in Table 8,
we present estimates by school type of the effect of the ERI on the number of experienced
teachers exiting, average experience, the number of new teachers and pupil-teacher ratios.
Focusing first on exits, lower-income, high-minority and lower-performing schools
experience less turnover due to ERI, although the point estimates still are sizable relative to the
baseline exit rates. Consistent with this difference in exits, less-advantaged schools experience
smaller declines in experience, even though having more experienced teachers pre-ERI leads to a
statistically significant decline in average experience in all school types. The starkest difference
across school types is in the effect of the program on the number of new teachers. In the lowSES and low-performing schools, the number of new teachers declines post-ERI with the number
of teachers with 15 or more years of experience pre-ERI. The ERI program led to large increases
in the number of new teachers, particularly relative to baseline, in other schools.
That the number of new teachers declines as a function of pre-ERI experience in lowerSES and lower-performing schools is somewhat surprising.24 In order to shed some light into
how the ERI program impacts the distribution of teacher experience and the number of teachers
in these schools, Appendix Table A-1 contains similar estimates to Table 4 but for the lowest
quartile of schools in the distributions of income, percent minority or baseline scores. In all four
columns, having more pre-ERI experienced teachers leads to a significant and large decline in
the number of teachers with 15-30 years of experience. However, unlike the estimates in Table 4,
there only are small increases in the number of mid-career teachers (those with 4 to 14 years of
experience), and the number of new teachers with less than 4 years of experience actually
declines. The total number of teachers in these schools declines slightly, by between -0.09 and 0.22 for each teacher with 15 or more years of experience pre-ERI, but this represents a small

24

In particular, these results differ from those of the 1996 California class size reduction policy, which had the effect
of switching many experienced teachers from low-SES to high-SES schools (Jepsen and Rivkin, 2009). The
differences in teacher sorting in response to these two programs is an interesting topic for future research.

25

decline in relative terms (just 2 percent).25 However, this decrease is commensurate with a small
decrease in enrollment at these low-resource schools; student-teacher ratios barely change as a
function of the number of pre-ERI experienced teachers in the lower-performing and lowerresource schools, as shown in Table 8. Larger test score effects in the more disadvantaged
schools are likely driven by some combination of fewer productive teachers retiring and their
replacements having more previous experience (rather than being novices). Our data and
empirical design do not let us distinguish between these two theories, however.
5.4.

Potential Mechanisms

In addition to the retirement of older teachers who are replaced by less experienced
teachers, there are several alternative mechanisms that may contribute to the positive effects of
the ERI-induced retirements on test scores. These mechanisms are not sources of bias, but rather,
are some of the ways through which ERI programs, or teacher retirement more generally, might
lead to increases in student achievement. Though our baseline estimates identify the effect of the
ERI program net of any of these mechanisms, which is a policy effect of interest, it is
informative to explore some of the ways in which teacher retirement might impact student
achievement other than through altering the experience profile of the teacher workforce.
First, as noted above, principals or administrators could shift resources towards the most
affected grades to reduce the impact of teacher turnover. However, as shown in Table 3, studentteacher ratios change negligibly as a function of the number of pre-ERI teachers with 15 or more
years of experience. Alternatively, school expenditures may increase in the schools that lost the
most teachers if the school district finance allocation method does not fully adjust for the change
in the teacher wage bill. Unfortunately, no information exists on school-level budgets during this
time period in Illinois, but previous work has not found consistent evidence that higher spending

25

The effect of ERI on the total number of teachers is found by summing the coefficients in Table A-1 in each row.

26

increases student academic performance.26
We examine the role of resources by estimating the effect on test scores of teachers
retiring in other grades in the school. If retirement leads to an increase in school resources, this
effect is unlikely to be restricted to own-grade retirements only. In Table 9, we show estimates of
equation (1) in which we include the number of teachers and the number of teachers with 15 or
more years of experience in higher grades pre-ERI in each school. We use only higher-grade
teachers because lower-grade teachers can influence current student test scores. This method
necessitates that we exclude 8th grade, as there are very few schools with 8th grades that have
higher-grade teachers in them. The first two columns of Table 9 show that excluding 8th grade
attenuates the estimate on the number of teachers with 15 or more years of experience, as
suggested by Table 6, but that we obtain the same qualitative result. When we include othergrade teachers, the estimate on the number of other-grade teachers with 15 or more years of
experience pre-ERI is negative but is not statistically significantly different from zero. These
results provide evidence against the hypothesis that teacher retirements led to higher school
resources, which then increased test scores.
A second potential mechanism driving our results is a change in teacher assignments
post-ERI. With the influx of new teachers, these teachers could be assigned disproportionately to
non-tested grades. In results available upon request, we have found no evidence that new
teachers were more likely to sort into grades 3, 6 or 8 post-ERI relative to the period before the
program was introduced. However, existing teachers could have moved into tested grades from
non-tested grades. Such an increase in experienced teachers could raise student test performance.
In Figure 5, we show experience distributions of teachers who taught in Illinois both before and
after ERI was introduced by whether they switched across tested and non-tested grades when the

26

See Hanushek (2003) for a critical review of this literature. Hoxby (2001) also shows evidence that spending
increases brought about by school finance reforms had no effect on dropout rates, but Papke (2005) finds that school
finance reform in Michigan increased 4th grade test pass rates.

27

ERI program was implemented. For each teacher, we use the maximum level of pre-ERI
experience to specify the experience level. As Panel A of the figure demonstrates, across all
schools, there was a shift among mid-career teachers into tested grades from untested grades.
The increase was largest among those with 5-7 years of experience pre-ERI.
However, the second two panels of the figure suggest these changes in teacher
assignment were not strongly related to teacher retirements. These panels show the experience
distributions by switching status among teachers in schools in the bottom and top quartiles of the
percent of teachers with 15 or more years of experience pre-ERI. Though there was an increase
of early-mid career teachers switching into tested grades in the top quartile of schools, the
increase was larger in the lowest quartile of schools, where the treatment effects were smallest.
Thus, there is some shifting of teacher assignments among schools in response to the outflow of
experienced teachers that led to more mid-career teachers in tested grades. But, these changes in
the most highly treated schools are small, and it is unlikely that they are of sufficient magnitude
to drive the nonnegative effects on test scores we find.
5.5.

Robustness Checks

In this section, we explore the robustness of our estimates to several of the modeling and
data assumptions made throughout the analysis. Table 10 shows a series of robustness checks
that demonstrate how our estimates change with these assumptions. Each cell is a separate
regression, and we show estimates using all grade-level teachers as well as using subject-specific
teachers in the grade. In the first row of Table 10, we measure the intensity of ERI treatment with
the number of teachers with 20 or more years of experience. We do this check because of the
small number of retirements among teachers with 15-19 years of experience (see Table 2). These
estimates are very similar to those in Table 5. The only difference is that the subject-specific
estimates are slightly smaller and are not statistically different from zero at conventional levels.
Next, instead of specifying treatment intensity using the number of teachers with 15 or
28

more years of experience (controlling for the total number of teachers), we use the percentage of
teachers with 15 or more years of experience (without controlling for the total number of
teachers). This functional form change in the treatment variable makes it difficult to directly
compare estimates with the baseline ones, but we can use information in the data to do so
indirectly. The coefficients in the second row of Table 10 correspond to an increase from no
experienced teachers to all experienced teachers (i.e. from 0 to 1) in the pre-treatment period.
On average in the data, an increase in one experienced teacher is related to a 0.11 increase in the
proportion of experienced teachers. For math and English teachers specifically, an increase of
one experienced teacher is related to an increase in the proportion of experienced teachers of
0.38 and 0.31, respectively. Multiplying the estimates by these percentages produces results that
are very similar to baseline for the models using all teachers. The results using this specification
also are somewhat smaller, though still qualitatively similar, using the subject-specific teachers.
The main finding of this analysis that teacher retirements due to ERI did not decrease (and may
have increased) test scores is unchanged when measuring treatment intensity using the
proportion, rather than the number, of experienced teachers.
In the next two rows, we examine the robustness of our estimates to our treatment of
missing grade information for teachers in the data. Because the vast majority of the missing data
are from Chicago, we first drop all Chicago schools from the analysis. Then, we drop all teachers
with missing grade information. Both sets of results are virtually identical to the baseline results,
which suggests our imputation of the missing grade information is not driving our conclusions.
In the following robustness check, we measure all pre-treatment variables using 1993
data rather than data from all pre-treatment years. The results are very similar to baseline. We
also control for the number of teachers in 1993 with 1-5 years of experience (separately),
interacted with the Post indicator. This specification controls for any positive shock to test scores
in schools with many inexperienced teachers pre-ERI that is driven by these teachers gaining
29

experience when the program comes into place. The estimates are very similar to those in Table
4 but are somewhat larger using all math teachers and somewhat smaller using subject-specific
reading teachers. Next, we control for school-by-post fixed effects that allow for unobserved
school-level shocks post-ERI. This model is identified only off of those schools in which there
are multiple grades per school, and thus the sample is particularly weighted to the 8th grade and
rural schools. The results are similar to baseline, and are especially close in magnitude to the 8th
grade results in Table 5. There is no evidence that school-specific shocks are biasing our results.
Finally, we estimate models at the district-grade rather than the school-grade level. This
robustness check is motivated by the concern that some teachers may switch schools to take
advantage of ERI-induced vacancies. If higher-quality teachers move from schools with lowerexperience levels to those with higher-experience levels due to the ERI program, our estimates
could be biased: achievement in more heavily treated schools would increase because of teachers
switching from less heavily treated schools. In this case, aggregate achievement would not
necessarily increase, as schools with fewer experienced teachers would become worse due to the
ERI. In order to test for these general equilibrium effects, we estimate our difference-indifference model at the district level, under the assumption that teachers are more likely to switch
schools within a district. These results are shown in the last row of Table 5 and are qualitatively
very similar to our baseline estimates. While somewhat smaller in magnitude, as would be
expected from the increased measurement error in the treatment intensity that comes with
aggregation, they still are positive.
We also estimated equation (1) using the proportion of teachers in each district switching
schools (both within and across districts) in each year as the dependent variable in order to
examine such switching behavior directly. The coefficient on Teachers  15 is -0.0003 (with a
standard error of 0.0005), off of a baseline switching proportion of 0.06. Thus, there is no
evidence the ERI leads to increasing rates of school switching among teachers that could bias our
30

estimates.
6

Conclusion
This paper presents the first evidence in the literature on the effects of teacher retirement

in response to ERIs on student achievement. We use an exogenous increase in the incentive to
retire among Illinois public school teachers in 1994 and 1995 that induced large numbers of
teachers to retire. Using the fact that schools that had more experienced teachers prior to the
implementation of the program were more affected by it, we use a difference-difference
framework to determine the effects of the ERI on student achievement.
Although we show that the ERI program led to a large amount of retirement by
experienced teachers, which consequently lowered teacher experience levels, we find the
program did not reduce test scores and instead led to increased student achievement in most
cases. Our estimates are sufficiently precise to rule out even small negative effects of the
program on math and English scores. We also show suggestive evidence that the ERI program
had larger positive effects in more disadvantaged schools.
These results raise a puzzle of why test scores would increase when large numbers of
experienced teachers retire. It could be the case that there is adverse selection in who responds to
the ERI opportunity. If the lowest-quality teachers are those whose employment is most elastic
with respect to retirement incentives, test scores would increase as these teachers are replaced
with newer ones. In such a case, our estimates yield information on the effect of ERI programs
on student achievement, but it would be more difficult to use them to predict the effects of the
large impending volume of teacher retirements due to the aging of the teacher workforce. Given
available data, it is not possible to examine the underlying productivity of teachers taking up the
ERI. But, the implication of our results is clear: offering expiring incentives for late career
teachers to retire does not harm student achievement on average.
From a broader policy perspective, our estimates suggest ERI programs could be
31

beneficial for school districts by saving them money on teacher salaries without having a
deleterious impact of retirement on student achievement. Along these lines, it is important
consider the costs of this program to both school districts and the state, as well as the value of
any increases in test scores that occurred because of the program. We calculate that the median
teacher retires 5 years earlier than expected because of the ERI.27 The median teacher therefore
retires at age 55 with 27 years of service rather than waiting until age 60 with 32 years of service.
Since replacing a 27-year veteran teacher with a novice one saves $20,772 per year on average,
this would result in savings per employee to the district of $95,306 (present discounted value
with a 3 percent real interest rate).28 However, for each year of creditable service purchased for
the ERI, the district had to pay 12% of the teacher’s salary in a lump-sum payment. Since the
median teacher bought 5 years of service, the median lump-sum payment made by the district
was 60% of a teacher’s salary, or $26,493. Thus, the median net PDV to the district per teacher
of the ERI was $68,812. Summed across the approximately 8,000 teachers who took up the
program, the ERI program resulted in total savings to IPS school districts of $550.5 million.
These cost savings were likely at the forefront of the policy discussion surrounding the ERI.
However, the teachers who retire early because of the ERI will receive pension benefits
for more years than if they had retired normally. In Illinois, it is the state, rather than the districts,
that must make up the increased costs to the pension system of these ERI retirees. The median
ERI-retiree receives $115,677 of increased benefits, in present value terms, from retiring five
years earlier. The teacher must also pay a lump-sum amount equal to 4% of her salary per year
purchased. Accounting for the district and teacher lump-sum payments, the net cost to the
pension system was $80,352 per ERI retiree, or $642.8 million to the pension fund. Therefore,
the total cost to the state’s taxpayers – the sum of the net benefit to the districts and the net cost

27

For more information on the parameters in this cost-benefit analysis, see Appendix B.
Because wages rise with tenure, we use the actual salaries of 1 to 5 year and 27 to 31 year teachers and calculate
the 5-year present discounted value of the differences in salaries in each of the 5 years.

28

32

to the pension fund – is approximately $92.3 million (PDV). Since there were approximately 1.8
million students in IPS in 1993, this represents a cost per student of $51.
A core conclusion that stems from these costs calculations is that even when an ERI
program creates substantial savings to school districts by reducing teacher wage bills, it still can
cost the state money through higher pension payments. This was the case in Illinois, and it is
plausible that this occurred because lawmakers did not fully understand this tradeoff. In addition
to this likely unintended cost, the central focus of this paper is in showing that the ERI had a
possibly unintended benefit in raising test scores. It therefore is worth considering the costeffectiveness of the policy as a tool for improving achievement, even though this may not have
been its initial intention.
Our confidence intervals in Table 4 suggest that the average effect of the ERI on test
scores was between -0.002 and 0.029, with an average effect across specifications of 0.010.
Using the average point estimate and cost estimate, then, suggests that taxpayers paid $51 per
student in return for a one percent of a standard deviation increase in test scores. At worst, the
taxpayers of Illinois paid $51 per student to decrease test scores by 0.002 of a standard deviation.
To put this cost-benefit ratio in perspective, a similar-sized improvement in student test scores
resulting from class size reductions would cost about $96 more per student, on average, than the
ERI.29 While conducting cost-benefit analyses and comparisons across interventions is inherently
difficult, the comparison is informative of the potential relative efficiency of ERIs as
interventions to increase test scores. Such policies may provide a potential means to save
districts money without hurting student achievement. And, with properly set prices, it is possible
for such a program to save tax-payers money as well.

29

As reported in Kreuger (2003), the Tennessee STAR class size reduction cost $7,660 per student for a 0.2
standard deviation increase in student-level test scores. As discussed above, school-grade test scores can be
translated to student-level test scores by dividing by a factor of 2.6. Assuming a linear relationship between the
spending on and returns to class size reductions, the class size reduction would require spending $147 per student
($7,660 divided by 52) to obtain the same sized increase in test scores we see with the ERI.

33

REFERENCES
Auriemma, Frank V., Bruce S. Cooper and Stuart C. Smith. 1992. “Graying Teachers: A Report
on State Pension Systems and School District Early Retirement Incentives.” ERIC
Clearninghouse on Educational Management:
https://scholarsbank.uoregon.edu/xmlui/bitstream/handle/1794/3271/graying.pdf?sequence=1.
Brown, Kristine M. and Ron A. Laschever. 2012. “When They're Sixty-Four: Peer Effects and
the Timing of Retirement.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4(3): 90-115.
Brown, Kristine. 2013. “The Link between Pensions and Retirement Behavior: Lessons from
California Teachers.” Journal of Public Economics. 98:1-14.
Chingos, Matt and Martin West. 2012. “Do More Effective Teachers Earn More Outside of the
Classroom?" Education Finance and Policy 7(1): 8-43 (2012).
Clotfelter, C.T., Ladd, H.F., & Vigdor, J.L. (2006). Teacher-student matching and the assessment
of teacher effectiveness. Journal of Human Resources, 41(4), 778-820
Costrell, Robert M. and Josh B. McGee. 2010. “Teacher Pension Incentives, Retirement
Behavior, and Potential for Reform in Arkansas.” Education Finance and Policy 4(4): 492-518.
Costrell, Robert M. and Michael Podgursky. 2009. “Peaks, Cliffs, and Valleys: The Peculiar
Incentives in Teacher Retirement Systems and Their Consequences for School Staffing.”
Education Finance and Policy 4(2): 175-211.
Feng, Li, David Figlio, Jane Hannaway, Tim Sass and Zeyu Xu. 2012. “Comparison of the Value
Added of Teachers in High-Poverty Schools and Teachers in Lower-Poverty Schools.” Journal
of Urban Economics. 74: 104-122.
Fitzpatrick, Maria D. 2013. “How Much Do Teachers Value Their Pension Benefits?” Mimeo.
Friedberg, Leora and Sarah Turner. 2010. “Labor Market Effects of Pensions and Implications
for Teachers.” Education Finance and Policy 5(4): 463-491.
Furgeson, Joshua, Robert P. Strauss and William B. Vogt. 2006. “The Effects of Defined Benefit
Pension Incentives and Working Conditions on Teacher Retirement Decisions.” Education
Finance and Policy 1(3): 316-348.
Goldhaber, Dan, and Michael Hansen. 2010. "Using Performance on the Job to Inform Teacher
Tenure Decisions." American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 100(2): 250-55.
Hanushek, Eric A. 2003. “The Failure of Input-based Schooling Policies.” The Economic
Journal 113(485): F64-F98.
34

Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain and Steven G. Rivkin. 2004. “Why Public Schools Lose
Teachers.” Journal of Human Resources 39(2): 326-354.
Hoxby, Caroline M. 2000. “The Effects of Class Size on Student Achievement: New Evidence
from Population Variation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(4): 1239-1285.
Hoxby, Caroline M. 2001. “All School Finance Equalizations are Not Created Equal.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 116(4): 1189-1231.
Jepsen, Christopher and Steven Rivkin. 2009. “Class Size Reduction and Student Achievement:
The Potential Tradeoff between Teacher Quality and Class Size.” Journal of Human Resources
44(1): 223-250.
Koedel, Cory and Michael Podgursky. 2011. “Teacher Pension Systems, the Composition of the
Teaching Workforce, and Teacher Quality.” University of Missouri, Department of Economics
Working Paper 11-09.
Krueger, Alan B. 1999. “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 114(2): 497-532.
Krueger, Alan. 2003. “Economic Considerations and Class Size” The Economic Journal.
113(485): F34-F63.
Lankford, Hamilton, Susanna Loeb and James Wyckoff. 2002. “Teacher Sorting and the Plight
of Urban Schools: A Descriptive Analysis.” Education Evaluation and Policy Analysis 24(1):
37-62.
Mahler, Patten. 2012. “Retaining a High Quality Teaching Workforce: The Effects of Pension
Design.” Working Paper, University of Virginia.
McGee, J.B. 2012. Who Leaves and Who Stays: An Analysis of Teachers’ Behavioral
Response to Retirement Incentives. Working Paper.
Papke, Leslie E. 2005. “The Effects of Spending on Test Pass Rates: Evidence from Michigan.”
Journal of Public Economics 89(5-6): 821-839.
Papay, John and Matt Kraft. 2011. “ Productivity Returns to Experience in the Teacher Labor
Market: Methodological Challenges and New Evidence on Long-Term Career Growth.”
Manuscript, Harvard School of Graduate Education.
http://scholar.harvard.edu/files/mkraft/files/papay__kraft__productivity_returns_to_experience_in_the_teacher_labor_market_-_nov_2011.pdf
Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek and John F. Kain. 2005. “Teachers, Schools, and Academic
Achievement.” Econometrica 73(2): 417-458.
35

Rockoff, Jonah E. 2004. “The Impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement: Evidence
from Panel Data.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 94(2): 247-252.
Tarter, Scott E. and Martha M. McCarthy. 1989. “Early Retirement Incentive Programs for
Teachers.” Journal of Education Finance 15(2): 119-133.
Wiswall, Matthew. 2013. “The Dynamics of Teacher Quality.” Journal of Public Economics.
100: 61-78.

36

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics
Full Sample
Mean
SD

3rd Grade
Mean
SD

6th Grade
Mean
SD

8th Grade
Mean
SD

5.19

5.24

2.27

1.48

5.07

4.57

9.76

6.40

Total Number of Teachers in Grade, Pre-ERI

9.38

8.35

4.33

2.33

9.36

7.15

17.01

9.75

Number of Math Teachers in Grade with 15 or
More Years of Experience, Pre-ERI

1.48

1.16

1.59

1.02

1.47

1.31

1.33

1.13

Total Number of Math Teachers in Grade, PreERI

2.64

1.61

2.95

1.42

2.61

1.84

2.24

1.43

Number of English Teachers in Grade with 15 or
More Years of Experience, Pre-ERI

1.80

1.36

1.60

1.02

1.78

1.42

2.14

1.64

Variable
Number With 15 or More Years of Experience,
Pre-ERI

Total Number of English Teachers in Grade, PreERI
Percent Black
Percent Hispanic
Percent Asian

3.25

1.95

2.98

1.45

3.20

2.06

3.71

2.33

12.80
6.26
2.66

24.14
13.28
4.89

12.60
6.53
2.71

23.36
13.89
4.76

14.91
6.98
2.67

27.04
14.69
5.05

10.20
4.87
2.56

20.55
9.75
4.84

Percent Limited English Proficient

2.97

7.43

3.56

8.53

3.24

7.88

1.72

4.18

24.26
95.14
107.79

23.24
1.66
75.53

25.04
95.46
74.85

23.85
1.42
41.67

26.96
95.05
104.67

25.48
1.76
72.82

19.40
94.80
161.62

17.72
1.75
87.64

Percent Low Income
Attendance Rate
Enrollment
Number of Observations
Number of School-Grades

32,291
4,634

14,957
2,072

11,743
1,765

Source: Illinois Teacher Service Record data from 1990 through 1997 combined with school-level Illinois State Board of
Education data on test scores. Notes: Means and standard deviations are based on school-by-year level data for 3rd, 6th and 8th
grade teachers. Teachers who teach multiple grades are included in the tabulations for each grade in which they teach. Teachers
who teach in self-contained classrooms are assumed to teach both math and English.

37

5,591
797

Table 2. Exit Likelihoods by Experience Level and the Experience Distributions of Exiters,
Before, During and After the ERI Program
Pr(Leave)
Difference
# of
Years of
1990-1993 1994-1995 1996-1997
(2)-(1)
(3)-(1)
Teachers
Experience
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.091
0.066
0.103
-0.025
0.012
11482
1
2
0.066
0.060
0.077
-0.006
0.011
11472
3
0.060
0.057
0.053
-0.003
-0.007
10995
4
0.053
0.045
0.063
-0.008
0.010
9900
5
0.056
0.060
0.059
0.004
0.003
9125
6-9
0.042
0.045
0.049
0.003
0.007
31609
10-14
0.031
0.040
0.032
0.009
0.001
36944
15-19
0.024
0.044
0.024
0.020
0.000
42754
20-24
0.032
0.062
0.019
0.030
-0.013
44181
25-29
0.051
0.129
0.023
0.078
-0.028
29694
30-34
0.111
0.367
0.054
0.256
-0.057
11951
35-39
0.253
0.407
0.169
0.154
-0.084
2835
0.281
0.362
0.238
0.081
-0.043
521
 40
Experience Distribution of Exit
Difference
# of
Years of
1990-1993 1994-1995 1996-1997
(2)-(1)
(3)-(1)
Teachers
Experience
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.080
0.035
0.143
-0.045
0.063
11482
1
2
0.055
0.030
0.112
-0.025
0.057
11472
3
0.045
0.030
0.062
-0.015
0.017
10995
4
0.038
0.022
0.063
-0.016
0.025
9900
5
0.038
0.026
0.057
-0.012
0.019
9125
6-9
0.105
0.067
0.153
-0.038
0.048
31609
10-14
0.104
0.065
0.096
-0.039
-0.008
36944
15-19
0.104
0.086
0.076
-0.018
-0.028
42754
20-24
0.128
0.138
0.072
0.010
-0.056
44181
25-29
0.112
0.201
0.069
0.089
-0.043
29694
30-34
0.117
0.225
0.048
0.108
-0.069
11951
35-39
0.062
0.067
0.037
0.005
-0.025
2835
0.012
0.010
0.012
-0.002
0.000
521
 40
Source: Illinois Teacher Service Record and school-level Illinois State Board of Education data, 1990-1997.
Notes: All years refer to the calendar year in which a school year ends and are based on all teachers in 3rd, 6th and 8th
grade. The Pr(Leave) tabulations show the proportion of teachers with a given experience level who left Illinois
public schools as of the end of the previous school year. The second panel shows the distribution of experience
among those exiting in the previous school year. Each of the first three columns sums to one in these estimates. The #
of Teachers shows the total number of teacher observations in each experience group throughout the analysis sample.

38

Table 3. OLS Estimates of the Effect of the Early Retirement Incentive Program on
Teacher Composition and Pupil-Teacher Ratios
Dependent Variable
Full Sample
3rd Grade
6th Grade
8th Grade
Number of Teachers with 15 or
More Years of Experience
0.078**
0.081**
0.085**
0.075**
Exiting in the Previous School
(0.013)
(0.011)
(0.024)
(0.019)
Year
Dependent Variable Mean

0.239

0.108

0.234

0.444

-0.405**
(0.040)

-1.088**
(0.103)

-0.472**
(0.060)

-0.241**
(0.049)

Dependent Variable Mean

15.52

15.39

15.25

16.09

Number of New Teachers

0.073**
(0.014)

0.076**
(0.019)

0.088**
(0.017)

0.063**
(0.022)

Dependent Variable Mean

0.368

0.156

0.405

0.635

-0.009
(0.035)

0.183
(0.196)

-0.002
(0.060)

0.020
(0.027)

14.95

19.46

13.36

10.35

Average Teacher Experience in
Grade

Pupil-Teacher Ratio
Dependent Variable Mean

Source: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) using Illinois Teacher Service Record data from 1990 through
1995 combined with school-level Illinois State Board of Education data on test scores.
Notes: The table shows estimates of 1 from equation (1) in the text, using as dependent variables the number
of teachers with 15 or more years of experience exiting in the previous year, average teacher experience in
each grade, the number of new teachers and pupil-teacher ratios in each grade. Each cell presents results from
a separate regression in the first column, and the estimates in each row in the final three columns come from
one regression that includes interactions between Post*Teachers  15 and Post*Teachers and grade
indicators. Teachers who teach multiple grades are included in the estimates for each grade in which they
teach. Teacher counts are based on all teachers within a grade and school in each year. All estimates include
controls for the demographic variables included in Table 1, the total number of teachers in the grade interacted
with a Post indicator, school-by-grade fixed effects, and grade-by-year fixed effects. All estimates except for
pupil-teacher ratios also contain a quadratic in school-grade-year enrollment. Standard errors clustered at the
school-grade level are in parentheses: ** indicates statistical significance at the 5% level and * indicates
statistical significance at the 10% level.

39

Table 4. OLS Estimates of the Effect of the Early Retirement Incentive Program on the
Number of Teachers of Difference Experience Levels
Independent Variable: Post*Number  15
Teacher Experience Level
Full Sample
3rd Grade
6th Grade
8th Grade
1
Dependent Variable Mean
2
Dependent Variable Mean
3
Dependent Variable Mean
4
Dependent Variable Mean
5
Dependent Variable Mean
6-9
Dependent Variable Mean
10-14
Dependent Variable Mean
15-19
Dependent Variable Mean
20-24
Dependent Variable Mean
25-29
Dependent Variable Mean
30-34
Dependent Variable Mean
35-39

0.073**
(0.014)
0.368

0.076**
(0.019)
0.156

0.088**
(0.017)
0.405

0.063**
(0.022)
0.635

0.060**
(0.014)
0.366

0.059**
(0.018)
0.167

0.081**
(0.024)
0.410

0.047**
(0.019)
0.604

0.030**
(0.012)
0.347

0.053**
(0.016)
0.163

0.055**
(0.016)
0.387

0.013
(0.019)
0.568

0.028**
(0.012)
0.317

0.043**
(0.014)
0.159

0.022**
(0.019)
0.336

0.028**
(0.018)
0.528

0.022**
(0.012)
0.306

0.025
(0.017)
0.157

-0.013
(0.015)
0.319

0.038**
(0.019)
0.513

0.049**
(0.021)
1.096

0.044*
(0.027)
0.569

0.039
(0.030)
1.126

0.053*
(0.032)
1.849

0.009
(0.022)
1.485

0.068**
(0.028)
0.741

0.016
(0.038)
1.524

-0.006
(0.032)
2.551

-0.266**
(0.033)
1.828

-0.305**
(0.028)
0.880

-0.227**
(0.053)
1.847

-0.280**
(0.047)
3.235

-0.178**
(0.032)
1.826

-0.048*
(0.027)
0.763

-0.216**
(0.056)
1.809

-0.178**
(0.044)
3.452

-0.105**
(0.022)
1.048

-0.011
(0.021)
0.453

-0.099**
(0.035)
1.007

-0.125**
(0.031)
2.004

-0.010
(0.015)
0.512

0.009
(0.013)
0.190

-0.023
(0.019)
0.504

-0.008
(0.023)
1.007

0.001
(0.009)

0.007
(0.007)

0.012
(0.016)

-0.006
(0.012)

40

Dependent Variable Mean
40+
Dependent Variable Mean

0.117

0.048

0.105

0.238

-0.002
(0.002)
0.017

0.0002
(0.003)
0.011

-0.0003
(0.0004)
0.017

-0.003
(0.002)
0.024

Source: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) using Illinois Teacher Service Record data from 1990 through 1995
combined with school-level Illinois State Board of Education data on test scores.
Notes: The table shows estimates of 1 from equation (1) in the text, using as dependent variables the number of
teachers with a given level of experience in each grade and year. Each cell presents results from a separate
regression in the first column, and the estimates in each row in the final three columns come from one regression
that includes interactions between Post*Teachers  15 and Post*Teachers and grade indicators. Teachers who teach
multiple grades are included in the estimates for each grade in which they teach. Teacher counts are based on all
teachers within a grade and school in each year. All estimates include controls for the demographic variables
included in Table 1, the total number of teachers in the grade interacted with a Post indicator, school-by-grade fixed
effects, grade-by-year fixed effects and a quadratic in school-grade-year enrollment. Standard errors clustered at the
school-grade level are in parentheses: ** indicates statistical significance at the 5% level and * indicates statistical
significance at the 10% level.

41

Table 5. OLS Estimates of the Effect of the Early Retirement Incentive Program on Student
Test Scores

Independent Variable
Post*Number  15 Years of
Experience, Pre-ERI

All Teachers
Math
Reading
0.003
0.009**
(0.004)
(0.003)

Subject-Specific
Teachers
Math
Reading
0.013*
0.013*
(0.008)
(0.007)

Post*Total Number of
Teachers, Pre-ERI

0.0001
(0.002)

-0.004
(0.006)

-0.004*
(0.002)

-0.005
(0.005)

Source: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) using Illinois Teacher Service Record data from 1990 through 1997
combined with school-level Illinois State Board of Education data on test scores.
Notes: Each column presents results from a separate regression. Teachers who teach multiple grades are included in
the estimates for each grade in which they teach. Teachers who teach in self-contained classrooms are assumed to
teach both math and English. All estimates include controls for the demographic variables included in Table 1, the
total number of teachers in a grade (or the total number of subject-specific teachers in the grade in the second two
columns) interacted with a Post indicator, school-by-grade fixed effects, grade-by-year fixed effects and a quadratic
in school-grade-year enrollment. Standard errors clustered at the school-grade level are in parentheses: ** indicates
statistical significance at the 5% level and * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level.

Table 6. OLS Estimates of the Effect of the Early Retirement Incentive Program on Student
Test Scores, by Grade

Independent Variable
Post*Number  15 Years of
Experience, Pre-ERI *I(Grade=3)

All Teachers
Math
Reading
0.002
-0.009
(0.010)
(0.008)

Subject-Specific
Teachers
Math
Reading
0.010
-0.003
(0.013)
(0.010)

Post*Number  15 Years of
Experience, Pre-ERI *I(Grade=6)

-0.00002
(0.005)

0.006
(0.004)

0.004
(0.010)

0.016*
(0.009)

Post*Number  15 Years of
Experience, Pre-ERI *I(Grade=8)

0.005
(0.005)

0.013**
(0.005)

0.032*
(0.018)

0.030*
(0.017)

Source: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) using Illinois Teacher Service Record data from 1990 through 1997
combined with school-level Illinois State Board of Education data on test scores.
Notes: Each column presents results from a separate regression. Teachers who teach multiple grades are included in
the estimates for each grade in which they teach. Teachers who teach in self-contained classrooms are assumed to
teach both math and English. All estimates include controls for the demographic variables included in Table 1, the
total number of teachers in a grade (or the total number of subject-specific teachers in the grade in the second two
columns) interacted with a Post indicator, school-by-grade fixed effects, grade-by-year fixed effects and a quadratic
in school-grade-year enrollment. Standard errors clustered at the school-grade level are in parentheses: ** indicates
statistical significance at the 5% level and * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level.

42

Table 7. OLS Estimates of the Effect of the Early Retirement Incentive Program on Student
Test Scores, by Income, Race and Baseline Scores
Ind. Var.: Post*Number  15
School Type
Math
Reading
Lowest Income
-0.001
0.014
Schools
(0.008)
(0.008)
All Other
0.002
0.009**
Schools
(0.004)
(0.004)
Lowest %
White Schools
All Other
Schools

0.004
(0.007)
0.004
(0.004)

0.018**
(0.007)
0.006
(0.004)

Lowest Baseline
Score Schools
All Other
Schools

0.010
(0.008)
0.003
(0.004)

0.019**
(0.008)
0.008**
(0.004)

Source: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) using Illinois Teacher Service Record data from 1990 through 1997
combined with school-level Illinois State Board of Education data on test scores.
Notes: Each cell presents results from a separate regression. Teachers who teach multiple grades are included in the
estimates for each grade in which they teach. The lowest income, percent white and baseline score schools are the
bottom 25% of schools on each measure, measured in the pre-treatment period. All estimates include controls for the
demographic variables included in Table 1 (except for the variable on which the sample is cut), the total number of
teachers interacted with a Post indicator, school-by-grade fixed effects, grade-by-year fixed effects and a quadratic in
school-grade-year enrollment. Standard errors clustered at the school-grade level are in parentheses: ** indicates
statistical significance at the 5% level and * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level.

43

Table 8. OLS Estimates of the Effect of the Early Retirement Incentive Program on Teacher Composition and Pupil-Teacher
Ratios, by Income, Race and Baseline Scores
Lowest
Other
Lowest %
Other %
Lowest
Other
Lowest
Other
Dependent Variable
Income
Income
White
White
Math
Math
Reading
Reading
Number Exiting in
Previous Year
Dep. Var. Mean

0.020
(0.034)
0.177

0.085**
(0.016)
0.253

0.049*
(0.026)
0.264

0.091**
(0.016)
0.231

0.038
(0.029)
0.230

0.087**
(0.016)
0.241

0.046*
(0.028)
0.224

0.086**
(0.016)
0.243

Average Teacher
Experience
Dep. Var. Mean

-0.209**
(0.083)
15.707

-0.465**
(0.037)
15.469

-0.203**
(0.081)
15.612

-0.496**
(0.040)
15.480

-0.214**
(0.098)
15.717

-0.468**
(0.037)
15.453

-0.218**
(0.096)
15.589

-0.473**
(0.038)
15.490

Number of New
Teachers
Dep. Var. Mean

-0.060**
(0.025)
0.248

0.104**
(0.013)
0.395

-0.024
(0.027)
0.342

0.107**
(0.014)
0.377

-0.062**
(0.027)
0.312

0.107**
(0.013)
0.384

-0.008
(0.005)
0.314

0.108**
(0.013)
0.384

-0.018
(0.150)
20.61

-0.011
(0.035)
13.99

0.044
(0.087)
18.51

0.006
(0.040)
14.14

-0.001
(0.113)
19.30

-0.002
(0.037)
14.00

0.018
(0.109)
19.26

-0.004
(0.037)
13.97

Pupil-Teacher Ratio
Dep. Var. Mean

Source: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) using Illinois Teacher Service Record data from 1990 through 1995 combined with school-level Illinois State Board of
Education data on test scores.
Notes: The table shows estimates of 1 from equation (1) in the text, using as dependent variables the number of teachers with 15 or more years of experience
exiting in the previous year, average teacher experience in each grade, the number of new teachers and pupil-teacher ratios in each grade. Each cell presents results
from a separate regression. Teachers who teach multiple grades are included in the estimates for each grade in which they teach. The lowest income, percent white
and baseline score schools are the bottom 25% of schools on each measure, measured in the pre-treatment period. All estimates include controls for the
demographic variables included in Table 1 (except for the variable on which the sample is cut), the total number of teachers interacted with a Post indicator,
school-by-grade fixed effects, grade-by-year fixed effects and a quadratic in grade-school-year enrollment. The pupil-teacher ratio estimates do not control for
enrollment. Standard errors clustered at the school-grade level are in parentheses: ** indicates statistical significance at the 5% level and * indicates statistical
significance at the 10% level.

44

Table 9. OLS Estimates of the Effect of the Early Retirement Incentive Program on Student
Test Scores – Including Other Grades
All Teachers –
All Teachers –
Including Higher
Excluding 8th Grade
Grade Teachers
Independent Variable
Math
Reading
Math
Reading
Post*Number  15 Years of
0.001
0.002
0.001
0.004
Experience, Pre-ERI
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.004)
0.002
(0.003)

-0.00002
(0.003)

Post*Number Other  15 Years of
Experience, Pre-ERI

-0.005
(0.005)

-0.006
(0.004)

Post*Total Other Teachers, Pre-ERI

-0.001
(0.003)

0.002
(0.003)

Post*Total Teachers, Pre-ERI

0.001
(0.003)

0.0004
(0.003)

Source: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) using Illinois Teacher Service Record data from 1990 through 1997
combined with school-level Illinois State Board of Education data on test scores.
Notes: Each column presents results from a separate regression. Eighth grades are excluded from the estimates.
Teachers who teach multiple grades are included in the estimates for each grade in which they teach. All estimates
include controls for the demographic variables included in Table 1, school-by-grade fixed effects, grade-by-year fixed
effects and a quadratic in school-grade-year enrollment. “Other” refers to all teachers in the school in higher grades.
Standard errors clustered at the school-grade level are in parentheses: ** indicates statistical significance at the 5%
level and * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level.

45

Table 10. Robustness Checks

Specification
Post* Number  20 Years of Experience,
Pre-ERI
Post*Percentage  15 Years of Experience,
Pre-ERI
Post* Number  15 Years of Experience,
Pre-ERI (Excluding Chicago)
Post* Number  15 Years of Experience,
Pre-ERI (Excluding Missing)
Using 1993 as Pre-Treatment Year
Controlling for # Inexperienced in 1993 *
Post
School-Post Fixed Effect
District-level Estimates

All Teachers
Math
Reading
0.002
0.009**
(0.003)
(0.003)
0.030
0.063*
(0.039)
(0.035)
0.004
0.009**
(0.004)
(0.003)
0.002
0.009**
(0.004)
(0.003)
0.006*
0.009**
(0.003)
(0.003)
0.008**
0.008**
(0.004)
(0.004)
0.007
0.003
(0.007)
(0.005)
0.002
0.002
(0.003)
(0.004)

Subject-Specific
Teachers
Math
Reading
0.008
0.008
(0.008)
(0.007)
0.007
0.007
(0.019)
(0.019)
0.015*
0.013*
(0.007)
(0.007)
0.013*
0.013*
(0.008)
(0.007)
0.012*
0.010
(0.007)
(0.006)
0.018**
0.006
(0.008)
(0.006)
0.032**
0.030**
(0.013)
(0.013)
0.008
0.004
(0.007)
(0.006)

Source: Authors’ estimation of equation (1) using Illinois Teacher Service Record data from 1990 through 1997
combined with school-level Illinois State Board of Education data on test scores.
Notes: Each column presents results from a separate regression. Unless otherwise noted, estimates show the
coefficient on the Post*Number  15 variable. Teachers who teach multiple grades are included in the estimates for
each grade in which they teach. Teachers who teach in self-contained classrooms are assumed to teach both math and
English. All estimates aside from those in the last row include controls for the demographic variables included in
Table 1, school-by-grade fixed effects, grade-by-year fixed effects and a quadratic in school-grade-year enrollment.
The estimates in the last row contain demographic variables, district-grade fixed effects, grade-year fixed effects and
a quadratic in district-year enrollment. The estimates in all but the second row include an interaction between the total
number of teachers in the grade (or the total number of subject-specific teachers) and a Post indicator. Standard errors
clustered at the school-grade level are in parentheses (clustered at district-grade in the final row): ** indicates
statistical significance at the 5% level and * indicates statistical significance at the 10% level.

46

Lifetime Consumption (in units of salary at age 55)

Figure 1.A. Budget Constraints for a Representative Teacher in IPS, With and Without ERI (5+5)

Present Value of Lifetime Consumption for a Teacher with 20
Years of Experience at Age 55 who Retires with a Given Level
of Experience

25

20

15

10

5

Without ERO or ERI
With ERO, but no ERI
With ERI

0
15

20

25

30

Amount of Experience
Notes: Based on authors’ calculations. The vertical axis measures the present value of consumption for a teacher who is age 55 and has 20 years of experience when the ERI becomes
available. The vertical axis presents the present discounted value of lifetime consumption associated with retirement with a given amount of experience (without taking time off) and under
a certain retirement plan. Consumption in each year is defined as income (salary if working and retirement benefit if retired) minus fees (if retirement incentive is purchased). Salary and
benefits are expected to grow by 3 percent per year nominally and we assume a real interest rate of 3 percent. The present value of consumption is measured at age 55 and is presented in
multiples of salary at age 55.

47

Figure 1.B. Increase in Lifetime Consumption Relative to Normal Retirement of Representative Teachers in IPS Due to ERI
(5+5), by Age and Experience

Units: Salary at Time of Retirement

6

Age 50

Age55

Age 60

5
4
3
2
1
0
15

20

25

30

Notes: Based on authors’ calculations. The vertical axis measures the ERI-induced increase in the present value of consumption for a teacher who is of the age and experience level
indicated when the ERI becomes available, relative to not taking up the ERI. Consumption in each year is defined as income (salary if working and retirement benefit if retired)
minus fees (if retirement incentive is purchased). Salary and benefits are expected to grow by 3 percent per year nominally and we assume a real interest rate of 3 percent. The
present value of consumption is measured at age 55 and is presented in multiples of salary at age 55. No 50 year old teachers with 30 years of experience exist in the data, so we
have omitted this category.

48

Figure 2. Distribution of Teacher Experience Pre- and Post-ERI Program, by Quartiles of the
Percent of Grade-Specific Teachers with 15 or More Years of Experience Prior to 1994
7

8

Lowest Quartile Above 14 Years
Experience

7
6

Second Quartile Above 14 Years
Experience

6
5

5

4

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

0

0
‐1

0

10

20

30

1990‐1993

7

40

50

60

‐1

20

30

1990‐1993

7

5

4

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

0

40

50

60

1994‐1995

Top Quartile Above 14 Years Experience

6

5

‐1

10

1994‐1995

Third Quartile Above 14 Years Experience

6

0

0

0

10

20
1990‐1993

30

40

50

60

‐1

0

10

20
1990‐1993

1994‐1995

30

40

50

60

1994‐1995

Source: Illinois Teacher Service Record data from 1990 through 1995 combined with school-level Illinois State Board of Education
data on test scores.
Notes: All years refer to the calendar year in which a school year ends, and distributions are based on all teachers in 3rd, 6th and 8th
grade. Each panel of the figure shows experience distributions for the pre-treatment period (1990-1993) and the period immediately
following the early retirement incentive program implementation (1994-1995) by the quartile of the percent of teachers with 15 or
more years of experience in the pre-treatment period.

49

Figure 3. Event Study Estimates of the Effect of the Early Retirement Incentive Program on
Student Test Scores, Using Grade-Specific Teacher Counts
0.03

Math

0.025
0.02
0.015
0.01
0.005
0
1990
‐0.005

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1995

1996

1997

‐0.01
‐0.015
‐0.02
0.03

Reading

0.025
0.02
0.015
0.01
0.005
0
1990
‐0.005

1991

1992

1993

1994

‐0.01
‐0.015
‐0.02

Notes: Estimates and 95% confidence intervals from interactions of year fixed effects and the number of teachers with 15 or
more years of experience. Years are indexed by the calendar year in which a school year ends. The 1993 coefficient is set to
zero, so there is no standard error bound for this year. Estimates include grade-by-year and school-by-grade fixed effects, the
demographic characteristics shown in Table 1, interactions between year fixed effects and the number of teachers in each
grade pre-ERI, and a quadratic in school-grade-year enrollment.

50

Figure 4. Event Study Estimates of the Effect of the Early Retirement Incentive Program
on Student Reading Test Scores, Using Subject- and Grade-Specific Teacher Counts
0.05

Math

0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
1990
‐0.01

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1995

1996

1997

‐0.02
‐0.03
‐0.04
0.05

Reading

0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
1990
‐0.01

1991

1992

1993

1994

‐0.02
‐0.03
‐0.04

Notes: Estimates and 95% confidence intervals from interactions of year fixed effects and the number of subject-specific
teachers with 15 or more years of experience. Years are indexed by the calendar year in which a school year ends. The 1993
coefficient is set to zero, so there is no standard error bound for this year. Estimates include grade-by-year and school-bygrade fixed effects, the demographic characteristics shown in Table 1, interactions between year fixed effects and the number
of subject-specific teachers in each grade pre-ERI, and a quadratic in school-grade-year enrollment

51

Figure 5. Pre-ERI Experience Distributions among Teachers Who Were in IPS Pre- and
Post-ERI, by Whether They Shifted Across Tested and Non-Tested Grades
Panel A: Full Sample
10
8
t 6
n
e
cr
e
P4
2
0
2

6

10

14

18

No Test to Test

22
26
30
Experience

34

38

Test to No Test

42

46

50

No Change

Panel B: Bottom Experience Quartile
10
8
t 6
n
e
cr
e
P4
2
0
2

6

10

14

18

No Test to Test

22
26
30
Experience

34

38

Test to No Test

42

46

50

No Change

Panel C: Top Experience Quartile
10
8
t 6
n
e
cr
e
P4
2
0
2

6

10

14

No Test to Test

18

22
26
30
Experience
Test to No Test

34

38

42

46

50

No Change

Notes: Sample include only those teachers who taught in IPS both pre- and post-ERI. “Test grades” are 3, 6, and 8,
and all other grades below 8 are “no test” grades. Top experience and bottom experience refer to quartiles of the preERI percent of teachers with 15 or more years of experience.

52

Appendix A: Supplementary Tables and Figures
Table A-1. OLS Estimates of the Effect of the Early Retirement Incentive Program on the
Number of Teachers of Difference Experience Levels in Disadvantaged Schools
Independent Variable: Post*Number  15
Teacher Experience Level
Low Income
Low White
Low Math
Low Reading
1

-0.060**
(0.025)

-0.024
(0.027)

-0.062**
(0.027)

-0.008
(0.005)

2

-0.009
(0.027)

0.024
(0.030)

-0.006
(0.032)

0.002
(0.031)

3

0.015
(0.023)

-0.005
(0.023)

-0.001
(0.022)

-0.003
(0.021)

4

0.012
(0.028)

0.025
(0.027)

0.013
(0.023)

0.011
(0.023)

5

0.032
(0.027)

0.064**
(0.020)

0.056**
(0.024)

0.057**
(0.023)

6-9

0.014
(0.049)

0.032
(0.040)

0.027
(0.043)

0.021
(0.042)

10-14

-0.024
(0.043)

0.014
(0.035)

0.001
(0.043)

-0.015
(0.046)

15-19

-0.291**
(0.051)

-0.269**
(0.054)

-0.268**
(0.053)

-0.267**
(0.052)

20-24

-0.023
(0.070)

-0.104*
(0.056)

-0.104
(0.071)

-0.114*
(0.070)

25-29

-0.121**
(0.052)

-0.137**
(0.048)

-0.008**
(0.003)

-0.174**
(0.056)

30-34

0.006
(0.024)

0.007
(0.029)

-0.163**
(0.056)

0.010
(0.033)

35-39

0.003
(0.019)

-0.004
(0.014)

0.001
(0.033)

0.0004
(0.018)

40+

-0.005
(0.004)

-0.002
(0.005)

0.012
(0.018)

-0.007
(0.005)

Notes: Data come from the 1990-1995 TSR combined with school-level Illinois State Board of Education data on
test scores. The table shows estimates of 1 from equation (1) in the text, using as dependent variables the number of
teachers with a given level of experience in each grade and year. Each cell presents results from a separate
regression. Teachers who teach multiple grades are included in the estimates for each grade in which they teach. The
lowest income, percent white and baseline score schools are the bottom 25% of schools on each measure, measured
in the pre-treatment period. All estimates include controls for the demographic variables included in Table 1 (except
for the variable on which the sample is cut), the total number of teachers interacted with a Post indicator, school-bygrade fixed effects, grade-by-year fixed effects and a quadratic in school-grade-year enrollment. Standard errors
clustered at the school-grade level are in parentheses: ** indicates statistical significance at the 5% level and *
indicates statistical significance at the 10% level.

53

Figure A-1. Event Study Estimates of the Effect of the Early Retirement Incentive Program on Teacher Composition
0.15

0.2

Number Exiting

0
1990
‐0.1

0.05

Coefficient

Coefficient

0.1

0
1990

Average Experience

0.1

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

‐0.2
‐0.3
‐0.4
‐0.5

‐0.05

‐0.6
‐0.7

‐0.1
0.12
0.1

0.12

Number of New Teachers

0.08

Pupil‐Teacher Ratio

0.06

0.04
0.02
0
‐0.021990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

Coefficient

Coefficient

0.06
0
1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

‐0.06

‐0.04
‐0.06

‐0.12

‐0.08
‐0.1

‐0.18

Notes: Estimates and 95% confidence intervals from interactions of year fixed effects and the number of teachers with 15 or more years of experience. Years are
indexed by the calendar year in which a school year ends. The 1993 coefficient is set to zero, so there is no standard error bound for this year. Estimates include
grade-by-year and school-by-grade fixed effects, the demographic characteristics shown in Table 1, and interactions between year fixed effects and the number
of teachers in each grade. The pupil-teacher ratio estimates do not control for enrollment.

54

Appendix B. Cost-Benefit Calculations
The cost-benefit calculations reported in Section 6 depend on parameters we have chosen
using our data. This are described in turn:
How Much Earlier Do Teachers Retire Because of the ERI?: We first calculate the
number of teachers with each level of experience in the pre-ERI period and the exit rates
of teachers with each given level of experience in both the pre-ERI and during-ERI
periods. Using the number of teachers with each level of accrued experience in the preERI period as the baseline, for each given level of starting experience (e.g. 15 years of
service, 16 years of service, etc.), we create conditional density functions for the fraction
of teachers that exit the system with each passing year. We perform this calculation for
both the period pre-ERI and the period over which the ERI was offered. We then
examine the median of this distribution before and during the ERI for each level of
experience of at least 15 years. By this measure, the median teacher with 15 years of
service or more is retiring with 32 years of experience in the pre-ERI period and retires 5
years earlier, with 27 years of experience in the ERI period.
Median Retirement Age Pre-ERI: Using the pre-ERI level of experience for the median
exiting teacher described above, we estimate the median retirement age assuming a
teacher starts her career at age 28 and does not have any employment breaks due to
childrearing or other reasons. The median experience level of a retiring teacher with 15 or
more years of experience is 32 years, which would make her 60 years old under this
assumption. We further assume that pensions are paid out until age 87, on average. This
means teachers receive their pension payments for 27 years pre-ERI and for 32 years
post-ERI.
Salary Levels: We use average teacher salaries of all teachers with a given level of
experience in 1992, the year before the ERI was introduced.
Lump-Sum Payment Calculations: Lump-sum payments are made by the district and
teacher, separately, for each teacher taking up the ERI. Districts pay 12% of the highest
salary, which we assume is the salary in 1992, for each year purchased. Since the median
teacher purchases 5 years, we assume districts pay 60% of the 1992 salary of a teacher
with 27 years of experience. Teachers must pay 4% of this salary for each year
purchased, which is 20% of the 1992 salary for a teacher with 27 years of experience if
she purchases 5 years of experience.
Interest Rate: We assume an interest rate throughout of 3%.
Percentage of Salary Paid: The pension system includes a formula for the cumulative
percentage of salary paid by the pension: 1.67% of salary for the first 10 years, 1.91% for
55

the next 10 years, 2.1% for the following 10 years, and 2.3% thereafter. A teacher with
32 years of experience, which is the median purchased experience level of teachers
retiring under the ERI, will receive 61.4% of her highest salary in benefits every year
(=10*.0167+10*.0191+10*.021+2*.023). We use the average salary of a teacher with 27
years of experience in 1992 to calculate these benefits. Note that the median teacher
retiring under ERI has 27 years of experience but is treated as if she has 32 years due to
the ERI program. This is why the experience levels used to calculate the payout rate and
the base salary differ.

56

