                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                MIGRATION AND FISCAL COMPETITION WITHIN A UNION

                                              Assaf Razin
                                             Efraim Sadka

                                         Working Paper 19282
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19282


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2013




We thank Russell Cooper for comments. Competent research assistance by Ori Katz is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.˛˛

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Migration and Fiscal Competition within a Union
Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka
NBER Working Paper No. 19282
August 2013, Revised December 2013
JEL No. F2,H2

                                             ABSTRACT

We develop a stylized EU-type model of a union consisting of rich, capital-abundant and high productivity
countries, and poor, capital-scarce and low productivity countries. We address two main issues: the
efficiency of tax competition and the effect of factor mobility on the size of the welfare state. We
identify a fiscal externality which impairs the efficiency of tax competition. We also demonstrate
how capital mobility within the union strengthens the competition over migrants from outside of the
union.


Assaf Razin
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Uris 422
Ithaca, NY 14853
and Cornell University
and also NBER
ar256@cornell.edu

Efraim Sadka
Tel Aviv University
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
P.O.B. 39040
Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv, 69978, ISRAEL
sadka@post.tau.ac.il
1     Introduction

  Consider some key features of the 28-country European Union. The
Union consists of countries which may all be viewed as welfare states, to
some extent or another. The core countries (e.g. Germany, France, the
U.K.) may be considered "rich" as they are relatively capital-abundant
and highly productive. These countries attract migrants from the rest
of the EU (the "poor" countries) with relatively low barriers, following
the Schemgen agreement (1995). They are also a destination, with rela-
tively high barriers for migration from developing countries (henceforth:
"The rest of the world") which burdens their …scal systems. The "poor"
countries (e.g. East-central European countries) are less capital abun-
dant and less productive. These countries are a source of net-migration
to the core "rich" countries. They are not a particularly attractive desti-
nation for migration from the rest of the world. They are also recipients
of net capital from the core countries, as there are on constraints on cap-
ital mobility within the EU following the Single Market Act that went
into e¤ect in 1992.
    In this paper we aim to examine how the aforementioned features
explain in theory the di¤erences in the tax rates, and the generosity of
the welfare state, on the one hand, and migration ‡ows, on the other
hand, between rich and poor countries. We examine also the role of
capital mobility in explaining this di¤erences. Further, we investigate
whether …scal competition within an economic union (of poor and rich
countries) is ine¢ cient, relative to …scal coordination. That is, starting
from a competition regime and moving to the coordination regime, a
union member is better o¤; albeit, at the expense of the non-union
immigrants.
    The organization of the paper is as follows. The next section provides
some evidence on the …scal burden of migration and on tax competition.
Section 3 presents the analytical framework. Section 4 set up the tax
competition equilibrium model. Section 5 develops the …scal coordina-
tion framework. Section 6 compares the tax competition regime to the
coordination regime. Section 7 analyzes the capital mobility e¤ect on
migration. Section 8 concludes.

2     Evidence
2.1    Tax Competition

Signi…cant declines in capital tax rates among U.S. states and Euro-
pean countries have been linked to tax competition. Corporate tax rates

                                    2
among OECD countries also have declined sharply over the past two or
three decades (Devereux, Rodoano, and Lockwood, 2008, Figure 1; U.S.
Treasury, 2007, Chart 5.1). This has led to deliberations among Euro-
pean Union (EU) o¢ cials over the question whether to introduce tax
harmonization measures (McLure, 2008).1
    Altshuler and Goodspeed (2002), Brueckner and Saavedra (2001),
Brueckner (2003), Case, Rosen and Hines (1993) bring some inconclu-
sive evidence concerning capital taxation for the “race to the bottom”
hypothesis of tax competition. Recently, Chirinko and Wilson (2013)
analyze a panel dataset covering the U.S. states for the period 1965 to
2006.2 Their study focuses on the reaction function of capital tax pol-
icy in a given U.S. state to changes in capital tax policy by other US
states. They …nd that aggregate shocks, not tax competition, are driving
the non-cyclical movements of capital taxation. They also …nd that the
slope of the reaction function (the equilibrium response of home state to
another state tax policy) is negative, contrary to many prior empirical
studies of positive reaction functions (the "race-to-the-bottom" hypoth-
esis). Their results suggest that the non-cyclical decline in capital tax
rates, among U.S. states, re‡ects simultaneous responses among states
to common shocks, rather than competitive responses to other states’
tax policy.

    Focusing on highly mobile, highly skilled earners, Kleven et al (2013)
provides evidence from Denmark that these earners respond signi…cantly
to tax cuts. They found that reducing tax rates over a certain income
threshold for high-earning, high skilled migrants increased their number
signi…cantly even though the tax rate reduction was limited to three
years. The number of highly-skilled migrants with incomes close, but
below, the thresholds, did not increase to the same extent. A common
drawback of the aforementioned studies is that they focus narrowly on
some, but not all, taxes and largely ignore the expenditure side of the
…scal system.

2.2     Fiscal Burden of Migration
In this section we review some relevant evidence on tax competition and
on the …scal burden of migration.
   1
     A comprehensive analysis of alternative locations of consumption taxes , levied on
destination or origin, basis is provided by Lockwood (2001). He …nds that destination
and origin bases are only equivalent in the presence of perfect mobility of factors of
production and in the regime of perfect competition".
  Lockwood, B.. (2001) "Tax Competition and Tax Co-ordination under Destination
and Origin Principles: A Synthesis," Journal of Public Economics,53, 141-162.
   2
     Not including Alaska and Hawaii


                                          3
    In 1997 the U.S. National Research Council sponsored a study on the
overall …scal impact of immigration into the U.S.; see Smith and Edmon-
ston (1997). The study looks comprehensively at all layers of government
(federal, state, and local), all programs (bene…ts), and all types of taxes.
For each cohort, de…ned by age of arrival to the U.S., the bene…ts (cash
or in kind) received by migrants over their own lifetimes and the lifetimes
of their …rst-generation descendents were projected. These bene…ts in-
clude Medicare, Medicaid, Supplementary Security Income (SSI), Aid
for Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), food stamps, Old Age,
Survivors, and Disability Insurance (OASDI), etc. Similarly, taxes paid
directly by migrants and the incidence on migrants of other taxes (such
as corporate taxes) were also projected for the lifetimes of the migrants
and their …rst-generation descendents. Accordingly, the net …scal burden
was projected and discounted to the present. In this way, the net …scal
burden for each age cohort of migrants was calculated in present value
terms. Within each age cohort, these calculations were disaggregated
according to three educational levels: Less than high school education,
high school education, and more than high school education.
    Indeed the …ndings suggest that migrants with less than high school
education are typically a net …scal burden that can reach as high as ap-
proximately US-$100,000 in present value, when the immigrants’age on
arrival is between 20–30 years. See also the related analysis of Auerbach
and Oreopoulos (1999).
    In the …rst 10 years after the enlargement of the European Union to
27 countries in 2004, only three members of the EU-15 (the UK, Sweden
and Ireland) allowed free access for residents of the accession countries
to their national labor markets. The other members of the EU-15 took
advantage of the clause that allows for restricted labor markets for a
transitional period of up to seven years. Focusing on the UK and the
8 accession countries (A8), Dustmann at al (2009) bring evidence of no
welfare migration.3 The average age of the A8 migrants during the pe-
riod 2004-2008 is 25.8 years, considerably lower than the native U.K.
average age (38.7 years). The A8 migrants are also better educated
than the native-born. A recent study by Barbone et al (2009), based on
the 2006 European Union Survey of Income and Living conditions, …nds
that migrants from the accession countries constitute only 1-2 percent
of the total population in the pre-enlargement EU countries (excluding
Germany and Luxemburg); by comparison, about 6 percent of the pop-
ulation in the latter EU countries were born outside the enlarged EU.
The small share of migrants from the accession countries is, of course,
   3
   The A8 countries are the …rst eight accession countries (Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Slovenia and Poland).


                                         4
not surprising in view of the restrictions imposed on migration from the
accession countries to the EU-15 before the enlargement and during the
transition period after the enlargement. The study shows also that there
is, as expected, a positive correlation between the net current taxes (that
is, taxes paid less bene…ts received) of migrants from all source countries
and their education level.
     Hainmeueller and Hiscox (2010), using survey data in the US, …nd
two critical economic concerns that appear to generate anti-immigrant
sentiments among voters: concerns about labor-market competition, and
concerns about the …scal burden on public services. Not unexpect-
edly, employing opinion surveys, Hanson et al (2007) bring evidence
that in the United States native residents of states which provide gener-
ous bene…ts- to migrants also prefer to reduce the number of migrants.
Furthermore, the opposition is stronger among higher income groups.
Similarly, Hanson et al (2009), again employing opinion surveys, …nd
for the United States that native-born residents of states with a high
share of unskilled migrants, among the migrants population, prefer to
restrict in migration; whereas native-born residents of states with a high
share of skilled migrants among the migrant population are less likely to
favor restricting migration. Indeed, developed economies do attempt to
sort out immigrants by skills (see, for instance, Bhagwati and Gordon
(2009)). Australia and Canada employ a point system based on se-
lected immigrants’characteristics. The U.S. employs explicit preference
for professional, technical and kindred immigrants under the so-called
third-preference quota. Jasso and Rosenzweig (2009) …nd that both the
Australian and American selection mechanisms are e¤ective in sorting
out the skilled migrants, and produce essentially similar outcomes de-
spite of their di¤erent legal characteristics.4

3        Analytical Framework

Suppose there is a continuum of R identical capital-abundant (rich)
countries and a countinuum of P identical capital-scarce (poor) coun-
tries. We denote by  =  the ratio of the number of rich and poor
countries. these countries form a union within which migration is free. In
addition, these countries are engaged in competition over migrants from
the rest of the world. The model incorporates two channels through
which native households are e¤ected by migration: the wage channel
and the …scal channel. The former relates to the fact that migration
reduces wages. The latter relates to the fact that migrants contribute
to the …nancing of the public good through proportional income taxes
    4
        See also Boeri, Hanson, and McCormick (2002); See also Mayda (2006)

                                          5
on labor and on capital.5 With respect to capital mobility within the
union we allow for both free and restricted mobility. The baseline model
described below considers free capital mobility. In order to elicit the
e¤ect of capital mobility on the …scal system, we consider also a special
case of restricted capital mobility.

3.1       Representative Rich Host Country

A representative rich host country produces a single good by employing
labor and capital according to a Cobb-Douglas production function,
                                         (1¬ )
                          =              0     1                     (1)
where  is GDP,  denotes a Hicks-neutral productivity parameter,
 denotes the input of labor,  denotes the input of capital, denotes
the share of capital and 1 ¬ denotes the share of labor.
   The competitive wage of labor is,

                               = (1 ¬ )                                   (2)


    There is a continuum of workers, where the number of native-born
is normalized to 1;  denotes the number of migrants from the rest of
the world,  denotes immigrants from the poor-host country,6 and 
is the individual labor supply. Thus, aggregate labor supply is given by:

                              = (1 +  +  )                             (3R)


       Total population is

                               = 1 +   +                                (4R)


   The rental price of capital ( ) equals the marginal productivity of
capital, that is:

                                  =                                      (5)
   5
     There exists a body of literature which emphasizes the importance of both chan-
nels. The wage channel is analayzed in, for instance, Ortega (2005) and also partly
in Kemnitz (2002). Ortega goes even further than this paper and allows migrants to
become part of the electorate in the period after migration has taken place.
   6
     We ignore migration within rich-host countries and within poor-host countries,
and from rich-host to poor-host countries, as these types of migration will not occur
in a symmetric equilibrium.


                                         6
(We assume for simplicity that capital does not depreciate.) An indi-
vidual holds a stock of capital,  . An individual can rent her capital
either at home or at other union countries. Thus, the total stock of
capital owned by residents,  , does not have to equal  , the total
input of capital, assuming that migrants own no capital. Capital tax-
ation is levied according to the source principle, that is, each country
taxes only the capital employed in that country.7 Denote the net-of-tax
rental price of capital in all other (either rich or poor) union countries
by  (note that with source-based taxation and free capital mobility,
the net-of-tax rate price of capital is indeed the same in all countries).
Then, the residents of the representative host country must enjoy the
same net-of-tax rental price at home, that is:

                                 (1 ¬    )     =                             (6)

    where  is the tax rate on capital employed by our representative
rich country.
    We specify a simple welfare state system in which there is a dual tax
system: a tax at the rate  on labor income and a tax at the rate 
on capital income (we allow for di¤erent rates of taxation of labor and
capital in order to examine the e¤ects of migration and capital mobility
separately on capital and labor taxation). The revenues from all taxes
are redistributed equally to all residents, native born and migrants alike,
as a uniform transfer,   per capita. This transfer may capture not only
a cash transfer but also outlays on public services such as education,
health, and other provisions, that bene…t all workers, regardless of their
contribution to the …nances of the system. Thus,  is not necessarily a
perfect substitute to private consumption.
       The government budget constraint is given by:
                                        +      
                          =                                                    (7)
                                              

    Note that we assume that immigrants are fully entitled to the welfare
state system. That is, they pay the tax rate  on their labor income
   7
     We do not consider residence-based taxation of capital, according to which each
country taxes its residents on all the capital they own, irrespective of its location.
In this case the capital tax policy does not change the capital tax base. Thus,
tax competition over mobile capital does not a¤ect tax policy. We therefore do
not consider residence-based taxation. Also, residence-based taxation is not readily
enforceable. See Frenkel, Razin and Sadka (1991) for an analysis of various principles
of international taxation.

                                          7
(they own no capital) and receive the bene…t  . All the individuals
(native-born and migrants) have the same preferences. The direct utility
function is
                                   1+
                          =   ¬     + ln( )                 (8)
                                1+ 
where  denotes consumption and   0, is the labor supply elasticity.
Recall that we interpret  not just as a pure cash transfer, but rather
as some public service that creates a utility of ln( ).8
    The budget constraint of a native-born individual is

                        = (1 ¬      )     + (1 + )                      (9)


    (Note that an individual earns a net-of-tax rental price of  on all the
stock of capital she owns, no matter in which country it is employed.)
    Individual utility-maximization yields the following labor supply equa-
tion
                           = ((1 ¬  )  )                         (10)

       The indirect utility function of a native-born individual is given by
                                                         1+
              = ln( ) +       ((1 ¬        )  )         + (1 + )      (11)
                              1+
3.2       A Representative Poor-Host Country

The description of the poor-host country is similar to that of the rich-
host country with a subscript "P" replacing the subscript "R". Also,
emigration occurs from the poor-host to the rich-host country in an
equilibrium (but not vice versa). The supply of migrants from the poor
to the rich country is in…nitely elastic. We further assume that work-
ers from the rest of the world emigrate only to the rich-host countries.
However, the supply of migrants from the rest of the world to the rich
country is not in…nitely elastic, due to various natural impediments. We
replace equations (3R) and (4R) by, accordingly

                             = (1 +  ¬  )                               (3P)
and
                               = 1 +  ¬                                  (4P)
   8
    This interpretation of b and the speci…cation of the utility derived from it ensure
that everyone, including the rich, opts for some positive level of b and is willing to
support some taxation


                                          8
       (Note that there are s rich countries for every poor country.)

    The features that render the R countries are the higher endowment
of capital and the higher productivity, that is:

                                  and                                  (12)

    Endowed with no capital, the indirect utility function of a migrant
is  ¬ (1 + ) .

3.3       Supply of Migrants from the Rest of the World

We assume that there is free migration from the rest of the world (to the
rich-host countries) according to an exogenously given upward supply of
migrants.9 Speci…cally, the number of migrants that wish to emigrate
to the rich-host countries rises with the level of utility (well-being) that
they will enjoy in the host countries. A possible interpretation for this
upward supply is as follows. For each skill type there is a heterogeneity
of some migration cost (due to some individual characteristics such as
age, family size, portability of pensions, etc.). This cost generates a
heterogeneity of reservation utilities, giving rise to an upward sloping
supply of migrants. We denote the supply function of migration by

                                    =  ( )                                 (13)
    where  is the number of migrants and  is the level of utility
enjoyed in the rich-host counties.
    We assume that would-be migrants are indi¤erent with respect to
the identity of the would-be rich-host country. All they care about is
the level of utility they will enjoy. Therefore, in equilibrium, the utility
enjoyed by migrants is the same in all rich-host countries. Denote this
equilibrium cuto¤ utility level by  .
    Being small enough, each rich-host country takes these cuto¤ utility
levels as given for her. That is, each rich-host country behaves as a
"utility - taker", in analogy to the "price taking" behavior of each agent
in perfectly competitive market.
   9
     In Razin and Sadka (2010) we consider a host-source country context and endo-
genise the supply of migrants to a single host country, abstracting from competition
among many host countries over the same pool of migrants. Here we consider an
exogenous supply of immigrants, as we focus on competition among many host coun-
tries.




                                         9
3.4          Fiscal Policy Choice

In this subsection we describe how governments employ …scal policy
tools, taxes and bene…ts, in order to enhance the well-being of its native-
born constituents.
3.4.1        Rich-Host Country

A representative rich-host country determines its …scal policy so as to
maximize the utility of the native-born ( ).

   That is, the …scal policy variables,    and  , are chosen so as
to maximize the indirect utility (given in equation (11)), subject to the
government budget constraint (given in equation (7)), and to the free
migration incentive-compatibility constraints:

                              ¬ (1 + ) =                               (14R)

       and

                      ¬ (1 + ) + (1 + ) =                          (15R)


    We denote by  the reservation utility-level enjoyed by would-be mi-
grants from the rest of the world. Each rich-host country takes this util-
ity level as given ("utility-taking behavior"). Note that migrants from
the rest of the world own no capital. This explains equation (14R).10
Similarly, we denote the utility level enjoyed by would-be migrants from
the poor-host country by  (also taken as given by the rich-host coun-
tries). When a native-born individual of the poor-host country emigrate
to the rich-host country, she enjoys utility of  ¬ (1 + ) + (1 + )
(see equation (11)). This explains equation (15R).11


    In determining its policy, the government takes also into account that
               and  are determined in equilibrium by
equations (1)-(6), (10) and (14R-15R).
  10
     Stricly speaking, the left-hand side of equation (14R) must be smaller than or
equal to the right-hand side of this equation, but as this constraint is binding in
equilibrium, we wrote it as an equality.
  11
     Stricly speaking, the left-hand side of equation (15R) must be smaller than or
equal to the right-hand side of this equation, with strict inequality holding only if
 = 0, which is not the case.


                                         10
   Note that in setting its optimal …scal policy, a representative rich-
host country takes also the net of tax return to capital, , as given.
Denote by an asterisk (*) the levels of the economic variables that ensue
with its optimal …scal policy.
3.4.2          Poor-Host Country


A representative poor-host country similarly determines its …scal policy
so as to maximize the utility of its native-born ( ). That is, the …scal
policy variables,    and  , are chosen so as to maximize the

indirect utility (given in equation (11) with the subscript "P" replacing
the subscript "R"), subject to the government budget constraint (given
in equation (7) with "P" similarly replacing "R"), the free migration
incentive-compatibility constraints

                              ¬ (1 + )                               (14P)

         and

                       ¬ (1 + ) + (1 + ) =                       (15P)

    and equations (1)-(6), (10) (with "P" similarly replacing "R"). Again,
  and  are taken as given. Note that constraint (14P) is not binding
and holds with a strict inequality.

4         Tax - Competition Equilibrium

Each one of the  (respectively, P) identical rich (poor)-host countries
admits  (respectively,  ) migrants from the rest of the world.12
Thus, the aggregate demand for migrants from the rest of the world is
 +   . Therefore, the cuto¤ utilities enjoyed by migrants from
the rest of the world is determined in a Nash-equilibrium, so as to equate
supply and demand:13
    12
      We consider only an equilibrium with a symmetry within each of the two types
of host countries
   13
      Because of the constant returns-to-scale assumption, one may think that there
is no unique determination of the size of internatinal ‡ows (of labor and capital).
But the upward aggregate supply of migrants and the …xed aggregate stock of capital
insure uniqueness in equilibrium (like the case of many …rms with constant-returns-
to-scale technologies in industry equilibrium).



                                        11
                           +   =  ( )                         (16)

    (Note that we have already embedded the market-clearing equation
for migrants from the poor-host to the rich-host countries by employing
the same symbol ( ) to denote both the supply and demand of such

migrants.)
   In equilibrium, we must further have

                                  =                               (17)

   That is, the (reservation) utility of a native-born in the poor-host
country which is taken as given by the rich-host country must indeed be
equal to the utility level enjoyed by this individual. Similarly,

                                 =                               (18)

   That is, the (reservation) utility of a native-born in the rich-host
country which is taken as given by the poor-host country must indeed
be equal to the utility level enjoyed by this individual.
   Also, the world-wide, net-of-tax, rental price of capital,  is deter-
mined so as to equate world demand for capital,  +   , to world
supply,  +   . That is:

                       +   =  +                           (19)

5    Fiscal Coordination


So far we assumed that the host countries compete with each other with
respect to the volume of migrants from the rest of the world, and for
capital. In addition, the rich-host countries compete with each other
with respect to migrants from the poor-host countries.
    There are several forces at play in the tax-competition equilibrium.
First, a host country (rich or poor) gains an infra-marginal bene…t from
each migrant (irrespective from where they come) because of the dimin-
ishing marginal production of labor. Presumably, the rich-host country
stands to gain more than the poor-host country. Second, a similar infra-

marginal gain holds for the receiving (presumably, the poor) with respect
to capital mobility. Third, there is a …scal leakage of capital tax revenues
to the migrants from the rest of the world. These migrants owns no cap-
ital and thus pay no capital tax. But they do share with native-born

                                    12
capital owners the revenues from capital taxation, as they receive the
same demogrant. Fourth, as capital moves only in one direction, from
the rich-host countries to the poor-host countries, it follows that a poor-
host country collects a tax on foreign capital, but pays no demogrants
to its native-born individuals who emigrate to the rich-host countries.

    An alternative, albeit di¢ cult to sustain, is for all of the host coun-
tries to coordinate their …scal policies.14 Naturally, this coordination
comes at the expense of the migrants from the rest of the
    world.

    The outcomes of the coordination depends on how the two types of
host countries decide to divide between them the gains from the coordi-
nation. We consider two extreme cases: (i) All the gains accrue to the
rich-host countries; (ii) all the gains accrue to the poor-host countries.
All other possibilities are in between.

    In coordinated-policy regimes the cuto¤ utility of migrants from the
rest of the world,  , is also controlled by the host countries, taking into
account that migration from the rest of the world takes place according to
the migration equations (14R) and (14P). They set also the common net-
of-tax rental price of capital, , taking into account the capital resource
constraint (19).
    Case (i): In this case the tax-competition equilibrium utility level of
the native-born individual in the poor-host country is taken as given, and
the utility level of the native-born individual in the rich-host country is
maximized.
    Case (ii): In this case the tax-competition equilibrium utility level of
the native-born individual in the rich-host country is taken as given, and
the utility level of the native-born individual in the poor-host country is
maximized.

6        Comparison between Tax Competition and Co-
         ordination
In this section we compare the tax policies that arise under competition
and under coordination. An interesting question is whether competition
    14
     This coordination is among the host countries only, unlike some other coordi-
nation arrangements (such as under the auspices of the WTO) that refer to both
exports and imports of goods and services. The coordination discussed here may be
relevant to unions of countries with independent tax policies such as the EU which
can coordinate a uniform migration and tax policy towards the rest of the world (as
the U.S.A does).

                                        13
can lead to "a race to the bottom" in the sense that it yields lower tax
rates and welfare-state bene…ts, relative to the coordination regimes.
Furthermore, we consider weather the tax race is di¤erent between the
Union rich and the Union poor country, and between labor and capital
taxation. Given the complexity of these issues, we are able to analyze
them only via numerical simulations over a broad range of parameter
values. We also provide some insights into the economic forces at play
that hinges on some …scal externalities.15
    Figure 1-5 depict the results of the numerical simulations. The para-
meter values chosen are such that migration from the rest of the world
goes only to the rich country.16

    [Figures 1-5 Here]
    The qualitative results are similar for case(i) and (ii), and for the sake
of brevity, we report only the results of case(i), where the rich country
keeps all the gains from coordination. Figure 1-2 depict the tax rates
for the rich countries. Somewhat surprisingly for us, the tax rate on
capital is higher under competition than under coordination, upsetting
the "race-to-the-bottom hypothesis".17

    The rationale for this result seems to be quite basic: a …scal external-
ity associated with the volume of migration. There are gains and losses
brought about by migration. A rich country has an infra-marginal gain
from migration because of the diminishing productivity of labor for a
given stock of capital. On the other hand, the native-born population
shares with migrants the tax collected from capital income (recall that
migrants have no capital): the transfer b that the migrants receive is not
…nanced fully by their labor income tax. That is, the capital tax rev-
enues paid by the native-born population "leak" also to the migrants18 .
Each rich country in a competitive regime evidently balances on the
margin the gains and losses from migration. In doing so, each country
takes the well-being of the migrants as given. It ignores the fact that a
tax-migration policy that admits an extra migrant raises the well-being
that must be accorded to migrants by all rich countries, in order to elicit
the migrant to come in (because of the upward-slopping supply of mi-
grants fro the rest of the world). As a result, it o¤ers migrants too high
  15
      In an Appendix we use a related generic model where the implications of the
…scal externality for tax competition are derived analytically.
   16
      Troughout we employ the following parameter values:  = 4;  2
[47 51]; = 033;  = 1;  = 1;  () = ( ) ;  = 3;  = 01;  = 1;  = 05
   17
      See also Razin and Sadka (2012).
   18
      Fiscal leakage e¤ects are analyzed in Razin and Sadka (2001), and Razin, Sadka
and Suwankiri (2011).

                                        14
level of b, levies too high tax on capital, and admits too many migrants.
Indeed, …gure 5 shows that the number of migrants from the rest of the
world is higher in the competitive than in the coordinated regime.
    Figure 3-4 depict the tax rates for the poor countries. First, all tax
rates are the same under competition, and under coordination. This is
because there are no …scal externalities in relation to migration from
the rest of the world, as such migration does not exist. As with resect
to migration from non Union poor to Union rich countries (and among
Union poor and Union rich countries), there is an in…nitely-elastic supply
of migrants. The absence of upward sloping supply of migrants (unlike
the case of migrants from the rest of the world), implies that there are
no …scal externalities.
    Comparing …gures 1 and 2 with 3 and 4 we see that the tax rates on
capital are generally lower in the poor than in the rich countries. The
rational for this result is as follows. Note that a poor country in the
Union does not receive migrants from the rest of the world. Therefore,
unlike the rich country in the Union, it does not have to raise the tax
on capital in order to attract migrants by o¤ering them higher social
bene…ts (b). (Recall that a tax on capital is a more e¤ective tool to
attract migrants than a tax on labor, because migrants own no capital
and therefore are una¤ected by a tax on capital.)19

7        Capital-Mobility E¤ects on Migration


The aforementioned analysis suggests that tax competition does not nec-
essarily lead to smaller governments than what ensues under tax coor-
dination. still, the outcome of competition is ine¢ cient in the context
of tax competition among localities as Dafes (1972) indeed argues. It
should be emphasized nevertheless that we do not question the common
wisdom that greater degree of factor mobility (for instance, because of
globalization) leads under tax competition to smaller governments, see
e.g. Razin and Sadka (2005). But, non of these studies have considered
the e¤ects of migration from the rest of the world on tax competition
within the union. To see this in a simple way consider only the e¤ect of
the mobility of capital on the size of the government.
    For this purpose we compare the models with perfect capital mobility
employed so far with the extreme case of no capital mobility at all. In
    19
    Indeed, even when we allowed the same capital endowment of capital and pro-
ductivity for the rich and the poor countries, still there is a lower tax on capital in
the poor country than in the rich country, as long as we administratively allow only
the rich country to admit migrants from the rest of the world.


                                          15
this case, each country will have its own interest rate ( or  ). That
is, equation (6) does no longer hold. Equation (9) becomes:

               = (1 ¬    )     + [1 ¬ (1 ¬       ) ]               (9’)
   Similarly, equation (11) becomes:

                    1                       1+
   = ln( ) +       ((1 ¬    )  )          + [1 ¬ (1 ¬    ) ]     (11’)
                   1+

   Equations (14R) and (15R) become, respectively:

                      ¬ [1 ¬ (1 ¬      ) ]     =                     (14R’)

   and


     ¬ [1 ¬ (1 ¬    ) ]    + [1 ¬ (1 ¬        ) ]   =         (15R’)


   Similarly, equation (14P) and (15P) become, respectively:

                      ¬ [1 ¬ (1 ¬      ) ]                           (14P’)

   and


     ¬ [1 ¬ (1 ¬     ) ]   + [1 ¬ (1 ¬        ) ]   =         (15P’)


    Equation (19) which is the Union-wide market-clearing equation for
capital is no longer valid. Instead, each country ha its own market
clearing equation, that is:

                         =  and  =                                     (19’)
   We now simulate with the same parameter values as before the tax
competition and tax coordination regime for the capital immobility case.
We compare the values of the …scal policy tools in this case (i.e., no
capital mobility) with the capital mobility case.

    [Figure 6-10 Here]
    Of particular interest is the e¤ect of capital mobility on the degree
of competition within the union over immigrants. Two tax instruments

                                       16
are available in order to attract immigrants from the rest of the world:
labor or capital taxes. Recall that immigrants pay the labor tax because
they bring in their labor skills, but they do not pay the capital tax,
because they bring with them no capital. Indeed, as …gures 7, 9, and
10 demonstrate, the tax on labor is lower and migration ‡ows are larger
in the regime of capital mobility, compared with the no-capital mobility
regime. To compensate for the loss in tax revenue from the fall in the
labor tax rate, the rich country raises the tax on capital when capital is
mobile; see …gure 6.

8         Conclusion

The literature on tax competition with free capital mobility cites sev-
eral reasons for the race-to-the-bottom hypothesis, in the sense that tax
competition may yield signi…cantly lower tax rates than tax coordina-
tion. With a …xed (exogenously given) population that can move from
one …scal jurisdiction to another, the Tiebout paradigm suggests that
tax competition among these jurisdictions yields an e¢ cient outcome,
so that there are no gains from tax coordination.20 This paper pro-
vides some support to the Tiebout hypothesis, in an economy where
immigration from outside is allowed. But the Tiebout framework does
not recognizes externalities. Our approach suggests that when a union of
heterogenous countries (as, for example, the EU) faces an upward supply
of immigrants, tax competition may lead to higher taxes than coordina-
tion, because of a …scal externality. Each rich country in a competitive
regime evidently balances on the margin the gains and losses from mi-
gration. In doing so, each country takes the well-being of the migrants
as given. It ignores the fact that a tax-migration policy that admits an
extra migrant raises the well-being that must be accorded to migrants
by all rich countries, in order to elicit the migrant to come in (because
of the upward-slopping supply of migrants fro the rest of the world).
As a result, it o¤ers migrants too high level of b, levies too high tax
on capital, and admits too many migrants. Indeed, …gure 3 shows that
the number of migrants from the rest of the world is higher in the com-
petitive than in the coordinated regime. The externality (…scal leakage)
causes tax rates (on both labor and capital), and the volume of migra-
tion (of both skill types), to be higher in the competitive regime than
in the coordinated regime. The …scal externality is therefore based on
an upward slopping supply of migrants from the rest of the world and
a relatively low endowment of capital of the migrants. Tax coordina-
tion within the Union internalize this externality with lower taxation on
    20
         See Tiebout (1956).

                                   17
capital and more intensive migration ‡aws.

9    Appendix


In order to shed some light on the analytics of the results consider a
very simple model with only one type of migrants and suppose that the
government owns all the capital. Note that the transfer () depends on
the labor tax ( ) and the number of migrants (). Denote then the
indirect utility function by (  ). In a competitive (uncoordinated)
regime each government solves the following optimization problem:
    maxf g (  )
    s.t.
    (  ) 
    where  is the utility level that must be enjoyed by the migrants and is
considered to be exogenously given by each government. At equilibrium,
we have  =  (), where  is the supply function of migrants. Thus,
a competitive (uncoordinated) equilibrium is given by:

                                + v =0                                (A1)

                               + v  = 0                             (A2)

                                 = ()                              (A3)

    where is the Lagrange multiplier and  is the inverse of  . Note
that there is an upward sloping supply of migrants, so that  0  0. Note
also that (A1) and (A2) imply that

                                =  = 0                              (A4)
   In a coordinated regime, the optimal policy is a solution to the fol-
lowing regime:
   maxf g (  )
   s.t.
   (  ) ()

    Thus, the optimal policy is characterised by

                                +  =0                                (A5)

                           +  ¬  = 0                            (A6)

                                    18
   We can then conclude that

                                 =0                               (A7)

                                  0                             (A8)
    (Recall that   0)
    Denote the competitive equilibrium levels of and  by       and  ,
respectively. At  , we have  = 0 (see equation (A4)). Suppose that
 …rst rises with  until it peaks at the competitive level of  (which
is  ), and then declines. Hence,   0 for           . Therefore, it
follows from (A8) that the coordinated level of  is  . That is, there
are fewer migrants in the coordinated regime than in the competitive
(unregulated) regime.
    Moving from the coordinated to the competitive regime presumably
lowers  . This is because  is higher in the competition regime and
hence, due to the "…scal leakage" e¤ect,  falls below zero. In order
to set  back to zero at the competitive regime, must fall if  is
negative. In this case, the tax rate is lower in the competitive than in
the coordinated regime.




                                  19
10    References

References
 [1] Altshuler, Rosanne, and Timothy J. Goodspeed. (2002). “Follow the
     Leader? Evidence on European and U.S. Tax Competition.”CUNY
     Working Paper.
 [2] Auerbach, A. and P. Oreopoulos (1999), "Analyzing the Economic
     Impact of U.S. Immigration," American Economic Review Papers
     and Proceedings, 89(2), 176-180.
 [3] Barbone, Luca, Bontch-Osmolovsky, Misha and Salman Zaidi
     (2009), "The Foreign-Born Population in the European Union and
     its Contribution to National Tax and Bene…t Systems" Policy Re-
     search Working Paper, the World Bank (April).
 [4] Bhagwati, Jagdish and Gordon Hanson (2009), editors, "Skilled Im-
     migration Today: Prospects, Problems and Policies", Oxford Uni-
     versity Press.
 [5] Boeri, T., Hanson, G. H., & McCormick, B. (Eds.). (2002). "Immi-
     gration Policy and the Welfare System: A Report for the Fondazione
     Rodolfo Debenedetti". Oxford University Press.
 [6] Brueckner, Jan K., and Luz A. Saavedra. (2001). “Do Local Govern-
     ments Engage In Strategic Property-Tax Competition? ” National
     Tax Journal, 54(2): 203–29..
 [7] Brueckner, Jan K. (2003). “Strategic Interaction Among Govern-
     ments: An Overview of Empirical Studies.” International Regional
     Science Review, 26(2): 175–88.
 [8] Case, Anne C., Harvey S. Rosen, and James R. Hines, Jr. (1993).
     “Budget Spillovers and Policy Interdependence: Evidence From the
     States.”Journal of Public Economics, 52(3): 285–307.
 [9] Chirinko, Robert S., and Daniel J. Wilson (2013), "Tax Competition
     among U.S. States: Racing to the Bottom or Riding on a Seesaw? "
     , Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Working Paper Series.
[10] Devereux, Michael P., Ben Lockwood, and Michela Redoano.
     (2008). “Do Countries Compete Over Corporate Tax Rates? ”Jour-
     nal of Public Economics, 92(5-6): 1210-1235.
[11] Dustmann, C., Frattini, T. & Halls, C. (2009), "Assessing the Fiscal
     Costs and Bene…ts of A8 Migration to the UK ", CReAM Discussion
     Paper No. 18/09
[12] Frenkel, J. A., Razin, A., & Sadka, E. (1991). "International taxa-
     tion in an integrated world." The MIT Press.
[13] Hainmueller, Jens, and Michael J. Hiscox (2010), "Attitudes toward
     Highly Skilled and Low-skilled Immigration: Evidence from a Survey


                                   20
       Experiment" American Political Science Review, 104, no 1, Febru-
       ary, 61-84.
[14]   Hanson, Gordon, Scheve, Kenneth, and Matthew J. Slaughter
       (2009) "Individual Preferences over High-Skilled Immigration in the
       United States," in Bhagwati, Jagdish and Gordon Hanson, editors,
       Skilled Immigration Today: Prospects, Problems and Policies, Ox-
       ford University Press.
[15]   Hanson, Gordon, Scheve Kenneth and Matthew J. Slaughter
       (2007), "Public Finance and Individual Preferences over Globaliza-
       tion Strategies" Economics and Politics, 19(1), March, 1-33
[16]   Jasso, Guillermina and Mark R. Rosenzweig (2009) "Selection
       Criteria and the Skill Composition of Immigrants: A Compara-
       tive Analysis of Australian and U.S. Employment Immigration," in
       Bhagwati, Jagdish and Gordon Hanson, editors, Skilled Immigra-
       tion Today: Prospects, Problems and Policies, Oxford University
       Press.
[17]   Kemnitz, A. (2002), "On the political economy of low-skilled immi-
       gration and the welfare state", International Tax and Public Finance
       9, 423 - 434.
[18]   Kleven, H. J., Landais, C., Saez, E., & Schultz, E. A. (2013). "Mi-
       gration and Wage E¤ects of Taxing Top Earners: Evidence from
       the Foreigners’Tax Scheme in Denmark" CEPR Discussion Paper
       Series No. 9410.
[19]   Mayda, A. M. (2006). "Who is against immigration? A cross-
       country investigation of individual attitudes toward immigrants."
       The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(3), 510-530.
[20]   McLure, Charles E., Jr. (2008). “Harmonizing Corporate Income
       Taxes in the European Community: Rationale and Implications.”
       In Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 22, ed. James Poterba,
       151-195. Chicago: University of Chicago Press (for the NBER).
[21]   Mendoza, Enrique G., and Linda L. Tesar, (2005). “Why Hasn’t Tax
       Competition Triggered a Race to the Bottom? Some Quantitative
       Lessons from the EU.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52: 163-
       204.
[22]   Oates, Wallace E. (1972). "Fiscal Federalism." New York: Harcourt
       Brace.
[23]   Ortega, F. (2005), "Immigration Quotas and Skill Upgrading," Jour-
       nal of Public Economics, 89(9-10), 1841-1863.
[24]   Razin, Assaf and Efraim Sadka (2001), "Labor, Capital and Fi-
       nance: International Flows", Cambridge University Press
[25]   Razin, Assaf and Efraim Sadka (2005). "The decline of the welfare
       state: demography and globalization." MIT Press.


                                     21
[26] Razin, Assaf and Efraim Sadka (2010), "Fiscal and Migration Com-
     petition", NBER working paper 16224.
[27] Razin, Assaf and Efraim Sadka (2010), "Tax competition and Mi-
     gration: the Race-to-the-Bottom Hypothesis Revisited", CESifo Eco-
     nomic Studies, 164-180.
[28] Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka, Ben Suwankiri (2011), "Migration and
     the Welfare State: Political-Economy Policy Formation," MIT
     Press.
[29] Smith, James P. and Barry Edmonston, editors, (1997), "The New
     Americans: Economic, Demographic and Fiscal E¤ects of Immigra-
     tion", National Academy Press, Washington, D.C
[30] Tiebout, Charles (1956), "A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures,"
     Journal of Political Economy, 64.
[31] U.S. Department of the Treasury. (2007). “Treasury Conference on
     Business Taxation and Global Competitiveness: Background Pa-
     per.”Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Treasury.




                                  22
