NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NEW EVIDENCE ON TAXES AND THE TIMING OF BIRTH
Sara LaLumia
James M. Sallee
Nicholas Turner
Working Paper 19283
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19283

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

The authors would like to thank Dan Feenberg, Naomi Feldman, Bill Gentry, Damon Jones, Ben Keys,
Janet McCubbin, Karl Scholz and seminar participants at Chicago, Illinois, Michigan, New Hampshire,
Wisconsin and NTA, SOLE, and the NBER for helpful comments. Sallee thanks the Population Research
Center at the University of Chicago for support. The views represented here do not necessarily represent
the views of the U.S. Department of Treasury or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Sara LaLumia, James M. Sallee, and Nicholas Turner. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

New Evidence on Taxes and the Timing of Birth
Sara LaLumia, James M. Sallee, and Nicholas Turner
NBER Working Paper No. 19283
August 2013
JEL No. H24,H26,J13
ABSTRACT
This paper uses data from the universe of tax returns filed between 2001 and 2010 to test whether
parents shift the timing of childbirth around the New Year to gain tax benefits. Filers have an incentive
to shift births from early January into late December, through induction or cesarean delivery, because
child-related tax benefits are not prorated. We find evidence of a positive, but very small, effect of
tax incentives on birth timing. An additional $1000 of tax benefits increases the probability of a late-December
birth by only about 1 percentage point. We argue that the response to tax incentives is small in part
because of confusion about eligibility and delays in the issuance of Social Security Numbers for newborns,
as well as a lack of control over medical procedures on the part of filers with the highest tax values.
We also document a precise shifting of reported self-employment income in response to variation
in incentives from the Earned Income Tax Credit due to childbirth. We estimate that this reporting
response reduces federal revenue by hundreds of millions of dollars per year.

Sara LaLumia
Department of Economics
Williams College
24 Hopkins Hall Drive
Williamstown, MA 01267
sl2@williams.edu
James M. Sallee
Harris School of Public Policy Studies
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
sallee@uchicago.edu

Nicholas Turner
Office of Tax Analysis
U.S. Department of the Treasury
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, D.C. 20220
Nicholas.Turner@treasury.gov

1

Introduction

The aim of this paper is to determine the degree to which parents are willing and able to
shift the timing of the birth of their children in order to gain pecuniary beneﬁts through
the tax system. The incentive to alter birthdates follows from the fact that child-related tax
beneﬁts, which currently exceed $1700 on average, are not prorated based on the birthdate of
a newborn. Thus, a child born on December 31 of a tax year qualiﬁes for the full year’s worth
of beneﬁts.1 As a result, parents who expect to have a birth close to the New Year have an
incentive to make sure that the birth occurs in December rather than January, perhaps by
scheduling labor induction or delivery by cesarean section.
To many non-economists, the notion that parents strategically alter the timing of childbirth for tax beneﬁts is peculiar, but it is accepted as a sensible, indeed likely, hypothesis
by most in the profession for several reasons. First, tax economists have demonstrated that
people are highly responsive to tax incentives in myriad contexts, especially when the beneﬁts are large and discrete and especially when individuals need only change the date of an
event or transaction in order to qualify for a beneﬁt.2
Second, ample evidence demonstrates that the timing of birth can be manipulated. For
example, there are substantially fewer births per day on weekends than on weekdays, which
apparently reﬂects some combination of patient and physician preferences. Births surged
in the ﬁrst week of January 2000 in both the U.S. and Australia (Gans and Leigh 2009b),
which implies that parents wanted to have “millennium babies.” In Taiwan, cesarean births
are more likely on days traditionally thought to be auspicious and less likely on days thought
to be inauspicious (Lo 2003), and cesarean births are avoided in the lunar month of July,
which is considered an unlucky time to have surgery (Lin, Xirasagar and Tung 2006).
Third, prior research has in fact found a strong link between the tax values garnered by
particular children and the probability that they were born in late December rather than early
January. The ﬁrst paper to explore this issue, Dickert-Conlin and Chandra (1999), found
that a 10 percent increase in child-related tax beneﬁts (from $401 to $441 in 1996 dollars)
increased the probability of a December birth by 1.4 percentage points (from 51.6% to 53%)
in a sample of births taking place in the two weeks surrounding New Year’s Eve. Gans and
1
Parents potentially face a trade-oﬀ of lost tax beneﬁts when the child ages out of eligibility in 17 or more
years in the future. Accounting for the expected present value of those beneﬁts, the gains to having a child
in late December remain substantial. Nevertheless, parents with low discount rates or those who forecast an
increase in tax values over time may be less responsive to current incentives.
2
Discrete beneﬁts, or tax “notches,” are considered in Kleven and Waseem (2013); Ramnath (2013); Sallee
and Slemrod (2012). Slemrod (1992) argues that responses to taxes are large when preferential treatment
can be obtained via intertemporal shifting, which is born out in many examples, including capital gains
realizations (Burman, Clausing and O’Hare 1994), changes to deductibility of donations (Ackerman and
Auten 2011), and even the timing of death (Kopczuk and Slemrod 2003).

2

Leigh (2009a) ﬁnd a smaller, but still substantial, delay in birth timing in response to a one
time pecuniary bonus given to children born after a certain date in Australia. Neugart and
Ohlsson (2013) also ﬁnd a large birth timing response to a German tax incentive.3
Taken together, this evidence suggests that birthdates are manipulable and that they
respond strongly to pecuniary incentives. It follows that one may expect to see increases in
the total amount of strategic birth timing if tax values rise. Aggregate data fail to support
this conjecture, however, because average tax values of children have risen substantially in
recent years but shifting of births into December has been constant. Figure 1 shows the
mean tax value of a child in the United States by year and the ratio of the number of births
that take place in the last week of December to the number that take place in the ﬁrst week
of January. Even when removing the millennium, there is a slight negative relationship in
the data, which casts doubt on the strength of tax eﬀects on birth timing.
In this paper, we reinvestigate the relationship between tax incentives and the timing of
birth using a data set superior in several ways to that utilized in prior research. We conclude
that there is in fact tax-motivated birth timing, but that the eﬀect of taxes is quite small.
The data suggest several reasons why tax eﬀects may be limited. First, not all tax ﬁlers
appear to understand that children born at the end of a year qualify for beneﬁts. Around
5% of parents of late December newborns fail to include their newborn on their tax return
even though they ﬁle, which costs them $1700 on average in foregone tax beneﬁts. This
underclaiming is likely due to a lack of information, but we show that lags in the granting
of Social Security Numbers for newborns (which are required on the tax form) may also be
partly responsible. Second, birth timing requires the cooperation of physicians, and parents
who stand to gain the most in terms of taxes—low-income ﬁlers likely eligible for the Earned
Income Tax Credit (EITC)—appear to be less able to secure the necessary “supply side”
cooperation.
While we conclude that the response of birth timing to tax incentives is quite small, we
do document a large reporting response to birth-related tax incentives. Households on the
phase-in portion of the EITC have an incentive to report additional income because it raises
the value of their tax credit. Because the EITC is a function of the number of children
3

Not all studies ﬁnd a large response of birth timing to potential beneﬁts. Evidence related to tax
incentives in Japan is mixed (Kureishi and Wakabayashi 2008), and Dickert-Conlin and Elder (2010) ﬁnd
no evidence that U.S. parents shift births forward to occur just before school eligibility cutoﬀ dates, despite
the reduced child care costs associated with sending a child to kindergarten a year earlier. Maghakian and
Schulkind (2011) examine tax incentives in the U.S. and ﬁnd a small eﬀect, a result which we discuss in detail
below. There is also a related literature investigating the responsiveness of overall fertility to tax beneﬁts.
Whittington, Alm and Peters (1990) suggest that a $100 increase in the tax value of the personal exemption
increases the fertility rate by 2.1 to 4.2 births per 1,000 women at risk. Crump, Goda and Mumford (2011)
update and extend this analysis, however, and ﬁnd a much smaller eﬀect that is restricted to timing over
the life cycle rather than an eﬀect on total fertility.

3

in a household, whether a child is born in late December or early January will change the
location of a particular household’s EITC schedule. Among those reporting self-employment
income (which is not subject to third-party veriﬁcation and is therefore easily falsiﬁed),
the income reported by parents of December and January newborns diverges sharply, with
each group demonstrating signiﬁcant bunching around their respective EITC-maximizing
levels. The EITC literature has previously shown similar bunching of self-employment income
(Saez 2010; Chetty, Friedman and Saez Forthcoming), but our novel identiﬁcation strategy
allows us to isolate a short-run response that better distinguishes reporting responses from
changes in labor supply.4 We argue below that this reporting response most likely implies
tax evasion—though we cannot deﬁnitively rule out all forms of tax avoidance—and estimate
that this evasion costs the tax system around $750 million per year.
For our analysis, we use micro data from the universe of tax returns ﬁled between 2001
and 2010, augmented with data from the Social Security Administration that provides children’s exact date of birth. These data provide us with a large number of births (over 800,000),
accurate information about the tax value of children, and precise information about household income. In our preferred speciﬁcation, we ﬁnd that an additional $1,000 of tax savings
is associated with a 1 percentage point increase in the probability that a birth occurs in the
last week of December.
Our estimates are substantially smaller than those in Dickert-Conlin and Chandra (1999),
who use a sample of 170 births and must impute tax values from self-reported income and
demographic information from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. We estimate
that a $1,000 increase in tax savings is necessary to generate the same amount of shifting
that Dickert-Conlin and Chandra (1999) ﬁnd will be induced by a $33 increase. Our results
are similar in magnitude to those reported in Maghakian and Schulkind (2011). They use
publicly available birth data from the U.S. Vital Statistics between 1990 and 2000. These
data cover all U.S. births and report method of delivery, but they lack any information on
income and they include only the month of birth, not the exact day. The authors therefore
must use data aggregated to the monthly level and impute child-related tax beneﬁts using
Census data on individuals with the same demographic variables as those in the birth certiﬁcate records, both of which generate measurement error that may drive down estimated
eﬀects. Our tax return data allow for more precise estimate of tax values for each individual
child.5
4
Chetty et al. (Forthcoming) compare the earnings of ﬁlers observed in the year before and year of birth,
without separating the sample by month or exact day of birth. They ﬁnd that, in geographic areas with high
awareness of the EITC, both self-employment and wage income are adjusted in credit-maximizing ways over
the course of the year of birth. Our analysis is closely related but relies on comparison of ﬁlers experiencing
births just days apart.
5
On the other hand, the use of tax return data does raise the possibility of bias resulting from misreporting

4

Our paper proceeds as follows. In section 2 we outline our empirical strategy. Section 3
describes our tax return data and details our estimation of the tax value of children. Section
4 presents our main results, and section 5 investigates the sensitivity of these results to
various potential sources of bias. We then discuss reasons why the tax eﬀect might be small
in section 6, and the ﬁnal section concludes.

2

Empirical Strategy

Our aim is to determine whether or not parents strategically alter the timing of childbirth
in response to tax incentives, and, if so, to quantify the magnitude of the response. Ideally,
we would relate randomly varied tax incentives to the probability of strategic timing, but we
do not have random variation and we do not know whether a birth occurred on a particular
date by choice or by chance. Instead, we focus on a sample of births that take place close
to New Year’s Eve, which therefore plausibly could have been shifted into December for tax
reasons, and ask if the probability of a December birth is systematically related to tax values.
Variation in tax values is a complicated function of household structure, income, year and
state of residence. Thus, depending on the control variables used, we can isolate several
diﬀerent types of identifying variation and look for robustness across related speciﬁcations.
We construct TaxValue, the reduction in total income tax liability caused by the addition
of a dependent child to a return, by taking the diﬀerence between a ﬁler’s estimated income
tax liability with and without a marginal dependent. In our baseline speciﬁcation, we focus
on the set of all births that take place within one week of New Year’s Eve, and ask whether
or not the probability that a child was born in December is related to that child’s TaxValue.
Regressions take the form:
DecBirthi = α + βT axV aluei + γXi + i ,

(1)

where DecBirth is a dummy coded as one if the birth takes place in December, and X is
a vector of controls. If parents with greater tax beneﬁts from a December birth are more
likely to have children in December, then β will be positive. This setup closely follows the
strategy developed in Dickert-Conlin and Chandra (1999).
The birth of a child triggers eligibility for a number of tax provisions. The availability
and generosity of these provisions depend on a taxpayer’s income, with variation over time
of income to the IRS that is correlated with tax beneﬁts. This is similar to a point made in Blank, Charles
and Sallee (2009), which argues that administrative records about age at marriage from before 1980 are less
accurate than retrospective survey data because individuals who were too young to marry legally had an
incentive to misinform public oﬃcials. We address such concerns here in our study of EITC compliance.

5

as a result of policy changes. In most cases the birth of a child allows a parent to claim
an additional dependent exemption. Exemptions are generally worth more to high-income
taxpayers who face higher marginal tax rates, although personal exemptions were phased
out at high levels of adjusted gross income (AGI) in tax years 1991-2009. For an unmarried
taxpayer, a ﬁrst birth can move the taxpayer from single ﬁling status to the more generous
head of household ﬁling status with a larger standard deduction and wider brackets. For a
low-income taxpayer, adding a child can make one eligible for a more generous EITC. This
delivers a larger beneﬁt in the 2000s than in the 1980s, thanks to legislative expansions of the
EITC in the intervening years. Beginning in 1998, a new child can make a ﬁler newly eligible
for the Child Tax Credit. Nonrefundable through 2000, this credit was initially of little value
to low-income ﬁlers. It is also of little value to high-income ﬁlers, due to AGI-based phaseout
rules. The introduction of a refundable portion (known as the additional child tax credit)
and expansions in credit generosity throughout the 2000s increased its value to low-income
ﬁlers.
The net eﬀect of these child-related provisions is shown in ﬁgure 2 for two years, 1986
and 2005. These years are the midpoints of the time periods analyzed in the Dickert-Conlin
and Chandra paper and in our paper. We consider a hypothetical married couple living in
Virginia and claiming their ﬁrst child. In both years, the EITC creates a bump in TaxValue
at low levels of AGI. In 1986, for incomes above the EITC range, tax savings rise steadily with
income. By 2005, because of income-related phaseouts of various child-related tax beneﬁts,
ﬁlers with high levels of AGI do not have particularly high tax savings from claiming a ﬁrst
dependent. In fact, the real value of claiming a ﬁrst child is essentially stagnant between
1986 and 2005 for those with real AGI above $130,000.
Taxation is not the only reason that individuals may prefer to give birth in late December
instead of early January. Parents and doctors may wish to avoid being in the hospital
and delivering a child during the New Year’s holiday. If parents who have a strong nonpecuniary preference for a December birth, or who have lower costs of shifting their birth
(perhaps because they have already decided to induce or have a c-section), also happen to
have particularly high (or particularly low) tax values, our estimates could be biased upwards
(or downwards).
To avoid such bias, we want to include in X, our vector of controls, anything that might
be correlated with strategic birth timing and tax values. Women who have had a c-section
are very likely to have a c-section for subsequent births.6 Because strategic shifts in the
timing of birth are less costly for deliveries that are already intended to be c-sections, we
6

In 2003, 88.7% of women giving birth after a prior cesarean birth had another cesarean delivery. For
comparison, 23.6% of women giving birth for the ﬁrst time had a c-section (Menacker 2005).

6

might expect higher parity births to be more likely to end up in December, even without
a tax motivation. Thus, we control for the number of prior own child dependents claimed.
Women who are older are also more likely to have c-sections or induced delivery because of
medical complications, so we control ﬂexibly for maternal age.7
We suspect that higher income individuals are more likely to have control over their medical procedures and to schedule deliveries, in part because low-income individuals are less
likely to have health insurance and c-section rates are somewhat lower among the uninsured
(Aron, Gordon, DiGiuseppe, Harper and Rosenthal 2000). We account for this by controlling
for a smooth polynomial or spline in income, which nevertheless leaves some residual relationship between taxable income and tax values as identifying variation. Alternatively, we
can control very ﬂexibly for taxable income and use the remaining sources of variation—from
birth order, geography and time—for identiﬁcation.
Geography provides useful variation in tax values that stems from state tax policy diﬀerences, but it may also introduce spurious correlation because medical practices often diﬀer
across locations, hospitals and individual physicians (Baicker, Buckles and Chandra 2006).
To account for geographic diﬀerences, we run speciﬁcations that include state ﬁxed eﬀects,
zip code ﬁxed eﬀects, or either set of ﬁxed eﬀects interacted with year. Finally, the average
tax beneﬁt of children is changing over time, and medical practices may also follow secular
trends. To account for this, we can control for year ﬁxed eﬀects, or year ﬁxed eﬀects interacted with other variables. Including year ﬁxed eﬀects isolates the tax value variation to
within-year variation, but, as detailed below, we also conduct other speciﬁcations that allow
changes to the tax code to identify the coeﬃcient of interest.

3

Data Description

3.1

Data Sources and Sample Restrictions

Our data are drawn from the universe of tax returns ﬁled between 2001 and 2010, supplemented with information from the Social Security Administration. We begin with a Social
Security Administration dataset, made available to the U.S. Department of Treasury, which
reports the date of birth and Social Security Number (SSN) for all SSN-holders in the United
States. We identify children born between 2001 and 2010, and we search for all tax returns
that include these children’s SSNs (as dependents) in the year of their births. Approximately
7

Among women classiﬁed as low risk (ﬁrst-time mothers with full-term singleton births), the rate of
cesarean delivery in 2003 was 20.9% for women under 30 years, 32.7% for women ages 30 to 39, and 46.8%
for women ages 40-54 (Menacker 2005).

7

86% of the newborns in the SSA data are claimed in the year of birth. This is a close match
to the estimate of Orszag and Hall (2003) that 87% of households ﬁled a return in 1999.
We impose a number of restrictions to arrive at our ﬁnal estimation sample. First, we
limit the sample to births that occur between December 25 and January 7. Next, we keep
only those cases in which the primary ﬁler claiming the newborn also ﬁled a tax return in the
year prior to the newborn’s birth. We do this to preserve symmetry between our December
and January samples. For a child born in January, to calculate the tax beneﬁt that would
have been realized if that child had been born in December, we need tax information in the
year before the birth actually occurred. Thus, to appear in our sample, a ﬁler claiming a
January-born child must appear in the year of birth and the year before. To avoid diﬀerential
selection of households that may not ﬁle in all years, we limit our December sample in a
parallel way, dropping ﬁlers who claimed December-born children if they did not ﬁle a tax
return in the prior year.
Next, we keep only returns that used a ﬁling status of single, head of household, or
married ﬁling jointly in the year of birth and in the prior year. This eliminates a small
number who were married ﬁling separately. We are especially concerned about controlling
for the mother’s demographic characteristics, so we drop returns on which there is no female
taxpayer between the ages of 16 and 50 listed as either the primary or secondary taxpayer
in the year of the birth. Adoptive parents likely have little control over the precise timing
of a child’s birth, so we drop cases in which an adoption credit is claimed in the year of
the newborn’s birth. To ensure that we are able to control for geographic factors, we drop
returns ﬁled by U.S. citizens living outside of the 50 states and the District of Columbia.
Finally, we drop data from January 2001 and December 2010, so that our data represent
paired December and January samples that each span the same New Year.

3.2

Estimating Tax Values

We use the National Bureau of Economic Research’s TAXSIM program to compute TaxValue, the tax savings associated with a December birth. This calculation is straightforward
for December births. We compute the ﬁling unit’s actual tax liability as a function of income,
ﬁling status, and actual number of dependents claimed. We then compute the counterfactual
liability, as if the birth occurred in January, by subtracting one from the number of dependents (or subtracting more than one when we observe a multiple birth) and by changing
head of household ﬁling status to single if the newborn is the only dependent child.8
8

We do observe some taxpayers claiming a dependent exemption for a newborn while simultaneously
using single ﬁling status. These people may be leaving money on the table, although there are situations in
which a parent is entitled to claim a dependent exemption for her child but is not entitled to use the head

8

The procedure for calculating TaxValue is slightly diﬀerent in the case of January births.
If a child is born in January of year t, we are interested in the tax value that would have been
realized had the child been born in the previous month, December of year t − 1. Thus, we
identify January births using year t tax returns, but we do not use those returns to calculate
the tax value. Instead, we locate the year t − 1 return of the ﬁler and compute that year’s
tax liability using TAXSIM. Then, we add one dependent to the tax return (or more in the
case of multiple births), changing those with a single ﬁling status to head of household, and
calculate the counterfactual tax liability. As with December births, the diﬀerence in the two
tax liabilities is our estimate of TaxValue.
Ninety-three percent of the ﬁlers in our sample have a constant ﬁling status across the
two years of returns, but the remainder experience some change. For December births, we
simply use the ﬁling status and household structure as it appears in the year of the child’s
birth, which is also the year for which the tax value is computed. The one exception is
the switch between head of household ﬁling status and single ﬁling status in the case of a
ﬁrst-born child, as described above. We must make a more diﬃcult choice about January
births when ﬁling status changes. For consistency and clarity, we have assumed in all cases
that a child born in January would have been claimed by the primary tax ﬁler had the child
been born in December. For example, the most common transition is the case where the
primary ﬁler was single or head of household in the year prior to the child’s birth and married
ﬁling jointly in the year of the birth. Among January births, 4.5% of our sample ﬁts this
description. In these cases, we assume that the person who is the primary ﬁler in the birth
year would have claimed the child. Our assumption is imperfect because it is possible that
if the child had been born in December then the ﬁler would have accelerated their change
in marital status into the prior tax year, or then the child would have been claimed by the
secondary ﬁler.

3.3

Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for our sample of births occurring in the last week
of December or the ﬁrst week of January. After applying the restrictions described above,
we have data on 819,850 births, of which 405,252 (49.4%) take place in December. In our
data, December mothers have slightly higher income and attachment to the labor force.
December mothers have an average AGI of approximately $69,500 while January mothers
have an average AGI of approximately $67,400. The share of December mothers with positive
of household ﬁling status. In order to ﬁle as head of household, an individual must satisfy the household
maintenance test, by providing over half the costs of maintaining a home. There is no household maintenance
test that must be satisﬁed in order to claim a dependent exemption (Holtzblatt and McCubbin 2003).

9

wage income in the tax year prior to the newborn’s birth is 76.8, while the corresponding
value for January mothers is 75.4.9
A comparison of sample means shows that December births have slightly higher average
tax savings than January births, a value of $1,779 versus $1,740. Figure 3 oﬀers further
information on this point. It plots the average TaxValue by day of birth for all days in
December and January. The average tax savings for births occurring in the last few days of
December are higher than the average tax savings for births occurring in the ﬁrst few days
of January. This is consistent with tax-motivated shifting of births. But, it could also be
explained by high-tax-value parents choosing to strategically move births forward to avoid
the New Year’s Day holiday; the pattern of tax values preceding Christmas is similar to the
pattern preceding New Year’s Day. We return to this point in section 5.

3.4

Comparison of Tax Returns and Vital Statistics

Not everyone ﬁles a tax return, so not all newborns appear in tax return data. To understand
how that may inﬂuence our analysis, we compare the tax data to the birth certiﬁcate database
from the National Vital Statistics System. The number of births that appear in our tax data
track the number of births in the Vital Statistics data closely over time—the correlation
between monthly raw counts of births is .93 in the raw data and .92 in our restricted sample.
Our data also closely match the weekly cycle of births, where about 10% of births occur on
each weekend day and 16% of births occur on each day of the work week.
Despite the high overall correlation across data sources, the data sets diverge in a seasonal
pattern. Figure 4 plots two ratios. In both ratios, the denominator is the total number of
births recorded in Vital Statistics in a particular month. The numerator for the upper line
is the total number of newborns observed in tax return data with birthdates in a particular
month, and the numerator in the lower line is the total number of such newborns in our ﬁnal
estimation sample, after imposing selection restrictions. In both cases, the ratio of tax-based
newborn counts to Vital Statistics counts is always smallest in December.10 A simple t-test
rejects equality of these ratios across December and January.
Figure 5 repeats this analysis for several income categories. Because the Vital Statistics
9

To facilitate comparison of our results with those of Dickert-Conlin and Chandra (1999), we construct
matching variables where possible, including mother’s wage income (from W2 records) and an urban residence
dummy (using the Rural Urban Commuting Area classiﬁcation established by the Economic Research Service
of the United States Department of Agriculture). We do not have measures of mother’s race or education,
but those variables are not particularly strong predictors of birth timing in Dickert-Conlin and Chandra
(1999).
10
Part of the seasonal pattern in Figure 4 is due to variation in demographic characteristics of mothers,
which has been shown by Buckles and Hungerman (Forthcoming) to vary seasonally. Seasonal variation in
demographics, however, cannot explain a discontinuity at the New Year.

10

data has no income information, the ﬁgure plots four series that have the same denominator
(total Vital Statistics birth counts by month) but have diﬀerent numerators (income-speciﬁc
tax-based birth counts by month). This ﬁgure reveals that the discontinuity at the turn of
the year is highly pronounced for low-income ﬁlers and is not visible for high-income ﬁlers.
Below, we demonstrate that the January discontinuity is not present for one-year old children
and that we can eliminate the gap in December to January birth ratios from the two data
sources by incorporating information about one-year-olds, instead of newborns.

4

Birth Timing Results

Our main empirical strategy is to run regressions of a December birth dummy on the tax
savings that a ﬁler would experience from claiming an additional dependent child and a set
of controls. Table 2 presents results from a number of such regressions estimated as linear
probability models. A matching Table A1 that uses a logit model is included in the appendix.
Marginal eﬀects from logit estimation are very similar, which is not surprising because the
predicted probabilities for all observations are close to 0.5.
Column 1 shows the most parsimonious speciﬁcation. The only right-hand side variable
is the tax savings associated with a December birth. This speciﬁcation uses tax variation due
to income, birth order, marital status, geography and time period to identify the coeﬃcient.
The estimate of 0.0098 indicates that a $1,000 increase in the tax value of a child is associated
with approximately a one percentage point increase in the probability of a December birth,
which is a 2% change on the base probability of 0.494. This is a small eﬀect, and it is
precisely estimated.
Column 2 adds controls for mother’s earnings, marital status, a dummy for whether
the child is the ﬁrst- or second-born, AGI, urban residence, mother’s age and year ﬁxed
eﬀects. This is the speciﬁcation closest to Dickert-Conlin and Chandra (1999), diﬀering only
in our exclusion of mother’s education and race, which are not available in our data set.
This increases the tax coeﬃcient slightly, to 0.0134. In sharp contrast, Dickert-Conlin and
Chandra estimate a 0.344 marginal eﬀect of a $1,000 increase in tax savings, which is 24
times larger than our estimate. Our estimates are quite close to the ﬁndings of Maghakian
and Schulkind (2011), whose analysis indicates a marginal eﬀect of around .016.
One possible source of the discrepancy between Dickert-Conlin and Chandra (1999) and
our results is the changing correlation between income and tax values, primarily due to legislative expansions to the EITC and Child Tax Credit. Income and TaxValue were positively
correlated in the earlier time period and are now negatively correlated. This changing relationship is evident in Figure 2, which shows tax values as a function of income for a sample
11

household structure in 1986 (the midpoint of their sample period) and 2005 (the midpoint
of our sample period).
Higher income parents are likely more able to shift births because they are more likely
to have private insurance (as opposed to Medicaid) and be in a position to dictate care.
Income may also be correlated with non-pecuniary reasons for birth timing (such as holiday
“convenience” eﬀects) if those eﬀects vary across types of medical providers. Thus, if income
is not adequately controlled for, tax value regressions may be subject to spurious correlation.
Because of their sample size, Dickert-Conlin and Chandra (1999) are forced to control for
income only linearly (and as an interaction with tax values), but a linear ﬁt will obviously
have trouble matching the tax value pattern because the EITC creates a signiﬁcant nonlinearity in the schedule. Thus the positive correlation between income and birth timing
might lead to an upward bias in their estimates. In contrast, because of our larger data set,
we are able to control for income quite generally and alleviate this source of bias. Moreover,
when we match their speciﬁcation, our estimates may not be subject to the same upward
bias because income and tax values are negatively correlated in the time period we analyze.
Weighing against this explanation, however, is the fact that our TaxValue coeﬃcient
estimates remain very small if we assign tax values based on the tax code from the earlier
time period. We have experimented with randomly altering the tax years associated with
our data, drawing hypothetical tax years uniformly from the years 1979–1993 included in
the Dickert-Conlin and Chandra (1999) sample. We use TAXSIM to re-estimate tax savings
for these earlier tax years, holding constant all other characteristics of our sample. The idea
is to reproduce any spurious correlation between income and birth timing that existed in
the earlier period. This exercise fails to generate inﬂated coeﬃcients, which casts doubt on
whether the changing correlation of income and tax values can explain the diﬀerence between
our results and those of Dickert-Conlin and Chandra (1999).
Additional columns in Table 2 probe the sensitivity of our results to alternative speciﬁcations. The next several columns control more ﬂexibly for maternal age (replacing the
linear age term with a full set of age dummies) and for AGI (replacing the linear AGI control
with a 5-piece spline). These choices are motivated by the nonlinear relationships between
maternal age, income, and the probability of cesarean birth. We also switch to a more ﬂexible set of controls for birth order, including separate dummies for whether a child is the
ﬁrst-, second-, third-, or fourth-born. Column 4 includes state ﬁxed eﬀects and column 5
substitutes zip code ﬁxed eﬀects for state ﬁxed eﬀects. The goal in both cases is to account
for time-invariant spatial variation in medical practices that might inﬂuence the probability
of a late-December birth and that is spuriously correlated with tax values. The estimated
coeﬃcient on TaxValue changes very little. It is a precisely estimated 0.0154 in column 4
12

and a precisely estimated 0.0153 in column 5.
We are particularly concerned about whether a relationship between income and nontax reasons to schedule a birth might be biasing the TaxValue coeﬃcient. This concern
motivates the substitution of a 5-piece spline in AGI for a linear AGI control, but even this
speciﬁcation may not be suﬃciently ﬂexible. Column 6 replaces the 5-piece AGI spline with
dummies for each $10,000 AGI bin. This has little impact on the TaxValue coeﬃcient, which
is now 0.0168.
Column 7 goes further in controlling for income and demographics and relying on policy
variation for identiﬁcation. In that speciﬁcation, year dummies are dropped, and the $10,000
AGI category variables are all interacted with marital status and dummies for ﬁrst or second
births, thereby controlling ﬂexibly for household structure and income, which determine tax
values within a given year. The goal of this speciﬁcation is to isolate the tax variation that
comes from policy changes over time. Variation related to a ﬁler’s household structure and
income is removed. Again, the TaxValue coeﬃcient changes very little. It is equal to 0.0153
in this speciﬁcation. In sum, our tax data provide evidence that in recent years there is a
small, but statistically signiﬁcant, correlation between tax beneﬁts and birth timing, which
is stable across a variety of speciﬁcations.
The coeﬃcients on other controls are generally stable across the speciﬁcations shown in
Table 2. There is strong evidence of a relationship between birth parity and the probability
of a late-December birth. First- and second-born children are persistently less likely than
higher birth order children to be born in late December. Married mothers and mothers with
higher levels of wage income have lower probabilities of late-December births.
If the positive correlation between tax values and December birth probability reﬂects a
causal eﬀect of taxes on birth timing, then we would expect to see a stronger relationship
among people who are more likely to have scheduled deliveries, which lowers the cost of
shifting. That is, for someone who is already planning to have an elective c-section or
induction, it is relatively easy to shift the date of that delivery. Tax returns provide no
information about the method of delivery, so we cannot limit the sample to cesarean and
induced deliveries. However, there is substantial variation across states and over time in
aggregate c-section rates. In addition, mothers who have already had a c-section are much
more likely to have a c-section in subsequent births. Thus, mothers who already have children
may be more sensitive to tax values, as many will intend to schedule delivery even before
considering tax beneﬁts. Wealthier people are also more likely to have c-sections and to
schedule delivery.11
Table 3 uses these sources of variation to see if the birth dates of children who were more
11

We document higher c-section rates among the socioeconomically advantaged in section 6.2.

13

likely to be delivered by c-section show a greater responsiveness to tax incentives. Column 1
of Table 3 adds the annual state-level c-section rate to our baseline analysis.12 This has very
little eﬀect on the TaxValue coeﬃcient or on other terms. Column 2 adds the interaction of
TaxValue and the c-section rate. The TaxValue coeﬃcient is no longer statistically diﬀerent
from zero, while the interaction term is positive. This suggests that mothers are more likely
to consider the tax beneﬁts of a December birth in making decisions about birth scheduling
when they are more likely to have a c-section.
Column 3 includes an interaction of TaxValue with AGI. If higher-income parents have
more control over their medical care, we expect a positive interaction. On the other hand,
lower-income parents might attach a great value to each dollar of tax beneﬁts, making the
interaction term negative. These appear to cancel out, as the T axV alue · AGI interaction
term is small and statistically insigniﬁcant. More evidence on the relationship between
income and tax-motivated birth timing is shown in Column 4, which restricts the sample
to those with AGI above $100,000. Here, tax savings of $1000 is associated with a 2.1
percentage point increase in the probability of a late-December birth. Column 5 considers
mothers who claim at least one child older than the newborn. When ﬁrst-born children
are excluded, an additional $1000 of tax savings is associated with a 2.2 percentage point
increase in the probability of a late-December birth. Table 3 is generally supportive of the
hypothesis that mothers with a higher propensity to give birth via c-section exhibit a greater
responsiveness of birth timing to taxes.

5

Potential Confounding Eﬀects

As another check on the plausibility of our results, we repeat our analysis for windows of
diﬀerent widths around New Year’s Day. It is easier to shift a birth by a day or two than
by a week or more for medical reasons. Thus, we would expect to see less evidence of shifts
in birth timing as we widen the sample window around the New Year. Figure 6 shows the
coeﬃcients on the T axV alue term from 31 separate regressions, each of which expands the
sample window to include a diﬀerent number of days.13 The ﬁrst regression, represented by
the left-most point in the ﬁgure, includes only births occurring within one day of the turn
of the year (that is, only December 31 and January 1). Moving rightward in the ﬁgure, the
12
To do so, we collected data on annual state-level c-section rates from the Births: Final Data series of
the National Vital Statistics Reports. In 2001 the cesarean delivery rate ranges from a low of 17.2% in Utah
to a high of 29.9% in Louisiana. All states experience an increase over the next decade. By 2010 the low is
22.6% in Arkansas and the high is 39.7% in Louisiana.
13
These regressions include demographic controls, a full set of maternal age dummies, a 5-piece spline in
AGI, and year dummies.

14

sample size gradually increases. The rightmost point is for a regression including all births
from December 1 to January 31. As expected, the positive relationship between tax savings
and the probability of a December birth is largest in very narrow windows around the turn
of the year and gradually falls as the time frame increases. The decline in the coeﬃcient,
however, is not as fast as would be consistent with a zero eﬀect of taxes on selection into
birth dates more than two weeks away from the New Year. This suggests that our baseline
estimate may be biased upwards by one or more of several potential confounding factors.
To explore this possibility further, we repeat our analysis on a placebo group of newborns
for whom we expect there to be no tax-motivated shifting of births. Speciﬁcally, we use a
sample drawn from the ﬁrst week of December and last week of January. Children born
in these windows were born at least 24 days from the New Year, making it very unlikely
that tax-motivated birth timing was relevant in these cases. That is, children born at the
beginning of December are not likely to have been born then because their parents induced
labor for tax reasons. Similarly, children born at the end of January likely had due dates too
far from New Year’s Eve to make strategic birth timing in December feasible or medically
safe. Thus, we would expect to ﬁnd no correlation between taxes and December births in
this sample if the only reason that December and January births diﬀer in tax values was
strategic timing.
In Table 4, the ﬁrst row of column 2 shows the TaxValue coeﬃcient in a regression
predicting December birth for the placebo sample. (The ﬁrst row of column 1 repeats the
corresponding result for our main sample, from column 4 of Table 2.) For the placebo sample,
we ﬁnd a statistically signiﬁcant coeﬃcient on TaxValue. An additional $1000 of tax savings
is associated with a 0.5 percentage point increase in the probability of a late-December birth,
which is one-third the size of our main estimate.14 In the next two subsections, we show that
this placebo eﬀect is largely explained by strategic reporting of self-employment income.

5.1

Strategic Reporting of Self-Employment Income

The tax savings associated with a late-December birth depends almost entirely on income
realized before the child is born. There is no reason to expect labor income of late-December
and early-January parents to diverge in the months leading up to birth. Pregnancy and
anticipated changes in household composition might alter preferences for leisure prior to a
birth, but any such eﬀect will be similar for the two groups. In addition, as long as birth
timing is at least partly unpredictable, during much of the year leading up to birth the
parents in our sample will be uncertain about whether or not their children will be born
14

We have estimated similar placebo eﬀects for all of the speciﬁcations in Table 2, and all estimates are
positive, statistically signiﬁcant, and in the range of 0.004 to 0.007.

15

in December. Labor supply is likely to change discontinuously at the time a child is born.
However, December parents in our sample have at most one week’s worth of post-birth labor
supply choices aﬀecting the annual labor income used in computing TaxValue. This aﬀords
December parents little time to ﬁne-tune their real labor supply choices in such a way as to
maximize the child-related tax beneﬁts they receive.
There is scope, however, for parents of December and January newborns to change their
reported income in response to the exact date of birth of their child. For most types of
income, misreporting is easily detected by the IRS because of third-party veriﬁcation. Income
earned as a result of self-employment (reported on a Schedule C) is not subject to thirdparty veriﬁcation and is an important source of tax evasion (Slemrod 2007). Most commonly,
misreporting of Schedule C income involves understating income. This is the behavior that
minimizes tax liability of a ﬁler facing a positive marginal tax rate. Filers who qualify for
the EITC face a more complicated set of incentives for reporting self-employment income.
The EITC functions as a wage subsidy at the lowest levels of income. A taxpayer who
reports more earned income, including Schedule C income, receives a larger credit. The
credit reaches a maximum and then plateaus. We refer to the amount of earned income
at which the credit reaches its maximum value as the ﬁrst EITC kink. An EITC recipient
maximizes her credit and minimizes her overall tax liability by reporting earned income
exactly equal to this kink. While the opportunity to inﬂate self-employment income to
boost EITC payments has long existed, studies using audit data from the 1980s and early
1990s found little evidence of over-reported self-employment income among EITC recipients
(Joulfaian and Rider 1996; McCubbin 2000). More recent studies, however, have shown
signiﬁcant bunching of reported self-employment income precisely around the ﬁrst EITC
kink (Saez 2010; Chetty et al. Forthcoming).15
The value of the EITC and the location of the kink point depend on the number of
children that a ﬁler has. Filers with no children are eligible for only a very small EITC,
one so small that it has regularly been treated as zero in the EITC literature.16 With one
qualifying child in 2010, a ﬁler earning $8950 was exactly at the ﬁrst EITC kink and eligible
for the maximum credit of $3050. A 2010 low-income ﬁler whose late-December ﬁrst birth
made her newly eligible for the EITC has an incentive to report earned income of exactly
15

The amount of EITC remains constant as earnings increase within the plateau range. As earnings
continue to rise, the EITC eventually begins to phase out. There is a second EITC kink point corresponding
to the income cutoﬀ between the plateau and phase-out ranges. Saez (2010) ﬁnds no evidence that taxpayers
bunch around this second, less salient, kink point, nor do we ﬁnd evidence of bunching at that point.
16
In 2010, the maximum EITC for a ﬁler with no qualifying children was $457, approximately 8% of the
maximum EITC for a ﬁler with multiple children. The set of papers that has relied on childless ﬁlers as a
control group unaﬀected by the very small EITC available to them includes Eissa and Hoynes (2004) and
Chetty et al. (Forthcoming).

16

$8950. An otherwise similar ﬁler with an early January 2011 ﬁrst birth has no particular
incentive to report $8950 on her 2010 return.
Figure 7 shows the distribution of income around the ﬁrst EITC kink point, restricting
attention to ﬁlers whose newborn child will be the only dependent on the tax return.17 That
is, in the tax year from which these income data are drawn, ﬁlers with January births claim
zero dependents and are eligible for only a very trivial EITC amount. Files with December
births claim exactly one dependent and will maximize their EITC by reporting earnings equal
to the ﬁrst EITC kink. Distributions are plotted separately for late December births (left
column) and for early January births (right column) as well as by the presence of Schedule
C income (top row) or its absence (bottom row). In all cases, the horizontal axis measures
the diﬀerence between a ﬁler’s income and the ﬁrst EITC kink point.18 When this diﬀerence
is zero, a ﬁler receives the maximum EITC payment.
For ﬁlers with no Schedule C income, there is no bunching around the ﬁrst EITC kink
point regardless of when a child is born. Comparing the top left and top right ﬁgures, there
is bunching around the ﬁrst EITC kink point for Schedule C ﬁlers with December births.
Chetty et al. (Forthcoming) deﬁne “sharp bunchers” as EITC recipients who have qualifying
children, who report some self-employment income, and who report total income within $500
of the ﬁrst EITC kink. They ﬁnd that 2.89% of EITC ﬁlers with children met this deﬁnition
in 2009. For the ﬁrst-child sample used in the construction of ﬁgure 7, approximately 1.0% of
December parents meet this deﬁnition of sharp bunching versus 0.55% of January parents.
As the newborns in our sample age, we expect that parents learn more about the EITC
and are more likely to engage in sharp bunching. Figure 7b plots the diﬀerence across the
December and January distributions for Schedule C ﬁlers. Each bar height is equal to the
percentage of December observations in a given income bin minus the percentage of January
observations in the same income bin. This ﬁgure shows that the excess December mass is
clustered at and to the right of the ﬁrst kink point. It also shows that the excess mass at
the kink point is drawn from the left tail of the distribution—that is, there are relatively few
parents of December newborns who are reporting income below the EITC kink.
The birth of a second child shifts the income at which a ﬁler maximizes her EITC. For
example, in 2010 the ﬁrst EITC kink increases from $8,950 to $12,550 when a ﬁler’s second
qualifying child is born. Figure 8 plots the distribution of income around the ﬁrst EITC
kink point for ﬁlers whose newborn becomes the second dependent child. As was true in the
ﬁrst child case, there is no evidence of bunching among ﬁlers who report zero Schedule C
17
For clarity, the sample included in the ﬁgure is also restricted to ﬁlers whose earnings are at most $3500
in either direction away from the kink.
18
We plot the data relative to the kink point rather than in terms of absolute earned income because the
location of the kink point changes slightly from year to year.

17

income. For ﬁlers with Schedule C income, those with December births bunch around the
kink point that maximizes their EITC payments. Among ﬁlers with January births, there is
also bunching, but it occurs at a point a few thousand dollars below the ﬁrst kink for ﬁlers
with two children. This is approximately the location of the ﬁrst kink for ﬁlers with one
qualifying child, which is the number of qualifying children that can actually be claimed by
these January parents. Together, Figures 7 and 8 suggest that both late-December and earlyJanuary parents with Schedule C income are willing to strategically report that income in a
credit-maximizing way. December parents face the opportunity to do this one year earlier,
and they immediately seize that opportunity.19
Why do parents of December and January newborns have diﬀerent distributions of income
around the kink points in the EITC schedule? A natural explanation is that the groups have
diﬀerences in their labor supply due to the subsidy’s incentives, but this explanation is
implausible in our population because we are comparing people who gave birth within a
few days of each other. Late December births do not aﬀord parents, even those with the
ﬂexibility of self-employment, much time to make adjustments in real labor supply. Unless
parents have perfect knowledge in advance of whether their baby will be born in December
or January (which cannot be the case for most ﬁlers given the limited amount of birth
retiming), we would expect to see some evidence of bunching in the January data if the
December bunching were driven by a forward-looking real labor supply response.
Saez (2010) and Chetty et al. (Forthcoming) previously found greater bunching among
Schedule C ﬁlers than among those with earned income derived solely from wages.20 This
suggests that the bunching is due to reporting responses, rather than actual labor supply,
because Schedule C ﬁlers are better able to misreport without getting caught by the IRS. A
comparison of wage earners and the self employed is not conclusive, however, because it may
be that among low-income workers only the self-employed have enough ﬂexibility to select
true income close to a kink point. Our comparison of those giving birth on either side of the
New Year is stronger evidence of a reporting response because both groups would have had
similar expectations of a December baby throughout the year when labor supply decisions
19

We have also constructed ﬁgures showing the year t+1 income distribution of parents whose ﬁrst children
are born early in January of t + 1. This is the ﬁrst year in which January parents can claim their newborns.
For ﬁlers with Schedule C income, the degree of bunching for these January parents is very similar to the
year t bunching of December parents shown in the top left-hand panel of Figure 7. This ﬁgure is available
upon request.
20
Note that Chetty et al. (Forthcoming) do ﬁnd evidence that wage income bunches around the ﬁrst EITC
kink point in the year of a child’s birth, but only in geographic ares with the highest levels of EITC awareness.
This suggests that the most tax-savvy wage earners do adjust post-birth real labor supply. They also ﬁnd,
as we do, that many ﬁlers with Schedule C income do not bunch their income, suggesting that not all people
avail themselves of the opportunity to maximize their subsidy, perhaps because they are willing to pay to
be honest as suggested in LaLumia and Sallee (2013).

18

were made, and there is simply too little time for labor supply adjustments once a child is
born at the end of December.
An alternative explanation is based on heterogeneity. Suppose that the most tax-savvy
parents are the ones who ensure that their child is born in December, and they are also the
ones most likely to bunch their income. Under this explanation, parents of children with
late December birthdays would be more tax-savvy on average than parents of children with
early January birthdays. If true, we should expect to see the diﬀerences in bunching persist
across birth months even when children are older. We ﬁnd the opposite. As soon as January
self-employed parents are ﬁrst able to claim their newborn children, they exhibit a degree of
bunching that matches what we ﬁnd for parents of December newborns (results not shown).
This weighs against the notion that December bunching is isolated to a diﬀerent “strategic
type.”
If the diﬀerences in the income distribution are not due to real labor supply or compositional diﬀerences across parents of children born in diﬀerent birth months, then the
diﬀerences must be due to reporting diﬀerences, which may represent legal avoidance or illegal evasion. Legal avoidance could take two forms. The ﬁrst is a shifting-forward of income
realization into the year of the child’s birth (from the subsequent year) among December
parents. Forward-shifting normally requires that some action, like actual collection or at
least invoicing, be performed before the end of the calendar year. Parents of a child born
in the last week of December have little time to carry out these actions. In our data, December parents report on average $1000, or around 1/12th, more in Schedule C income than
January parents. It seems likely that low-income Schedule C ﬁlers are engaged in informal
work where cash exchanges prevail, invoices are uncommon and capital expenditures and
inventories are limited. If true, then the opportunities for intertemporal shifting of income
would be limited. This weighs against (but does not entirely rule out) legal forward shifting
of income as an explanation.
A second form of legal avoidance is to alter reported net self-employment income not by
increasing the amount of reported income itself but by deducting fewer business expenses.
Decisions about which costs to deduct can be made in a short window of time while having
a large impact on annual income. We have no direct way of ruling out this mechanism, the
legality of which is murky, but note that it has the same revenue impact as pure evasion
because it implies foregone revenue (that is, greater EITC payouts) that is not recovered in
a subsequent year.
Our setting provides new evidence that the bunching around the ﬁrst EITC kink point
is due to strategic reporting and not to real labor supply responses. Moreover, it seems that
evasion is the most likely explanation, though subtle forms of avoidance cannot be completely
19

ruled out. This is potentially at odds with the ﬁndings of Kleven, Knudsen, Kreiner, Pedersen
and Saez (2011). They use randomized audits in Denmark to conclude that the bunching
of self-employment income around kink points in the Danish tax schedule is about one-third
attributable to evasion and about two-thirds attributable to legal avoidance methods that
are not overturned in an audit. It is, of course, possible that the breakdown of evasion and
avoidance is diﬀerent for a random sample of Danish taxpayers than it is for low-income
ﬁlers in the U.S.
Lastly, we provide a back of the envelope calculation of the EITC overpayments made as
a result of this reporting response, under the assumption that the response represents tax
evasion resulting from ﬁlers claiming false income to maximize their return. Here, we use
data from the placebo period (December 1 to 7 and January 25 to 31) to isolate the eﬀects
of misreporting, but our estimates are similar if we use data from the treatment period. We
compute a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences of the mean tax savings associated with a December birth.
The ﬁrst mean value for our diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimate is the tax value, in the year of
their birth, for all children born in December ($1764). The second is the tax value for these
same children when we recode all Schedule C income as zero ($1697). The diﬀerence between
these two values ($67) indicates how much reported Schedule C income, which includes both
real labor supply and evasion (or avoidance), raises tax values on average. We then calculate
the corresponding values for children born in January ($1746 and $1696). Because we are
using the tax information for the year prior to the child’s birth to calculate tax values as if
they had been born in December (as we do throughout the paper), the birth of these January
newborns provides no marginal incentive to evade. The diﬀerence for January births ($50)
reﬂects the tax value resulting from real Schedule C income but not evasion. The diﬀerencein-diﬀerences, which is $17, is thus an estimate of the revenue lost due to Schedule C evasion,
per child claimed in the tax code, averaged over all children including those not eligible for
the EITC and those not evading. In our sample period, from 2001 to 2010, there were an
average of 3.8 million newborns per year claimed on tax returns. Thus the annual amount
of tax evasion attributable to Schedule C misreporting by new parents is $17 * 3.8 million
per year = $65 million per year.21
If the revenue lost is due to evasion, there is no reason to think it will be limited to the
year in which the child is a newborn. The EITC is available as long as a child is younger
than 19, or up to 24 if the child is a full time student, and Dowd and Horowitz (2011) show
that the probability a child is claimed as a dependent for the EITC declines with the child’s
21
We get a very similar answer if we perform the calculation on just those who ﬁle the EITC, for whom
the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences estimate ﬁnds the per child revenue loss to be $40. Considering the fraction of
children claimed on the EITC, the total cost is very close to our estimate here.

20

age. From their results, we estimate that $65 million per year for newborns translates to
$753 million per year for children of all ages.22 This is a rough calculation, but it is useful in
giving a sense of the order of magnitude of the reporting response. While signiﬁcant, $753
million is only around 4.5% of the total amount of overclaiming related to the EITC in tax
year 2010 (Government Accountability Oﬃce 2011), and about 1.3% of the $60 billion of
federal EITC spending in 2010.

5.2

Noncompliance Biases Estimates Upward

We have argued that ﬁlers with a December newborn changed their reported income so as
to maximize the value of the EITC. This will raise the average tax value of December births
and bias our results upward. There are several ways to deal with this challenge. One method
is to estimate our main speciﬁcation on the sample of those who do not have any Schedule C
income. Dropping those observations lowers our sample size by 148,047 (18%), with 73,123
coming from January and 74,924 coming from December. This method gives us a sample of
observations less likely to have manipulated income, but it drops somewhat more observations
from December and eliminates a potentially interesting part of the sample. Alternatively, we
recalculate tax values based on all sources of income except for Schedule C income; that is, we
change Schedule C income to zero for all ﬁlers and re-estimate T axV alue. This alternative,
less easily manipulated, tax value measure can be used directly as the regressor of interest
or it can be used as an instrument for the original tax value, in which case it isolates the
variation attributable to all non-Schedule C factors.
Table 4 shows the sensitivity of our results to alternative treatments of Schedule C income.
In all cases the set of controls matches column 4 of table 2. Any one of the three alternatives
reduces the estimated tax eﬀect for children born around the turn of the year. The tax
eﬀect falls to 0.0111 when Schedule C ﬁlers are dropped and to 0.0081 or 0.0094 when the
zero-Schedule-C tax value calculation is used in the reduced form or as an IV, respectively.
The second column in table 4 repeats this analysis for the placebo sample of the ﬁrst week
of December and the last week of January. The signiﬁcant 0.0054 TaxValue coeﬃcient found
in the baseline placebo estimate falls substantially, to 0.0014, when all ﬁlers with Schedule
C income are dropped. When using the tax value that sets Schedule C income equal to zero,
either as an IV or in the reduced form, the placebo eﬀect becomes a tightly estimated zero.
22

Speciﬁcally, Dowd and Horowitz (2011) report that 43% of newborns appear on an EITC return but only
22% of 11 year olds are claimed. For our calculation, we assume that the decline in claiming is linear between
newborns and 19-year-olds, and interpolate the number of children appearing at each age. This calculation
suggests that newborns who appear on an EITC return appear, on average, 11.6 times in their life. We
further assume that the amount of evasion attached to each child is constant over the age distribution, so
our estimate is $65 million times 11.6.

21

Together, these results suggest that strategic reporting of self-employment income biases
the baseline results upwards. Correcting for this confounding eﬀect lowers our preferred
estimate of the eﬀect of taxes on the probability of a late December birth to approximately
0.9 percentage points, roughly one-third smaller than the estimates in table 2.

5.3

Non-tax Convenience Eﬀects Are Small

Parents and physicians may prefer that labor and delivery occur when a hospital’s staﬃng
level is high and its patient count is low. Weekdays tend to have greater numbers of hospital
employees at work and lower risks of mortality from some causes (Bell and Redelmeier
2001), and average daily birth counts are higher on weekdays than on weekends. Similarly,
anticipated hospital crowding on holidays, including New Year’s Day, might inﬂuence parents
to schedule births for shortly before a holiday. If a preference for holiday avoidance is
negatively correlated with TaxValue, our baseline estimates will understate the causal impact
of taxes on the probability of a December birth.
To quantify this potential bias, we estimate the relationship between tax values and
having a child at another “convenient” time, either on a weekday or just before a major
holiday. There is no tax provision that treats weekday births more favorably than weekend
births. Thus, any relationship between the tax value of a newborn and the probability of a
weekday birth cannot be measuring a causal eﬀect of taxes. Instead it must reﬂect spurious
correlation between child-related tax beneﬁts and the propensity to schedule a birth for
a time when hospitals are fully staﬀed. Similar logic applies to any relationship between
TaxValue and the probability of a pre-holiday birth for holidays other than the New Year.
Column 1 of table 5 predicts whether a birth occurs on a weekday. Here we use a sample of
births from the ﬁrst week of December, a time without any signiﬁcant holidays and too early
to plausibly contain births that have been accelerated for tax reasons. There is a positive and
statistically signiﬁcant correlation between taxes and weekday birth, but it is small—around
10% of the magnitude of our baseline estimates. Columns 2 through 6 consider samples of
births occurring in two-week windows centered around other holidays. We consider Memorial
Day, July Fourth, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, and Superbowl Sunday.23 In each case we repeat
our main speciﬁcation with the same set of controls, where the dependent variable is coded
as 1 if the birth took place in the week before the holiday. All of the estimated coeﬃcients
are small, with the largest one-tenth the size of our main estimate. The coeﬃcient for
Memorial Day is signiﬁcant at the 10% level, but all other estimated eﬀects are statistically
23

We deﬁne a holiday as the ﬁrst day of an extended work weekend. The Memorial Day and Labor Day
holidays begin on the Saturday before the Monday holiday, the Thanksgiving holiday begins on Thursday,
and the Superbowl holiday begins on Saturday.

22

insigniﬁcant at conventional levels. These results weigh against concerns that correlations
between tax values and propensities to time births for convenience have a signiﬁcant impact
on our estimates.

5.4

Accounting for Missing Tax Data Lowers Estimated Tax Eﬀect

As documented in section 3.4, infants born in December are systematically less likely to be
claimed on a tax return in the year of their birth than are infants born in January. This
means that our baseline analysis may suﬀer from bias due to missing data. Accounting for
this bias drives down our estimated tax eﬀect still further.
A newborn might fail to appear in the tax data for three reasons. First, if the parent
makes a typo in entering the number or the IRS makes an error in transcribing the data, we
will be unable to ﬁnd the newborn’s SSN in the tax data. This type of random error surely
accounts for some missing children, but it cannot explain a seasonal pattern.
Second, the rightful claimant of the child might not ﬁle his or her taxes at all. Some
people fall below the ﬁling threshold, so they are not required to ﬁle taxes. Such ﬁlers with
children, however, will most likely qualify for a refund from the EITC if they have any earned
income. Filers may not realize this immediately, however. If learning about the EITC takes
time, this could explain our seasonal pattern. Parents who have a child in January have 14
months to learn of their eligibility in order to ﬁle in the year of their child’s birth, whereas
parents who have a December birth have only 4 months.
Third, the potential claimant of the child might ﬁle his or her taxes but not claim the
child. This would be a costly mistake in nearly all cases (the exception being if the ﬁler
had exactly zero tax liability for the year). The most obvious explanation for this would be
if parents do not realize that a child born at the end of the year qualiﬁes as a dependent.
Eligibility confusion is plausible, as it is not altogether intuitive to think that a child born,
for example, on December 31 should qualify a family for a year’s worth of beneﬁts.
The instructions for the 1040 do not necessarily resolve such confusion if it exists. For
example, the 2012 instructions list a variety of conditions for deeming a child a dependent,
including that the child “lived with you for more than half of 2012. If the child did not live
with you for the required time, see Exception to time lived with you, later” (bold font added).
Several pages later, the exception explains that “if the person meets all other requirements
to be your qualifying child but was born or died in 2012, the person is considered to have
lived with you for more than half of 2012 if your home was this person’s home for more than
half the time he or she was alive in 2012.” To a tax lawyer, this makes clear that a newborn
can be claimed (although what if the child did not leave the hospital until January?), but

23

it seems likely that not all individuals ﬁnd this section of the instructions and interpret it
correctly.
If eligibility confusion is the cause of the missing December newborns, then the discrepancy between December and January births appearing in the tax data should disappear when
children are older. This is exactly what we ﬁnd. In our data, we identify 405,252 children
born in the last week of December and claimed on a tax return in the year of their birth.
We ﬁnd 414,598 children born in the ﬁrst week of January and claimed on a tax return,
which makes December births 49.4% of our sample. When we look instead at one-year olds
claimed on tax returns, we ﬁnd 468,753 children born in the last week of December and
449,734 children born in the ﬁrst week of January. December births account for 51.0% of
the one-year-olds claimed on tax returns and born in the two-week period centered around
the turn of the year. This matches precisely December’s share of Vital Statistics births in
the corresponding two-week windows between 1994 and 2002 (excluding the millennium).24
To consider the possible impact of these missing observations on our regression estimates,
we impute a tax value for each child missing in his year of birth but observed one year later,
and add these observations into our sample. We must observe income in order to impute a
tax value. Thus we use slightly diﬀerent procedures to calculate tax values when a parent
is missing from the tax universe in the year of her child’s birth and when the parent ﬁles
but fails to claim the newborn. If the parent did ﬁle in the child’s birth year, we apply our
standard tax value estimation procedure.25 If the parent did not ﬁle in the child’s birth year,
we pull income information from the return ﬁled in the following year, when the child was
one. This is less reliable than our standard tax value calculation, as income ﬂuctuates across
years. Nevertheless, an examination of these values should give us a sense of whether and
how the absence of some newborns from the tax return data inﬂuences our estimates.
Table 6 shows regression results when children who are missing from the tax data as
newborns but present as one-year-olds are included in the sample. The top panel repeats
our baseline procedure with no correction for potential misreporting of Schedule C income.
Adding parents who did ﬁle in the year of the child’s birth without claiming the newborn
(column 2) drives down the TaxValue coeﬃcient from around 0.0154 to 0.0111. Including
our imputed tax value for those who did not ﬁle at all in the year of the newborn’s birth
(column 3) drives down the estimate still further to about 0.0052.
24

The tax data and the Vital Statistics data cover diﬀerent years, so this coincidence does not guarantee
that we have completely resolved the puzzle of missing December births, but it does suggest that the
December versus January imbalance is a short-term phenomenon.
25
Of the 63,501 December-born children who are missing as newborns and present at age one, two-thirds
have parents who ﬁled in the birth year but failed to claim the newborn. Of the 35,136 January-born missing
newborns, 54% had a primary ﬁler who ﬁled in the birth year.

24

The bottom two panels correct for Schedule C misreporting by using an estimate of tax
value that excludes Schedule C income completely, or a two-stage least squares analysis
that uses the tax value estimated without Schedule C income as an instrument for the fully
inclusive tax value. Results are similar across the two methods. When we include parents
who ﬁled in the year of birth, but failed to claim the newborn, our estimated tax coeﬃcient
falls by 40%, from 0.0094 to 0.0056 in Panel B and 0.0081 to 0.0048 in Panel C. When we also
include in our sample parents who did not ﬁle a tax return in the year of the newborn’s birth,
but did ﬁle and claim the one-year-old in the following year, our coeﬃcients become even
smaller and are no longer statistically signiﬁcant. The estimated tax value for this group is
far more speculative than our other estimates, however, because it relies on tax data from
a year other than the year of the child’s birth. For that reason, we do not emphasize these
results other than to note that the uneven representation of December and January newborns
in tax return data appears not to be biasing our results downwards. If anything, correcting
for this issue lowers our estimated tax eﬀects.
We can also use these imputed tax values for children missing from the tax code in the
year of their birth to calculate the amount of money left on the table by tax ﬁlers. Newborns
who do not appear in the tax data could be the result of a parent entering an SSN incorrectly,
a transcription error on the part of the IRS, changes in family structure over time, or taxpayer
confusion about the legality of claiming a newborn. The incremental increase in the number
of children not claimed in December, as compared to January, however, seems most likely
to be due to taxpayer confusion about their ability to claim a newborn. Of January births,
4.3% of those who are claimed as a one-year-old do not appear in the data when they are
newborns, but their primary ﬁler has a return. For December births, 9.6% of children ﬁt
that description, suggesting that around 5.3% of December newborns are not claimed in the
year of their birth because of confusion or other mistakes. Our data suggest that the failure
to claim these 5.3% of newborns is not because they had particularly low tax values—we
estimate that the mean tax value in that group is $1,706 (as compared to $1,779 in our main
sample). This suggests that a modest number of ﬁlers may be leaving a signiﬁcant amount
of money on the table due to confusion about the tax code or other frictions that prevent
proper ﬁling.

6

Why Is There Not More Tax-Induced Birth Timing?

We have used data from tax returns to estimate a very small eﬀect of taxes on birth timing.
This small magnitude might be surprising in light of the estimates of Dickert-Conlin and
Chandra (1999). However, in this section we establish, using Vital Statistics data, that the
25

total amount of birth timing around New Year’s Eve is small. It is smaller than the number
of births shifted from a typical weekend to surrounding weekdays; it is smaller than the
number of births delayed to occur just at the beginning of the new millennium; and it is
similar to the number of births shifted forward to occur just before other major holidays.
A small number of births being shifted at the margin along which there are tax beneﬁts to
shifting provides prima facie evidence that the eﬀect of taxes on birth timing must be small.
To provide context for interpreting the quantity of birth timing around New Year’s Eve,
we analyze Vital Statistics data available from December 1994 to January 2002.26 Considering only the last week of December and the ﬁrst week of January, 51.0% of births take place
in December. If the counterfactual is an equal number of births in each of the two weeks,
then the 51.0% ratio is consistent with 2% of early-January births being shifted. Christmas
complicates this analysis. If some births are accelerated from the last week of December to
earlier in December, we may be understating the percentage of early-January births being
shifted. Thus, we also compare the number of births in the ﬁrst week of January to the
number that occur in the last two weeks of January. That comparison suggests that 6.4% of
births shift out of the ﬁrst week of January.27 Looking at day-speciﬁc birth counts suggests
that most births shifted out of the ﬁrst week of January would otherwise have occurred on
January 1 or 2. Together these two days contain 17% fewer births than the average two-day
period at any other point in January.
To determine if this amount of birth shifting is large or small, we compare it to the
amount of shifting evident at other times. Approximately 20% of births take place on a
typical weekend, whereas we would expect 2/7ths, or 28.6%, if all births took place on
random days. This implies that 30% of births expected to take place on a weekend are
shifted to a weekday, almost double the amount of shifting around New Year’s Eve. A
second comparison is to birth timing around the millennium. The number of births in the
ﬁrst week of January 2000 exceeded the number in the last week of December 1999. The
fraction of December births in that two-week window was only 48.5%. While the ﬁrst week of
January typically contains fewer births than any other week in January, in 2000 it contained
2.6% “extra” births. This suggests that the willingness to shift births into the ﬁrst days
of the new millennium, with no associated monetary beneﬁt, swamps willingness to shift
births in response to tax incentives. A third comparison comes from other holidays. Of
the births that take place within a two-week window around Thanksgiving, 52.5% are in
26

We examine these years because counts of births by exact date are not publicly available in other years.
We omit December 1999 and January 2000 because of the millennial eﬀects, in which extra births occurred in
early January. Including those months would make forward-shifting around the New Year look even smaller.
27
Calculations based on comparing the ﬁrst week of January to the next three weeks in January, the 8th
to the 28th, yield nearly identical estimates.

26

the week before, suggesting that 5% of births that would take place in the week starting
with Thanksgiving are accelerated. In the two week periods centered around July Fourth,
Memorial Day, Labor Day and Christmas, the pre-holiday week contains from 50.6% to
51.1% of births. Thus, the small degree of tax-motivated shifting we have estimated with
tax return data is corroborated by patterns observed in Vital Statistics data.
In the remainder of this section, we explore several barriers that may explain why so
few people accelerate receipt of tax beneﬁts by scheduling births for late December. As
discussed above, some individuals may be unaware that having a December newborn entitles
them to the full tax beneﬁts of a dependent. The pattern of missing December newborns
is consistent with such confusion. In addition, we provide evidence that delays in receiving
Social Security Numbers and physician preferences on the supply side of the market might
play a role in dampening the birth timing response to tax incentives.

6.1

Delays in Social Security Numbers May Cost Some Taxpayers

To claim a dependent child on a tax return, a ﬁler must list the child’s Social Security Number
on the 1040 (LaLumia and Sallee 2013). Obtaining an SSN is not an instantaneous process,
and in fact typically takes several weeks. Although the parent of a late-December newborn
will almost certainly have received her child’s SSN by the standard April 15 ﬁling deadline, a
large majority of individuals ﬁle well in advance of this deadline. Low-income individuals are
particularly likely to ﬁle early. In recent years, more than 50% of refundable EITC payments
are made in February (LaLumia 2013), indicating that the recipients of these payments ﬁled
at some point in February or late January. As a result, some ﬁlers—particularly low-income
ﬁlers—may not have their child’s SSN at the time that they otherwise wish to ﬁle.
Choosing to ﬁle early, and forgoing the opportunity to claim a newborn whose SSN has
not yet arrived, is an expensive choice. However, it is one low-income ﬁlers might make if they
are not well-informed, if they face liquidity constraints, or if they are extremely impatient.
It may be inconvenient and costly for taxpayers to assemble their tax documents and go to
a tax preparation location. If they ﬁrst learn of the SSN requirement while meeting with the
tax preparer, they may be unwilling to endure the hassle of leaving and returning a second
time after some delay. We also know from the study of refund anticipation loans that ﬁlers
are willing to take loans with extremely high implicit annual interest rates (Berube, Kim,
Forman and Burns 2002). This costly choice of the ﬁler is not necessarily countered by the
incentives of a paid preparer because the preparer likely has a strong incentive to get a ﬁler
to complete her return in a single visit. Preparers serving this population may not trust that
their clients will return if sent away, so the preparers may not have an incentive to advocate

27

that the ﬁler wait for an SSN to ﬁle.
There is variation across states in the average time elapsed between a child’s birth and
her parents’ receipt of a Social Security number. The process begins with parents ﬁlling
out an application at the hospital immediately following the birth of their child. That
document is processed by a state agency, which then forwards the information to the federal
Social Security Agency, which takes around two weeks to process the form and mail a Social
Security card to parents. SSA reports on its website the average time that it takes each state
to process a form, which ranges from 1 to 5 weeks.
Figure 9 shows that states with longer average SSN processing times have more December
newborns missing from tax return data. The vertical axis, computed from tax return data
for births in the two-week window around the turn of the year, measures the state-speciﬁc
fraction of births in the last week of December. A lower value suggests that more Decemberborn newborns are missing from the tax return data. The horizontal axis measures the
average processing time, in weeks. A ﬁtted OLS regression line is included in the ﬁgure.
The slope coeﬃcient from that regression is -0.0036, with a standard error of 0.0014.28 This
indicates that states with longer delays have relatively fewer late-December births appearing
in tax return data, consistent with the hypothesis that delays in obtaining an SSN explain
some portion of the cases in which parents fail to claim an eligible child.

6.2

Some Willing Parents May Be Unable to Shift

The decision to shift a child’s date of birth is not made unilaterally by parents. Birth dates
are manipulated by the scheduling of delivery, involving either labor induction through the
use of pitocin or the performance of a cesarean delivery. Either procedure requires the
cooperation of a doctor. If delivery is already being scheduled for reasons unrelated to taxes,
any additional shifting of birth is likely to be low cost because parents need only request a
diﬀerence in delivery date. If delivery is not already being scheduled, then parents desirous
of tax beneﬁts would have to convince their doctor to schedule the birth.29
As demonstrated in ﬁgure 2, the greatest rise in child-related tax beneﬁts in recent years
has been for low-income ﬁlers eligible for the EITC. Many of these low-income patients
will be covered by Medicaid. Medicaid recipients are less likely to have cesarean deliveries
than are privately insured patients, and there is a positive relationship between Medicaid
28

Circle sizes indicate state population. The coeﬃcients are very similar, and are statistically signiﬁcant,
whether or not the data are weighted by population size. They are also similar when monthly counts of
December and January births are used in place of weekly counts.
29
Baicker et al. (2006) argue that geographic diﬀerences in cesarean rates appear to be driven by supply
side factors related to doctors, rather than demand side factors related to patients, which supports the
reasoning developed here.

28

reimbursement rates for c-sections and the number of c-section deliveries (Gruber, Kim
and Mayzlin 1999; Currie and Gruber 2001). Doctors may be more willing to cater to the
preferences of those with generous private insurance and choice of provider.30 If the parents
who have the highest tax values are less able to shift their births, this will limit the strength
of any tax incentives and mute any eﬀect of rising average beneﬁts in the time series.
Auxiliary evidence on the ability of diﬀerent demographic groups to choose the timing of
their birth comes from Vital Statistics data. Table 7 shows that mothers from less advantaged
backgrounds are less likely to have given birth via c-section or induction, and are more likely
to have a weekend birth. Both patterns suggest that low-income mothers have less ability
to choose a tax-advantaged birth date. This helps to explain why we estimate only a small
eﬀect of taxes on birth timing.

7

Conclusion

Our results cast doubt on the hypothesis that, over the last decade, large numbers of parents
have strategically shifted the timing of childbirth in response to tax incentives. Our research
has the beneﬁt of using actual tax return information, which greatly improves the accuracy
of estimated tax values, and large estimation samples drawn from the universe of tax returns.
Our results do show a positive correlation between tax values and the probability that a child
is born in December, but that correlation is quite small and precisely estimated. We estimate
that an additional $1000 of child-related tax beneﬁts increases the probability that a child is
born in the last week of December rather than the ﬁrst week of January by only about one
percentage point. These ﬁndings are similar to the conclusions of Maghakian and Schulkind
(2011), but they diﬀer greatly from the magnitude of the ﬁndings in Dickert-Conlin and
Chandra (1999).
We estimate a small correlation between birth timing and taxes, but this is commensurate
with the modest amount of birth timing that takes place around New Year’s Eve. This begs
the question of why there is not more strategic birth timing to begin with, especially given
the apparent willingness of parents and physicians to alter birth timing around other dates,
like holidays, weekends or the millennium. Our partial explanation is that many of the
ﬁlers with the most to gain—low-income parents eligible for the EITC—may have the least
control over medical procedures and may be the least likely to have a scheduled delivery,
which facilitates tax-motivated timing.
Another partial explanation is related to a new fact we document, which is that the
30

When patients giving birth are themselves physicians, c-section rates are lower and there is little relationship between reimbursement rates and the probability of a c-section (Johnson and Rehavi 2013).

29

percentage of December-born children claimed immediately on tax returns is lower than the
percentage of January newborns claimed at the ﬁrst available opportunity. The pattern of
newborns not claimed on tax returns is suggestive both of confusion regarding eligibility and
omissions caused by delays in the issuance of Social Security Numbers. Both factors suggest
that some low-income ﬁlers, many of whom have high tax values, face obstacles that keep
them from taking advantage of child-related tax beneﬁts.
Finally, our analysis also uses a novel approach for identifying noncompliance in selfemployment income for recipients of the EITC. Our evidence is based on comparing the
tax returns of parents who had children a few days apart, either in late December or early
January. The self-employment income of parents of December newborns diverges sharply
from their January counterparts, which is diﬃcult to explain in terms of actual labor supply
given the similarity of their demographic situation. This is consistent with previous ﬁndings
in the literature regarding the role of self-employment income with regards to the EITC, but
our approach oﬀers stronger evidence that this strategic reporting represents evasion rather
than avoidance.

References
Ackerman, Deena and Gerald Auten, “Tax Expenditures for Noncash Charitable Contributions,” National Tax Journal, 2011, 64 (2, part 2), 651–687.
Aron, David C, Howard S. Gordon, David L. DiGiuseppe, Dwain L. Harper, and
Gary E. Rosenthal, “Variations in Risk-Adjusted Cesarean Delivery Rates According
to Race and Health Insurance,” Medical Care, 2000, 38 (1), 35–44.
Baicker, Katherine, Kasey S. Buckles, and Amitabh Chandra, “Geographic Variation in the Appropriate Use of Cesarean Delivery,” Health Aﬀairs, 2006, 25 (5), 355–367.
Bell, Chaim M. and Donald A. Redelmeier, “Mortality Among Patients Admitted to
Hospitals on Weekends as Compared with Weekdays,” New England Journal of Medicine,
2001, 345 (9), 663–668.
Berube, Alan, Anne Kim, Benjamin Forman, and Megan Burns, “The Price of
Paying Taxes: How Tax Preparation and Refund Loan Fees Erode the Beneﬁts of the
EITC,” 2002. Brookings Institution Working Paper.
Blank, Rebecca M., Kerwin Koﬁ Charles, and James M. Sallee, “A Cautionary Tale
About the Use of Administrative Data: Evidence from Age of Marriage Laws,” American
Economic Journal: Applied Microeconomics, April 2009, 1 (2), 128–149.
Buckles, Kasey S. and Daniel M. Hungerman, “Season of Birth and Later Outcomes:
Old Questions, New Answers,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Forthcoming.

30

Burman, Leonard, Kim Clausing, and John O’Hare, “Tax Reform and Realizations
of Capital Gains in 1986,” National Tax Journal, 1994, 47 (1), 1–18.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Emmanuel Saez, “Using Diﬀerences in Knowledge Across Neighborhoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings,” American
Economic Review, Forthcoming.
Crump, Richard, Gopi Shah Goda, and Kevin J. Mumford, “Fertility and the
Personal Exemption: Comment,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (4), 1616–1628.
Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber, “Public Health Insurance and Medical Treatment:
The Equalizing Impact of the Medicaid Expansions,” Journal of Public Economics, 2001,
82 (1), 63–89.
Dickert-Conlin, Stacy and Amitabh Chandra, “Taxes and the Timing of Births,”
Journal of Political Economy, 1999, 107 (1), 161–177.
and Todd Elder, “Suburban Legend: School Cutoﬀ Dates and the Timing of Births,”
Economics of Education Review, 2010, 29 (5), 826–841.
Dowd, Tim and John B. Horowitz, “Income Mobility and the Earned Income Tax
Credit: Short-Term Safety Net or Long-Term Income Support,” Public Finance Review,
2011, 39 (5), 619–652.
Eissa, Nada and Hilary Williamson Hoynes, “Taxes and the Labor Market Participation of Married Couples: The Earned Income Tax Credit,” Journal of Public Economics,
2004, 88 (9-10), 1931–1958.
Gans, Joshua S. and Andrew Leigh, “Born on the First of July: An (Un)natural
Experiment in Birth Timing,” Journal of Public Economics, 2009, 93 (1-2), 246–263.
and

, “The Millennium Bub,” Applied Economics Letters, 2009, 16 (13-15), 1467–1470.

Government Accountability Oﬃce, “Improper Payments: Recent Eﬀorts to Address
Improper Payments and Remaining Challenges,” April 2011. GAO-11-575T.
Gruber, Jonathan, John Kim, and Dina Mayzlin, “Physician Fees and Procedure
Intensity: The Case of Cesarean Delivery,” Journal of Health Economics, 1999, 18 (4),
473–490.
Holtzblatt, Janet and Janet McCubbin, “Whose Child Is It Anyway? Simplifying the
Deﬁnition of a Child,” National Tax Journal, 2003, 56 (3), 701–718.
Johnson, Erin M. and M. Marit Rehavi, “Physicians Treating Physicians: Information
and Incentives in Childbirth,” 2013. NBER Working Paper 19242.
Joulfaian, David and Mark Rider, “Tax Evasion in the Presence of Negative Income
Tax Rates,” National Tax Journal, 1996, 49 (4), 553–570.

31

Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen and Mazhar Waseem, “Using Notches to Uncover Optimization Frictions and Structural Elasticities: Theory and Evidence from Pakistan,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (2), 669–723.
, Martin B. Knudsen, Claus Thustrup Kreiner, Soren Pedersen, and Emmanuel
Saez, “Unwilling or Unable to Cheat? Evidence from a Tax Audit Experiment in Denmark,” Econometrica, 2011, 79 (3), 651–692.
Kopczuk, Wojciech and Joel Slemrod, “Dying to Save Taxes: Evidence from EstateTax Returns on the Death Elasticity,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2003, 85 (2),
256–265.
Kureishi, Wataru and Midori Wakabayashi, “Taxing the Stork,” National Tax Journal,
2008, 61 (2), 167–187.
LaLumia, Sara, “The EITC, Tax Refunds, and Unemployment Spells,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2013, 5 (2), 188–221.
and James M. Sallee, “The Value of Honesty: Empirical Estimates from the Case of
the Missing Children,” International Tax and Public Finance, 2013, 20 (2), 192–224.
Lin, Herng-Ching, Sudha Xirasagar, and Yu-Chi Tung, “Impact of a Cultural Belief
about Ghost Month on Delivery Mode in Taiwan,” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 2006, 60, 522–526.
Lo, Joan C., “Patients’ Attitudes vs. Physicians’ Determination: Implications for Cesarean
Sections,” Social Science & Medicine, 2003, 57, 91–96.
Maghakian, Teny and Lisa Schulkind, “What a Diﬀerence a Day Makes: A New Look
at Child Tax Beneﬁts and the Timing of Births,” March 2011. Working Paper.
McCubbin, Janet, “EITC Noncompliance: The Determinants of the Misreporting of Children,” National Tax Journal, 2000, 53 (4, part 2), 1135–1164.
Menacker, Fay, “Trends in Cesarean Rates for First Births and Repeat Cesarean Rates
for Low-Risk Women: United States, 1990-2003,” National Vital Statistics Reports, 2005,
54 (4), 1–9.
Neugart, Michael and Henry Ohlsson, “Economic Incentives and the Timing of Births:
Evidence from the German Parental Beneﬁt Reform of 2007,” Journal of Population Economics, 2013, 26 (1), 87–108.
Orszag, Peter R. and Matthew G. Hall, “Nonﬁlers and Filers with Modest Tax Liabilities,” Tax Notes, 2003, August 4, 723.
Ramnath, Shanthi, “Taxpayers’ Response to Tax-Based Incentives for Retirement Savings:
Evidence from the Saver’s Credit Notch,” Journal of Public Economics, 2013, 101, 77–93.
Saez, Emmanuel, “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?,” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 2010, 2 (3), 180–212.
32

Sallee, James M. and Joel Slemrod, “Car Notches: Strategic Automaker Responses to
Fuel Economy Policy,” Journal of Public Economics, 2012, 96 (11-12), 981–999.
Slemrod, Joel, “Do Taxes Matter? Lessons from the 1980’s,” American Economic Review,
1992, 82 (2), 250–256.
, “Cheating Ourselves: The Economics of Tax Evasion,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
Winter 2007, 21 (1), 25–48.
Whittington, Leslie A., James Alm, and H. Elizabeth Peters, “Fertility and the Personal Exemption: Implicit Pronatalist Policy in the United States,” American Economic
Review, 1990, 80 (3), 545–556.

33

# Births Dec.25-31 / # Births Jan. 1-7

1.1

1500
1300

Late December to Early January
Birth Ratio
1.05

1100
900

1

700
500
Average Tax Value

0.95

300
100

0.9

Average Tax Benefit for Children Born (2000
Dollars)

Figure 1: Average Tax Savings Per Child and Ratio of Late December to Early January
Births Over Time

-100
1989

1992

1995

1998

2001

2004

Source: Birth counts come from the Vital Statistics. Public use versions of these data do not include counts
of births by exact day after 2002. Average tax values are estimated from the March CPS and TAXSIM.

3000
2000
1000
0

TaxValue, 2005 Dollars

4000

Figure 2: Tax Savings from a December Birth, by AGI

0

50000

100000

150000

200000

AGI, 2005 Dollars
2005

1986

The ﬁgure plots the combined federal and state tax savings associated with claiming a ﬁrst dependent, for
a married couple ﬁling in Virginia. Dollar amounts are reported in 2005 dollars.

34

1800
1750
1650

1700

Average Tax Value

1850

1900

Figure 3: Tax Value by Date of Birth

Dec 7

Dec 25 Jan 1

Jan 7

Jan 25

Date of Birth

This ﬁgure plots the mean value of combined federal and state tax savings associated with a December birth,
by the child’s date of birth, for all December and January births meeting the sample restrictions. The shaded
data points are the ones used in our main estimation sample. The horizontal bars indicate averages over
several time periods, namely December 1 - 7 (placebo treatment period), December 25-31 (true treatment
period), January 1-7 (true control period) and January 25-31 (placebo control period).

35

.5

.6

.7

.8

.9

1

Figure 4: Ratio of Tax-Based Count to Vital Statistics Count

12/2001 12/2002 12/2003 12/2004 12/2005 12/2006 12/2007 12/2008
All Births in Tax Data

With Sample Restrictions

Each line shows the ratio of month-speciﬁc counts of newborns appearing in tax return data to corresponding
month-speciﬁc counts from Vital Statistics data.

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

Figure 5: Ratio of Income-Speciﬁc Tax Counts to Total Vital Statistics Counts

12/2001 12/2002 12/2003 12/2004 12/2005 12/2006 12/2007 12/2008
AGI<30K
60K<AGI<90K

30K<AGI<60K
AGI>90K

Each line shows the ratio of the number of newborns claimed by parents in a particular AGI category to the
corresponding month-speciﬁc count of all births appearing in Vital Statistics.

36

0

.005

Coefficent on Tax Value
.01
.015
.02

.025

Figure 6: Coeﬃcient on Tax Value, by Days Included in Sample

0

10
20
Days around Turn of Year Included in Analysis

30

Each point represents the coeﬃcient on TaxSavings from a linear probability model predicting December
birth. The shaded area shows 95% conﬁdence intervals. The number of birth dates included in the regression
gradually increases from births at most one day from the turn of the year on the left-hand side of the ﬁgure
(that is, December 31 and January 1 births only) to births up to 31 days from the turn of the year on the
right-hand side of the ﬁgure (that is, all births occurring in the months of December and January).

37

Figure 7: Distribution of Distance Between Income and First EITC Kink by SelfEmployment and Birth Month: Filers For Whom Birth is First Child
(a) Distribution By Month and Schedule C Status
Schedule C Income>0, January Births

Schedule C Income=0, December Births

Schedule C Income=0, January Births

4
2
0
8 10 12
0

2

4

6

Percent of Observations

6

8 10 12

Schedule C Income>0, December Births

−3500

0

3500−3500

0

3500

Distance to the First EITC Kink

6
4
2
0
−2
−4
−6

Difference in Percentage (Dec−Jan)

(b) Diﬀerence in Distribution Across Months for Schedule C Filers

−10000

−5000

0

5000

10000

Distance to First EITC Kink

Figure (a) plots the distribution of the diﬀerence between earned income in year t and the minimum amount
of earned income that would maximize the EITC receipt for the ﬁler had the child been born in that year.

38

Figure 8: Distribution of Distance Between Income and First EITC Kink by SelfEmployment and Birth Month: Filers For Whom Birth is Second Child
(a) Distribution By Month and Schedule C Status
Schedule C Income>0, January Births

Schedule C Income=0, December Births

Schedule C Income=0, January Births

4
2
0
8 10 12
0

2

4

6

Percent of Observations

6

8 10 12

Schedule C Income>0, December Births

−3500

0

3500−3500

0

3500

Distance to the First EITC Kink

6
4
2
0
−2
−4
−6

Difference in Percentage (Dec−Jan)

(b) Diﬀerence in Distribution Across Months for Schedule C Filers

−10000

−5000

0

5000

10000

Distance to First EITC Kink

Figure (a) plots the distribution of the diﬀerence between earned income in year t and the minimum amount
of earned income that would maximize the EITC receipt for the ﬁler had the child been born in that year.

39

Figure 9: Fraction of Births in December Out of All Births in Two-Week Window Against
Reported Average SSN Wait Times by State

.46

Dec 25-31/(Dec 25-31 + Jan 1-7)
.48
.5

.52

Fraction Late December Births Against SSN Wait Time

1

2

3
SSA Wait Time (Weeks)

4

5

Average wait times for a SSN by state are taken from the Social Security Administration’s website. Parents
must wait an additional two weeks for processing by SSA after SSA receives an application from the state
agency. Circle sizes are proportional to the number of births in each state. The ﬁtted line is a regression
line ﬁtted to the weighted data.

40

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
Full
Sample
Tax value
1759.45
(1003.92)
AGI
68461.64
(341,486)
Mother has wages>0
76.1
(42.7)
Mother’s wages
21417.64
(34897.43)
First child
39.9
(49.0)
Second child
37.6
(48.4)
Third child
16.5
(37.1)
Fourth child
5.3
(22.3)
Fifth or greater child
0.6
(7.9)
Married
74.2
(43.7)
Mother’s age
29.4
(6.4)
Child is male
51.1
(50.0)
Urban
80.7
(39.5)
Observations
819,850

December
Births
1779.45
(985.39)
69517.56
(350,824)
76.8
(42.2)
21846.88
(36148.69)
39.9
(49.0)
37.8
(48.5)
16.5
(37.1)
5.3
(22.3)
0.6
(7.6)
74.3
(43.7)
29.5
(6.3)
51.1
(50.0)
81.0
(39.3)
405,252

January
Births
1739.90*
(1021.33)
67429.52*
(332,102)
75.4*
(43.1)
20998.08*
(33624.16)
39.9
(49.0)
37.5
(48.4)
16.6
(37.2)
5.3
(22.4)
0.7*
(8.3)
74.1
(43.8)
29.3*
(6.5)
51.1
(50.0)
80.4*
(39.7)
414,598

Standard errors are in parentheses. A star in the last column indicates
that the means for December and January births are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
at the 5% level. For January births, characteristics are measured in the
tax year prior to the birth.

41

42

Each column shows the result of a linear probability model predicting December birth. Columns 3 through 7 also include dummies for
third- and fourth-order births. Standard errors are clustered on state by year. Asterisks indicate statistical signiﬁcance as follows,***
1%, ** 5%, * 10%.

Closest
to DCC
Alternative Speciﬁcations
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Tax Value
0.0134***
0.0151***
0.0154***
0.0153***
0.0168***
0.0153***
(in $1000s)
(0.0007)
(0.0008)
(0.0008)
(0.0008)
(0.0009)
(0.0011)
Mom’s Wages,
0.00014*** -0.0001*** -0.0001*** -0.0001*** -0.0001*** -0.0001***
(t − 1)
(2.11·10−5 ) (2.80·10−5 ) (2.76·10−5 ) (2.72·10−5 ) (2.77·10−5 ) (2.97·10−5 )
Married
0.0058***
-0.0402*** -0.0416*** -0.0453*** -0.0381***
(0.0019)
(0.0025)
(0.0024)
(0.0025)
(0.0025)
1st or 2nd Kid
-0.0043***
(0.0015)
First Kid
-0.0191*** -0.0201*** -0.0192*** -0.0251***
(0.0068)
(0.0070)
(0.0068)
(0.0068)
Second Kid
-0.0121*
-0.0121*
-0.0122*
-0.0159**
(0.0067)
(0.0069)
(0.0067)
(0.0067)
Urban
0.0069***
-0.0006
0.0029**
-0.0004
-0.0005
(0.0015)
(0.0016)
(0.0015)
(0.0016)
(0.0016)
−6
AGI
2.84·10
(1.75·10−6 )
Mother’s Age
0.0013***
(0.0001)
Year Dummies
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Mom’s Age Dummies
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
5-Piece Spline in AGI
Yes
Yes
Yes
State Dummies
Yes
Zip Code Dummies
Yes
Flexible AGI Controls
Yes
Yes
Interact Income with Married, Kids
Yes
N
819,850
819,850
819,850
819,850
819,850
819,850
819,850
R2
0.0001
0.001
0.005
0.006
0.046
0.005
0.006

No
Controls
(1)
0.0098***
(0.0007)

Table 2: Predicting December Birth, OLS Results

Table 3: Predicting December Birth, Allowing Heterogeneity in C-Section Likelihood

Tax Value (in $1000s)
TaxValue · C-Section Rate

Adding State
C-Section Rates
Level
Interaction
(1)
(2)
0.0154*** 0.0004
(0.0008)
(0.0051)
0.0005***
(0.0002)

9.39·10−6
(6.31·10−6 )

TaxValue · AGI
C-Section Rate
Demographic Controls
Year Dummies
Mom’s Age Dummies
5-Piece Spline in AGI
N

AGI
Interaction
(3)
0.0142***
(0.0007)

Higher
AGI
Order
>100K
Births
(4)
(5)
0.0206*** 0.0219***
(0.0046)
(0.0012)

-0.0001
(0.0010)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
819,850

-0.0011
(0.0010)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
819,850

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
819,850

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
139,824

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
491,493

The table shows results of linear probability models predicting December birth. This matches column 3 in
table 2, which has a tax coeﬃcient of 0.015. Column 4 is limited to observations where the AGI on the
return exceeds $100,000. Column 5 is limited to observations where the newborn is not the ﬁrst dependent
child claimed on the return. Standard errors are clustered on state by year. Asterisks indicate statistical
signiﬁcance as follows,*** 1%, ** 5%, * 10%.

43

Table 4: Sensitivity of Results to Potential Misreporting of Schedule C Income
Treatment Period
(Dec 25 - Jan 7)
(1)
Baseline
0.0154***
(0.0008)
Alternative Treatments of Schedule C Income
Drop Filers With Sch C=0
0.0111***
(0.0008)
Zero Out Schedule C, Reduced Form 0.0081***
(0.0007)
Zero Out Schedule C, IV
0.0094***
(0.0008)

Placebo Period
(Dec 1-7 and Jan 25-31)
(2)
0.0054***
(0.0008)
0.0014*
(0.0008)
-0.0006
(0.0007)
-0.0007
(0.0008)

Each coeﬃcient reports coeﬃcients from a separate linear probability model regression that includes controls
matching those in column 4 of table 2. The ﬁrst column uses the main sample of data from the two weeks
surrounding the New Year. The second column uses the ﬁrst week of December and last week of January.
Dependent variable is coded as 1 if the birth took place in December in either case. The ﬁrst row reports
a coeﬃcient for our standard T axV alue variable. The second row drops all observations with Schedule C
income not equal to zero. The third row replaces the standard TaxValue calculation with the tax value
estimated after setting Schedule C income equal to zero for all ﬁlers. The fourth row is the second stage
coeﬃcient from an IV regression where T axV alue is instrumented by the tax value with Schedule C income
set equal to zero. Standard errors are clustered on state by year. Asterisks indicate statistical signiﬁcance
as follows,*** 1%, ** 5%, * 10%.

44

45

Memorial Day
(2)
-0.0011**
(0.0005)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1,122,110

Birth Occurs on
July Fourth Labor Day Thanksgiving
(3)
(4)
(5)
-0.0006
0.0006
0.0002
(0.0005)
(0.0005)
(0.0006)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1,139,469
1,145,207
1,030,983

Superbowl
(6)
0.0001
(0.0005)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1,085,168

The table shows results of linear probability models predicting birth in a particular time period. The control speciﬁcation
matches column 3 in table 2. For the weekday regression, the dependent variable is coded as 1 if the child is born on a
weekday, as opposed to a weekend, and the sample is drawn from the ﬁrst week of December. Each holiday period is a two-week
symmetric window centered on (a) the Friday before the holiday weekend for Memorial Day and Labor Day, (b) the Thursday
of Thanksgiving, (c) the Sunday of the Super Bowl and (d) the exact day of July 4. Data come from tax years 2001 to 2009.
Standard errors are clustered on state by year. Asterisks indicate statistical signiﬁcance as follows,*** 1%, ** 5%, * 10%.

Birth
Occurs on
Weekday
(1)
Tax Value (in $1000s) 0.0019***
(0.0007)
Year Dummies
Yes
Mom’s Age Dummies
Yes
5-Piece Spline in AGI
Yes
State Dummies
Yes
N
435,977

Table 5: Are Tax Values Correlated with Birth Timing Around Weekends or Other Holidays?

Table 6: Sensitivity of Results to Treatment of Newborns Missing from Tax Returns
Baseline
(1)

Parent Filed
in Birth Year
(2)

Parent Filed
in Subsequent Year
(3)

A. OLS with no Schedule C correction
Tax Value
0.0154*** 0.0111***
(in $1000s) (0.0008)
(0.0008)

0.0052***
(0.0006)

B. Zero Out Schedule C Income, IV
Tax Value
0.0094*** 0.0056***
(in $1000s) (0.0008)
(0.0006)

-0.0006
(0.0007)

C. Zero Out Schedule C Income, Reduced Form
Tax Value
0.0081*** 0.0048***
-0.0006
(in $1000s) (0.0007)
(0.0007)
(0.0006)
N

819,850

881,717

918,583

The table shows results of linear probability models predicting December birth. The
speciﬁcations used in these regressions matches column 4 of Table 2. All regressions
include a 5-piece spline in AGI, a set of maternal age dummies, state dummies, and
year dummies. The two-stage least squares result use the tax value with Schedule
C income zeroed out as an instrument for the full tax value. Standard errors are
clustered on state by year. Asterisks indicate statistical signiﬁcance as follows,***
1%, ** 5%, * 10%.

Table 7: Method and Timing of Birth, by Mothers’ Characteristics
Percent C-section or Induced
Less than high school
35.7%
High school degree
42.7%
Some college
46.3%
Four-years of college or more
45.8%
Teen mother
34.2%
Not teen mother
43.8%
Born outside US
35.9%
Native born
44.9%
Total
42.8%

Percent Weekend Births
22.6%
20.7%
20.0%
20.1%
23.5%
20.5%
23.0%
20.1%
20.8%

The table reports the percentage of births that take place on Saturday or Sunday across diﬀerent demographic
characteristics of mothers in the 2002 Vital Statistics birth certiﬁcate records. If 2/7 of all births took place
on the weekend, weekends would account for 28.6% of births.

46

47

Each column shows the result of a logit model predicting December birth. Columns 3 through 7 also include dummies for third- and
fourth-order births. Due to computational limitations, we have not estimated column 5, which includes zip code ﬁxed eﬀects.

Closest
to DCC
Alternative Speciﬁcations
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Tax Value
0.0135***
0.0151***
0.0154***
0.0142***
0.0142***
(in $1000s)
(0.0007)
(0.0008)
(0.0008)
(0.0007)
(0.0007)
Mom’s Wages,
0.00016*** -0.0001*** -0.0001***
-0.0001****** 0.0001***
−5
−5
−5
(t − 1)
(2.29·10 ) (2.94·10 ) (2.91·10 ) .
(203·10−5 )
(2.08·10−5 )
Married
0.0057***
-0.0406*** -0.0419***
-0.0387***
(0.0019)
(0.0025)
(0.0025)
(0.0018)
1st or 2nd Kid
-0.0046***
(0.0016)
First Kid
0.0058
0.0073
0.0303***
(0.0072)
(0.0073)
(0.0073)
Second Kid
0.0107
0.0118*
0.0315**
(0.0070)
(0.0070)
(0.0070)
Urban
0.0068***
-0.0006
-0.0021
0.0042***
0.0042***
(0.0014)
(0.0015)
(0.0015)
(0.0015)
(0.0015)
AGI
0.0031
(0.0021)
Mother’s Age
0.0013***
(0.0001)
Year Dummies
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Mom’s Age Dummies
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
5-Piece Spline in AGI
Yes
Yes
Yes
State Dummies
Yes
Zip Code Dummies
Yes
Flexible AGI Controls
Yes
Yes
Interact Income with Married, Kids
Yes
N
819,850
819,850
819,850
819,850
819,850
819,850
819,850

No
Controls
(1)
0.0098***
(0.0007)

Table A1: Predicting December Birth, Logit Results

