                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         STATE INCENTIVES FOR INNOVATION, STAR SCIENTISTS AND JOBS:
                          EVIDENCE FROM BIOTECH

                                            Enrico Moretti
                                           Daniel J. Wilson

                                        Working Paper 19294
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19294


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2013




We are grateful to Tim Bartik, the editor and two referees for useful suggestions. Katherine Kuang,
Timothy Ni, and Lauren Ford provided excellent research assistance. Moretti thanks the Innovation
Policy working group at the NBER, the W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research and Microsoft
for generous support. The views expressed in this paper represent those of the authors alone and do
not necessarily represent the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Enrico Moretti and Daniel J. Wilson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
State Incentives for Innovation, Star Scientists and Jobs: ¸˛Evidence from Biotech
Enrico Moretti and Daniel J. Wilson
NBER Working Paper No. 19294
August 2013
JEL No. H0,J0,R0

                                              ABSTRACT

We evaluate the effects of state-provided financial incentives for biotech companies, which are part
of a growing trend of placed-based policies designed to spur innovation clusters. We estimate that
the adoption of subsidies for biotech employers by a state raises the number of star biotech scientists
in that state by about 15 percent over a three year period. A 10% decline in the user cost of capital
induced by an increase in R&D tax incentives raises the number of stars by 22%. Most of the gains
are due to the relocation of star scientist to adopting states, with limited effect on the productivity of
incumbent scientists already in the state. The gains are concentrated among private sector inventors.
We uncover little effect of subsidies on academic researchers, consistent with the fact that their incentives
are unaffected. Our estimates indicate that the effect on overall employment in the biotech sector is
of comparable magnitude to that on star scientists. Consistent with a model where workers are fairly
mobile across states, we find limited effects on salaries in the industry. We uncover large effects on
employment in the non-traded sector due to a sizable multiplier effect, with the largest impact on employment
in construction and retail. Finally, we find mixed evidence of a displacement effect on states that are
geographically close, or states that economically close as measured by migration flows.


Enrico Moretti
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
moretti@econ.berkeley.edu

Daniel J. Wilson
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
101 Market St.
Mail Stop 1130
San Francisco, CA 94105-1530
Daniel.Wilson@sf.frb.org
1 Introduction
    There is growing empirical evidence that agglomeration of economic activity generates
significant economies of scale at the local level. This evidence raises both normative questions,
concerning whether government intervention is socially optimal from a national or global
perspective, and positive questions about whether such intervention, even if desirable, is
effective. Can firms’ location decisions be influenced by government incentives and, if so,
should national or local governments provide incentives to firms to cluster in particular
locations?
    These questions have led to growing interest among economists on the effect of place-based
economic policies. Place-based economic policies are development strategies intended to foster
economic activity in a city or a region. These policies are widespread both in the US and in the
rest of the world. 1 Indeed, it is rare for a large production or research facility to open today in the
US without the provision of some form of subsidy from the relevant local government
(Greenstone and Moretti, 2004; Greenstone, Hornbeck and Moretti, 2010.)
    An increasingly common type of place-based policy is state-provided subsidies for “high-
tech” and life-science firms designed to spur innovation-based clusters. Urban economists have
long suspected that innovative industries like high-tech and life-science are characterized by
significant localized agglomeration economies. For example, the distribution of the bio-
technology industry is heavily clustered spatially, with a large fraction of the industry
employment concentrated in Boston/Cambridge, the San Francisco Bay area, San Diego, New
Jersey, Raleigh-Durham and the Washington, D.C. area. This concentration is consistent with the
existence of strong localized agglomeration externalities. 2



1
  Bartik’s seminal book on place-based economic policies (1991) provides a comprehensive taxonomy and
discussion of the different types of policies. In the US, state and local governments spend $80 billion per year on
these policies (Story, 2013), while the federal government spends $15 billion (GAO, 2012). Examples of location-
based policies typically adopted by local and state governments include direct subsidies and/or tax incentives for
local firms, subsidized loans, industrial parks, technology transfer programs, export assistance and export financing,
the provision of infrastructure, and workforce training.
2
 The hypothesis of agglomeration economies dates back at least to Marshall (1920) who discussed how they could
be generated by a variety of mechanisms, including localized knowledge spillovers, thick labor markets for
specialized workers, and localized supply chains.

                                                          2
    Because local governments often aim at creating and fostering self-sustaining clusters of life-
science research, a growing number of them have introduced incentives that specifically target
the biotech industry. As of 2010, 11 states provide some type of incentive for biotech firms, and
their generosity appears to be growing. In addition, over the past two decades, general R&D tax
credits offered by U.S. states have become increasingly important. These credits are not specific
to biotech, but given the importance of R&D for the industry they are likely to disproportionally
benefit the biotech sector. As of 2010, 34 states provide a broad-based tax credit on R&D, and
the average effective credit rate has grown approximately four-fold over this period to equal half
the value of the federal effective credit rate. In many states, the state tax credit is considerably
more generous than the federal credit (Wilson 2009).
    Yet, despite the growing importance of these incentives, their effects are not well
understood. 3     In this paper, we investigate the effects of state-provided biotech incentives on the
local biotech industry and the broader state economy. We construct a rich state-level panel data
set combining data on biotech-specific incentives and general R&D tax credits with data on
various outcomes measuring biotech activity in a given state and year. Our outcome measures
consist of the number of “star scientists” (defined below), employment, wages, establishments
and patents – each specific to the biotech sector – for the period 1990-2010. We also estimate
models where the outcome variables measure employment in the non-traded sector outside
biotech. Using this data set, we identify the effect of biotech incentives and the R&D user cost
off of the variation within each state over time.
    We find significant effects both of the biotech specific subsidies and the general R&D tax
credits on biotech star scientists, defined as those patenters whose patent count over the previous
ten years is in the top 5% of patenters nationally. 4 The adoption of biotech subsidies raises the

3
  Economists have long cautioned that due to the complex nature of the market failures at work it is unclear what
cluster policies should do in practice and how they should do it (Duranton, 2011). A number of recent empirical
studies have sought to assess the effectiveness of state-wide incentives. Examples include, but are not limited to,
Faulk (2002), Bartik and Erickcek (2010), Bartik and Eberts (2012), Chirinko and Wilson (2008), Chirinko and
Wilson (2010), Wilson (2009), Head et al. (1999), and Duranton, Gobillon and Overman (2011). Overall, the
empirical evidence on the effect of tax incentives on local labor markets is still limited and more work is needed to
understand how in practice these subsidies contribute to economic development.
4
  We follow the literature in using the term “star scientists,” though it should be noted that patenters include
institutions such as universities and corporations in addition to individuals. Specifically, in our biotech patent
database, individuals account for 70.9% of patents, universities account for 5.6%, and other institutions (mostly
corporations) account for 23.5% of patents.

                                                         3
number of star scientists in a state by 15 percent relative to states’ pre-adoption baseline. This is
important because of the existing evidence on the important role played by the localization of
star scientists on the localization and survival of U.S. biotech clusters (Zucker, Darby, and
Brewer, 1998).
      Notably, most of the gains in star scientists are due to the relocation of star scientists to
adopting states, with limited effect on the prolificacy of incumbent scientists already in the state.
In addition, we find that the gains are concentrated among private sector inventors, both
corporate and individual. We uncover little effects of subsidies on academic researchers,
consistent with the fact that incentives for universities – which are mostly non-profit – are
unaffected by the subsidies.
      The effect of incentives on employment is not limited to top scientists, but it extends to other
parts of the biotech workforce. We uncover significant effects on total employment in the
Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manufacturing industry (16 percent gain); the Pharmaceutical
Preparation Manufacturing industry (31 percent gain); and the scientific R&D industry (18
percent gain). Because the effect for all workers is generally similar to the effect for stars, we
infer that the incentives do not alter the ratio of stars in the workforce. 5
      Consistent with a model where workers are fairly mobile across states, we find limited
effects on average salaries in these three industries. While we do not have a direct measure of
start-up creation, we find that the number of biotech-related establishments also increases
following incentive adoption. On the other hand, we find limited effects on patents following the
subsidy, possibly because it takes time for biotech research to come to fruition.
      We cannot rule out the possibility that the adoption of subsidies is correlated with
unobserved trends in the vitality of the local economy in general or the local innovation sector in
particular. However, we fail to find an effect of biotech subsidies and R&D credits on
employment in fields different from biotech. Triple difference models that include other sectors
largely confirm our estimates for the employment effects.
      Consistent with the presence of a local employment multiplier effect (Moretti, 2011), we do
uncover an indirect effect on the local non-traded sector, including retail, construction and real
estate. It appears that by increasing employment in biotech, the incentives indirectly increase
5
    The Pharmaceutical Preparation Manufacturing industry is an exception.

                                                          4
employment in local services, like construction and retail, whose demand reflect the strength of
the local economy.
       In additional specifications, we test whether the provision of biotech-specific tax credits
increases biotech employment at the expense of nearby states. We find mixed evidence of an
effect on states that are geographically close, or states that are economically close as measured
by worker migratory flows. If there is displacement, it is likely to be national in scope.
       Finally, we provide some partial, illustrative and indirect evidence on whether there is a first
mover advantage in providing incentives. In the presence of agglomeration economies and large
fixed costs, the initially positive effect of the subsidy on the biotech industry of an early adopting
state should be long lasting, as biotech activity keeps agglomerating in the state even after other
states have matched the subsidy. On the other hand, in the absence of significant agglomeration
economies and large fixed costs, the initially positive effect experienced by an early adopter will
not last after competing away any relative advantage. In this case, local biotech activity will
revert to the long run equilibrium level that existed before the provision of any subsidies.
Empirically, we find limited evidence of a first-mover advantage for biotech incentives, although
data limitations preclude us from drawing definitive conclusions.
       In terms of policy implications, it is important to keep in mind that our finding that biotech
subsidies are successful at attracting star scientists and at raising local biotech employment do
not imply that biotech subsidies are a good use of taxpayer money. Finding that the provision of
tax incentives by a state results in an increase in biotech R&D activity in that state does not
necessarily suggests the existence of a market failure, nor does it imply that the provision of tax
incentives is an efficient use of public funds. In this paper we have little to contribute to the
question of local efficiency of place based policies. Efficiency of these policies from the point of
view of the nation as a whole is even harder to address and is outside the scope of this paper. 6
           The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe our data
and the incentives available for biotech companies. In Section 3, we discuss the possible
mechanisms through which incentives can affect a state economy and we present the
econometric models used. The empirical results of the paper are in Section 4. Section 5
concludes.
6
    See Kline and Moretti (2013) for a discussion.

                                                     5
2 Data
         We investigate the effects of biotech and R&D incentives on a number of different
measures of economic activity in the biotech sector. The dataset used in this paper is obtained
from combining several separate data sources. In this Section we describe the data sources used
and we provide descriptive statistics.
         Incentives. We focus our analysis on two types of state-specific incentives for
innovation: R&D tax credits and biotech-specific subsidies. The former subsidize any form of
investment in R&D, not just biotech. But given the disproportionate importance that R&D costs
have for biotech, it is obviously an important cost shifter for firms in the industry. To quantify
the magnitude of R&D tax incentives offered by states in our sample, we treat R&D as an input
into a firm’s production function, whose price is the implicit rental rate, or user cost, after taxes.
Extending the standard Hall-Jorgenson (1967) formula for the user cost of capital to incorporate
tax and subsidies – and ignoring federal taxes just for the exposition – yields the following
formula for the user cost of R&D capital (per dollar of investment):


                User Cost of R&D = (r t +δ) [ (1 - s k st – z t st ) / (1 – t st ) ]


         where r t is the real interest rate in the economy, assumed to be the same for all states in
any given year; δ is the economic depreciation rate of R&D capital, assumed to be the same for
all firms; t st and k st are the corporate income tax rate and the R&D tax credit rate in a given
state and year; s is the share of R&D expenditures that qualify for the credit according to the tax
code, set equal to .5 based on IRS Statistics; and z denotes the present discounted value of tax
depreciation allowances. The formula provides a comprehensive measure of the tax advantage
provided by each state in each year that is comparable across jurisdictions and periods. We use
data from Wilson (2009), updated through 2010, to compute the relevant user cost of capital for
each state and year in our sample.
         In addition to generic R&D tax credits, states have adopted a variety of specific fiscal
incentives to attract biotech activity to their jurisdiction. These incentives take various forms,
including tax credits on investment or job creation , sales and use tax exemptions, low-interest

                                                        6
start-up loans, and even grants. In total, 11 states have some form of incentive targeted primarily
at the biotech sector. Appendix 1 provides the list of adopting states and details on each state’s
program. 7
         One major limitation of our data is that, unlike R&D tax credits, it is difficult to come up
with a comparable measure of the generosity of the biotech incentives, due to the heterogeneity
in their forms. For instance, Massachusetts adopted in 2009 a “Life Sciences Tax Incentive
Program” consisting of an investment tax credit, special sales tax exemptions, and a refundable
research tax credit, all applicable only for companies in life sciences. Constructing a single
summary measure of the value of this program that could be compared with another state, which
might have only one of these three tax incentives (though it could be especially generous) or
might have another type of incentive altogether (such as low interest loans as in North Carolina
or research grants as in California), is next to impossible. In principle, one could construct a
proxy for the effective credit rate by taking the ratio of the total amount spent by each state for
“tax expenditures” and grant outlays divided by the biotech sector revenues in the state.
However, states do not typically report how much they spend on incentives separately from other
items in their budget. After a comprehensive search, we were unable to find systematic data for a
significant number of states. Thus, in our empirical analysis, we simply use an indicator for the
adoption of biotech incentives. The coefficient on this indicator has to be interpreted as the mean
effect of adoption, averaged across all adopting states.
         Biotech Star Scientists. We use data on biotech patents to identify the location of
prolific biotech scientists and to measure biotech innovation in a state.                        We purchased a
proprietary data set on biotech patents from IFI Claims Patent Services, a company that provides
data services associated with biotechnology and related fields.                    IFI’s specialists, who have
expertise in chemistry and biology, go through public individual patent records (from U.S. Patent
and Trademark Office, USPTO) and identify all patents that involve advances in the
biotechnology field. This identification is necessary because the technology classes that the
USPTO assigns to patents (which change only infrequently and hence often cannot keep up with
emerging technologies) do not map well to biotech, which is at the intersection of a number

7
 North Carolina is the earliest adopter. Because the state adopted a biotech incentive in 1984, and our data begins in
1990, North Carolina does not contribute to identification of the coefficients in our regression models.

                                                          7
technological fields. Analyses of the biotech sector based on USPTO technology classes, as the
previous literature has relied on, are likely to have difficulty cleanly identifying effects on
biotech patenting given this poor mapping. To our knowledge, this paper is the first to use the IFI
database or any other data specifically focused on identifying biotech patents.
       The IFI’s patent database contains five variables for each (IFI-identified) biotech patent
from 1976 – 2010: year, inventor name, inventor city, inventor state, and USPTO patent ID
number. A single patent may have multiple inventors and hence multiple observations in this
data set. From these data, we construct three variables at the state-by-year level: (1) patent
counts, (2) number of “star” scientists patenting in the state, and (3) number of star scientists that
are new to the state in that year. The latter variable, the number of new star scientists, is the sum
of an extensive margin – star scientists who were patenting in a different state in the previous
year – and an intensive margin – star scientists who were in the previous year in the same state
but were not “stars” (as defined below). In some specifications, we will analyze the effect of
incentives on each margin separately.

       For constructing patent counts by state-year, if the patent has multiple inventors from
multiple states, we assign fractions of the patent to each of its inventors’ states in proportion to
the number of inventors of that patent in each state. For example, if a patent has four inventors,
one from California, one from Oregon, and two from Washington, we would give a patent count
of 0.25 to California, 0.25 to Oregon, and 0.5 to Washington. After constructing patent counts
for each inventor*patent-ID observation in this way, we then simply sum biotech patent counts
by state*year.

       We define “star” biotech inventors, in a given year, as those that are at or above the 95th
percentile in number of biotech patents over the past ten years. In other words, stars are
exceptionally prolific patenters in the biotech field. The 95th cutoff is of course arbitrary, but our
empirical results are not sensitive to it. We have also estimated our regressions based on star
measures using the 90th or 99th percentiles and obtained similar results. Stars in a given year are




                                                  8
assigned to a single state (even if they have listed different states on different patents)
corresponding to the state in which they have the most patents (in that year). 8

         The IFI database includes inventor names and distinguishes between individual and
institutional (corporations, research institutions, and universities) inventors by listing names for
the latter in all uppercase. Furthermore, it is possible to separate institutions into universities and
other institutions (mainly corporations) by classifying patenters with the word “university” or
“college” in their name as universities. We exploit this information to measure state-year counts
of patents, stars, and new stars separately for individuals, universities, and other (non-university)
institutions.

         Employment, Wages and Establishments. In addition to these measures of biotech
innovation, we look at biotech sector employment, wages and number of establishments. While
our patent data allow an exact identification of biotech patents, the same is not true for labor
market and establishment data. First, NAICS does not directly and exactly identify the biotech
industry including both the R&D side and the production and sales side. Second, and more
importantly, for years before 1998, SIC codes were used, and the link with biotech is even more
imperfect. In practice, we consider three different NAICS industries as potentially reflecting
biotech activity: Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manufacturing (NAICS 3254), Pharmaceutical
Preparation Manufacturing (NAICS 325412 – a subset of 3254), Research and Development in
the Physical, Engineering, and Life Sciences (NAICS 54171). 9 None of these three sectors
perfectly captures the biotech industry, as each of them excludes parts of biotech and includes
parts of other industries that do not belong to biotech. But we hope that taken together, the three


8
  The city and state of the patenter may be measured with error, especially when there is a difference between the
location of the inventor and the location of her employer. It is also possible that there are two or more inventors with
the same name within the same city, state, and year, although such instances should be quite rare because the
number of biotech patents within a city-state-year cell is rarely large and hence the probability of two inventors
within that cell having the exact same name should be very small. Both of these cases would induce classical
measurement error in the dependent variable, and so not a cause of bias.
9
  In principle, restricting the third group to R&D in Life Science would be better, but too many states have their
values set to missing to protect confidentiality. There also is a NAICS industry for “Research and Development in
Biotechnology” (541711), however, employment, wage, and establishments data for this industry is only available
from 2007 onward.

                                                           9
sectors may prove informative about the industry. We also note that in our analysis, employment,
salaries and number of establishments are used as dependent variables. Well-behaved
measurement error in the dependent variable of linear models increases standard errors, but does
not introduce any systematic bias in the estimates.

       We obtain employment data by month, industry and state from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics’ Census of Employment and Wages (CEW) series, and aggregate to a yearly frequency.
These data are based on administrative records (state Unemployment Insurance payroll reports)
so they contain minimal measurement error. They cover all employers, with no minimum
thresholds for employer size. We obtain data on wages and number of establishments by month
and state from the Census Bureau’s County Business Patterns (CBP) data series, and aggregate
to a yearly frequency. Both the CEW and CBP data contain missing (non-disclosed) values for
some state-years when disclosure of such values could potentially be used to identify specific
employers. For our regressions, we construct balanced panels for each dependent variable by
dropping states that do not have complete time series for that variable.



       Summary Statistics. Table 1 shows summary statistics. Panel A shows the means of our
variables. Columns 1 to 3 and 7 to 8 show the means in levels (which we use in the regressions)
and Columns 4 to 6 show the means in per capita terms. The means are calculated over our total
sample. Columns 1 and 4 report means across all states; columns 2, 3, 5, and 6 split the sample
between states that adopt biotech incentives and those that do not. While adoption occurs
sometimes in the middle of the sample period, the means are computed across all years in the
sample. Columns 7 and 8 shows the means only for adopting states before and after the adoption.

       Columns 2 and 3 indicate that states that adopt biotech incentives appear to have a
stronger presence of life science industry, though much of that appears to be simply a matter of
size differences: the adopters are larger states on average. Yet, even after scaling by population,
the adopters tend to have a higher average level of biotech economic activity (columns 5 and 6).
The most striking difference is in the number of star biotech scientists – those scientists who are
major producers of biotech research. The Table indicates that adopting states have significantly


                                                10
more stars than non-adopting states.             There are 7.9 star scientists per million residents in
adopting states, while the corresponding figure for non-adopting states is 3.5.
        We also look at “new stars” – star scientists that are new to the state, either because they
were patenting in a different state in the previous year or because they were not stars in the
previous year. This group of movers and rising stars is particularly interesting, because it
captures one of the stated goals of state biotech subsidies, namely to attract and grow major
producers of biotech research. Just under 1 per million residents in adopting states are new stars,
while new stars in non-adopting states are only 0.4 per million.
        Of course, some of the differences between adopting states and non-adopting states
reflect pre-existing differences among states in the penetration of the life science sector, while
other differences reflect the effect of subsidies (if there is any). Absolute employment in
Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manufacturing (3254), Pharmaceutical Preparation Manufacturing
(325412), Research and Development in the Physical, Engineering, and Life Sciences (54171) is
also higher in adopting states, although the per-capita differences are smaller. For example,
0.08% of residents in states that adopt incentives at some point during the sample period work in
the Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manufacturing industry, compared with 0.07% in states that
do not adopt. 10 For Pharmaceutical Preparation Manufacturing, there is no discernible difference
in per-capita employment.
        Salaries and number of establishments also tend to be higher among adopters: the average
salary in the Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manufacturing industry in states that adopt incentives
is $52,710, compared with $47,329 in states that do not adopt (2011 dollars); the number of
establishments is almost double in the former group relative to the latter.
        Columns 7 and 8 of the table show the pre- and post-adoption means for adopting states.
While there is more annual employment in pharmaceutical manufacturing after adoption, there
are actually lower levels of stars scientists, new star scientists, R&D employment, and patents
after adoption. What this comparison of raw means is missing, and what our regression analysis
will capture, is the national trends in these variables. As the regression results show, it turns out



10
 The states that have the most jobs per capita in the industry are Indiana (2.71%), North Carolina (2.13%), and
Connecticut (2.05%).

                                                        11
that the post-adoption decline in these variables is actually smaller for adopting states compared
with the pattern over time in non-adopting states.
         In our empirical analysis we use the subset of states for which we have non-missing
observations in at least 20 years. Columns 1 to 3 of Panel B show the number of observations,
number of states, and number of years in our total sample. Columns 4 to 6 show the same for the
estimation sample. The number of states in each dependent variable’s balanced panel is also
shown at the bottom of each column in the regression results tables. 11
         Lastly, to give a sense of how much of the within-state variation in the R&D user cost is
driven by variation in the R&D tax credit, we first regress the R&D user cost on state and year
fixed effects and then regress the residual on the state R&D tax credit rate. The R-squared from
the latter regression is 0.345. By comparison, the R-squared from regressing the residual on the
state tax rate is just 0.004. Because the R&D user cost is a non-linear function of these two state
tax policies along with federal tax policies, interactions of the state R&D tax credit and these
other components likely explain much of the remaining variation. We conclude that the key
(single) driver of within-state changes in the R&D user cost is the R&D credit rate.




3 Possible Mechanisms and Econometric Models
         The adoption of subsidies for the biotech industry can affect the state economy through a
number of different channels – both direct and indirect. Here we first discuss the most important
channels, and then describe how we propose to empirically assess their importance.


3.1 Mechanisms
         (A) Direct Effects: By making biotech R&D more profitable in the state, the adoption of
incentives may directly affect the state economy by increasing the size of the industry in the



11
   We do this because we need to have a sufficiently long time dimension in our panel to be able to identify (with
reasonable precision) state fixed effects as well as the medium-run (over three years) effects of the incentives. This
leads to their being a different number of states across outcomes (dependent variables) in the tables and makes the
results less comparable from outcome to outcome. As a robustness check we have repeated all of the regressions
with the same sample of 28 states that have non-missing data for all of the outcomes that we look at. The results are
quite similar, though the standard errors are larger. (Results available on request) Limiting the sample in this way
involves a considerable loss of information for most of the outcomes, many of which have data for all 50 states.
                                                         12
state. In practice, this direct effect may result in changes in the industry’s employment, wages
and number of firms.
       (i) Employment. To quantify the employment effect, we will begin by focusing on the
effect of biotech incentives on the number of star scientists in the state. The presence of star
scientists is important because they are arguably the most important input in the biotech
production function.
       The literature on star scientists has highlighted the role that stars have historically played
in the birth and growth of the biotech industry since the mid 1970’s. Star scientists have been
shown to play the key role in the development of the biotech scientific discoveries and their
successful commercialization. Their localization is therefore an important determinant of the
localization of the biotech industry itself. Zucker, Darby and Brewer (1998) argue that the
importance of these individuals, especially the more entrepreneurial among them, “derives from
the tacit character of new breakthrough discoveries. In this way, knowledge, at least when it is
new, is embodied in particular individuals; it cannot diffuse rapidly, as might easily-duplicated
recipes.”
       The adoption of incentives can in principle increase the number of star scientists in a state
through two channels: (a) relocation by star scientists relocate to the adopting state or (b)
increase their patenting prolificacy of incumbent scientists already present in the state and their
movement into the top tier of patenters. Empirically, we will seek to separate these two margins.
       The effect of subsidies on biotech research is expected to be vastly different for private
firms and academic institutions. Biotech incentives and R&D tax credits typically target private
sector research, not academic institutions, which are almost universally nontaxable
organizations. Thus incentives should have a smaller, possibly zero, direct effect on academic
researchers than on private sector researchers. While it is still possible that incentives might have
an indirect feedback effect on academia through displacement (expected negative effect) or
human capital spillovers and agglomeration economies (expected positive effect), this indirect
effect should be smaller than the direct effect. Our empirical analysis will differentiate between
biotech scientists in the private sector and in academia.
       While scientists are probably the most important input in the biotech industry, they are
not the only one. Quantitatively, the most important channel through which the adoption of

                                                 13
incentives might affect the local economy is through increases in the overall employment in the
industry. We will quantify this channel by assessing changes in overall industry employment
caused by biotech incentives. Biotech incentives may help established firms to expand, or foster
the creation of new biotech star-ups. While we do not have direct measures of start-up creation,
we will investigate the effect of incentives on the total number of biotech firms in the state.
       We note that our estimates capture the overall effect of incentives on industry
employment. This overall effect is the sum of the direct effect on the size of the industry and any
localized agglomeration economies, if they exist.
       (ii) Wages. Of course, the adjustment to an increase in the demand for biotech workers
induced by an increase in subsidies need not come entirely in the form of employment gains. If
the supply of scientists or other workers in the biotech sector is not elastic, the effect of
incentives on employment could be limited, but there could be an effect on salaries. Indeed,
Goolsbee (1998) finds that when the federal government increases subsidies for R&D, the
immediate effect on employment is rather limited because the short run labor supply of this type
of worker is quite inelastic at the national level and most of the increased spending translates into
higher wages. Empirically, this appears particularly true for scientists related to defense R&D
such as physicists and aeronautical engineers.
       Our setting is different in two respects. First, and most fundamentally, Goolsbee was
looking at nation-wide changes, while we look at state-level policies. The elasticity of labor
supply at the state level is likely to be quite different from the elasticity of labor supply at the
national level. While it is difficult to add highly specialized workers in the nation as a whole in
the short run, workers are mobile, and highly educated workers are particularly mobile, making
state-level elasticity of labor supply likely to be significantly larger than the national level
elasticity. For this reason, we expect that while wage effects may take place, at least some of the
effect will manifest itself in increased employment.
       Second, within each local labor market, there may be mobility across sectors. This type
of mobility is rare for biotech engineers, but it is probably common for less specialized
occupations, like support staff, commercial personnel, and unskilled labor, which arguably
represent a significant fraction of workers in the three industries we focus on. The degree of
mobility that exists between the biotech industry and the rest of the labor market does not have to

                                                 14
be identical to the one that exists between government supported research sector and the rest of
the labor market.


         (B) Indirect Effects. In addition to the direct effect on the biotech sector, the adoption of
incentives may affect parts of the state economy outside the biotech sector. First, biotech
incentives need to be financed implicitly or explicitly through higher taxes on the rest of the state
taxpayers. This will likely result is economically costly distortions and lower employment in
other parts of the state economy. Separate from the negative effect of taxation, there might be
two additional indirect effects on the local traded and non-traded sector:
         (i) Employment in the Non-Traded Sector. It is possible that the employment gains in
biotech indirectly may result in employment changes in the non-traded sector outside biotech
through a local job multiplier effect. Every time a state economy generates a new biotech job by
attracting a new biotech company, additional jobs might also be created, mainly through
increased demand for local goods and services.
         This multiplier effect is expected to be particularly large for innovative industries like
biotech. First, workers in innovative industries tend to have higher-than-average salaries and
therefore tend to support more local jobs thorough their personal consumption of local non-
traded services. In addition, firms in innovative industries tend to consume more local services.
Third, agglomeration economies may also be stronger in these industries, further increasing the
local multiplier effect. Consistent with this hypothesis, Moretti (2011) finds that for each
additional job in the manufacturing sector in a given city, 1.6 jobs are created in the local non-
traded sector in the long run and that this number is significantly larger for high tech
manufacturing industries and industries that are more human capital intensive.
    (ii) Employment in the Traded Sector Outside Biotech In principle, it is possible that an
increase in biotech activity may affect labor demand not just the local non-traded sector, but also
the local traded sector. 12 The sign of this relationship is a priori unknown. The increase in labor
demand in the state caused by an increase in biotech activity could result in higher local wages
(if local labor supply is not perfectly elastic) and therefore hurt employment in other parts of the

   12
        This would make the placebo tests and the triple difference models discussed above
invalid.
                                                  15
traded sector. Unlike the case of non-tradable goods, the price of tradable goods is set on national
market and cannot adjust to local economic conditions. Thus, some of the production in traded
industries may be shifted to different cities. On the other hand, gains in biotech may increase the
local demand for intermediate goods and services. This effect depends on the geography of the
industry supply chain. While many industries are geographically clustered, the magnitude of this
effect is likely to be quantitatively limited if the market for traded industries is truly national. 13
     In practice, however, we expect the indirect effect of biotech on the rest of the tradable sector
to be limited. The biotech sector is very small with respect to the rest of all state economies.
Thus, it is unlikely to generate strong general equilibrium effects on local wages. Indeed, given
that we will find below that the salary effects on the biotech sector itself are small, it is unlikely
that the salary effects outside biotech can be very large. 14 In addition, the biotech supply chain is
quite distinct from that of most other parts of the traded sector.


3.2 Econometric Models
         We now turn to the description of our econometric models. For each of the outcome
variables that we consider, we estimate a two-way fixed effects regression of the outcome on
both the biotech incentive indicator variable and the R&D user cost variable, controlling for state
and year fixed effects:

                            yit = fi + ft + β Bit + γ rit + ε it                                                     (1)

where y it is the outcome of interest; f i and f t are state and year fixed effects, respectively; B it is
the biotech incentive indicator, and r it is the R&D user cost. 15 If incentives are successful at
increasing biotech activity in a state, we expect β > 0 and γ < 0, since a more generous R&D tax
credit would result in a lower user cost of R&D investment. We do not control for total

13
  In addition, if agglomerations economies are important, the increase in biotech may result in more local
agglomeration outside biotech.
14
  Moretti (2011) finds limited effect of shocks to one part of the traded sector on other parts of the traded
sector.
15
  We jointly estimate the separate effects of the biotech incentives and the R&D user cost rather than estimating
their effects in separate regressions to avoid any possible bias due to correlation between biotech incentives and
R&D credits. Estimating the effects in separate regressions yields similar results.

                                                         16
employment in the state, because employment in the local non-traded sector is likely to be
endogenous, and vary as a function of employment in biotech (see Section 4.3).

       Identification of the effect of biotech incentives and the R&D user cost comes from
variation over time within a state. We assume that while states may differ in the political
influence of the local biotech industry, the exact timing of these changes is mostly driven by
exogenous factors. For example, California adopted specific incentives for biotech companies
when state-wide Proposition 71 in support of state funding for stem-cell research was approved
by voters. While California has had a significant biotech presence since the inception of the
industry in the mid-1970’s, the timing of the stem-cell proposition was largely a reflection of
idiosyncratic political factors, especially the imposition of constraints on the use of federal funds
for stem-cell research by the G.W. Bush administration.

       As far as the R&D user cost is considered, we expect its variation to be largely
exogenous as well. First, because these credits apply to all R&D-performing industries,
idiosyncratic movements in the relative size and relative political influence of the biotech sector
should have a limited, if any, effect on R&D credit adoption. Second, as with biotech incentives,
the exact timing of R&D credit adoption likely owes more to idiosyncratic political and budget
conditions than to recent R&D activity.

       However, we cannot rule out that the adoption of incentives reflects unobserved
differences across states in the prospects of the local biotech industry.         While permanent
differences across states are fully accounted for, time-varying differences are not. The sign of the
potential bias is not known a priori. If the probability of adoption is correlated with unobserved
factors that favor the biotech industry – as in the case where states with strengthening innovation
clusters tend to adopt incentives for biotech and R&D – then our model will over-estimate the
true effect of the subsidies. On the other hand, if the probability of adoption is correlated with
factors that impede growth of the biotech industry – as in the case where states that historically
lack innovation clusters tend to adopt incentives for biotech or R&D – then our models under-
estimate the true effect of the subsidies.




                                                 17
         To get a sense of the magnitude of this problem, we investigate what happens to
industries other than biotech. First, we perform a series of placebo tests, where we test for
whether the incentives are correlated with employment changes in high tech industries different
from biotech. If states that have a growing local innovation sector are more likely to adopt
incentives, we might find that biotech incentives are positively correlated with employment in
the Computer industry, or the Chemical Industry. We also test for whether the incentives are
correlated with changes in employment in non-high tech industries, like Food Manufacturing.
          In addition, to formalize this intuition, for employment outcomes we estimate triple
difference models that estimate the differential effect of incentives on the biotech industry above
and beyond any effect on non-biotech industries. Specifically, we estimate the following model:


           f ji f jt + β BIO ( Bit ⋅ BIO jit ) + γ BIO ( rit ⋅ BIO jit ) + β 0 ( Bit ) + γ 0 ( rit ) + ε jit
     y jit =+                                                                                                  (2)




Where the subscript j indicates whether an observation is for the biotech sector or the non-
biotech sector; f ji and f jt are state*sector and year*sector fixed effects, respectively; BIO jit is an
indicator variable that takes the value 1 if the observation is for the biotech sector and 0 if the
observation is for the non-biotech sector. Unfortunately, data limitations prevent us from
extending the triple difference models to the analysis of star scientists and patents. 16

         Equations (1) and (2) measure short run effects. To allow for the biotech incentives or the
R&D user cost to have delayed effects, we estimate a variant of equation (1) with current plus
two lags of each variable:

                                      2               2
                   yit = fi + ft + ∑ β s Bit − s + ∑ γ s rit − s + ε it                                        (3)
                        =s 0=s 0




16
  Individual level patent data with the relevant geocoding information are available from the NBER Patent Database
only until 2006. Given that several of the biotech incentives in our data set were adopted shortly before and after
2006, using these data to construct non-biotech measures of star scientists and patents provides too few years to
estimate the effect of incentive adoption with any reasonable degree of precision.

                                                            18
In this case we report the cumulative effects over the three years (i.e., the sum of the coefficients
on the current and two lags of the biotech incentive or R&D user cost). 17 This extension is of
more use for identifying the treatment effect of changes in the R&D user cost than it is for
identifying that of biotech incentives. This is because the R&D user cost varies from year to year
whereas the biotech incentive dummy variable is a step function because a change in this
variable from 0 to 1 tends to be permanent. Including lags in the R&D user cost allows for the
possibility that the effect of a temporary change in the R&D user cost may not occur for one or
two years after the change. Delayed effects from the enactment of a biotech incentive will be
picked up even without including lags because the value of the incentive dummy will remain 1
for years beyond the enactment. Nonetheless, it is useful to include lags of this dummy when
including lags of the R&D user cost to control for any contemporaneous correlation between
adoption of the two types of subsidies. Moreover, including lags of this dummy tests for whether
the effect gets larger over time by seeing whether the post-adoption outcome is even larger in
periods more than one (or two) years beyond the adoption year (compared with the post-adoption
outcome including the adoption year).

        Residuals in our models are likely to be serially correlated. Two factors make serial
correlation an especially important concern in our setting. First, the unexplained component of
our outcome variables is likely to be positively serially correlated. This happens because
unobserved state-specific shocks to number of biotech stars and employment in biotech are likely
to be fairly persistent over time, although not completely permanent. After all, the actual number
of biotech stars or employment in biotech in a state does not vary much from year to year, but it
is not fixed either. Second, the key independent variables are also highly serially correlated
within each state over time. The indicator for biotech subsidies takes the value of 0 in all the
years before adoption and the value of 1 in all the years after adoption. The measure of R&D
user cost is also highly serially correlated. These two factors reinforce each other to create
potentially large mismeasurement in the OLS standard errors (Bertrand, Duflo, Mullainathan,




17
   We also experimented with additional lags, which resulted in similar cumulative effects though with larger
standard errors.

                                                         19
2004). Throughout the paper, all models estimate Newey-West standard errors allowing for
AR(2) serial correlation. 18

           To estimate the effect of a state’s incentives on other states’ outcomes we estimate
models with spatial lags:


                     yit = fi + ft + β Bit + γ rit + β out Bitout + γ out ritout + ε it ,           (4)
         out
where X it is a spatial lag of a given variable X = {B, r}, defined as
                                         J                      J
       =X itout                         ∑=
                                         ωi , j X j ,t ;
                                         j ≠i
                                                         ∑ ωi, j 1
                                                                j ≠i
                                                                                .

           A spatial lag is simply a weighted average of X it from other states. The weights, ω it , are
the elements of a spatial weighting matrix meant to capture the relevant “relatedness” between
pairs of states. We present results below based on two complementary definition of distance: (i)
geographical proximity (inverse distance) between states’ population centroids (provided by the
Census Bureau); and (ii) economic distance as measured by population flows (from Census
Bureau data on interstate migration).
           Finally, we estimate models that test whether the effect of adoption of incentives depends
on the order of adoption. To do this, we generate a dummy variable,B4 it , that is one for the first
four adopters of biotech incentives and zero otherwise. (We set out to use the first three adopters,
but Colorado and Missouri – both 1999 adopters – tied for third place). Similarly, we generate a
dummy, R4 it , that is one for the first four R&D credit adopters and zero otherwise. We then
expand equation (1) above to include these dummies and their interactions with their
corresponding incentive variable:


            yit= fi + ft + β Bit + γ rit + ∂B4it + λ R4it + σ B4it ∗ Bit + η R4it ∗ rit + ε it      (5)



           In the presence of strong agglomeration economies and large fixed costs, states that adopt
earlier should enjoy a stronger effect (σ > 0 and/or η < 0) than states that adopt later. On the
18
     See Bertrand, Duflo, Mullainathan (2004) for alternative solutions to this problem.

                                                               20
other hand, in the absence of significant agglomeration economies and large fixed costs, the
initially positive effect of the subsidy may decline when other states also adopt and the relative
attractiveness of the state declines.




4 Empirical Results
4.1 Number of Star Scientists
            We begin by estimating the effect of incentives on the most skilled part of biotech labor
force, the star scientists. 19 Panel A in Table 2 reports estimates of equation (1) via OLS where
the dependent variable is either the number of stars (columns 1 to 3) or new stars (column 4 to
6). The two pre-adoption means provided at the bottom of the panel are the baseline number of
star scientists in adopting states in the year before adoption of the biotech incentive and in the
year before adoption of the adoption of R&D subsidies, respectively. For biotech incentives, the
percent effect is defined as the ratio of the coefficient over the pre-adoption mean, holding
constant R&D tax credits. For R&D user cost, the percent effect is the effect of an increase in
R&D tax credits large enough to lower the R&D user cost by 10 percent evaluated at the pre-
credit-adoption sample mean, holding constant biotech incentives. 20
            Entries in column 1 indicate that the adoption of biotech incentives is associated with an
average increase in the number of star scientist equal to 14.7. Compared with the baseline
number of 100.7 star scientists on average in adopting states in the year before adoption, this
effect represents a 14.6% increase. As expected, the coefficient on the R&D user cost is
negative: a higher user cost implies less R&D investment and therefore fewer star scientists. The
point estimate indicates that an increase in R&D tax credits large enough to lower the R&D user
cost by 0.1 (about 8% of its pre-credit adoption sample mean) would raise the number of star
scientists in the state by 7.8 scientists. Evaluated at the pre-credit adoption sample means for

19
  As noted earlier, we use the term “scientists” loosely here as about 30% of the patenters in our biotech patent
database are not individuals but rather universities, corporations, and other institutions. Below, we look at the effect
of incentives on stars defined separately for individual, universities, and corporations and other institutions.
20
     Specifically, we calculate this elasticity as − ( ∂y ∂r ) ⋅ ( r / y ) 10 where the upper bars denote the pre-credit-
adoption sample means and ( ∂y ∂r ) is the coefficient on the R&D user cost (r).

                                                               21
both the dependent variable and the R&D user cost, the implied percentage increase in stars
scientists from a 10% reduction in the R&D user cost is 22.3%. We regard both of these effects
as economically important. 21
         The variable “new stars” captures positive changes over time in the number of star
scientists in a state. While “stars” is a stock, “new stars” is a flow. When the number of new
stars is the dependent variable, the coefficients on the incentives in the two-way fixed effects
models such as equation (1) represent the effects of the incentives on the rate of change in star
scientists. Estimates in columns 3 and 4 indicate that biotech incentives and reductions in the
R&D user cost are associated with an acceleration in the growth of stars scientists.
Quantitatively, the effect appears strong. Entries in column 3, for example, indicate that the
adoption of biotech incentives is associated with an average increase in the number of new stars
of 1.9, a 7.2% increase relative to the pre-adoption mean, though the point estimate is not
statistically significant. An increase in R&D tax credits that lowers the R&D user cost by 10
percent would raise the number of new star scientists in the state by 17.3% relative to the
baseline.
         In columns 2 and 4 we report the medium run effect, as measured by the cumulative
effect for the first three years. This medium run effect is statistically indistinguishable from the
immediate effect. 22 The percent effects of biotech incentives for stars and new stars are,
respectively, 11.3% and 5.5%. The percent effects of a 10% lower R&D user cost for stars and
new stars are, respectively, 24.1% and 15.3%.
         We are also interested in uncovering possible interaction effects of biotech subsidies and
R&D tax credits. Columns 3 and 6 show the results of including an interaction between the
biotech incentive dummy and the R&D user cost. Here, we aim to assess whether biotech and
R&D incentives have extra benefits if a state employs both of them, over and above their direct
effect. We find that the interaction term is statistically different from zero, indicating that the
adoption of both biotech incentives and more generous R&D tax credits results in an additional
21
  We note that comparing the magnitude of the effect of biotech subsidies to the effect of R&D tax credits is not
feasible, due to the lack of data on the generosity of biotech subsidies: We do not know whether biotech subsidies
are cheap or expensive for states, compared to R&D tax credits.
22
   Recall that because the R&D user cost varies from year to year whereas the biotech incentive dummy variable is a
step function, this model is more useful for R&D user cost than it is for biotech incentives.

                                                         22
positive effect on stars above and beyond their individual effects. (Recall that a negative
coefficient on the interaction implies higher employment from having both a biotech incentive
and a lower R&D user cost since the expected sign on the R&D user cost is negative.) 23
           Difference-in-difference estimates in Table 2 are biased if states adopting incentives
experience different trends in the number of biotech stars. In Appendix Table 2 we investigate
the robustness of our estimates to the inclusion of four region-specific time trends (columns 1
and 2) and 9 division-specific time trends (columns 3 and 4). The models here are similar to the
baseline models in panel A of Table 2. Estimates that condition on region or division trends are
qualitatively consistent with the corresponding estimates in Table 2. 24


           Intensive vs. Extensive Margin. Overall, Panel A indicates that adoption of more
generous incentives by a state results in a significant increase in the number of biotech star
scientists in the state. The number of star scientists in a state can change (a) because star
scientists relocate to the adopting state or (b) because incumbent scientists already present in the
state increase their patenting prolificacy and move into the top tier of patenters. Separating these
two sources of variation is useful because it provides some information on the possible
mechanism(s) underlying the incentives’ effects.
           In panel B of Table 2 we address this question by separately analyzing these extensive
and intensive margins. We define the extensive margin of “new stars” in a given state in year t as
the flow of star patenters who were in a different state in the year t-1, based on year t-1 patent(s).

23
     In these models we do not report the percent effect because it is unclear how to define the pre-adoption means.
24
  We have performed numerous additional robustness checks that are available on request: (1) Our baseline models
are based only on states for which we have non-missing observation for at least 20 consecutive years. We do this
because we need to have a sufficiently long time dimension in our panel to be able to identify (with reasonable
precision) state fixed effects as well as the medium-run (over three years) effects of the incentives. However,
shortening the length of the panel gives qualitatively similar results, but larger standard errors. (2) In addition, we
have re-estimated all of models with the same sample of 28 states that have non-missing data for all of the outcomes
to increase comparability. The results are quite similar, though as one would expect the standard errors are larger.
(3) We have also re-estimated our main models replacing the R&D user cost variable with the R&D credit rate. The
results are shown in Appendix Table 3. We find that the R&D credit rate generally has positive and significant
effects on economic outcomes in the Biotech sector, consistent with the negative and significant effects of the R&D
user cost we found in our baseline specifications (given that the user cost is inversely related to the credit rate). (4)
We also attempted to estimate models that include state specific trends, but standard errors were so large to make
these estimates uninformative.

                                                            23
(Patenters with patents in multiple states in a given year are assigned to the state where they have
the most patents.). We define the intensive margin of “new stars” in a given state in year t as the
flow of star patenters who were in the same state in year t-1 based on year t-1 patent(s) and did
not qualify as “stars” because their 10-year trailing biotech patent count (measured in t-1) was
not in the top 5% of all biotech patenters. By construction, the sum of the intensive and
extensive margins equals the variable “new star” used in Panel A.
       Estimates indicate that biotech incentives are quite effective on the extensive margin, but
have no discernible effect on the intensive margin, at least within 3 years from adoption. In fact,
the estimated effect of biotech incentives on the extensive margin more than accounts for the
total effect on new stars, with the effect on the intensive margin being negative but statistically
insignificant. (The coefficient on total new stars is of course equal to the sum of the coefficients
on each of the two margins.)
       We find that R&D incentives appear to stimulate both margins. The point estimate on the
extensive margin is much larger, but percentage effect relative to the baseline is only slightly
larger for the extensive margin. The percent effects of a 10% reduction in the R&D user cost on
the extensive and intensive margin are, respectively, 18.0% and 15.3%. Overall, it seems that it
is easier to incentivize existing star scientists to move to a state than it is to turn less prolific
inventors already in your state into stars. We caution however, that patenting takes time. It is
possible that three years are a time horizon not long enough to allow for a complete estimation of
the intensive margin effect.


       Private Sector Stars vs. Academic Stars. Biotech incentives and R&D tax credits
typically target private sector research, not academic institutions, which are almost universally
nontaxable organizations. As argued above, the incentives should have a smaller, possibly zero,
direct effect on academic researchers than on private sector researchers.
       In Table 3, we separately identify the effect of subsidies on stars, depending on whether
they are individual patenters, patenters working for academic institutions, or patenters working
for corporations and other non-academic institutions. For both biotech incentives and R&D tax
credits, we uncover a larger percent effect on individual star patenters and corporate and other
non-academic star patenters than on academic stars. In particular, the percentage effects of

                                                 24
biotech incentives are 16.5% for individual stars, 7.2% for corporate and other non-academic
stars, and 0.1% for academic stars. For the R&D user cost, we find an effect for all three
categories. The point estimates are larger for individual stars and corporate and non-academic
stars than they are for university patenters, yet the estimate percentage effects are largest for
university patenters.       However, it must be noted that the percentage effects for university
patenters are particularly difficult to measure given that the baseline (pre-credit-adoption) level
of university new stars is very close to zero.
          Overall, the results indicate that the incentives have a larger effect on individuals and
corporations than they are on universities. This is consistent with the hypothesis that academic
institutions may not benefit from tax incentives as much as private sector researchers.


4.2 Overall Industry Employment
          The findings on star scientists are important not just in itself, but especially because of
the role that stars play in the birth and growth of the biotech industry. But of course, the vast
majority of workers in the biotech industry are not star scientists. Table 4 assess the effect of
subsidies on total industry employment (measured in thousands of jobs) for the three industries
that are closest to biotech: the Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manufacturing sector ( columns 1, 2
and 3); in the Pharmaceutical Preparation Manufacturing sector ( columns 4, 5, and 6), which is a
subset of Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manufacturing; and in the Scientific R&D sector (
columns 7, 8, and 9). 25
          Estimates indicate that adoption of biotech incentives is associated with a significant
increase in the number of jobs in all three industries. The estimated employment effects are
economically sizable. For example, the entry in column 1 suggests that the adoption of biotech
incentives by a state is associated with 1,324 additional Pharmaceutical and Medicine
Manufacturing jobs in the state. Compared with the average baseline industry employment level
in adopting states in the year before adoption (8,043), this amounts to a 16.5% increase in

    25
         Note that the definition of the last industry group is not ideal, because it is rather expansive: not
only it includes all life science R&D, but also other types of R&D outside the life science sector. A
narrower definition is not feasible. While R&D biotech is identified in the County Business Patterns in
recent years, it is not identified before 1998.
                                                      25
employment. The medium run effect in column 2 is slightly smaller, but not statistically
different. The percentage effect is similar for employment in the R&D industry ( columns 7 and
8).   Not surprisingly, the percentage effects are largest for the Pharmaceutical Preparation
Manufacturing sector – a subset of Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manufacturing and arguably a
closer approximation of biotech employment – at about 30% ( columns 4 and 5).
        More generous R&D tax credits are also associated with more employment in the three
industries. An increase in R&D tax credits large enough to lower the R&D user cost by 10
percent would raise industry employment by between 6% and 18%. As with biotech incentives,
the percentage effects of a 10% reduction in the R&D user cost are largest for the Pharmaceutical
Preparation Manufacturing sector at 15.6%. Surprisingly, the percentage employment effect of a
10% reduction in the R&D user cost is small and insignificant in the R&D industry. However,
the effect becomes significant if one allows for a delayed effect by including two lags of the
R&D user cost. In this case, the cumulative effect of a 10% reduction in the user cost is 10.3%.
        Columns 3, 6, and 9 investigate the possible interactions of biotech subsidies and R&D
tax credits. Point estimates and percent effects suggest that having both a biotech incentive and a
low R&D user cost leads to higher employment in these sectors. This is consistent with the
presence of an interaction effect uncovered above for star scientists.
        The estimated effects of the subsidies for total employment in Table 4 are generally
similar to the estimated effects for stars in Table 2 in percent terms. This implies that the
provision of incentives does not alter the ratio of stars in the workforce. In retrospect, this is not
too surprising. The share of stars is largely determined by the production function, and there is
no reason to expect that the provision of subsidies alter the technology used by biotech
companies.    The exception seems to be the Pharmaceutical Preparation Manufacturing sector
where the percent effect is significantly larger for overall employment than star scientists.
        Our estimates of the effect of R&D tax credits are consistent with some of the key
estimates in the literature. Consider for example an increase in R&D tax credits resulting in a
10% reduction in R&D user costs. Assuming that R&D costs are one-quarter of overall costs in
biotech firms, a 10% reduction in R&D user costs cause a 2.5% reduction in overall costs. Our
estimates indicate that such a reduction would result in an increase in employment of 2% to 4%.
This range is consistent with estimates by Bartik and Erickcek (2010). In their analysis of

                                                 26
Michigan's MEGA program, they find an elasticity of -0.2 of state business activity with respect
to overall state and local business taxes, corresponding roughly to an elasticity of -4 with respect
to a change in overall business costs, as state and local business taxes tend to be somewhere
around 5% of overall business value-added.
          Another study that addresses a similar question to our analysis here is Bartik and
Hollenbeck (2012). They study the effects of an R&D tax credit in the state of Washington on
job creation. They find that this tax credit created jobs: employment grew by between 0.5 and 0.6
percent at the firms that claimed credits because of the tax credit. Once scaled by the size of the
R&D credit, this estimate is not inconsistent with our estimates, although somewhat smaller.


          Placebos and Triple-Difference Estimates. Identification of coefficients in Table 4
comes from within-state changes over time in incentives. State fixed effects fully account for
any permanent difference between states that adopt incentives and those that do not. But
estimates in these difference-in-difference models may be biased if the timing of incentive
adoption is correlated with unobserved shocks to a state local economy. For example, it is
possible in principle that states tend to adopt biotech incentives when the local biotech sector is
stronger than in the rest of the nation. This would be the case if economic strength of the local
biotech industry translates into lobbying clout. If adoption is positively correlated with industry
strength, our estimate of the adoption effect would be upward biased. The reverse could also be
true, if states tend to adopt biotech incentives in a countercyclical/stimulate way, i.e. when the
local biotech sector is weak. In this case our estimate of the adoption effect would be downward
biased.
          An examination of the media reporting around the time of adoption in four states did not
reveal any particular pattern in the motivations used by legislators for adoption. To obtain some
more systematic evidence on the validity of our identification assumption, we provide three
additional pieces of information. First, as mentioned above, we include results where we
condition on four region-specific trends and nine division-specific trends. Our point estimates
appear robust to the inclusion of these controls (see Appendix Table 2).
          Second, we test for whether the incentives are correlated with changes in employment in
tradable industries other than biotech. We look only at tradable industries because increased

                                                 27
activity in the biotech industry resulting from subsidies may well cause increased demand for
local non-tradable services such as construction, retail, and real estate. 26 Thus, for the purpose of
a placebo test, we focus on other tradable industries which should not materially be affected by
biotech-specific incentives, though they could be affected by more general incentives such as
R&D credits.              We consider overall Manufacturing excluding Chemicals; Machinery
Manufacturing; Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing; and Food Manufacturing.
Other non-chemical manufacturing industries did not have sufficient state-level data coverage.
           The results are shown in Table 5. The coefficient on the biotech incentive is either
insignificantly different from zero or negative in all cases, suggesting no stimulative effect from
the incentive. Perhaps surprisingly, the R&D user cost is also found to have no effect on
employment in these industries. Possible reasons for this are that R&D scientists are a smaller
share of total employment in these industries compared with the biotech industry and/or that
labor supply of R&D workers in these industries is more inelastic.
           We explore more systematically the idea of using other tradable industries as a control
group by providing triple-difference estimates. Specifically, we report estimates of equation (2),
using our baseline specification where outcomes now vary by state, year, and sector (where
sector is “biotech” or “non-biotech”) and interacting all right-hand-side variables, including year
and state fixed effects, by a biotech sector indicator. The triple-difference estimates of the
incentive is identified from the difference between the biotech sector and the non-biotech sector
in the pre-adoption to post-adoption change in the outcome for adopting states relative to the
change over the same period for non-adopting states. Unlike Table 5, here we include all
nonbiotech industries in the tradable sector in the analysis, in order to use all available
information on control industries. 27 We do not include non-tradable industries because
employment changes there are endogenous to biotech subsidies due to employment multiplier
effects (see Section 4.3 below).
           The results are shown in Table 6. The focus in the triple-difference models is on the
coefficients on biotech incentives. The coefficients on R&D user cost are reported for
completeness but are not particularly informative on the validity of our identifying assumption:
26
     We investigate this possibility below.
27
     Data limitations preclude triple-difference estimates of the models for biotech stars in Tables 2 and 3.

                                                             28
unlike biotech-specific incentives, R&D tax credits affect both the treatment and the control
group. The triple-difference coefficient in the table measures whether R&D tax credits
differentially affect biotech relative to other traded industries.
        We find estimates for the effects of biotech-specific incentives that are similar to those
from difference in difference models. Notably, the percent effects of the biotech-specific
incentives are very close to those in Table 4. We find that reductions in the R&D user cost
increase employment in pharmaceutical manufacturing more so than in other tradable industries
(as a whole), but surprisingly we find the opposite for employment in the R&D industry.
        Overall, the evidence in Tables 5 and 6 is reassuring. While we cannot rule out the
possibility that that the adoption of incentives reflects unobserved time-varying differences
across states in the prospects of the local biotech industry, this evidence lends some credibility to
our identification assumptions.


4.3 Employment in the Local Non-Traded Sector
    We have found that biotech-specific incentives and tax credits for R&D result in increases in
biotech employment. A related question is whether this direct effect on employment is limited to
the biotech sector or it extends to other parts of the labor force through the type of multiplier
effects discussed in Section 3.1 above.
        Consistent with the notion of a strong local multiplier effect, Table 7 indicates that the
adoption of biotech incentives results in significant employment gains in the construction
industry (37,000 additional jobs, 16% of pre-adoption baseline), retail industry (31,000
additional jobs, 6.7% of the baseline) and real estate industry (6,000 additional jobs, 8.0% of the
baseline). States adopting tax credits for R&D experience significant employment gains in
construction but not in retail or real estate. The percent effect for construction is 7.6%.
        These indirect effects are quantitatively very large, especially the ones for biotech
incentives. Taken at face value, these effects imply significantly larger multiplier effects that the
one found by Moretti (2011b) for high tech, human capital intensive industries. We note that the
magnitude of these effects could in principle reflect the possibility that other policies are enacted
simultaneously with the changes in biotech incentives or with changes in the generosity of R&D



                                                  29
tax credits that might affect the non-traded sector.                    It could also reflect the presence of
unobserved shocks to the local economy that are positively correlated with adoption. 28


4.4 Salaries in the Biotech Industry
           Our main focus is on employment, measured both by the number of jobs and by the
number of star scientists. In additional models, we also look at salaries. Table 8 focuses on
salaries. Following the standard in the literature estimating wage equations, we measure the
dependent variable in log values. The coefficients on the biotech incentives thus represent
elasticities; percentage effects are simply the elasticities times 100. The coefficients on the R&D
user cost represent the percent effect of a one-unit change in the R&D user cost. We compute
the percent effects of a 10% reduction in the R&D user cost, shown in the table, by multiplying
the coefficient by 10% of the mean R&D user cost in the year prior to credit adoption for
adopting states. Consistent with a model where labor supply of biotech workers at the state level
is fairly elastic, we find the effect of subsidies on salaries to be limited. Biotech incentives are
not associated with wage increases in the Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manufacturing (columns
1 and 2) and in the Pharmaceutical Preparation Manufacturing sectors. There is a positive
although small effect of adoption for the Scientific R&D sector: adoption is associated with 0.5%
percent increase in the sector’s salaries (column 5), but over a three year period the effect
disappears. Turning to R&D user costs, we find that changes in the user cost get capitalized to
some extent into salaries in the pharmaceutical industries but not in the R&D industry. However,
the effect is quite small: a 10% reduction in the R&D user cost results in a 0.4% increase in the
average salary in Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manufacturing as well as in the subsector of
Pharmaceutical Preparation Manufacturing. In Appendix Table 2 we include of four region-
specific trends and 9 division specific trends. Our point estimates appear robust to the inclusion
of these controls.
       The small wage effects in Table 8 stand in contrast with Goolsbee’s (1998) findings of large
wage effects following labor demand increases due to policy changes. The difference is likely to
be explained by the differences in the geographical scope of the analysis, as discussed in Section

28
     This would cast doubt on our identification strategy. However, we are not aware of any specific examples of state-
sponsored subsidies to the non-traded sector that tend to be systematically associated with biotech incentives.
                                                           30
3.1 above. In our analysis policy variation occurs at the state level – thus allowing for inter-state
mobility to induce significant shifts in local labor supply –while in Goolsbee’s analysis the
policy variation is national.
    In addition, workers in the three industries under consideration are unlikely to be all
specialized. A significant fraction of workers employed in biotech have skills that are not
specific only to that industry. Thus, there is likely to be significant within-state, cross-sector
reallocation, at least for workers in non-scientific occupations. For example, when demand for
administrative staff increases in biotech in response to an increase in state subsidies, some
administrative staff might leave other sectors to move to biotech. Unfortunately, we do not have
salary data for scientists. In theory we would expect their salaries to be more sensitive to demand
shifts than the salary of the general population, as movements across industries are less likely.


4.5 Biotech Establishments and Biotech Patents
           One important question is whether state subsidies for innovation help the formation of
start-ups. We do not have direct measures of start-up creation, but we report the effect on number
of establishments. Increases in the number of establishments may arise either because state
incentives foster more start up creation, or because established companies open new facilities in
a state.
    In Table 9 we report the effect on number of establishments. Increases in the number of
establishments may arise either because state incentives foster more start up creation, or because
established companies open new facilities in a state.
    We find a significant effect of biotech incentives on the number of establishments in both
Pharmaceutical Manufacturing and the R&D industry. The percent effects are between 10% and
18%. By contrast, we find no significant effect of declines in the user cost of R&D on number of
establishments in Pharmaceutical Manufacturing but we find a significant increase in Scientific
R&D establishments. We find that a 10% reduction in the user cost of R&D is associated with
about a 14% increase in R&D establishments, and the effect appears to grow slightly over time.
           The analysis so far has focused on the inputs used by biotech firms. We now examine one
measure of output: biotech patents. Given that we find an increase in employment and in star
scientists – arguably important inputs in the production of innovation – one might expect a

                                                 31
significant increase in number of patents filed – arguably a good proxy for output in the process
of innovation. The findings, shown in Table 10, are mixed. On the one hand, we fail to find a
statistically significant effect of biotech incentives on biotech patents, though the point estimate
implies a fairly large percentage effect (about 14%). On the other hand, we find a significant
effect of R&D user costs, indicating that variation in R&D user costs has a more immediate
effect on patent filings. The percentage effect of a 10% reduction in the R&D user cost is found
to be 27.8%. In Appendix Table 2 we include of four region-specific trends and 9 division
specific trends. Our point estimates appear robust to the inclusion of these controls.
     We also look at biotech patent counts broken out by those patented by individuals versus
universities versus corporations and other non-academic institutions. The estimated percentage
effects are similar across the three categories. As with total patents, the biotech incentives have
no statistically significant effect while reductions in the R&D user cost increase patents for each
category by roughly 25%.


4.6 Models with Spatial Lags
     We now turn to the question of whether the provision of local incentives is a zero sum game
across jurisdictions, or whether it increases aggregate biotech activity. Previous work on state tax
incentives (not specific to biotech) have tended to find negative, or “beggar thy neighbor,”
effects of own-state incentives on other states and a zero-sum game nationally (Wilson 2009,
Chirinko and Wilson 2008, and Goolsbee and Maydew 2000). We cannot directly evaluate this
question, but we provide some indirect evidence by testing whether the provision of incentives
results in a decline (or increase) in star scientists and employment in nearby states (see equation
4). 29
     We measure proximity using either a geographical definition or an economic one. In panel A
of Table 11 we measure distance using a spatial weighting matrix based on population flows
between states. In particular, population flows between state i and state j is defined as the
average between the annual percent of population moving from state i to state j, and the annual
percent of population moving from state j to state i, based on Census Bureau data. For the

29
  Kline and Moretti (2013) provide a model-based approach to estimating the aggregate effects of place based
policies.

                                                    32
biotech incentive, which is expected to have a positive in-state effect on star scientists, a positive
coefficient on the spatial lag would imply a positive spillover of one state’s incentives to star
scientist employment in “nearby” states while a negative coefficient implies a negative or
“beggar thy neighbor” effect. For the R&D user cost, increases in which are expected to lower
the number of star scientists, a negative coefficient implies a positive spillover while a positive
coefficient implies a “beggar thy neighbor” effect.
     The table indicates that for the total stock of stars, there is a significant negative effect of one
state’s incentives on neighboring states. The magnitude of the out-of-state effect is roughly
similar to that of the own state effect, suggesting a zero-sum game nationally. However, we
should note that the point estimates on the spatial lags are imprecisely estimated. Hence, we are
hesitant to make definitive statements about the net effect of the incentives nationally. In
contrast to this finding for the stock of star scientists, we find no evidence of spatial spillovers
for entry of new stars or total employment in biotech industries. For the R&D user cost, we find
no evidence of statistically significant spatial spillovers except for the flow of new star scientist
for which we find a positive spillover. 30 That is, a reduction in the R&D user cost in one state
appears to increase the flow of new star scientists to both that state and its neighbors. This
positive spillover could reflect regional agglomeration forming as a result of one state reducing
R&D costs.
     The results are quite similar if we use a spatial weighting matrix based on geographical
proximity. Panel B shows estimates from model that use a distance-based weighting matrix
based on the inverse of the distance between each pair of states. It includes only those states with
non-missing data for the particular dependent variable in that particular regression. 31



30
   The lack of significant negative spillovers from R&D tax incentives on biotech stars and employment contrasts
with the negative spillovers of such incentives on R&D spending found in Wilson (2009). It is possible that
spillovers are more negative outside of the biotech sector where positive agglomeration-related spillovers could be
more prevalent. Another possible explanation is that R&D spending is much more geographically mobile than is
employment. Part of the spending mobility may reflect increases in salaries of R&D workers in tax-advantaged
states. Part of it could also reflect corporations relabeling R&D spending from one location to another in response
to differentials in R&D tax incentives.
31
   One obvious alternative measure of distance would be an indicator for contiguity. A contiguity-based spatial
weighting matrix is appealing in theory, but it is unfeasible in our setting. For employment, salaries, and
establishments, there are states with missing data. This makes the contiguity weighting matrix unmeasurable for
many states.
                                                         33
       The point estimates using a distance-based spatial lag are very similar to estimates in panel
B, although the standard errors are higher. The two statistically significant cells in panel A are no
longer significant. Overall, the findings of panel A and B points to some displacement, but are
not precise enough to draw firm conclusions.


4.7 The Effect of Early Adoption
       Finally, we test whether the effect of adopting biotech incentives is stronger for earlier
adopters, as one would expect in the presence of strong agglomeration forces. To do so, we add
an interaction between the biotech incentive dummy and an indicator for whether the state is one
of the first four adopters of biotech incentives (see equation 5). 32 Similarly, we include an
interaction between the R&D user cost and an indicator for whether the state is one of the first
four adopters of an R&D tax credit. We focus on the effects on stars, new stars, and employment
in each of the three biotech-related industries.
       Our estimates in Appendix Table 4 point to a generally small effect of biotech incentives for
earlier adopters. For each of the five outcomes, it appears that the effect for earlier adopters is
virtually zero (as the interaction effects roughly cancels out the total effects), while the effect for
later adopters is stronger. For R&D tax credits, we find that early credit adopters experienced
larger pharmaceutical employment gains from the resulting drops in the R&D user cost than did
later adopters. However, for star scientists and R&D employment, we find no significant
difference in the R&D user cost effect between early and later adopters. 33
       Overall, there is little evidence that early adopters enjoy larger benefits from adoption. We
caution, however, that we cannot draw strong conclusions from this test, as the magnitude of the
biotech incentives is unknown, and may have been set endogenously by states. In the presence of
agglomeration economies, for example, late adopters face stronger incentives to overcome the
early adopters’ advantage, and may provide more generous subsidies.




32
  We originally intended to use an indicator for whether the state is one of the first three adopters, but the place of
third adopter is a tie between Colorado and Missouri.
33
     Findings are robust to the controlling for the state share of national biotech employment.

                                                            34
5   Conclusions
       States spend billions of dollars to attract R&D activity to their jurisdiction. We shed light
on how effective these policies are at attracting jobs in biotech. We find significant increases in
the number of star scientists, the number of biotech workers and the number of establishments,
but limited effects on salaries and patents. While we think that the timing of the variation in the
incentive levels is largely driven by idiosyncratic political factors, we cannot rule out the
possibility that it may be endogenous.
       We stress that the finding that subsidies to biotech R&D raise biotech employment in a
state does not tell us whether those subsidies are economically justified. Knowledge of the
magnitude, the geographical scope and the direction of localized spillovers is a prerequisite for
an appropriate design of an efficient innovation policy.




                                                35
Bibliography



Bartik, Timothy J. (1991). “Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development
        Policies?” Kalamazoo: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

Bartik, Timothy J., 2002. Evaluating the impacts of local economic development policies on
     local economic outcomes: what has been done and what is doable? Upjohn Working Papers
     03-89, W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

Bartik, Timothy J. and George Erickcek. (2010). “The Employment and Fiscal Effects of
        Michigan’s MEGA Tax Credit Program,” Upjohn Working Papers and Journal Articles
        10-164, W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

Bartik, Timothy J. and Randal W. Eberts. (2012). “The Role of Tax Incentives and Other
        Business Incentives in Local Economic Development”, Book chapters authored by
        Upjohn Institute researchers, in: Nancy Brooks & Kieran Donaghy & Gerrit-Jan Knaap
        (ed.), Oxford Handbook of Urban Economics and Planning, pages 634-654 W.E. Upjohn
        Institute for Employment Research.

Bartik, Timothy J., and Kevin Hollenbeck (2012). “An Analysis of the Employment Effects of
        the Washington High Technology Business and Occupation (B&O) Tax Credit:
        Technical Report” W.E. Upjohn Institute, Upjohn Institute working paper; 12-187

Black, Dan, Natalia Kolesnikova, and Lowell Taylor, 2009. "Earnings Functions When Wages
       and Prices Vary by Location," Journal of Labor Economics, University of Chicago Press,
       vol. 27(1), pages 21-47, 01.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo and Sendhil Mullainathan; How Much Should We Trust
       Differences-in-Differences Estimates?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119(1),
       pp. 249-75.

Busso, Matias, Jesse Gregory, and Patrick M. Kline. “Assessing the Incidence and Efficiency of
       a Prominent Place Based Policy.” NBER Working Paper 16096. National Bureau of
       Economic Research, June 2010.

Chirinko, Robert, and Daniel J. Wilson. “State Investment Tax Incentives: A Zero‐Sum Game?”
     Journal of Public Economics 92(12), Dec. 2008, pp. 2362‐2384.

Chirinko, Robert, and Daniel J. Wilson. (2010) “Job Creation Tax Credits: Whether, When, and
     Where?” FRBSF Working Paper 2010‐25.

Chirinko, Robert, and Daniel J. Wilson. (2013). “Tax Competition among U.S. States: Racing to
       the Bottom or Riding on a Seesaw?” FRBSF Working Paper 2008-03.
                                              36
Combes, Pierre Philippe, Gilles Duranton, and Henry G. Overman, 2005. Agglomeration and the
   adjustment of the spatial economy. Papers in Regional Science 84 (3), 311-349.

Duranton, Gilles, Laurent Gobillon & Henry G. Overman, 2011. "Assessing the Effects of Local
    Taxation using Microgeographic Data," Economic Journal, Royal Economic Society, vol.
    121(555), pages 1017-1046, 09.

Duranton, Gilles, and Diego Puga, 2004. Micro-foundations of urban agglomeration economies.
    In: Henderson, J. Vernon, Thisse, Jacques-Francois (Eds.), Handbook of Urban and
    Regional Economics, vol. 4. North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Duranton, Gilles, Overman, Henry G., 2005. Testing for localization using microgeographic
    data. Review of Economic Studies 72 (4), 1079-1106.

Duranton Gilles. “California Dreamin': The feeble case for cluster policies” Review of Economic
      Statistics, 2011, 3(1), 3-45.

Duranton Gilles, Philippe Martin, Thierry Mayer, and Florian Mayneris. "The Economics of
      Clusters: Evidence from France,” Oxford University Press, 2010.

Ellison, Glenn, and Edward L. Glaeser, 1999. The geographic concentration of industry: does
        natural advantage explain agglomeration? American Economic Review Papers and
        Proceedings 89(2), 311-316.

Faulk, Dagney. “Do State Economic Development Incentives Create Jobs? An Analysis of State
       Employment Tax Credits. National Tax Journal. 2002.

Government Accountability Office. 2012. “Federal Economic Development Grants to
      Communities with High Rates of Poverty and Unemployment.” GAO-12-938R.

Glaeser, Edward L. (2001). “The economics of location-based tax incentives.” Harvard Institute
       of Economic Research, Discussion Paper Number 1932.

Glaeser, Edward, and Joshua Gottlieb (2008). The economics of place-making policies.
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

Goolsbee, Austan (1998). "Does Government R&D Policy Mainly Benefit Scientists and
      Engineers?," American Economic Review, American Economic Association, vol. 88(2),
      pages 298-302, May.

Goolsbee, Austan, and Edward L. Maydew (2000). “Coveting thy neighbor’s manufacturing: the
      dilemma of state income apportionment.” Journal of Public Economics, vol. 75, pp. 125-
      143.



                                              37
Greenstone, Michael and Enrico Moretti. (2004). “Bidding for Industrial Plants: Does Winning a
       ‘Million Dollar Plant’ Increase Welfare?” MIT Department of Economics Working Paper
       No. 04-39.

Greenstone, Michael, Rick Hornbeck, and Enrico Moretti. (2010). “Identifying Agglomeration
       Spillovers: Evidence from Million Dollar Plants”, Journal of Political Economy.

Hall, Robert E. and Dale Jorgenson. (1967). “Tax Policy and Investment Behavior”, American
       Economic Review, 57.

Head, K., Ries, J., and Swenson, D., 1999. Attracting foreign manufacturing: investment
       promotion and agglomeration. Regional Science and Urban Economics 29 (2), 197 – 218.

Helsley, Robert W. and William C. Strange, "Matching and Agglomeration Economics in a
     System of Cities," Regional Science and Urban Economics, 20,1990, pp. 189-212.

Kline, Patrick. and Enrico Moretti (2012). “Local Economic Development, Agglomeration
     Economies and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority.”
     2012.

Kline, Patrick and Enrico Moretti (2013). “Place Based Policies with Unemployment”, NBER
        Working Paper 18758.

Marshall, Alfred (1920): Principles of Economics. London, U.K.: MacMillan and Co.

Moretti, Enrico, 2004a. Estimating the external return to higher education: evidence from cross-
    sectional and longitudinal data. Journal of Econometrics 120 (July-August), 175-212.

Moretti, Enrico, 2004b. Workers’ education, spillovers and productivity: evidence from plant-
    level production functions. American Economic Review 94 (June), 656-690.

Moretti, Enrico, 2004c. Human capital externalities in cities. In: Henderson, J. Vernon, Thisse,
    Jacques-Francois (Eds.), Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics, vol. 4. North-
    Holland, Amsterdam.

Moretti, Enrico (2011). “Local labor Markets,” Handbook of Labor Economics.

Moretti, Enrico, “Local Multipliers” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings
    (2011b).

Moretti, Enrico. “The New Geography of Jobs,” Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 2012.

Rosenthal, Stuart S., William C. Strange, 2004. Evidence on the nature and sources of
    agglomeration. In: Henderson, J. Vernon, Thisse, Jacques-Francois (Eds.), Handbook of
    Urban and Regional Economics, vol. 4. North-Holland, Amsterdam.
                                                38
Rosenthal, Stuart S., William C. Strange, 2003. Geography, industrial organization, and
    agglomeration. Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (2), 377-393.

Rosenthal, Stuart S., William C. Strange, 2008. The attenuation of human capital spillovers.
    Journal of Urban Economics 64 (2), 373-389.

Story, Louise 2013 “As Companies Seek Tax Deals, Governments Pay High Price”, New York
        Times, Dec 1, 2013.

Wilson, Daniel J. (2009). “Beggar Thy Neighbor? The In-State, Out-of-State, and Aggregate
    Effects of R&D Tax Credits.” Review of Economics and Statistics 91(2), 431-436.

Zucker, Lynne G, Michael R. Darby, and Marilynn B. Brewer, 1998. "Intellectual Human
       Capital and the Birth of U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises," American Economic Review,
       American Economic Association, vol. 88(1), pages 290-306, March.




                                               39
                                                         Table 1. Summary Statistics
                                                               Panel A. Means
                                                                        Mean (in levels)                     Mean (per 100,000 residents)               Mean (in levels) ‐‐ Adopting States Only

                                                                            Biotech                                    Biotech
                                                                           Incentive         Non‐                     Incentive
Variable Name                                               All States     Adopters        adopters    All States     Adopters        Non‐adopters   Pre‐adoption mean         Post‐adoption mean
Star Scientists                                                  28.04            80.19        15.32         0.436            0.790          0.349                   90.78                      63.30
New Star Scientists                                               9.17            24.37         5.46         0.053            0.096          0.043                   26.37                      18.13
Employment in Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manuf.                5,529            8,058        4,853        74.145            83.348        71.687                   7,211                      9,257
Employment in Pharmaceutical Preparation Manufact.              4,563            5,958        4,191        52.809            52.136        52.990                   4,742                      7,920
Employment in Scientific R&D                                    9,026           18,465        6,655       175.131          199.365        169.043                  20,115                     16,132
Salaries in Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manuf.                 48,656           52,710       47,329       ‐‐              ‐‐              ‐‐                       50,264                     56,904
Salaries in Pharmaceutical Preparation Manufact.               50,294           51,960       49,631       ‐‐              ‐‐              ‐‐                       51,494                     52,742
Salaries in Scientific R&D                                     46,420           51,869       44,943       ‐‐              ‐‐              ‐‐                       42,574                     67,360
Establishments in Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manuf.             35.20            67.01        27.02         0.599            0.781          0.552                   70.55                      61.46
Establishments in Pharmaceutical Preparation Manufact.           17.89            29.84        14.72         0.298            0.319          0.292                   30.56                      28.72
Establishments in Scientific R&D                                226.81           513.70       156.84         4.465            5.336          4.252                  546.68                     462.12
Number of Patents                                                78.33           211.78        45.78         1.288            2.090          1.093                  239.12                     169.62
Biotech Incentive Dummy                                          0.081            0.414            0         0.002            0.011          0.000                   0.000                      1.000
R&D User Cost                                                    1.175            1.171        1.176         0.059            0.027          0.066                   1.171                      1.171

                                                         Panel B. Observation Counts
                                                                        Total Sample                              Regression Sample
Variable Name                                             N            # of states*    # of years* N               # of states     # of years
Star Scientists                                                   1071              51           21           1071              51              21
New Star Scientists                                               1071              51           21           1071              51              21
Employment in Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manuf.                   996              47           21            798              38              21
Employment in Pharmaceutical Preparation Manufact.                 929              44           21            588              28              21
Employment in Scientific R&D                                      1046              49           21            987              47              21
Salaries in Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manuf.                     693              47           20            618              43              18
Salaries in Pharmaceutical Preparation Manufact.                   499              28           20            438              37              18
Salaries in Scientific R&D                                         900              45           20            670              40              18
Establishments in Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manuf.              1020              51           20           1020              51              20
Establishments in Pharmaceutical Preparation Manufact.            1000              50           20           1000              50              20
Establishments in Scientific R&D                                  1020              51           20           1020              51              20
Number of Patents                                                 1071              51           21           1071              51              21
Biotech Incentive Dummy                                           1071              51           21           1071              51              21
R&D User Cost                                                     1071              51           21           1071              51              21

* With at least one non‐missing observation
                                                    Table 2. The Effect of Incentives on the Number of Star Scientists
                                                      1                     2                   3                    4                     5                   6
Panel A. Stars & New Stars                                                   Stars                                                        New Stars
A1 Contemporaneous Effects
 Biotech Incentive                                      14.680 *                                   632.270 *              1.905                                104.468
                                                        (8.527)                                  (356.313)              (1.987)                                (81.742)
 R&D User Cost                                         ‐77.786 ***                                  ‐62.186 **         ‐18.402 **                               ‐15.812 **
                                                      (28.908)                                     (25.595)             (7.864)                                  (7.403)
Biotech Incentive * R&D User Cost                                                                 ‐531.288 *                                                    ‐88.230
                                                                                                 (301.021)                                                     (68.852)
A2 Cumulative Effects (0‐2 years)
 Biotech Incentive                                                         11.421                                                           1.451
                                                                           (8.072)                                                        (1.926)
 R&D User Cost                                                            ‐84.113 **                                                     ‐16.290 *
                                                                        (33.011)                                                          (8.583)
Pre‐Biotech‐Incentive‐Adoption Mean                                   100.667                                                         26.556
Pre‐Credit‐Adoption Mean                                              40.158                                                          12.248
Percent Effect of Biotech Incentives                    14.582             11.345                                        7.175              5.466
Percent Effect of R&D User Cost                         22.303             24.118                                       17.300            15.314
Panel B. New Stars                                             New Stars, Extensive Margin                                     New Stars, Intensive Margin
B1 Contemporaneous Effects
 Biotech Incentive                                        3.037 *                                 141.826 **             ‐1.132                                 ‐37.358
                                                        (1.758)                                   (70.035)                (.847)                               (36.058)
 R&D User Cost                                         ‐14.027 **                                  ‐10.522 *             ‐4.375 *                                 ‐5.290 **
                                                        (6.474)                                     (6.053)             (2.531)                                  (2.475)
Biotech Incentive * R&D User Cost                                                                ‐119.394 **                                                     31.164
                                                                                                  (59.183)                                                     (30.418)
B2 Cumulative Effects (0‐2 years)
 Biotech Incentive                                                             2.674                                                         ‐1.223
                                                                             (1.843)                                                          (.974)
 R&D User Cost                                                              ‐13.455 *                                                        ‐2.835
                                                                             (7.097)                                                        (3.259)

Pre‐Biotech‐Incentive‐Adoption Mean                                      20.778                                                          5.778
Pre‐Credit‐Adoption Mean                                                  8.959                                                          3.289
Percent Effect of Biotech Incentives                  14.617                12.870                                    ‐19.585              ‐21.161
Percent Effect of R&D User Cost                        18.029                17.294                                    15.315                9.924
Sample Period                                       1990‐2010            1992‐2011             1990‐2010            1990‐2010           1992‐2010           1990‐2010
Number of Observations                                   1071                   969                 1071                 1071                  969               1071


Notes. Regressions estimated via OLS. Standard errors based on Newey‐West VC estimator with within‐state AR(2) errors. Pre‐adoption means are the baseline
numbers of star scientist in adopting states in the year before adoption of incentive or credit. For biotech incentives, the percent effect is defined as the ratio of the
coefficient over the pre‐adoption mean, holding constant R&D tax credits. For R&D user cost, is the effect of an increase in R&D tax credits large enough to lower the
R&D user cost by 10 percent (relative to its average among adopting states), holding constant biotech incentives. Panel A includes all patenters. In Panel B, we define
the extensive margin of “new stars” in a given state in year t as the flow of star patenters who were in a different state in the year t‐1, based on year’s t‐1 patent(s).
Patenters with patents in multiple states in year t‐1 are assigned to a single state based on their modal state. We define the intensive margin of “new stars” in a given
state in year t as the flow of star patenters who were in the same state in year t‐1 based on year’s t‐1 patent(s) and did not qualify as “stars” because their 10‐year
trailing biotech patent count measured in t‐1 was not in the top 5% of all biotech patenters. Sample includes data for 51 states. All models include state fixed effects
and year fixed effects.
                                         Table 3. The Effect of Incentives on the Number of Star Scientists, by type of Patenter

                                                                          Stars                                                        New Stars
                                                  (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)                (5)                  (6)
Panel A. Individual
A1 Contemporaneous Effects
 Biotech Incentive                                   13.171 *                                   565.095 *               2.249                                119.119
                                                     (7.325)                                  (305.030)               (1.888)                                (77.656)
 R&D User Cost                                      ‐61.609 **                                   ‐47.669 **          ‐15.982 **                               ‐13.030 *
                                                   (23.957)                                     (20.883)              (7.345)                                  (6.825)
Biotech Incentive * R&D User Cost                                                              ‐474.798 *                                                   ‐100.539
                                                                                              (257.737)                                                      (65.490)
A2. Cumulative Effects (0‐2 years)
 Biotech Incentive                                                        10.806                                                           1.830
                                                                          (6.974)                                                        (1.826)
 R&D User Cost                                                           ‐66.265 **                                                     ‐14.642 *
                                                                        (27.325)                                                         (8.159)
Pre‐Biotech‐Incentive‐Adoption Mean                                   79.778                                                          24.556
Pre‐Credit‐Adoption Mean                                              31.930                                                          11.506
Percent Effect of Biotech Incentives                16.509                13.545                                      9.161                7.454
Percent Effect of R&D User Cost                     22.217                23.896                                     15.994              14.653

Panel B. Corporate
B1 Contemporaneous Effects
 Biotech Incentive                                    1.263                                      62.425               ‐0.434                                  ‐14.668
                                                    (1.309)                                    (56.429)                (.293)                                (11.781)
 R&D User Cost                                     ‐14.800 ***                                  ‐13.255 ***           ‐2.137 **                                 ‐2.497 ***
                                                    (4.770)                                      (4.422)               (.975)                                    (.968)
Biotech Incentive * R&D User Cost                                                               ‐52.615                                                        12.245
                                                                                               (47.642)                                                        (9.957)
B2 Cumulative Effects (0‐2 years)
 Biotech Incentive                                                         0.431                                                           ‐0.441
                                                                         (1.238)                                                            (.322)
 R&D User Cost                                                          ‐16.334 ***                                                        ‐1.500
                                                                         (5.524)                                                          (1.030)
Pre‐Biotech‐Incentive‐Adoption Mean                                   17.667                                                           2.000
Pre‐Credit‐Adoption Mean                                              7.316                                                            1.064
Percent Effect of Biotech Incentives                 7.150                 2.438               353.347               ‐21.676             ‐22.068            ‐733.379
Percent Effect of R&D User Cost                     23.293               25.709                 20.862                23.131              16.237              27.023

Panel C. University
C1 Contemporaneous Effects
 Biotech Incentive                                    0.004                                       0.644               ‐0.029                                   ‐1.750
                                                      (.191)                                    (6.226)                (.057)                                 (1.746)
 R&D User Cost                                       ‐2.027 *                                    ‐2.011 *             ‐0.624 *                                 ‐0.667 *
                                                    (1.221)                                     (1.213)                (.368)                                   (.368)
Biotech Incentive * R&D User Cost                                                                ‐0.550                                                         1.481
                                                                                                (5.299)                                                       (1.494)
C2 Cumulative Effects (0‐2 years)
 Biotech Incentive                                                         ‐0.083                                                         ‐0.054
                                                                            (.200)                                                         (.063)
 R&D User Cost                                                             ‐2.277 *                                                       ‐0.819 **
                                                                          (1.340)                                                          (.412)
Pre‐Biotech‐Incentive‐Adoption Mean                                    3.333                                                           0.222
Pre‐Credit‐Adoption Mean                                               2.056                                                           0.120
Percent Effect of Biotech Incentives                0.119                  ‐2.502                                   ‐13.121              ‐24.386
Percent Effect of R&D User Cost                    11.352                 12.747                                     59.720               78.404
Sample Period                                   1990‐2010             1992‐2010             1990‐2010            1990‐2010            1992‐2010           1990‐2010
Number of Observations                               1071                      969               1071                  1071                   969              1071



Notes: Regressions estimated via OLS. Standard errors based on Newey‐West VC estimator with within‐state AR(2) errors. Pre‐adoption means are the baseline
numbers of star scientist in adopting states in the year before adoption of incentive or credit. For biotech incentives, the percent effect is defined as the ratio of the
coefficient over the pre‐adoption mean, holding constant R&D tax credits. For R&D user cost, is the effect of an increase in R&D tax credits large enough to lower the
R&D user cost by 10 percent (relative to its average among adopting states), holding constant biotech incentives. Panel A includes individual patenters. Panel includes
corporae patenters. Panel C includes aacdemic patenters. Sample includes data for 51 states. All models include state fixed effects and year fixed effects.
                                                          Table 4. The Effect of Incentives on Employment in Biotech Related Industries
                                                                                                                                                          Research & Development in the Physical,
                                     Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manufacturing (3254)         Pharmaceutical Preparation Manufacturing (325412)            Engineering, and Life Sciences (54171)
                                       (1)              (2)              (3)                      (4)               (5)              (6)                 (7)              (8)                (9)
Contemporaneous Effects
 Biotech Incentive                          1.324 **                            64.682 **            1.796 **                            47.858 *          3.951 ***                        157.398 ***
                                            (.658)                            (29.513)               (.740)                            (27.334)          (1.482)                            (59.433)
 R&D User Cost                             ‐8.355 **                             ‐6.115 *           ‐8.793 **                             ‐6.327          ‐5.844                              ‐1.801
                                          (3.476)                               (3.167)            (4.402)                               (3.943)         (4.150)                             (3.579)
Biotech Incentive * R&D User Cost                                              ‐54.761 **                                               ‐39.848 *                                          ‐132.002 ***
                                                                              (25.317)                                                 (23.416)                                             (50.520)

Cumulative Effects (0‐2 years)
 Biotech Incentive                                           1.190 *                                                    1.741 **                                             4.037 **
                                                            (.700)                                                      (.784)                                             (1.980)
 R&D User Cost                                            ‐10.030 **                                                   ‐9.819 *                                             ‐9.517 *
                                                           (3.953)                                                    (5.329)                                              (5.593)
Pre‐Biotech‐Incentive‐Adoption
Mean                                                        8.043                                                   5.792                                                 21.701
Pre‐Credit‐Adoption Mean                                 7.698                                                    6.495                                                 10.611
Percent Effect of Biotech Incentive       16.456          14.791                                   31.016            30.062                              18.206            18.601
Percent Effect of R&D User Cost           12.496          15.003                                   15.589            17.409                               6.341            10.327
Sample Period                       1990‐2009          1990‐2009            1990‐2009           1990‐2009         1990‐2009         1990‐2009         1990‐2009        1990‐2009         1990‐2009
Number of States                              38               38                  38                  28                28                28                47                47               47
Number of Observations                       798             722                  798                 588               532               588               987               893              987



Notes: Employment is measured in thousands. Regressions estimated via OLS. Standard errors based on Newey‐West VC estimator with within‐state AR(2) errors. For biotech incentives, the percent effect
is defined as the ratio of the coefficient over the pre‐adoption mean, holding constant R&D tax credits. For R&D user cost, is the effect of an increase in R&D tax credits large enough to lower the R&D
user cost by 10 percent (relative to its average among adopting states), holding constant biotech incentives. All models include state fixed effects and year fixed effects.
                                                 Table 5. The Effect of Biotech Incentives on Employment in Other Industries in the Traded Sector


                                                            Chemical                        Machinery Manufacturing              Computer and Electronic Products            Food Manufacturing
                                                (1)                     (2)                (3)               (4)                     (5)                 (6)               (7)           (8)
Contemporaneous Effects
 Biotech Incentive                                ‐22.240                                     ‐0.098                                     ‐12.825 **                        ‐2.158 ***
                                                 (18.917)                                    (1.273)                                      (5.386)                           (.748)
 R&D User Cost                                     56.965                                     ‐1.383                                      22.497                            4.376
                                                 (83.436)                                    (9.663)                                    (15.182)                          (4.085)

Cumulative Effects (0‐2 years)
 Biotech Incentive                                                        ‐17.571                                  0.487                                  ‐12.836 **                        ‐2.410 ***
                                                                         (22.833)                                (1.556)                                   (6.291)                           (.659)
 R&D User Cost                                                             31.212                                 ‐1.097                                   23.770                            3.167
                                                                        (101.754)                               (11.653)                                 (18.456)                          (4.508)
Pre‐Biotech‐Incentive‐Adoption Mean                    368.308                                     23.735                                   63.676                               42.436
Pre‐Credit‐Adoption Mean                               322.756                                     29.093                                   40.551                               34.513
Percent Effect of Biotech Incentives              ‐6.038                   ‐4.771             ‐0.415              2.053                 ‐20.141         ‐20.158            ‐5.084         ‐5.679
Percent Effect of R&D User Cost                   ‐2.032                   ‐1.113              0.547              0.434                   ‐6.388          ‐6.749           ‐1.460         ‐1.057
Sample Period                                 1990‐2009                1990‐2009          1990‐2009           1990‐2009               1990‐2009       1990‐2009        1990‐2009      1990‐2009
Number of States                                      48                       48                 49                 49                       49              49               51             51
Number of Observations                             1008                       912              1029                 931                    1029              931            1071             969


Notes. Regressions estimated via OLS. Standard errors based on Newey‐West VC estimator with within‐state AR(2) errors. Employment is measured in thousands. For biotech incentives, the percent
effect is defined as the ratio of the coefficient over the pre‐adoption mean, holding constant R&D tax credits. For R&D user cost, is the effect of an increase in R&D tax credits large enough to lower
the R&D user cost by 10 percent (relative to its average among adopting states), holding constant biotech incentives. Sample includes data for 51 states. All models include state fixed effects and
year fixed effects.
                                                      Table 6. Triple Difference Estimates


                                                Employment (3254)                 Employment (325412)                Employment (54171)
                                                       (1)                               (2)                                (3)
Contemporaneous Effects
Biotech Incentive ‐ Biotech Industry                            1.290 **                                1.801 **                     3.862 ***
                                                                (.658)                                  (.741)                     (1.470)
R&D User Cost ‐ Biotech Industry                               ‐1.165 ***                              ‐8.996 **                     4.447 ***
                                                                (.324)                                (4.406)                        (.837)
Pre‐Biotech‐Incentive‐Adoption Mean                             8.043                                   5.792                      21.701
Pre‐Credit‐Adoption Mean                                        7.698                                   6.495                      10.611
Percent Effect of Biotech Incentives                           16.042                                 31.098                       17.795
Percent Effect of R&D User Cost                                 1.742                                 15.950                        ‐4.826
Sample Period                                               1990‐2009                              1990‐2009                    1990‐2009
Number of Observations                                           1595                                    1176                         1973



Notes: Regressions estimated via OLS. Standard errors based on Newey‐West VC estimator with within‐state AR(2) errors. Pre‐adoption
means are the baseline numbers of star scientists in adopting states in the year before adoption of incentive or credit. For biotech incentives,
the percent effect is defined as the ratio of the coefficient over the pre‐adoption mean, holding constant R&D tax credits. Sample includes
data for 51 states. All models include indicators for state, year, biotech sector, as well as the the interaction of state and biotech, and year
and biotech.
                                           Table 7. The Effect of Incentives on Employment in the Non‐Traded Sector



                                                           Constr                                      Retail                                 Real Estate
                                                (1)                   (2)                   (3)                  (4)                (5)                  (6)
Contemporaneous Effects
 Biotech Incentive                                 36.819 **                                   31.349 ***                              5.814 ***
                                                 (14.623)                                    (10.867)                                (2.034)
 R&D User Cost                                    ‐87.570 *                                   ‐18.286                                 ‐5.021
                                                 (49.198)                                    (40.324)                                (6.680)

Cumulative Effects (0‐2 years)
 Biotech Incentive                                                       35.121 **                                 32.185 ***                               6.098 ***
                                                                       (16.028)                                  (11.447)                                 (2.324)
 R&D User Cost                                                        ‐133.096 **                                 ‐43.734                                ‐10.560
                                                                       (57.853)                                  (46.676)                                 (7.712)
Pre‐Biotech‐Incentive‐Adoption Mean                        229.83                                     470.79                                    73.12
Pre‐Credit‐Adoption Mean                                 131.86                                     312.45                                    40.68
Percent Effect of Biotech Incentives          16.02                 15.28                  6.66                  6.84              7.95                 8.34
Percent Effect of R&D User Cost                   7.647                 11.623                0.674                 1.612             1.421                2.989
Sample Period                                 1990‐2009             1990‐2009             1990‐2009             1990‐2009        1990‐2009            1990‐2009
Number of States                                     50                     50                   51                    51                51                   51
Number of Observations                             1050                    950                 1071                   969              1071                  969


Notes. Regressions estimated via OLS. Standard errors based on Newey‐West VC estimator with within‐state AR(2) errors. Employment is measured in thousands.
For biotech incentives, the percent effect is defined as the ratio of the coefficient over the pre‐adoption mean, holding constant R&D tax credits. For R&D user
cost, is the effect of an increase in R&D tax credits large enough to lower the R&D user cost by 10 percent (relative to its average among adopting states), holding
constant biotech incentives. All models include state fixed effects and year fixed effects.
                                                               Table 8. The Effect of Incentives on Salaries

                                                  Pharmaceutical and Medicine                 Pharmaceutical Preparation         Research & Development in the Physical,
                                                     Manufacturing (3254)                      Manufacturing (325412)             Engineering, and Life Sciences (54171)
                                                 (1)                  (2)                     (3)                (4)                     (5)                   (6)
Contemporaneous Effects
 Biotech Incentive                                  0.001                                         0.000                                         0.005 *
                                                    (.003)                                        (.004)                                        (.003)
 R&D User Cost                                     ‐0.033 **                                     ‐0.034 *                                      ‐0.006
                                                    (.016)                                        (.020)                                        (.020)

Cumulative Effects (0‐2 years)
 Biotech Incentive                                                         ‐0.001                                   ‐0.003                                      0.003
                                                                            (.002)                                   (.003)                                     (.003)
 R&D User Cost                                                            ‐0.035 **                                 ‐0.033                                     ‐0.008
                                                                            (.018)                                   (.027)                                     (.025)
Percent Effect of Biotech Incentives               0.077                   ‐0.076                0.047              ‐0.265                     0.513            0.341
Percent Effect of R&D User Cost                     0.374                   0.401                 0.392              0.377                      0.069           0.089
Sample Period                                  1990‐2007               1990‐2007             1990‐2007          1990‐2007                  1990‐2007       1990‐2007
Number of States                                       43                       43                   37                  37                        40               40
Number of Observations                                618                      555                  438                 395                       670              590


Notes: Regressions estimated via OLS. Standard errors based on Newey‐West VC estimator with within‐state AR(2) errors. For biotech incentives, the percent effect is
defined as the ratio of the coefficient over the pre‐adoption mean, holding constant R&D tax credits. For R&D user cost, is the effect of an increase in R&D tax credits
large enough to lower the R&D user cost by 10 percent (relative to its average among adopting states), holding constant biotech incentives. All models include state fixed
effects and year fixed effects.
                                                      Table 9. The Effect of Incentives on Number of Establishments

                                                Pharmaceutical and Medicine                Pharmaceutical Preparation            Research & Development in the Physical,
                                                     Manufacturing (3254)                   Manufacturing (325412)                Engineering, and Life Sciences (54171)
                                                 (1)                  (2)                  (3)                (4)                     (5)                     (6)
Contemporaneous Effects
 Biotech Incentive                                   9.102 ***                                  5.541 **                                   113.541 **
                                                   (3.319)                                    (2.425)                                      (45.636)
 R&D User Cost                                      ‐9.812                                     ‐8.827                                     ‐333.870 ***
                                                  (10.920)                                    (8.961)                                    (120.078)

Cumulative Effects (0‐2 years)
 Biotech Incentive                                                        7.840 **                                   4.775 *                                     105.524 **
                                                                        (3.144)                                    (2.574)                                       (47.431)
 R&D User Cost                                                           ‐9.663                                   ‐13.035                                       ‐405.360 ***
                                                                       (11.918)                                  (12.964)                                      (142.180)
Pre‐Biotech‐Incentive‐Adoption Mean                       76.78                                     35.556                                      621.222
Pre‐Credit‐Adoption Mean                                  47.08                                     23.260                                      281.929
Percent Effect of Biotech Incentives           11.86                10.21                 15.58                13.43                  18.28                   16.99
Percent Effect of R&D User Cost                     2.400               2.363                  4.370               6.453                   13.636                 16.556
Sample Period                                  1990‐2007            1990‐2007             1990‐2007           1990‐2007                 1990‐2007             1990‐2007
Number of States                                       51                  50                     50                  49                       51                     51
Number of Observations                                977                 880                    955                 863                     1020                    918


Notes: Regressions estimated via OLS. Standard errors based on Newey‐West VC estimator with within‐state AR(2) errors. For biotech incentives, the percent effect is
defined as the ratio of the coefficient over the pre‐adoption mean, holding constant R&D tax credits. For R&D user cost, is the effect of an increase in R&D tax credits large
enough to lower the R&D user cost by 10 percent (relative to its average among adopting states), holding constant biotech incentives. All models include state fixed
effects and year fixed effects.
                                                                        Table 10. The Effect of Incentives on Patents

                                                        Patents                         Patents (Individual)                Patents (Corporate)             Patents (University)
                                               (1)                (2)                 (3)              (4)                (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)
Contemporaneous Effects
 Biotech Incentive                               36.469                                 29.276                                5.607                         1.463
                                               (30.836)                               (21.616)                              (8.388)                       (1.254)
 R&D User Cost                                ‐275.933 **                            ‐192.160 **                           ‐67.667 **                    ‐15.152 **
                                             (114.246)                                (79.066)                            (30.795)                        (5.970)

Cumulative Effects (0‐2 years)
 Biotech Incentive                                               27.020                                  24.577                              1.400                             1.030
                                                               (29.990)                                (20.999)                            (8.503)                           (1.265)
 R&D User Cost                                                ‐269.134 **                             ‐185.172 **                         ‐70.328 **                        ‐13.045 **
                                                             (131.251)                                 (90.765)                          (35.660)                            (6.589)
Pre‐Biotech‐Incentive‐Adoption Mean                    262.94                                183.95                                66.05                            13.31
Pre‐Credit‐Adoption Mean                             114.11                                 79.53                                31.67                             6.42
Percent Effect of Biotech Incentives           13.870            10.276               15.915         13.361                 8.488          2.120          10.993            7.741
Percent Effect of R&D User Cost                27.844            27.158               27.821         26.809                24.603         25.570          27.181           23.402
Sample Period                               1990‐2010       1992‐2010              1990‐2010      1992‐2010             1990‐2010      1992‐2010       1990‐2010        1992‐2010
Number of Observations                           1071               969                 1071            969                  1071            969            1071              969



Notes: Regressions estimated via OLS. Standard errors based on Newey‐West VC estimator with within‐state AR(2) errors. For biotech incentives, the percent effect is defined as
the ratio of the coefficient over the pre‐adoption mean, holding constant R&D tax credits. For R&D user cost, is the effect of an increase in R&D tax credits large enough to lower
the R&D user cost by 10 percent (relative to its average among adopting states), holding constant biotech incentives. All models include state fixed effects and year fixed effects.
                                                                                 Table 11. Spatial Lag Specifications


                                                                                                                                                                     Research & Development in the
                                                                                             Pharmaceutical and Medicine             Pharmaceutical Preparation       Physical, Engineering, and Life
                                         Stars (95th percentile) New Stars (95th percentile)    Manufacturing (3254)                  Manufacturing (325412)                Sciences (54171)
                                                 (1)                      (2)                         (3)                                    (4)                                  (5)
PANEL A: Spatial Weighting Matrix based on interstate population flows.
Contemporaneous Effects
 Biotech Incentive                                      13.583                     1.712                        1.235 *                                 1.769 **                                3.990 ***
                                                        (8.326)                  (1.940)                        (.631)                                  (.711)                                (1.439)
 R&D User Cost                                         ‐76.110 ***              ‐17.774 **                     ‐7.538 **                               ‐7.959 *                                ‐5.214
                                                      (28.760)                   (7.821)                      (3.606)                                 (4.471)                                 (4.059)
Spatial Lag
 Biotech Incentive                                     ‐19.147 *                  ‐3.717                       ‐1.027                                  ‐0.459                                   1.798
                                                      (10.079)                   (3.034)                        (.900)                                  (.918)                                (2.346)
 R&D User Cost                                       ‐244.358                 ‐111.325 *                       18.356                                  30.271                                  ‐3.494
                                                   (215.649)                   (62.434)                      (19.819)                                (22.716)                                (33.226)
Pre‐Biotech‐Incentive‐Adoption Mean                   100.667                    26.556                         8.043                                   5.792                                  21.701
Pre‐Credit‐Adoption Mean                                40.158                   12.248                         7.698                                   6.495                                  10.611
Percent Effect of Biotech Incentives                    13.493                     6.446                       15.352                                  30.549                                  18.387
Percent Effect of R&D User Cost                         21.823                   16.709                        11.275                                  14.111                                   5.657
Sample Period                                     1990‐2010                  1990‐2010                     1990‐2010                               1990‐2010                               1990‐2010
Number of States                                             50                       50                            37                                      28                                     46
Number of Observations                                    1050                      1050                           777                                     588                                    966

PANEL B: Spatial Weighting Matrix based on inverse‐distance between each pair of states.
Contemporaneous Effects
 Biotech Incentive                                     14.264                       1.721                                 1.245 *                       1.822 **                                3.843
                                                       (8.948)                    (2.100)                                 (.669)                        (.740)                                (1.511)
 R&D User Cost                                        ‐76.448 ***                ‐18.017 **                              ‐7.959 **                     ‐8.945 *                                ‐5.946
                                                     (28.542)                     (7.651)                               (3.529)                       (4.599)                                 (4.068)
Spatial Lag
 Biotech Incentive                                    ‐12.415                      ‐6.709                              ‐2.006                           0.996                                   ‐1.905
                                                     (20.250)                     (6.294)                             (1.527)                         (1.412)                                  (4.544)
 R&D User Cost                                      ‐252.065                   ‐152.247 **                             ‐3.416                           0.517                                 ‐57.970
                                                   (238.878)                    (66.725)                             (17.642)                        (25.051)                                (47.213)
Pre‐Biotech‐Incentive‐Adoption Mean                  100.667                      26.556                                8.043                           5.792                                  21.701
Pre‐Credit‐Adoption Mean                               40.158                     12.248                                7.698                           6.495                                  10.611
Percent Effect of Biotech Incentives                   14.169                       6.482                              15.483                          31.462                                  17.707
Percent Effect of R&D User Cost                        21.920                     16.938                               11.905                          15.858                                    6.452
Sample Period                                     1990‐2010                  1990‐2010                             1990‐2010                       1990‐2010                               1990‐2010
Number of States                                            50                         50                                  37                              28                                       46
Number of Observations                                   1050                        1050                                 777                             588                                      966



Notes: In panel A, the Spatial Weighting Matrix is based on interstate population flows. In palel B, the spatial Weighting Matrix based on inverse‐distance between each pair of states.
                            Appendix Table 1. Description of State Biotech Incentives
State                Year         Credit Type

Maryland         2008 - present   Income Tax Credit for early-stage biotech companies
Massachusettes   2009 - present   "Life Sciences Tax Incentive Program": Investment tax credit, special sales tax
                                  exemptions, refundable research tax credit
New Jersey       1996 - present
                                  "Business Employment Incentive Program" (BEIP). Broad-based grant for job creation,
                                  with a lower job-creation qualifying threshold for biotech and "emerging high technology."
                                  Also provides financial assistance for companies in these sectors.
Arkansas         2003 - present   JCTC, Sales tax refunds, and R&D Tax credits with higher subsidies for "targetted
                                  businesses," which consists of: (i) Advanced materials and manufacturing systems; (ii)
                                  Agriculture, food and environmental sciences; (iii) Biotechnology, bioengineering and life
                                  sciences; (iv) Information technology; (v) Transportation logistics; and (vi) Bio-based
                                  products."
Colorado         1999 - present   Biotech Sales and Use Tax Refund
Washington       2004 - present   High Tech Business & Organization Credit for R&D Spending, Includes the
                                  "Biotechnology & Medical Device Manufacturing Sales & Use Tax Deferral/Waiver"
Maine            1997 - present   Sales tax exemption on machinery, equipment, instruments, and supplies for biotech
                                  research
Missouri          1999 - 2003     State & local sales or use tax exemption for life sciences companies (which is just slightly
                                  broader than the sales and use tax exemptions available to most manufacturers)
Florida          2002 - present
                                  Specialized incentives and tax credits, (more technically, the biomedical industry was re-
                                  classified as "high-impact", so that qualified companies could be eligible for the state's
                                  preexisting capital investment tax credits and the High Impact Performance Incentive (a
                                  JCTC-type program)
North Carolina   1984 - present   Has the North Carolina Biotechnology Center which make low interest loans to biotech
                                  start-ups.
California       2004 - present   California Stem Cell Research and Cures Act, which provides biotech research grants
                                    Appendix Table 2. Estimates Conditional on Region and Division Trends

                                                                               Region Trends                           Division Trends
                                                                   Biotech Incentive    R&D User Cost       Biotech Incentive R&D User Cost
Contemporaneous Effects
Stars                                                                           13.174           ‐73.117                 9.043          ‐50.335
                                                                                (7.663)         (30.817)               (6.524)         (29.934)
New Stars                                                                         1.428            ‐4.673                1.025            ‐2.238
                                                                                 (.886)           (3.498)               (.753)           (3.547)

Employment ‐ Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manufacturing (3254)                 1075.857         ‐9435.284               432.613        ‐8904.278
                                                                              (565.127)       (3754.774)             (455.727)       (3352.449)
Employment ‐ Pharmaceutical Preparation Manufacturing
(325412)                                                                      1353.251         ‐9473.389               739.146      ‐10285.490
                                                                              (645.549)       (4637.265)             (544.011)       (4262.766)
Employment ‐ Research & Development in the Physical,
Engineering, and Life Sciences (54171)                                         3672.225        ‐3510.039              3252.809         ‐303.420
                                                                             (1363.094)       (4290.760)            (1219.043)       (4326.328)

Wages ‐ Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manufacturing (3254)                         0.001            ‐0.030                0.001               ‐0.032
                                                                                 (.003)            (.016)               (.003)               (.016)

Wages ‐ Pharmaceutical Preparation Manufacturing (325412)                        0.002            ‐0.031                0.001               ‐0.033
                                                                                 (.004)            (.019)               (.004)               (.020)
Wages ‐ Research & Development in the Physical, Engineering, and
Life Sciences (54171)                                                            0.006            ‐0.001                0.006               ‐0.004
                                                                                 (.003)            (.020)               (.003)               (.020)
Establishments ‐ Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manufacturing
(3254)                                                                            7.706           ‐7.425                 5.872            6.548
                                                                                (2.825)         (11.111)               (2.220)         (12.109)
Establishments ‐ Pharmaceutical Preparation Manufacturing
(325412)                                                                          4.385          ‐10.182                 3.011          ‐11.234
                                                                                (2.122)           (9.242)              (1.624)           (8.968)
Establishments ‐ Research & Development in the Physical,
Engineering, and Life Sciences (54171)                                         104.825          ‐319.254                96.439         ‐231.389
                                                                               (42.757)        (123.663)              (36.592)        (119.521)
Patents                                                                          32.862         ‐256.727                20.083         ‐178.617
                                                                               (28.534)        (120.816)              (24.622)        (115.070)


Notes: Regressions estimated via OLS. Standard errors based on Newey‐West VC estimator with within‐state AR(2) errors. There are 4 Census
regions and 9 Census divisions.
                                                       Appendix 3. R&D Tax Credit Rate Replacing R&D User Cost

                                                                                     Pharmaceutical and                                Research & Development in
                                                              New Stars (95th       Medicine Manufacturing Pharmaceutical Preparation the Physical, Engineering, and
                                  Stars (95th percentile)       percentile)                  (3254)         Manufacturing (325412)         Life Sciences (54171)
                                          (1)                    (2)                        (3)                    (4)                             (5)
Contemporaneous Effects
 Biotech Incentive                            14.759 *                   1.662 *                   1.301 **                     1.758 **                      3.928 ***
                                             (8.405)                    (.967)                    (.656)                       (.738)                       (1.479)
 R&D User Cost                                65.072 **                  4.450                     5.993 **                     6.025                         3.572
                                            (25.572)                   (2.927)                   (2.997)                      (3.842)                       (3.467)
Sample Period                             1990‐2010                 1990‐2010                 1990‐2009                    1990‐2009                    1990‐2009
Number of States                                 51                        51                        38                           28                           47
Number of Observations                         1071                      1071                       798                          588                          987



Notes: Employment in columns 3‐5 is measured in thousands. Regressions estimated via OLS. Standard errors based on Newey‐West VC estimator with within‐state AR(2) errors.
                                                  Appendix Table 4. Effect of Early Adoption on Star Scientists and Employment

                                                                                             Pharmaceutical and                                        Research & Development in
                                                                      New Stars (95th       Medicine Manufacturing      Pharmaceutical Preparation    the Physical, Engineering, and
                                         Stars (95th percentile)        percentile)                 (3254)               Manufacturing (325412)           Life Sciences (54171)
                                                 (1)                     (2)                       (3)                          (4)                               (5)
Contemporaneous Effects
 Biotech Incentive                                    23.987 *                   3.577                      3.036 ***                    3.110 ***                        6.460 ***
                                                    (13.285)                   (3.080)                    (1.004)                      (1.019)                          (2.180)
 R&D User Cost                                       ‐82.554 ***              ‐19.567 **                   ‐8.621 **                    ‐8.690 **                        ‐6.882
                                                    (29.979)                   (8.125)                    (3.450)                      (4.274)                          (4.245)
First4adopters*Incentive
 Biotech Incentive                                  ‐24.761 *                  ‐4.449                      ‐3.927 ***                    ‐3.484 ***                     ‐6.660 ***
                                                   (14.040)                   (3.319)                     (1.049)                       (1.054)                        (2.262)
 R&D Tax Credit                                      46.141                    17.031                    ‐10.295 *                     ‐11.753 *                         3.899
                                                   (40.038)                  (12.525)                     (5.360)                       (6.180)                        (4.154)
Pre‐Biotech‐Incentive‐Adoption Mean                100.667                     26.556                       8.043                         5.792                        21.701
Pre‐Credit‐Adoption Mean                             40.158                    12.248                       7.698                         6.495                        10.611
Percent Effect of Biotech Incentives                 23.828                    13.469                     37.743                        53.698                         29.771
Percent Effect of R&D User Cost                      23.671                    18.395                     12.894                        15.406                           7.468
Sample Period                                    1990‐2010                 1990‐2010                  1990‐2009                     1990‐2009                       1990‐2009
Number of States                                         51                        51                          38                            28                             47
Number of Observations                                 1071                      1071                         798                           588                            987



Notes: Employment in columns 3‐5 is measured in thousands. Regressions estimated via OLS. Standard errors based on Newey‐West VC estimator with within‐state AR(2) errors.
