NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE U.S. MARKET FOR HIGHER EDUCATION:
A GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM ANALYSIS OF STATE AND PRIVATE COLLEGES
AND PUBLIC FUNDING POLICIES
Dennis Epple
Richard Romano
Sinan Sarpça
Holger Sieg
Working Paper 19298
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19298
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

The authors thank Chuck Manski and seminar participants at The Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
the University of Pennsylvania, and the 2014 Thompson Lecture at the Midwest Economic Association
Meetings for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Dennis Epple, Richard Romano, Sinan Sarpça, and Holger Sieg. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The U.S. Market for Higher Education: A General Equilibrium Analysis of State and Private
Colleges and Public Funding Policies
Dennis Epple, Richard Romano, Sinan Sarpça, and Holger Sieg
NBER Working Paper No. 19298
August 2013, Revised May 2014
JEL No. D40,D58,I21
ABSTRACT
We develop a general equilibrium model of the market for undergraduate higher education that captures
the coexistence of public and private colleges, the large degree of quality differentiation among them,
and the tuition and admission policies that emerge from their competition for students. The calibrated
version of the model matches well the aggregate characteristics of U.S. higher education including
college attendance in public and private schools, tuition levels, and the distribution of federal aid. Predictions
about the distribution of students across colleges by ability and income and about the provision of
institutional aid are realistic. We use the model to examine the consequences of federal and state aid
policies. A one-third increase in the availability of federal aid increases college attendance by 6%
of the initial college population, virtually all of the increase being in state colleges and mainly of poor
students. Private colleges reduce institutional aid and use the net funding gain to spend more on educational
inputs and to substitute some highly able poor students for less able rich students. Reductions in federal
or state aid result in reduced attendance mainly by poor students. Reductions of support to state colleges
does not cause private colleges to grow but does improve their quality as demand shifts toward them.
Dennis Epple
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
Posner Hall, Room 257B
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
epple@cmu.edu
Richard Romano
University of Florida
Department of Economics
Gainesville
Florida 32611
richard.romano@warrington.ufl.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19298

Sinan Sarpça
Koç University
Rumelifeneri Yolu, Saryer
34450 stanbul
Turkey
ssarpca@ku.edu.tr
Holger Sieg
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
holgers@econ.upenn.edu

1. Introduction
Rising tuition and increasing student debt have prompted increasing scrutiny of US colleges and
universities.1 State and federal expenditures in support of college are large, together amounting
to more than $200 billion per year.2 State and federal aid policies have been transformed due to
the lingering effects of the Great Recession, which created severe budget problems for most state
governments. States are spending $2,353 or 28 percent less per student in higher education,
while tuition at state schools has increased 27 percent in real terms.3 Counterbalancing some of
these draconian cuts and tuition increases, the Obama administration significantly expanded the
availability and generosity of Pell grants.4 There is, however, debate about the extent to which
federal aid programs enhance accessibility of college to low- and middle-income students and
the extent to which such aid simply bids up college tuitions and costs.5 Understanding the
impact of changes in programs of such magnitude requires general equilibrium analysis. The
theoretical analysis of the provision of higher education is, however, relatively scarce.
Moreover, no theoretical model captures the coexistence of public and private universities and
the tuition and admission policies that arise from their competition for students.
The purpose of this paper is to develop a new model of the US market for undergraduate
higher education to provide a framework for understanding equilibrium choices of students and
providers and to gain new insights into the effectiveness of public policies. Building on recent
advances in modeling the equilibrium in the higher education market, our model includes
competing state and private colleges with alternative objectives, students that differ by income,
ability, and unobserved idiosyncratic preference for colleges, and federal aid modeled to
1

Tuition net of financial aid has increased at approximately twice the rate of inflation for three decades (Bureau of
Labor Statistics), and student debt has tripled in the past decade (Federal Reserve).
2
Federal Student Aid, an office of the U.S. Department of Education, is the largest provider of student financial aid
in the U.S. During the 2010-11school year alone, Federal Student Aid provided approximately $144 billion in new
aid to nearly 15 million post-secondary students. The CBO recently undertook an extensive evaluation of the Pell
Grant Program to investigate reasons for rising costs and possible policy changes (CBO, 2013). The provision of
higher education is also highly subsidized by state governments. According to the National Center for Educational
Statistics, 70 percent of higher education students in the U.S. attend public universities and colleges operated by
state governments. The total state aid to four-year institutions is $62.18 billion or $4,818 per student enrolled in
public colleges in 2008 (Palmer, 2008).
3
Center for Budget and Policy Priorities.
4
The maximum Pell grant increased from approximately $4000 to $5500 during the first term of the Obama
administration.
5
As part of the Ensuring Continued Access to Student Loans Act of 2008, Congress required that the GAO evaluate
how the increases in federal loan limits impact tuition and other expenses (GAO, 2014).

1

approximate U.S. policy. The model provides an appealing set of theoretical predictions,
including substantial exercise of market power by private colleges, provision of need- and meritbased aid at private colleges, minimum ability admission standards at state colleges that vary
across in- and out-of-state students, and optimal exploitation of the federal aid formula by private
colleges. A quantitative version of the model does an excellent job of matching aggregates as
well as predicting patterns of attendance, private college tuition, and student costs. Predictions
of the effects of changes in funding policies on tuition choices and attendance are in line with
recent estimates.
One theoretical challenge is to capture the different objectives of private and public
universities and the different constraints they face within a general equilibrium model. Our
approach builds on the insight that neither public nor most private colleges are likely to
maximize profit. Most private colleges focus primarily on their reputation. This motivates our
approach of modeling private schools as maximizing quality, which depends on the measured
abilities of their students and the educational resources colleges provide them.
Private colleges are largely unconstrained in their policies beyond the limits imposed by
technology and the market. They typically vary tuition with measures of student ability and
household wealth.6 An important challenge in understanding higher education is to provide a
compelling theoretical explanation of the fact that even small private colleges that would seem to
have little market power can systematically engage in pricing by income and, therefore, extract
significant additional revenues from their students. This paper shows that we can obtain realistic
pricing patterns if students have unobserved idiosyncratic preference shocks for colleges in their
choice set.
Public universities face state mandates to provide affordable education to in-state
students. This suggests modeling state universities as maximizing the aggregate achievement of
in-state students. Public universities also face regulated price caps and have limited powers to set
tuition and financial aid policies. However, they obtain direct subsidies from their state
legislatures. Moreover, regulated tuitions generally differ between in- and out-of-state students.
With such a characterization of state colleges, our model shows that state colleges optimally use
6

Among others, Epple, Romano, and Sieg (2003) provide evidence on price discrimination by income and ability by
institutions of higher education.

2

minimum ability admission thresholds that differ between in- and out-of-state students. Our
results also suggest that out-of-state students provide two important functions for state schools.
First, they provide valuable peer externalities since the admission standard for out-of-state
students is typically higher than the admission standard for in-state-students. Second, out-of-state
students pay higher tuition rates and thus cross-subsidize the education of in-state-students.
A major goal of the paper is to evaluate the impact of federal aid on equilibrium in the
market for higher education. The federal government pursues a very different strategy than state
governments in providing aid to higher education. Instead of providing higher education at
subsidized rates, it provides aid to students and their families. The amount of available aid is
basically determined by the difference between the cost of attending the college and the federally
determined expected family contribution, as long as the difference is below a maximum amount
of aid. The cost of attending includes the college’s tuition, room and board, and an allowance for
other expenses like books. Federal aid, therefore, can benefit students at public and private
universities while state subsidies are primarily targeted at in-state students that attend public
schools. Availability of federal aid increases qualifying students’ demands to attend colleges.
Faced with increased demand, private colleges might reduce institutional aid. We characterize
optimal tuition and admission policies in the presence of institutional aid.
To assess the theoretical model and explore its quantitative implications, we develop a
quantitative version of it. The model matches well the observed distribution of student types
between state and private colleges in the U.S. It also matches the degree of need-based and
merit-based aid provided by private colleges and the allocation of federal aid. While there is
broad agreement among educators, policy makers, and economists that government should
ensure affordable access to quality higher education, the functioning of the current aid system is
debated.
We evaluate the effects of two recent policy changes. First, the Obama administration has
significantly increased the amount of federal aid available to students. We show that a one-third
increase in the maximum federal aid from $6000 to $8000 increases college enrollment by 6
percent, with those increases being primarily among relatively poor students and almost entirely
at state institutions. Private schools react with a mixture of reduced institutional aid, increased
expenditure on educational inputs, and by substituting some high-ability and lower-income
3

students for some richer and less-able students. Crowd out of institutional aid in private colleges
of increased federal aid is at least 25% depending on how it is measured. We find that decreases
in federal aid of the same magnitude have approximately the opposite effects.
The second policy experiment is motivated by the reduced state subsidies coupled with
increased tuition that have occurred in a number of states on the heels of the recent recession. We
examine a revenue neutral reduction in the per student state subsidy of $2000 dollars
accompanied by the same increase in tuition to in-state and out-of-state students. The share of the
college-age population attending college decreases by 7.5 percent. This enrollment decreases is
almost entirely in state colleges, with mainly poor students exiting, but also with nontrivial exit
of some upper-middle-income students of lower ability who are too rich to qualify for federal
aid. Increased federal aid protects some lower middle-income students from the state tuition
increase who then remain in college. An interesting effect in state colleges is that they reduce
the ability admission threshold to out-of-state students because those students pay higher tuitions
and thus offset revenue losses from the reduced state subsidy. Private colleges do not grow but
the less elite ones benefit from increased demand as state colleges become more expensive; they
substitute higher-ability students of moderate income formerly at state institutions in place of
some richer and lower-ability students.
A large literature exists on the economics of higher education. A general observation is
that this literature has focused more on demand-side issues while taking as given college
policies. We develop further the supply side of the market for higher education with our focus
on college decision making and competition among colleges. By modelling college choices, we
might better understand the quality variation across colleges, differences in tuition, admission
and expenditure policies, variation in student bodies, and provide context to interpret and predict
the effects of policy changes.
This paper relates to the existing literature in several ways. First, a few theoretical papers
focus on college pricing and admissions. Appealing to the example of higher education,
Rothschild and White (1995) provide a model with peer effects and profit maximizing and
competing private colleges. Type-specific prices exist such that free-entry equilibrium is
efficient. Our model differs in a number of ways including colleges with alternative objective
functions, market power of private colleges, and a multi-dimensional type space of students.
4

Epple, Romano, and Sieg (2006) develop and estimate a model with competing private colleges
that maximize quality.7 The present model differs by having a public sector of providers,
unobserved idiosyncratic student preferences, and a realistic specification of provision of federal
aid, all with fundamental consequences for the equilibrium allocation. Since a majority of
students attend state colleges who compete with private colleges, including a public sector is
necessary to obtain a more complete characterization of the market for higher education and to
evaluate policy changes. The introduction of idiosyncratic preferences better explains provision
of institutional financial aid by private colleges than in ERS (2006) and yields realistic
attendance overlap of observationally equivalent students that does not arise there. A realistic
characterization of provision of federal aid is obviously needed to examine its effects and the
crowd-out issue.
Another strand of the theoretical literature on higher education concerned with
admissions focuses on the effects of affirmative action policies [see Chan and Eyster (2003),
Epple, Romano, and Sieg (2002, 2008), Loury, Fryer, and Yuret (2008)]. The model here
abstracts from race considerations. Some theoretical research investigates college application
choices of students when admissions are uncertain [see Chade, Lewis, and Smith (forthcoming)
and Fu (2012)8]. In our model, though admissions are restricted based on observables, students
know their options (with one exception) and application is costless.9 Finally, some other
theoretical work has focused on the effects of early admission that are practiced by some elite
colleges [see Avery and Levin (2010) and Kim (2010)], which we do not consider.
Our analysis makes predictions about the attendance pattern of heterogeneous students
and about the effects on attendance of financial-aid policies. An empirical literature is focused
on liquidity constraints faced by prospective students and consequences for college attendance.
While there is an abundance of evidence that college attendance is correlated with household

7

Building on Epple, Romano, and Sieg, Sarpca (2010) studies specialization among colleges if students differ by a
vector of skills.
8
Fu (2012) also estimates her model.
9
Optimal pricing by private colleges in our analysis implies students know when they will have access to a college.
However, when we consider price caps, colleges then admit just a proportion of a few student types that would like
to attend while paying the price cap and these student types are not certain that they will be admitted. These
students fail to optimize in our model. It is of interest to merge the analyses with flexible tuition and certainty of
admissions with analysis where frictions imply uncertain admission and students then play an application game.

5

income, how much of this is explained by liquidity constraints vs. preparedness is debated.10
Recent empirical and experimental research has also investigated the role of information and
complexity in students’ applications for aid, college application, and attendance decisions.11 Our
model’s prediction about crowd out of increased federal aid with reduced institutional aid is
consistent with most of the empirical evidence on this topic. Using difference-in-difference
estimation, Long (2004) finds about 30% of HOPE merit scholarships in Georgia are offset in
private colleges by increased list tuitions and reduced institutional aid. Singell and Stone (2007)
estimate dollar for dollar crowd out in private colleges using yearly variation in the maximum
Pell grant. Most recently, Turner (2013) uses jumps and kinks in the provision of federal aid to
identify crowd out. We relate our predictions to her estimates below. Our model provides a
structure to interpret attendance and crowd-out effects of financial aid policies that emphasizes
equilibrium college responses.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops our equilibrium model
of the market for higher education. Section 3 defines equilibrium and provides a theoretical
characterization of general equilibrium properties. Section 4 contains the quantitative analysis,
including the effects on attendance, tuitions, and student costs of recent policy changes. Section
5 offers some conclusions and directions for future research. Some of the proofs are provided in
the appendix.12
2. Private and Public Provision of Higher Education
We develop a new model of competition in higher education. Our specification
incorporates both public and private sector provision of education, thereby modeling competition
both within and across the public and private sectors. The model also assumes student
preferences are private information, yielding important new results with respect to admission and
pricing by private colleges. To clarify the basic mechanisms we abstract from the existence of
10

See Cameron and Heckman (2001), Keane and Wolpin (2001), Carneiro and Heckman (2002), and Cameron and
Taber (2004) for evidence that liquidity constraints are not the main barrier to college education. See Dynarski
(2000, 2003), Stanley (2003), Kane (2007), and Cornwell, Mustard, and Sridhar (2006) for evidence that aid
increases enrollments. Deming and Dynarski (2009) and Dynarski and Judith Scott-Clayton (2013) provide reviews
of the evidence including many more references.
11
See Bettinger, Long, Oreopoulis, and Sanbonmatsu (2012) and Carrell and Sacerdote (2013) for experimental
findings on the effects of providing information and financial assistance supporting college application, and for
discussion of the larger literature.
12
There is also an on-line appendix, the contents of which noted as they arise in the paper.

6

the federal aid program in this section. In the next section, we augment the basic model with
federal aid and some other elements. For expositional ease, we use “college,” “university,” and
“school” interchangeably.
2.1. Higher Education Alternatives. We consider a model with S regions or states. Normalize the
student population in the economy to 1. Let π s denote the student population proportions or size
of each state and note that ∑ Ss=1π s = 1 . Students in each state differ continuously by after-tax
income y and ability b. It is convenient to work with after-tax income, which is the relevant
income to determine household choices. Let f s ( b, y ) denote the density of ( b, y ) in state s .
Each state operates one public university. In addition to the S public universities, there are R
private universities that operate nationwide. There is also an outside option referenced by 0 -- not
attending university -- which is free and provides a given educational quality denoted by q0 .
The total number of alternatives is then J = S + R + 1. 13 The “student population” consists of the
entire college-age population, including those that choose the outside option.14
2.2. Preferences. A student with ability b that attends a university of quality qj has an
achievement denoted by a( q j ,b ). Let psj ( b, y ) denote the tuition that a student from state s with
ability b and income y pays for attending college j. Let ε j denote an idiosyncratic preference
shock for school j, which is private information of the student.
Assumption 1 The utility of student (s,b,y) for college j is additively separable in the
idiosyncratic component and given by:
U j ( s,b, y,ε j ) = α U( y − psj ( b, y ),a( q j ,b )) + ε j .

(1)

U( ⋅ ) is an increasing, twice differentiable, and quasi-concave function of the numeraire and

educational achievement, a( ⋅ ). Educational achievement is an increasing, twice differentiable,
and strictly quasi-concave function of college quality and own ability; and α is a weighting
parameter.

13

We abuse notation for convenience by using S to denote both the number of state colleges and the set of them
{1, 2,… ,S}, and likewise for R and J (which usage will be obvious by context). Also for expositional
convenience, we refer to university or college j from the set of all alternatives J, distinguishing the outside option 0
only when it is important to do so.
14
There are approximately 22 million individuals aged 20 through 24 in the resident U.S. population.

7

Students choose among their college options to maximize utility as discussed further below. Let
the optimal decision rule be denoted by δ ( s,b, y,ε ).
Assumption 2 The vector ε satisfies standard regularity assumptions in McFadden (1974).
Integrating out the idiosyncratic taste components yields conditional choice probabilities for
each type:

rsj ( b, y; P( s,b, y ),Q ) = ∫1{ δ j ( s,b, y,ε ) = 1} g( ε ) dε ,

(2)

where 1{ ⋅ } is an indicator function, δ j ( ⋅ ) = 1 means college j is chosen, P( s,b, y ) denotes the
vector of tuitions that apply to student type (s,b,y), and Q denotes the vector of college qualities.

2.3 Private Colleges. Private colleges attract students from all states of the country. Their
objective is to maximize quality. We make the following assumptions about costs functions,
private college endowments, and college quality.
Assumption 3 College j has a cost function
C( k j ,I j ) = F + V ( k j ) + k j I j , V ′,V ′′ > 0,

(3)

where k j denotes the size of college j’s student body and I j denotes expenditure per student on
educational resources in college j .

The costs F + V ( k j ) are independent of educational quality, which we refer to as “custodial
costs.”
Assumption 4 Let E j denote the (exogenous) non-tuition income of college j. Private colleges
can be ranked by these amounts: E1 < E2 < … < ER .

Assumption 5 Letting θ j denote mean ability in college j's student body, college quality
q j = q j ( θ j ,I j ) is a twice differentiable, increasing, and strictly quasi-concave function of
( θ j , I j ). 15
15

There is a large literature on educational peer effects. Methodological issues in identifying peer effects are
discussed in Manski (1993), Moffitt (2001), and Brock and Durlauf (2001). Recent research on peer effects in higher
education includes studies of college dormitory roommates (Sacerdote, 2001; Zimmerman 2003; Boisjoly, Duncan,
Kremer, Levy and Eccles, 2006; Duncan, Boisjoly, Kremer, and Levy, 2005; Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner 2006;
Kremer and Levy, 2008), dormitory residential groupings (Foster 2006), randomly formed groups in military
academies (Lyle, 2007, 2009; Carrell, Fullerton, and West, 2009), classroom peer effects (Arcidiacono, Foster,
Goodpaster, and Kinsler, 2009), effects of high school peers (Betts and Morell,1999), and peer effects among
medical students (Arcidiacono and Nicolson, 2005). See Epple and Romano (2011) for a more complete literature
survey.

8

We model private colleges as monopolistically competitive:
Assumption 6 Private college j takes as given other colleges' tuitions and qualities when
maximizing quality.

Note that Assumptions 3 and 5 apply to state colleges as well.
Under these assumptions we can write the quality optimization problem of private college
j as follows:
max

θ j ,I j ,k j ,psj ( b ,y )

q( θ j ,I j )

(4)

subject to a budget constraint
S

∫∫ ∑π

s

psj ( b, y ) rsj ( b, y; P( s,b, y ),Q ) f s ( b, y ) db dy + E j = F + V ( k j ) + k j I j

(5)

s =1

and identity constraints:

1
θj =
kj

kj =

 S

π s rsj ( b, y; P( s,b, y ),Q ) f s ( b, y )  db dy
∫∫b  ∑
s =1


(6)

 S

π s rsj ( b, y; P( s,b, y ),Q ) f s ( b, y )  db dy.
∫∫  ∑
s =1


(7)

Solving the private college's problem, we obtain the following result.
Proposition 1 For any student (s,b,y) with rsj > 0, tuition satisfies:

psj ( b, y ) +

rsj ( b, y;⋅ )
∂rsj ( b, y;⋅ ) / ∂psj ( b, y )

= V ′( k j ) + I j +

∂q( θ j ,I j ) / ∂θ

∂q( θ j ,I j ) / ∂I

( θ j − b ).

(8)

The proof is in the appendix.
The left-hand side of (8) is marginal revenue, reflecting the college’s exercise of market
power to extract rents from those who have a strong idiosyncratic preference for the college. As
will become evident, this proves to play a central role in accounting for the third-degree price
discrimination by income that characterizes observed pricing in private colleges. The right-hand
side is the “effective marginal cost” of student (s,b,y)’s attendance, which sums the marginal
resource cost given by the first two terms and the marginal peer cost given by the last term. The

9

marginal peer cost multiplies the negative of the student's effect on the peer measure (equal to
( θ − b ) / k ) by the resource cost of maintaining quality (equal to

EMC j ( b ) ≡ V ′( k j ) + I j +

∂q / ∂θ
∂q / ∂I

k ) . Henceforth, we let:

∂q / ∂θ
(θ j − b )
∂q / ∂I

(9)

denote the effective marginal cost of the student. Note that EMC varies with students in college j
only with the student's ability, and that the peer cost is negative for students of ability exceeding
the school's mean.16 EMC j ( ⋅ ) also depends on ( k j ,I j ,θ j ), but we suppress this to simplify
notation. For V ′′ sufficiently high, EMC will increase with kj, which we assume holds. Students
for whom marginal revenue is below EMC at kj with rsj = 0 are not admitted to college j. Let
Ra(s,b,y) denote the subset of private colleges that admit (s,b,y) types.

Epple, Romano, and Sieg (2006) characterize optimal private college pricing in a model
with no informational asymmetry; colleges then charge each admitted student his or her
reservation price (i.e., practice first-degree price discrimination) and admit only those with
reservation price that covers their EMC. Need-based aid arises in such a full information setting
if colleges have a preference for income diversity in the student body. Here we obtain
substantial need-based aid without such an assumption.
2.4 Public Colleges. From the perspective of a state college a student is either an in-state student
or an out-of-state student. We assume that the state legislature sets tuition rates, and we do not
model this process.
Assumption 7 Tuition charged to in-state students is fixed exogenously at Ts and to out-ofstate students at Tso . The state also provides its college an exogenous per student subsidy of zs ,
financed by a balanced budget state income tax denoted ts .
16

It is interesting to compare this result to that for a profit-maximizing private college. We have shown a profitmaximizing college would have a tuition function that is of the exact form of (9). Given educational inputs, the
quality maximizing college sets tuition to maximize profits, while taking account of the peer value effect, so as to
have the maximum funds to increase quality. However, the quality maximizing college has stronger incentive to
spend on educational inputs, implying the expenditure on inputs will differ between the profit and quality
maximizers. Moreover, the latter implies the weight on the peer effect ( θ − b ) in (9) will differ, implying the
quality maximizer has stronger incentives to attract higher ability students. Distinguishing the objectives empirically
is then relatively subtle, as both objectives imply similar pricing, though merit aid should be steeper under quality
maximization. Quality maximization also leads to use of revenues to enhance educational resources beyond their
effects on increasing revenues.

10

We assume a state college maximizes the aggregate achievement of its in-state students. This
can also be interpreted as an objective of maximizing future income of in-state students.
Assumption 8 Letting γ s ( b, y )∈[0,1] denote the fraction of in-state students of type ( b, y )
state college s admits and rss ( b, y ) the fraction of those admitted that attend, the state college
maximizes: ∫ ∫a( q( θs ,I s ),b )γ s ( b, y )rss ( b, y;P,Q ) f s ( b, y )dbdy.

To write a state college's optimization problem while taking account of the constraints, let

γ so ( b, y )∈ [0,1] denote the proportion of out-of-state students of type (b,y) the college admits
and rts ( b, y;P,Q ) the fraction of those admitted from state t ≠ s that attend.17 State college s
solves:
max

θ s ,I s ,ks ,γ s ( b ,y ),γ so ( b ,y )

∫∫ a( q( θ ,I

),b )γ s ( b, y )rss ( b, y; P,Q ) f s ( b, y )dbdy

s

s

θs =

1
ks

∫ ∫bπ γ ( b, y )r

+

1
ks

∫ ∫bγ

(10)

subject to the identity constraints:
s s

so

ss

( b, y; P,Q ) f s ( b, y )dbdy



( b, y )  ∑π t rts ( b, y; P,Q ) f t ( b, y )  dbdy
 t≠s

(11)

and
k s = ∫ ∫π sγ s ( b, y )rss ( b, y; P,Q ) f s ( b, y )dbdy


+ ∫ ∫γ so ( b, y )  ∑π t rts ( b, y; P,Q ) f t ( b, y )  dbdy
 t ≠s


(12)

the budget constraint:
F + V ( k s ) + k s I s − z s k s = ∫ ∫ pss ( b, y )π sγ s ( b, y )rss ( b, y; P,Q ) f s ( b, y )dbdy


+ ∫ ∫γ so ( b, y )  ∑π t pts ( b, y )rts ( b, y; P,Q ) f t ( b, y )  dbdy
 t≠s


(13)

the tuition regulation constraint:
17

The value to college s of attracting an out-of-state student of type (b,y) does not vary with the state, implying it is
optimal to admit out-of-state students of type (b,y) with the same frequency. The yield will vary in general,
however.

11

 T for all students ( t ,b, y ) with t = s
pts ( b, y ) =  s
Tso for all students ( t ,b, y ) with t ≠ s

(14)

and the feasibility constraints:

γ s ( b, y ),γ so ( b, y ) ∈ [0,1] for all students ( t,b, y )

(15)

The following result summarizes optimal behavior of state colleges:
s
, all out-of-state students
Proposition 2 State college s admits all in-state students with b ≥ bmin
o
with b ≥ bmin
, and no other students, where
s
s
a( q( θ s ,I s ),bmin
) / λ + Ts + zs − EMCs ( bmin
) = 0
o
Tso + z s − EMCs ( bmin
) = 0

(16)
(17)

Since EMC(b) is a decreasing function, it is further implied that:
s
o
s
< ( = ) ( > ) bmin
bmin
as a( q( θ s ,I s ),bmin
) / λ + Ts > ( = ) ( < ) Tso .

(18)

Out-of-state students are admitted if and only if the revenue they generate covers their
EMC( b ). Their value to the state school comes from their tuition and, perhaps, positive effect

on in-state peers. In-state students have an additional marginal value of attendance, specifically
their direct contribution to the school's objective of in-state achievement maximization. The term

a / λ in (16) and (18) equals the monetized value of the increase in aggregate state achievement
from the in-state student's attendance. While Ts < Tso empirically, it is also likely that
s
a( q( θ s ,I s ),bmin
) / λ + Ts > Tso , implying a lower admission standard for in-state students.

2.5 Utility Maximization. Let Sa ( s,b, y ) denote the subset of state colleges to which student
(s,b,y) is admitted, and J a ( s,b, y ) ⊂ Sa ( s,b, y ) ∪ Ra ( s,b, y ) ∪ O the options that might provide

positive utility to the student. Taking as given tuitions, qualities, and non-institutional aid
(introduced later), student (s,b,y) chooses among j ∈ J a ( s,b, y ) to maximize utility. By
Assumption 2, the choice δ ( s,b, y,ε ) is generically unique, with choice probabilities for student
type (s,b,y) given by (2).18
18

The informational environment in our model implies students face no uncertainty in admissions, so we can abstract
from an application/admission game. See Chade, Lewis, and Smith (2011) and Fu (2012). We also abstract from the
choice of a major. Arcidiacono (2005) and Bordon and Fu (2012) develop and estimate a dynamic model of choice

12

2.6 State Budget Balance. To close the model, we assume that each state operates with a
balanced budget. Letting Ys denote aggregate pre-tax income in state s per potential college
student in the economy, the state income tax satisfies:

tsYs = zs ks for all s ∈ S.

(19)

3 Equilibrium
3.1 Definition of Equilibrium. We are now in a position to define equilibrium. Let P− j denote
the vector of price functions that omits college j, and likewise for qualities Q− j . The exogenous
elements of equilibrium are: (i) the student utility and achievement functions and the distribution
on the idiosyncratic preference vector; (ii) the state student type distributions and proportions;
(iii) the college cost and quality functions; (iv) the number of private colleges and their nontuition revenues; (v) the number of states, their state subsidies, and in- and out-of-state tuitions;
and (vi) the quality of the outside option.
Definition 1 Given (i) - (vi), an equilibrium consists of a price and quality vector ( P,Q ) with
corresponding college characteristics ( θ j ,I j ,k j ) for all j ∈ J \ O; state admission criteria

( γ s ( b, y ),γ so ( b, y )) for all s ∈ S; and a set of student choices δ ( s,b, y,ε ) for all ( s,b, y ) and
j ∈ J with corresponding utilities Uδ and choice probabilities rsj ( b, y ) that satisfy:

(a) private college quality maximization by all colleges j ∈ R, taking as given ( P− j ,Q− j ), the
student choice probability functions, and public policies;
(b) public college in-state achievement maximization by all state colleges s ∈ S , taking as given

( P− s ,Q− s ), the student choice probability functions, and public policies;
(c) utility maximization by all students ( s,b, y ), taking as given ( P,Q ) and public policies
including state admission criteria; and
(d) state budgets balance.

The equilibrium notion is monopolistically competitive. In particular, colleges take as given
other colleges’ prices and qualities when choosing their own. Thus, a college does not consider
of academic major under uncertainty.

13

that variation in their own pricing/admission policies will have an impact on other colleges’
qualities through size and peer effects. This is reasonable if individual colleges are small in the
market for students and vastly simplifies the analysis. Nevertheless, because of the peer effect
on college quality, multiple equilibria might arise. We return to this issue shortly.
3.2 A Parameterization of the Model Additional insights can be obtained by specializing to the
parametric framework employed in our computational model.
Assumption 9 The quality function is given by

q j = θ γj I ωj , γ ,ω > 0

(20)

The utility function is given by:

U j ( y − psj ,a( q j ,b )) = α ln[( y − psj )q j b β ] + ε j

(21)

The disturbances ε j are independent and identically distributed with Type I Extreme Value
Distribution having location parameter equal to zero and scale parameter equal to one.

Using (9), effective marginal cost is then given by:

EMC j ( b ) = V ′ ( k j ) + I j +

γIj
( θ − b ).
ωθ j j

(22)

The probability that student ( s,b, y ) chooses college j ∈ J a ( s,b, y ) is:

rsj ( b, y; P( s,b, y ),Q ) =

[( y − psj )q j ] α
α
∑ k∈J a ( s ,b , y )[( y − psk )qk ]

.

(23)

As a consequence, we have:

∂rsj

∂psj

= −

rsj ( 1 − rsj )α

y − psj

.

(24)

Then:
Proposition 3 For the parameterization in Assumption 9, private college j’s pricing to students
with rsj > 0 can be expressed as:

psj ( b, y ) =

( 1 − rsj )α
1 + ( 1 − rsj )α

EMC j ( b ) +

1
y.
1 + ( 1 − rsj )α

(25)

Tuition is a weighted average of EMC( b ) and student income. As a consequence, our
model can explain the combination of merit- and need-based aid that colleges frequently provide.
14

Holding rsj constant, (25) implies that tuition declines with ability and increases with income.
We have not proved the latter in the general equilibrium, however, because rsj will vary with
(b,y) due both to college j’s choices and other colleges’ choices.19 As a practical matter, the share

of any college is sufficiently small so that it is unlikely that variation in rsj will disrupt this
pattern of pricing.20 We also find that tuition in all private colleges decreases with ability and
increases with income in our computational analysis.
Merit aid arises because higher-ability students improve quality, promoting the college’s
objective. Need-based aid arises as colleges practice classic third-degree price discrimination.
Tuition is based on student observables, ability and income. Fixing ability, demand of higherincome types is relatively inelastic. Along a (b,y)-type’s demand curve, the unobserved
idiosyncratic preference term varies. Those with higher-income and strong idiosyncratic
preference for a college have relatively high willingness to pay to attend, implying relatively
inelastic demand of higher-income types as compared to lower-income types. The flip side of
higher tuition to higher-income types is, of course, more institutional aid to lower-income types.
The result that a private college’s mark-up on EMC increases with income reflects market
power.

21

A private college’s market power derives in part from their having relatively high

quality due to endowment funding and flexibility in practices relative to state colleges.
Idiosyncratic preferences provide the key source of their market power. A surprising stylized

fact about higher education in the U.S. is that even small and not so highly ranked colleges can
get away with substantial tuition mark ups. The model can explain this. The weight on income
in (25) equals

1
. Taking the example in our computational model below, α = 15. If
1 + ( 1 − rsj )α

rsj = .10, then the weight on income is .069. It is perhaps not surprising that a college that serves
19

One can prove (see the on-line appendix) that tuition would decline with ability and increase with income if a
private college faces no competition, but this is not the empirically relevant case.
20
For example, suppose all MIT students score at the 99th percentile or higher on the SAT mathematics test. MIT
would then serve approximately four percent of SAT test takers in that score range. MIT’s type-specific share would
be much smaller because of income variation of students in that score range. In fact, MIT reports that the middle
50% of its students fall in the 97th and above math percentile range: http://mitadmissions.org/apply/process/stats.
21
Since the weight on EMC(b) in (25) is less than one, it may seem that tuition could be less than EMC for student
having sufficiently low income. However, student types that attend private college j must have y > EMC( b ).
Otherwise, by (25), psj > y, contradicting that college j is in the student's effective choice set.

15

10% of a student type could extract 7% of the household’s income in tuition. As rsj → 0, the
weight on income scarcely drops, to 6.25%.22 Colleges with very small market shares in
equilibrium will still exercise significant market power.23

3.3 Federal Aid, Price Caps, and Non-Tuition Costs For clarity, we have thus far focused on
the model without federal financial aid. In this section, we introduce a realistic version of
financial aid into the model specification and explore pricing by a private school in the presence
of federal aid. To obtain a better quantitative model, it is also desirable to account for price caps
in private schools and non-student tuition costs. We discuss each of these extensions in this
section of the paper.
Though we do not have an explicit theory explaining a private college’s “list tuition” or
“price cap,” in practice private colleges adopt a tuition maximum and then provide some students
with financial aid.24 Let Pjc denote private college j’s price maximum or cap, which we treat as
exogenous. Institutional aid to student ( s,b, y ) is then given by Pjc − psj ( b, y ).
The federal government provides college students with aid through several programs.
Broadly speaking, federal aid levels vary with student resources and with the cost of attending
college. For students seeking aid, the federal government first computes a student’s expected
family contribution (EFC). This is the amount the federal government deems as appropriate for
the family to pay out-of-pocket for a college education. In addition to the student’s family
income, this depends on a variety of factors, mainly family assets and family size. As described
in more detail below, we can model EFC as an increasing function of the student’s after-tax
family income. Federal aid is then linked to the difference between the student’s cost of
attendance (COA), as calculated by college j, and the student’s EFC. The idea is that aid should
be made available only to the extent the student’s educational costs exceed EFC. The COA

22

There is no argument that the weight on systematic utility, i.e. α, should vary with college sizes.
This is in contrast to Epple, Romano, and Sieg (2006) where private college market power derived from
endowments. To obtain significant pricing by income, the model assumed a preference of colleges and students for
income diversity.
23

24

Adoption of a price maximum is probably explained by marketing to students and society. As we show later, our
model implies that a price maximum will prevent some wealthy and lower-ability students from buying their way
into top colleges. In reality, no doubt exceptions to the latter occur. The model with price caps abstracts from such
buying-in, while we have found that the model without price caps exaggerates this buying in.

16

equals list tuition (including mandatory fees) plus an allowance for non-tuition costs, mainly for
room and board, books, and travel expenses.25 We assume the allowance (L) is the same at all
colleges so that COA j = Pjc + L. Federal aid programs generally have a maximum award, which
we denote in total by A. A student’s federal aid at private college j is then given by:

Aj ( y ) = Min{ Max[ 0,Pjc + L − EFC( y )], A }.

(26)

Federal aid at state colleges is calculated analogously, with the list price of private schools
replaced by the in- or out-of-state tuition. Thus, in state colleges, federal aid generally varies for
in- and out-of-state students so we write aid as Asj ( y ) for cases where the college might be
public.
To investigate the effects on equilibrium, first note that the attendance probabilities are
adjusted for federal aid and the non-tuition costs (L):

rsj ( b, y; P( s,b, y ),Q ) =

[( y − psj − L + Asj ( y ))q j ] α
α
∑ k∈J a ( s ,b , y )[( y − psk − L + Ask ( y ))qk ]

.

(27)

The state college problem is as above with the adjustment to the attendance probabilities, and the
admission criterion continues to satisfy Proposition 2. Federal aid only has quantitative effects
on state colleges.
Adoption of a price cap has a qualitative effect on the solution to a private college’s
problem. Proposition 4 summarizes the effects of price caps, non-tuition costs, and federal aid
on pricing and admissions of a private college. To state and understand Proposition 4, we must
take account of the fact that EMC j ( ⋅ ) is a function of kj which is itself a function of the
proportion of type attending college . Here we then write EMC j ( b,k j ( r )), where r denotes the
proportion of the type of interest. Define r̂j ( b ) in EMC j ( b,k j ( rˆ )) = Pjc , this proportion
illustrated in Figure 1.
Proposition 4 No students for whom EMC j ( b,k j ( 0 )) ≥ Pjc are admitted to private college j. For
students for whom EMC j ( b,k j ( 0 )) < Pjc :

25

We include mandatory fees in the price cap.

17

psj ( b, y ) =

( 1 − rsj )α
1 + ( 1 − rsj )α

EMC j ( b( rsj )) +

1
( y − L + Aj ( y ))
1 + ( 1 − rsj )α

(28)

and rsj satisfies (27) if psj ≤ Pjc ;
psj = Pjc if p satisfying ( 28 )exceeds Pjc ,

(29)
 rsj satisfies( 27 )if rsj > rˆ j ( b )
and 
rsj = rˆ j ( b ) otherwise.


Proof of Proposition 426 Refer to Figure 1, which shows the demand of a type to attend college
j in the presence of a price cap, the implied marginal revenue, and four cases of EMC.27 For the
lowest EMC, EMC1, the price cap is non-binding and quality-maximizing pricing is
unconstrained. Here, by analogy to pricing in (27), tuition satisfies (28) which adjusts income
for non-tuition costs and any federal aid; and attendance is on demand. For EMC2, the price cap
is binding and the optimum is at a corner solution with tuition equal to the price cap. It would
not be optimal to reduce admissions below demand since the effective marginal revenue (equal
to the price cap) exceeds effective marginal cost. For EMC3, tuition equal to the price cap is
obviously optimal, but restricting admissions below the level of demand is also (obviously)
optimal. The latter two cases conform to the respective cases in (29). For EMC4, admitting any
students would reduce quality.
Changes to federal aid will affect student demands and thus the quality maximizing price
and the implied institutional aid. In the quantitative analysis, we examine the extent to which
increases in federal aid are crowded out by reduced institutional aid.
3.4 Equilibrium Selection As noted, multiple equilibria might arise due to the peer effect on
college quality. In the quantitative analysis that follows, we will restrict attention to a
“hierarchical adherence” equilibrium that requires the private college hierarchy to follow the
endowment hierarchy. This might be violated if the quality-taking students expect a higherability peer group and thus higher quality at a college with lower endowment and the implied
student demands lead quality maximizing qualities to set tuition, admissions, and expenditures
consistent with these student expectations. Facing low demands, a higher endowed college may
26

The proof enhances interpretation and is therefore included in the text.
Demand that is unconstrained by the price cap is given by the choice probability multiplied by the density of the
type.
27

18

find it difficult to attract high ability students and offset this with generous institutional aid
and/or high per student expenditure.28 Given we must select an equilibrium to perform policy
analysis, we analyze what is arguably the most natural equilibrium.29

4 Quantitative Analysis
4.1 Quantitative Model Specification. To assess the performance of the model, we examine a
numerical specification of it and then compute equilibria under alternative public policies.30 We
consider a model with two states and thus state schools, each state having the same policies and
distributions of potential student types. Table 1 summarizes the parameter values that we use.31
Our calibration is based on the 2007-08 academic year. The average in-state tuition in 2007-08
was $6,200, and the average out-of-state tuition was $15,100 for full-time undergraduates
enrolled in public 4-year institutions. The average public subsidy was $8,495 per Full Time
Equivalent (FTE) student.
To obtain values for private colleges, we rank colleges by SAT score and combine them
into five groups. Endowments per student are chosen to correspond to those in the NSF
WebCASPAR data. An assumed 2% annual draw allocated to undergraduate education yields the
values in Table 1. Average list prices for private bachelor’s and private research universities in
2009 were 22.6 and 30.4 (in thousands of dollars henceforth). These values guide our choice of
price caps that ascend across the quality hierarchy as shown in Table 1.
The parameters of the utility-quality functions in (20) and (21) are set as γ = .85,

ω = .15, and β = .85. The weight, γ , on peer quality in the utility function is a combination of a
production function effect (more able peers give rise to favorable achievement spillovers) and a
28

If better endowed colleges were also hampered by lower price caps, then it would be more difficult for them to
compete. However, we also assume price caps rise along the hierarchy and thus with the endowments.
29
Equilibrium would need to satisfy hierarchical adherence if college endowments are sufficiently different since
student quality expectations must be consistent with the college quality choices that actually arise. However, it is
doubtful the theoretical condition holds in reality and there appear to be exceptions in reality (e.g., Franklin W.
Ohlin College of Engineering is ranked among the top five in per student endowment, but their ranking in
engineering, while high, is not comparable). In defense of the assumption as an approximation, the components of
college quality are highly correlated with per student endowment. For their sample of 1241 nonprofit, four-year
public and private colleges, Epple, Romano, and Sieg (2003) report a correlation between per student endowment
and per student expenditure of .80 and between per student endowment and mean SAT equal to .34.
30
The on-line appendix discusses how to compute equilibria.
31
The on-line appendix details sources used in the calibration.

19

preference effect (highly ranked universities convey networking and prestige benefits.) These
three parameters and the quality of the outside option ( q0 = 2.7432 ) are set such that in the
baseline equilibrium: (i) the average private tuition net of institutional aid is about 23.4 and share
of private schools in total enrollment is 30 percent; (ii) total enrollment is 40 percent of potential
students; and (iii) shadow prices on income and ability are consistent with financial aid
regressions reported in the literature. The value of α =15 in the utility function is chosen to
match the proportion of in-state students at state schools. The non-tuition cost of attending
college (room and board, travel, supplies), L, is set to $10,250.
We specify the college cost function as C( k ,I ) = F + v1k + v2 k 2 + kI . Epple, Romano,
and Sieg (2006) estimate “custodial cost functions” (costs net of kI) using micro data for a large
sample of colleges and discuss how to aggregate cost functions. Their analysis suggests that
average cost functions initially decline quickly and then are fairly flat over a large range of
values. Also, custodial costs amount to approximately 60 percent of total expenditures on
average.32 Given the values of utility function parameters and the number of state and private
schools, the cost function parameters also need to be consistent with school sizes in equilibrium.
Based on these considerations, we specify the cost function parameters in Table 1.
To approximate the EFC function, we assume that the student is a dependent, is the only
college student in a household with 3 or 4 family members, and follow the EFC formula guide
Worksheet A.33 EFC is weakly increasing in after-tax income and non-excluded assets, with
various allowances. We set a student’s income equal to zero and assume the household head is
of age 45 to 54. Using our assumptions about family characteristics, we calibrate the
household’s relevant assets and the several allowances in the EFC formula. While the empirical
EFC function is piecewise linear with 7 adjusted income tiers, we approximate it with a three tier
function of after-tax income: EFC( y ) = max{ 0, .48 y − 10,300, .69 y − 22,500 }. This implies, for
example, that a student with COA (list tuition plus $10,250) equal to $40,000 loses eligibility for
any federal aid as after-tax income rises above $90,580.
We measure federal aid as a weighted sum of grants, work-study aid, and loans using the
formula: Federal Aid = Grants + 0.33 Work-study + 0.1 Loan. The maximum Pell Grant in 2008
32
33

See Table 1 in Epple, Romano, and Sieg (2006).
This is available at https://studentaid.ed.gov/. The on-line appendix describes our calibration of EFC in detail.

20

was $4731. Subsidized federal loans are capped at $3,500 and $4,500 for the first two years, and
at $5,500 for each year after that. The upper limit on work-study earnings varies by the cost of
living, with the average is on the order of $2500. Combining these and weighting according to
the above formula implies a maximum federal aid of very close to the $6,000 we assume here.
We use data from the Current Population Survey (CPS) for 2009 to estimate the after-tax
income distribution. We find that a lognormal distribution with a location parameter (standard
errors shown in Table 2) fits the data well ln( y + 41,536 ) ∼ N( 11.46 ,.402 ). Ability is calibrated
to IQ, normalized such that ln( b ) ∼ N( 1.0,0.15 ). We follow Epple and Romano (1998, 2008)
in setting the correlation of household income and student ability as 0.4.
4.2 The Baseline Equilibrium. The first two columns of Table 3 summarize the fit of our
baseline model. We report total enrollment, the fraction of students in state schools, the
proportion of in-state students in state schools, average tuition rates in state and private schools,
average federal aid by school type, and the fractions receiving such aid. Finally, we report the
average institutional aid, equal to the average discount in private colleges from private colleges’
tuition caps. The model does an excellent job of replicating U.S. average values.
Table 4 provides more detail on the baseline equilibrium. The upper part of the table
shows values by college, with the first two rows for the two identical state colleges and the next
five rows for the five private schools ordered by their quality and thus per student endowment.
The state colleges are much larger (kj) than the private colleges and private college sizes are
inversely related to their qualities. Resources per student, mean ability, average tuition, and the
mean income of students all increase along the college quality hierarchy. Average federal
financial aid is higher in private than state colleges. Average federal aid varies little across the
private college quality hierarchy, though declines at the top end due to a wealthier student body.
The last column reports the proportion paying full tuition in each private college and thus
receiving no institutional aid. The attendance-weighted average percentage paying full tuition
from the model is 31%, very close to the NCES estimate of 33% in private nonprofit 4-year
colleges.34
Some averages across colleges are reported at the bottom of the table. Average federal
34

See Figure 3, “Student Financing of Undergraduate Education: 2007-08: Sticker, Net, and Out-of-Pocket Prices,”
August 2010, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education Statistics.

21

aid conditional on receiving some federal aid in private colleges, $5,400, is near the $6000
maximum. Average student cost, which includes the $10,250 in non-tuition costs but nets out
financial aid, is much higher in private than public colleges. The minimum ability thresholds for
admission at state schools are also reported in Table 4. The in-state threshold for admission is
substantially lower than the out-of-state threshold. Thus, the higher tuition that state colleges get
from out-of-state students is not enough to offset a state’s focus on achievement of its own
residents (as discussed in Proposition 2).
Figure 2 displays the ability and income distributions for in-state and out-of-state students
at public colleges along with the distributions for the lowest and highest ranked private
colleges.35 These figures illustrate the extent of income and ability heterogeneity within colleges
and stratification by income and ability across colleges. These figures show that out-of-state
students attending a state college are, on average, of higher ability and higher income than instate students; and that students in private colleges are, on average, of higher ability than in
public colleges. The graphs also illustrate that average income follows the hierarchy of ability
across colleges. More detail is provided in the panels of Table 5, which show the proportions of
prospective students attending college by income and ability deciles. For example, in the middle
panel titled “all private colleges,” the entry in the upper right cell means that 92% of the highest
income and ability deciles attend a private college in equilibrium. The top two panels, for the top
private college and all private colleges respectively, illustrate both the selectivity of private
colleges and the relative greater selectivity of the most elite private college. 36 The lower panel
illustrates that public colleges tend to attract middle- and upper-income students in the middle of
the ability distribution. No poor and low-ability students attend college, and almost all very highability students with median or higher income attend college. The columns of zeroes in state
colleges at low-ability deciles reflect, of course, their minimum admission ability thresholds
(Proposition 2). While equilibrium has a degree of income and ability stratification across the
college quality hierarchy, one can see in Table 5 that many students with the same ability and
income attend different colleges. For example, 8 percent of students in the highest income and
35

These figures are kernel density plots based on equilibrium outcomes for a random sample of students from the
calibrated distribution of ability and income, f(b,y).
36
This information for all colleges and the information we provide below for all colleges is available at the on-line
appendix.

22

ability decile attend state colleges, with the rest distributed across the private colleges. This
attendance overlap is in contrast to Epple, Romano, and Sieg (2006) where pure income and
ability stratification arises, the underlying difference being idiosyncratic variation in student
preferences for colleges here.
We next turn to pricing. For private colleges, the central property of the tuition function
is that it is increasing with income and decreasing with ability. The combination of merit- and
need-based aid is well documented empirically, but this has not been well explained
theoretically. The model presented in Epple, Romano, and Sieg (2006) yielded such pricing, but
the model assumed an income-based peer externality to explain the extent of need-based aid. The
key difference here is that idiosyncratic preferences among students for attending particular
colleges increase colleges’ market power, permitting more price discrimination by student
income. The resulting pricing by income is illustrated in Figure 3, which shows the increase in
tuition with income in the top and bottom private colleges for a student at the 95th percentile of
ability. This figure also shows the effect of federal financial aid on net tuition over the range of
incomes for which students are eligible for federal aid. Decline in tuition by student ability is
explained by the positive impact of ability on college quality, this manifest in lower effective
marginal cost of higher ability students. Table 6A provides detail on federal aid, institutional aid,
and net tuition in the top private college. For the top private college, pricing by ability is seen in
comparison across the 9th and 10th ability deciles in the middle panel of Table 6A. The tuition
premium is manifest by negligible institutional aid received by high-income students in the 9th
ability decile relative to students of comparable income in the 10th ability decile. In the same
panel, the decline in aid as income rises within the 10th ability decile shows the pricing by
income. We view the findings about the tuition and student cost structure as a central

contribution of the paper.
The structure of private school pricing applies to all private colleges (see the on-line
appendix). Student costs follow the same pattern in private colleges. Student costs fall more
rapidly than tuition with income due to increasing federal aid. However, the federal aid is
crowded out some by decreased institutional aid, an issue we return to below. The top panel of
Figure 4 shows the overall distribution of cost-to-student in private colleges, averaged within
narrow bins, in the baseline equilibrium, and for two policy alternatives discussed in the next
23

section. The figure includes the non-tuition cost, which we have estimated to be $10,250. The
upward jump at $36,000 is a result of increasing numbers of students paying maximum tuition in
the private schools they attend.
The distribution of cost-to-student in state colleges is shown in the bottom panel of
Figure 4. We see two predominant spikes. The spike at approximately 10 is for in-state students
who receive maximum federal aid, whose costs are then close to the non-tuition costs. The spike
at approximately 16 is for in-state students who do not qualify for federal aid. The two small
spikes at 21 and 25 are out-of-state students who, respectively, do and do not qualify for
maximum federal aid. Additional detail regarding federal aid and tuition in state colleges is
provided in Table 6B. The left panel shows that federal aid to state college students drops as
income rises and varies a little due to the tuition variation that arises from the changing mix of
in-state and out-of-state students. Students in the top 30% of the income distribution that attend
state college receive no federal aid and hence pay full tuition (top three income deciles in the
right panel). For these students, tuition varies only by in- versus out-of-state status. Students in
the 30th to 50th income percentiles attend in-state, where federal aid covers almost all tuition.
Students must finance their non-tuition costs. While almost two-thirds of the population meets
the in-state college admission threshold, these costs keep the poorest students from attending
college (see Table 5).
To measure the market power of private colleges, we compute the average tuition markups over marginal cost along the quality hierarchy, finding a roughly 20% markup in each
college. Measured in thousands of dollars, the markups are 4.2, 4.5, 4.7, 5.0, and 5.6. While
these values indicate substantial market power, they would be higher yet with no price caps.
In summary, differences in attendance and student costs between state and private
colleges, and across the private college hierarchy, are explained by the differences in objectives
of the two types of colleges, the differences in the constraints they face, differences in
endowments across the private colleges, and competition among colleges.37 State colleges are
much larger and serve many lower ability students, in part reflecting their objective to maximize
aggregate achievement of their in-state residents. Private colleges are more elite given their

37

As discussed in Section 3.4, we have also selected equilibrium with the quality hierarchy following the endowment
hierarchy.

24

objective of maximizing quality. The variation across student types in tuition net of institutional
aid in private colleges results from pursuit of the quality objective in the face of competition
from state colleges and other private colleges.38
4.3 Policy Analysis. The first policy change we examine is a change in the maximum level of
federal aid, this motivated by the substantially increased aid implemented under the Obama
administration. We consider an increase in the maximum federal aid from $6,000 to $8,000.
Aggregate effects of this policy change are summarized in Table 3. Overall college enrollment
increases by 2.4% with virtually all of this increase being in state colleges. 39 The upper panel of
Table 7 reports percentage changes in enrollments aggregated over all colleges by income and
ability decile resulting from the policy change. As shown by the shaded areas, the primary
effects are increased attendance by poorer and lower ability students. The ability threshold for
admission of in-state students declines a little, while slightly increasing for out-of-state students,
the former leading to a nontrivial increase in attendance of lower ability students at state
colleges.40
Private college growth is miniscule, but their qualities improve a bit as they spend more
per student (about $340 on average) and slightly improve their peer groups. The latter comes
from a moderate substitution of some very high ability and poor students for some not-as-high
ability and rich students. Overall, the policy change does moderately increase access of poorer

students to college and to higher-quality colleges.
Effects on student cost are of interest. In state colleges, average federal aid rises by
approximately $820 and the percent getting some aid rises from 30 to 36%. Average student
cost declines by approximately $810, so almost all of the increased federal aid is passed through
to students in state colleges. Average federal aid at private schools rises by more than in state
38

Our model does not let state colleges discount tuition, this limiting their power to promote their objective. Given
the leeway of many state colleges, it would be of interest to study such alternatives in future work.
39
Measured as a percent of the initial student population, the predicted increase in college attendance is 6 percent.
Dynarski and Scott-Clayton (2013) summarize a subset of the empirical evidence: “Taken together, the quasiexperimental evidence suggests that an additional $1,000 of grant aid may increase college enrollment by 4
percentage points.” In our model, the increase in maximum federal aid to $8,000 implies an average increase in
federal aid among students that get positive aid of about $1,580. Thus, the predictions of our model are in line with
the empirical evidence.
40
The federal income tax used to finance the increased federal aid rises as does the state tax to finance increased
enrollment in state colleges. The tax increases, a failure to qualify for increased aid, and the small decline in the
state college quality index lead some middle-income and rich students to exit state colleges who were near the
margin of attendance (explaining the negative entries in the upper panel of Table 7).

25

schools, by approximately $890, and the percent getting some aid rises from 39 to 43. However,
average student cost at private schools declines by only three-fourths of the increased average
federal aid. The remaining 25% is absorbed as increased revenue by private colleges as they
reduce institutional aid in response to the increased demand arising from increased federal aid.
The increased revenue is in turn used to increase expenditure per student.
The distribution of the “crowd-out” is illuminating. Our model predicts that nearly 60%
of increased federal aid is crowded out by reduced institutional aid among students that attend
private colleges in both policy regimes.41 The proceeds of the increased tuition to these students
is used to further the private college objective not only by spending more on educational
resources, but also by substituting some poorer very high ability students for wealthier not-so
high ability students from whom lower tuition must be charged. The overall effect, noted above,
is pass-through to students of 75% of the average increase in federal aid.
Figure 4 shows the effect of increased federal aid on the overall distributions of costs to
students in public and private colleges. The predominant effect in public colleges is shown by the
leftward shift of left-most spike, relative to the baseline, as students receiving maximum
financial aid receive an additional $2,000 dollars. The effect on private colleges is to shift the
entire distribution to the left.
A decrease in the maximum federal aid to $4,000 has essentially symmetric effects. This
symmetry is evident in comparison of the shaded areas in the top and middle panels of Table 7.
Relative to the baseline, enrollment in all colleges declines by approximately 2.1% of the
potential student population, almost all of this at state colleges, and mainly among the poorest
students. Average income rises somewhat at all colleges, state and private, the former as poorer
students drop out and the latter due to a substitution of some higher-income and lower-ability
students for lower-income and higher-ability students. In state schools, both the fraction
receiving some federal aid and average federal aid decline. In private colleges, the fraction

41

If one does the same calculation for students in the same private college before and after the policy change, then
the crowd out rises to 63%. This value is comparable to Turner’s estimate of crowd out in selective (nonprofit)
colleges of 72%. Combining regression discontinuity and regression kink estimation, Turner obtains the interesting
result that colleges value admission of Pell Grant recipients per se, and so provide a discount to attract them.
However, as their Pell Grant rises, institutional aid is reduced, with the average crowd out then 72% in selective
colleges.

26

receiving aid drops and average federal aid declines while average institutional aid rises
somewhat. This “crowd-in” is the mirror image of the crowding out of institutional aid in the
scenario with increased federal aid.
Recently, states have cut funding to their colleges with offsetting tuition increases. This
motivates the last policy experiment we conduct. We consider a $2,000 decrease in per student
state funding, accompanied by a $2,000 increase in tuition to both in- and out-of-state students.
Enrollment in colleges drops substantially by 3% of the potential student population, with almost
no effect on private college enrollments (which have miniscule growth). As one can see in the
bottom panel of Table 7, most of the decreased enrollment is of poor students, but there is also
non-trivial exit of middle-income students. Since tuition rises by $2,000 to all state college
students one might expect that federal aid would rise to compensate for the increased student
cost. While this is true for students that qualify for aid $2,000 below the maximum and remain
in a state college, the exit of lower income students who would receive a lot of aid and the cap on
federal aid implies average federal aid in state colleges is virtually unchanged. As such, average
student cost of state college students rises by $2,086, very close to the amount of the tuition
increase. An interesting effect is that the admission standard is lowered for out-of-state students
from the 48th to 45th ability percentile, while virtually unchanged for in-state students. The value
of the cross subsidization from out-of-state to in-state students increases. Though the effects are
small, the policy change benefits less elite private colleges as demand of students near the
margin of attending a private vs. state college increases. More higher-ability and not-so-high
income students attend, displacing some lower-ability rich students.
The top panel of Figure 4 shows that the reduction in state subsidies to public colleges
shifts the distribution of costs in private schools to the right. The bottom panel shows that a
reduction in state aid adversely impacts all students in state colleges, with the distribution
relative to the baseline shifted to the right by approximately the amount of the reduction of the
state subsidy.

Overall, effects of either reduced federal or state funding are severe for students at the
low-income boundary of college attendance while also increasing cost to (many) students who
remain in college; both effects are mitigated to some degree by private colleges through changes
in provision of institutional aid and increased admissions of some high-ability poorer students.
27

6 Conclusions
This paper provides a general equilibrium model of the market for higher education that includes
competing state and private colleges with alternative objectives, students that differ by income,
ability, and unobserved idiosyncratic preference for colleges, and federal aid modeled to
approximate U.S. policy. The model provides an appealing set of theoretical predictions,
including substantial exercise of market power by private colleges, provision of need- and meritbased aid at private colleges, minimum ability admission standards at state colleges that vary
across in- and out-of-state students, and optimal exploitation of the federal aid formula by private
colleges. The quantitative version of the model does an excellent job of matching aggregates as
well as predicting patterns of attendance, private college tuition, and student costs.
Utilizing the model for policy analysis, we find moderate overall enrollment effects of
increased federal aid, but with large effects on lower-income households. Attendance changes
are concentrated in state colleges. Increased federal aid leads private colleges to substitute some
lower-income and higher-ability students for somewhat less able students with higher income.
The increase in federal aid is passed along to poorer students in state colleges, but much of the
increased federal aid is crowded out by reduced institutional aid in private colleges. Predicted
effects of decreased federal aid are roughly symmetric. Decreased subsidies at state colleges
coupled with higher tuition, as has characterized many states of late, has dire effects on
attendance by poorer students and on student costs.
Our theoretical and computational findings exhibit the benefits of modeling the
distinctive features of the market for higher education. Scope clearly remains for further
generalizations, such as extending the analysis to consider heterogeneity across states in
constraints on state colleges and investigation of alternative approaches to provision of federal
aid. A perhaps more difficult extension would be to make endogenous the state subsidy and
constraint policies. An issue here is whether one would assume the state regulator’s objective
differs from the college objective. Introducing a for-profit sector of providers is of interest.
Merging the analysis with research on student application frictions is an important topic.
Extending the model by introducing the market for college instructors would provide further
insights. Finally, expanding the dimensions of student heterogeneity such as to race is also of
interest.
28

References
Arcidiacono, P. (2005). Affirmative Action in Higher Education: How do Admission and Financial Aid Rules Affect
Future Earnings? Econometrica, 73 (5), 1477-1524.
Arcidiacono, P. and Nicholson, S. (2005). Peer Effects in Medical School. Journal of Public Economics, 89 (2-3),
327-350.
Arcidiacono, P., Foster, G., Goodpaster, N., and Kinsler, J. (2009). Estimating Spillovers using Panel Data, with an
Application to the Classroom. Working Paper.
Avery, C. and Levin, J. (2010). Early Admissions at Selective Colleges. American Economic Review, 100 (6), 1-34.
Bettinger, E., B. T. Long, P. Oreopoulis, and L. Sanbonmatsu, “The Role of Application Assistance and Information
in College Decision: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA Experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
(2012), 1205-1242.
Betts, J. and Morell, D. The Determinants of Undergraduate Grade Point Average: The Relative Importance of
Family Background, High School Resources, and Peer Group Effects, Journal of Human Resources, 34(2), 268-293.
Boisjoly, J., Duncan, G. J., Kremer, M., Levy, D. M., and Eccles, J. (2006). Empathy or Antipathy? The Impact of
Diversity. American Economic Review, 96 (5), 1890-1905.
Bordon, P. and Fu, C. (2012). College-Major-Choice to College-Then-Major-Choice. Working Paper.
Brock, W. and Durlauf, S. (2001). Discrete Choice with Social Interactions. Review of Economic Studies,
68 (2), 235-260.
Carrell, Scott and Sacerdote, Bruce, “Late Interventions Matter Too: The Case of College Coaching New
Hampshire,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 19301, May 2013.
Cameron, Stephen, and Heckman, James, “The Dynamics of Educational Attainment for Black, Hispanic, and White
Males,” Journal of Political Economy, 109, 2001, 455-499.
Cameron, Stephen, and Taber, Christopher, “Estimation of Educational Borrowing Constraints Using Returns to
Schooling,” Journal of Political Economy, 112, 2004, 132-182.
Congressional Budget Office, “The Federal Pell Grant Program: Recent Growth and Policy Options,” Pub. No.
4451, September 2013.
Carneiro, Pedro, and Heckman, James, “The Evidence on Credit Constraints in Post-Secondary Schooling,” The
Economic Journal, 112, 2002, 705-734.
Carrell, S. E., Fullerton, R. L., and West, J. E. (2009). Does Your Cohort Matter Measuring Peer Effects in
College Achievement. Journal of Labor Economics, 27 (3).
Carrell, S.E., Sacerdote. B. and. West, J. “From Natural Variation to Optimal Policy? The Importance of
Endogenous Peer Group Formation,” Econometrica (forthcoming).
Chade, H., Lewis, G., and Smith, L. (2011). Student Portfolios and the College Admissions Problem. Working
Paper.
Chan, J. and Eyster, E. (2003). Does Banning Affirmative Action Harm College Quality? American

29

Economic Review, 93 (3), 858-873.
Cornwell, Christopher, Mustard, David, and Sridhar, Deepa, “The Enrollment Effects of Merit-Based Financial Aid:
Evidence from Georgia’s HOPE Program,” Journal of Labor Economics, 24(4), 2006, 761-786.
Deming, David and Dynarski, Susan, “Into College, Out of Poverty? Policies to Increase the Post-Secondary
Attainment of the Poor,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 15387, September 2009.
Duncan, G. J., Boisjoly, J., Kremer, M., Levy, D. M., and Eccles, J. (2005). Peer Effects in Drug Use and
Sex among College Students. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 33 (3), 375-385.
Dynarski, Susan, “Hope for Whom? Financial Aid for the Middle Class and Its Impact on College Attendance,”
National Tax Journal, 53(3), September 2000, 629-662.
_________, “Does Aid Matter? Measuring the Effect of Student Aid on College Attendance and Completion,”
American Economic Review, 93(1), March 2003, 279-288.
__________ and Scott-Clayton, Judith, “Financial Aid Policy: Lessons from Research,” The Future of Children,
23(1), Spring 2013, 67-91.
Epple, D. and Romano, R. (1998). Competition between Private and Public Schools, Vouchers and Peer
Group Effects. American Economic Review, 88, 33-63.
Epple, D. and Romano, R. (2008). Educational Vouchers and Cream Skimming. International Economic
Review, 49, 1395-1435.
Epple, D. and Romano, R. (2011). Peer Effects in Education: a Survey of the Theory and Evidence. In
Benhabib, J., Bisin, A., and Jackson, M. (Eds.), Handbook of Social Sciences, Vol 1b, Elsevier Science, 1053-1163.
Epple, D., Romano, R., and Sieg, H. (2003). Peer Effects, Financial Aid, and Selection of Students into
Colleges. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 18 (5), 501-525.
Epple, D., Romano, R., and Sieg, H. (2006). Admission, Tuition, and Financial Aid Policies in the Market
for Higher Education. Econometrica, 74(4), 885-928.
Epple, D., Romano, R., and Sieg, H. (2008). Diversity and Affirmative Action in Higher Education. Journal
of Public Economic Theory, 10 (4), 475-501.
Foster, G. (2006). It’s not your peers, and it’s not your friends: Some progress toward understanding the
educational peer effect mechanism. Journal of Public Economics, 90, 1455-1475.
Fu, C. (2012). Equilibrium Tuition, Applications, Admissions and Enrollment in the College Market. Working
Paper.
Government Accountability Office, “Impact of Loan Limit Increases on College Prices Is Difficult to “Discern,”
Report to Congressional Committees, GAO-14-7, February 2014.
Kane, Thomas, “Evaluating the Impact of the D.C. Tuition Assistance Grant Program,” Journal of Human
Resources, 42 (3), 2007, 555-582.
Keane, Michael, and Wolpin, Kenneth, “The Effects of Parental Transfers and Borrowing Constraints on
Educational Attainment,” International Economic Review, 42, November 2001, 1051-1103.

30

Kim, M. (2010). “Early Decision and Financial Aid Competition among Need-blind Colleges and Universities,”
Journal of Public Economics, 94, 410–420.
Kirshstein, R. J. and Hurlburt, S. (2012). Revenues: Where Does the Money Come From? A Delta Data
Update, 2000-2010. American Institutes for Research, Washington, D.C.
Kremer, M. and Levy, D. (2008). Peer Effects and Alcohol Use among College Students. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 22 (3), 189-206.
Long, Bridget, “How do Financial Aid Policies Affect Colleges?” The Journal of Human Resources, 39 (4), Fall
2004, 1045-1066.
Loury, G., Fryer, R., and Yuret, T. (2008). An Economic Analysis of Color-Blind Affirmative Action. Journal
of Law, Economics, and Organization, 24, 319-355.
Lyle, D. S. (2007). Estimating and Interpreting Peer and Role Model Effects from Randomly Assigned Social
Groups at West Point. Review of Economics and Statistics, 1-20.
Lyle, D. S. (2009). The Effects of Peer Group Heterogeneity on the Production of Human Capital at West
Point. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1 (4), 69-84.
Manski, C. (1993). Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem. Review of Economic
Studies, 60, 531-542.
McFadden, D. (1974). The Measurement of Urban Travel Demand. Journal of Public Economics, 3, 303-328.
Moffitt, R. (2001). Policy Interventions, Low-level Equilibria, and Social Interactions. In Social Dynamics, MIT
Press.
Palmer, J. (2008). State Higher Education Tax Appropriations Data for Fiscal Year 2008. Center for the
Study of Education Policy, Illinois State University.
Sacerdote, B. (2001). Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth Roommates, Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 116 (2), 681-704.
Sarpca, S. (2010). Multi-dimensional Skills, Specialization, and Oligopolistic Competition in Higher Education.
Journal of Public Economics, 94, 800-811.
Singell, Larry and Stone, Joe, “For who the Pell tolls: The response of university tuition to federal grants-in-aid,”
Economics of Education Review 26 (3), June 2007, 285-295.
Stanley, Marcus, “College Education and Mid-Century G.I. Bills,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (4), 2002,
784-815.
Stinebrickner, R. and Stinebrickner, T. R. (2006). What can be learned about peer effects using college
roommates? Evidence from new survey data and students from disadvantaged backgrounds. Journal
of Public Economics, 90, 1435-54.
Turner, Lesley, “The Road to Pell is Paved with Good Intentions: the Economic Incidence of Federal Student Grant
Aid,” mimeo, March 2013, University of Maryland.
Zimmerman, P. (2003). Peer Effects in Academic Outcomes: Evidence from a Natural Experiment, Review of
Economics and Statistics, 85 (1), 9-23.

31

Appendix. Proof of Proposition 1. Given Assumptions 5 and 6, the quality maximization
problem is a strictly quasi-concave programming problem with unique solution under the
condition described next. Substitute (7) into (5) and (6). Then (5) and (6) define an implicit
mapping from psj ( b, y ) into ( θ j ,I j ) say ( θ j ( psj ( b, y )),I ( psj ( b, y ))). If the latter is a convex
set, the problem is strictly quasi-concave, which we then assume. To derive (8), write out the
Lagrange function for the problem presented in (4) - (7). Suppressing the j subscript and the
functional arguments, the Lagrange function is:

 S


L = q + λ  ∫∫ ∑ π s ps rs f s dbdy  + E − F − V − kI 

  s =1

S
S




+ η  kθ − ∫∫ b∑ πs rs f s dbdy  + Ω  k − ∫∫ ∑ πs rs f s dbdy  .
s =1
s =1





(34)

Compute the derivatives with respect to θ , I , and k, and the first variation with respect to

ps ( b, y ).
S


∂rs
∂r
qθ f s dbdy + η  k − ∫∫ b∑ πs s qθ f s dbdy 
∂q
∂q
s =1


S
∂r
− Ω ∫∫ ∑ π s s qθ f s dbdy = 0.
∂q
s =1

(35)

S
 S

∂r
∂r
LI = qI + λ  ∫∫ ∑ π s ps s qI f s dbdy − k  − η ∫∫ b∑ π s s qI f s dbdy
∂q
∂q
s =1
 s =1

S
∂r
− Ω ∫∫ ∑ π s s qI f s dbdy = 0.
∂q
s =1

(36)

Lk = − λ[V ′ + I ] + ηθ + Ω = 0.

(37)

Lps ( b ,y ) = λπ s f s ( rs + ps ∂rs / ∂ps ) − ηbπ s f s ∂rs / ∂ps − Ωπ s f s ∂rs / ∂ps = 0 ∀ ps ( b, y ).

(38)

S

Lθ = qθ + λ ∫∫ ∑ π s ps
s =1

From (35) and (36), one obtains:
qθ
η
=− .
qI
λ

(39)

Divide (37) and (38) by λ, yielding respectively:
η
Ω
− [V ′ + I ] + θ + = 0.
λ
λ

(40)
32

η
Ω

π s f s  rs + ps ∂rs / ∂ps − b∂rs / ∂ps − ∂rs / ∂ps
λ
λ



 = 0 ∀ ps ( b, y ).

(41)

Substituting (39) and (40) into (41), after dividing through by ∂rs / ∂ps , completes the derivation.
Proof of Proposition 2. From the first-order conditions, one can write the first variation with
respect to admission of in-state and out-of-state students as:
Lγ s = λπ s rs f s ( b, y )[ a( ⋅ ) / λ + Ts + z − EMCs ( b )]

(42)



Lγ so = λ  ∑ π t rts f t ( b, y )  [ Tso + z − EMCs ( b )]
 t≠s


(43)

where λ > 0 is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the budget constraint (13). From (42)
and (43), using the feasibility constraints, one obtains the results.
Proof of Proposition 3. Substitute (24) into (8) and rearrange.

33

34

Figure 2
Ability Distributions Of Students In State Colleges
and in Lowest and Highest Ranked Private Colleges

Out-of-state\

Lowest Private
/College

Density

In-state-

Highest Private
/College

2.4

2.6

2.8

3.0

3.2

3.4

3.6

3.8

4.0

4.2

4.4

4.6

4.8

5.0

Ability

Income Distributions of Students in State Colleges
and in Lowest and Highest Ranked Private Colleges

In-state-

Density

Out-of-State/Highest Private
/Lowest Private

0

20

40

60

80

100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280
Income

35

36

Figure 4
Effects of Policy Changes Distributions of Costs to Students in Private Colleges
0.16
Baseline (Left Bar)
0.14
Increased Federal Aid (Middle Bar)
0.12
0.1

Reduced State Aid (Right Bar)

0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44

Effects of Policy Changes on Distributions of Costs to Students in State Colleges
0.7
0.6
Baseline
0.5
Increased Federal Aid
0.4
Reduced State Aid
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28

37

38

39

Income

Income

Table 5: College Attendance Proportions

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

1
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

1
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

2
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

2
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

3
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

Top Private College
Ability Deciles
4
5
6
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

7
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

8
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

9
13%
4%
3%
1%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

10
21%
13%
14%
6%
4%
2%
1%
0%
0%
0%

3
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

All Private Colleges
4
5
6
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

7
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

8
45%
21%
16%
8%
1%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

9
82%
49%
43%
31%
9%
1%
0%
0%
0%
0%

10
92%
83%
86%
83%
67%
43%
19%
10%
3%
0%

7
97%
92%
84%
70%
52%
54%
55%
19%
1%
0%

8
53%
73%
71%
65%
52%
54%
55%
19%
1%
0%

9
18%
47%
48%
48%
47%
53%
55%
19%
1%
0%

10
8%
16%
12%
12%
17%
31%
43%
18%
1%
0%

Income

State Colleges

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

1
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

2
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

3
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

4
44%
37%
35%
29%
21%
23%
22%
7%
0%
0%

5
96%
91%
83%
69%
47%
53%
54%
18%
1%
0%

6
97%
92%
84%
70%
52%
54%
55%
19%
1%
0%

40

41

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
1&2

1 to 3
-

4
0
0
0
0
0.1
3.7
6.0
6
-

Income Deciles

5
0
0
0
0.0
0.4
3.5
6.0
6
-

10
9
8
7
6
5
1 to 4
Income Deciles

10
9
8
7
6
5
1 to 4

Ability Deciles
1 to 8
9
10
0.0 6.4
0.1 10.8
0.2 11.3
14.2
18.5
21.1
-

Institutional Aid

10
9
8
7
6
5
1 to 4

Tuition Net of Federal and
Institutional Aid**
Ability Deciles
1 to 8
9
10
34.5
28.1
34.1
23.0
28.6
17.5
14.3
9.7
7.1
-

Ability Deciles
6
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.1
0.1
1.2
1.2
3.7
3.7
6.0
6.0
6
6
-

Federal Aid
8
0
0
0
0.1
1.2
3.7
6.0
6
-

9
0
0
0
0.1
1.2
3.6
6.0
6
-

10
0
0
0
0.1
1.3
3.7
6.0
6
-

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
1&2

1 to 3
-

4
6.2
6.2
6.2
6.2
6.1
2.5
0.2
0.2
-

5
6.8
6.5
6.4
6.4
6.3
2.8
0.2
0.2
-

Ability Deciles
6
7
8.3
8.4
7.5
7.6
7.0
7.0
6.7
6.7
6.8
6.8
2.9
3.0
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
-

8
8.4
7.5
7.0
6.7
6.8
2.9
0.2
0.2
-

Tuition Net of Federal Aid**

Table 6B: Federal Aid and Tuition by Ability and Income Percentiles in State College*

Ability Deciles
1 to 8
9
10
0
0
0.3
0.5
5.7
5.7
6
6
6
-

Federal Aid

Income Deciles

*All values are measured in thousands.
**To obtain total student costs, including non-tuition costs, add 10.25 to tuition net of financial aid.

Income Deciles

Income Deciles

Table 6A: Federal Aid, Institutional Aid, and Tuition by Ability and Income Percentiles in Highest Quality Private College*

9
8.2
7.5
7.0
6.7
6.8
3.0
0.2
0.2
-

10
8.3
7.5
7.1
6.7
6.8
2.9
0.2
0.2
-

Income Deciles

Table 7: Change in Total Enrollment Proportions for All Colleges Combined

Income Deciles

Income Deciles

Income Deciles

1 to 3
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

9

10

16%
14%
12%
7%
4%
4%
19%
16%
3%
0%

Ability Deciles
5
6
7
8
Maximum Federal Aid = $8,000
-1%
-1%
-1%
-1%
-2%
-1%
-1%
-2%
-3%
-3%
-3%
-3%
-4%
-4%
-4%
-4%
-5%
-2%
-2%
-2%
-5%
-3%
-3%
-3%
14%
13%
14%
14%
24%
25%
25%
24%
5%
5%
5%
5%
0%
0%
0%
0%

0%
-1%
-1%
2%
1%
-2%
13%
25%
6%
0%

0%
0%
0%
1%
4%
3%
13%
24%
7%
0%

-24%
-19%
-19%
-12%
-6%
-9%
-30%
-22%
-3%
0%

Maximum Federal Aid = $4,000
1%
1%
1%
2%
3%
2%
2%
3%
5%
4%
4%
4%
8%
7%
7%
6%
9%
3%
3%
3%
5%
2%
3%
2%
-37%
-36%
-36%
-36%
-37%
-38%
-38%
-37%
-5%
-6%
-6%
-6%
0%
0%
0%
0%

0%
1%
1%
-2%
-2%
2%
-36%
-38%
-6%
0%

0%
0%
0%
-3%
-8%
-8%
-33%
-40%
-9%
0%

-1%
-1%
-2%
-4%
-3%
0%
-9%
-5%
0%
0%

State Change = $2,000
0%
0%
0%
-1%
-1%
-2%
-2%
-2%
-4%
-5%
-4%
-4%
-8%
-8%
-8%
-8%
-4%
-7%
-6%
-7%
1%
1%
1%
1%
-21%
-21%
-21%
-21%
-12%
-13%
-13%
-12%
-1%
-1%
-1%
-1%
0%
0%
0%
0%

0%
0%
-1%
-4%
-5%
1%
-21%
-13%
-1%
0%

0%
0%
0%
-1%
-1%
0%
-16%
-12%
-1%
0%

4

42

