                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE DISINTERMEDIATION OF FINANCIAL MARKETS:
                        DIRECT INVESTING IN PRIVATE EQUITY

                                              Lily Fang
                                           Victoria Ivashina
                                             Josh Lerner

                                         Working Paper 19299
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19299


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2013




We thank a number of institutional investors for making this analysis possible by generously sharing
their data and answering our many follow-on questions. We thank Jean-Nöel Barrot (discussant), Ludovic
Phalippou, Per Strömberg and participants at the New York Fed/NYU Conference on Private Equity,
the University of Chicago, the Greenwich Roundtable, and the London Business School Private Equity
Symposium for their insightful comments. Lilei Xu and Chris Allen provided remarkable assistance
with the analysis. We thank Per Strömberg and Rudiger Stücke for access to unpublished data. Harvard
Business School’s Division of Research provided financial support. A number of the authors has advised
institutional investors in private equity funds, private equity groups, and governments designing policies
relevant to private equity. All errors and omissions are our own. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Lily Fang, Victoria Ivashina, and Josh Lerner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Disintermediation of Financial Markets: Direct Investing in Private Equity
Lily Fang, Victoria Ivashina, and Josh Lerner
NBER Working Paper No. 19299
August 2013
JEL No. G0,G23

                                              ABSTRACT

One of the important issues in corporate finance is the rationale for and role of financial intermediaries.
In the private equity setting, institutional investors are increasingly eschewing intermediaries in favor
of direct investments. To understand the trade-offs in this setting, we compile a proprietary dataset
of direct investments from seven large institutional investors. We find that solo investments by institutions
outperform co-investments and a wide range of benchmarks for traditional private equity partnership
investments. The outperformance is driven by deals where informational problems are not too severe,
such as more proximate transactions to the investor and later-stage deals, and by an ability to avoid
the deleterious effects on returns often seen in periods with large inflows into the private equity market.
The poor performance of co-investments, on the other hand, appears to result from fund managers’
selective offering of large deals to institutions for co-investing.


Lily Fang                                             Josh Lerner
INSEAD                                                Harvard Business School
Lily.FANG@insead.edu                                  Rock Center 214
                                                      Boston, MA 02163
Victoria Ivashina                                     and NBER
Harvard Business School                               jlerner@hbs.edu
Baker Library 233
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
vivashina@hbs.edu
    1. Introduction

       One of the enduring interests in the corporate finance literature has related to the ubiquity

of intermediaries in financial markets. In the benchmark Arrow-Debreu world of complete

information and perfect markets, there is no need for financial intermediaries: individuals and

firms can transact seamlessly with each other. But as these strict assumptions are relaxed, an

explicit role for financial intermediaries emerges.

       The widely offered explanations for the frequent appearance of intermediaries in

financial markets are two-fold. 1 The first involves transaction costs. Many authors, beginning

with Gurley and Shaw (1960), have highlighted the presence of frictions which can impose a

substantial drag on the returns of investors operating independently. By pooling capital across

multiple individuals and institutions, the costs associated with assessing and undertaking

investments can be shared, thereby enhancing investors’ returns.

       The second explanation highlighted in the literature builds on information advantages of

financial intermediaries. The possibility that an intermediary may have superior information to

that of investors has motivated many models. To cite two classic models, Leland and Pyle (1977)

argue that intermediaries invest in assets where they have special knowledge, while Diamond

(1984) suggests that these financial actors serve as “delegated monitors.” The majority of the

information-driven models of financial intermediation have focused on the banks. But Chan

(1982) and Admati and Pfleiderer (1994) highlight how informational advantages may motivate

investors to deploy equity capital through private equity funds.

       To be sure, these explanations are not exhaustive. Among the alternative rationales

developed in the literature are the ability of intermediaries to shift risk across parties and time
1
  This discussion is drawn from several review articles, including Allen (2001), Allen and
Santomero (1998), and Gorton and Winton (2003).
(Merton, 1987), their provision of liquidity to investors whom might have to otherwise

inefficiently terminate investments (Diamond and Dybvig, 1983), their role as a bridge between

investors with differing beliefs (Coval and Thakor, 2005), and their ability to offer compensation

schemes that institutional investors are constrained from offering (Gennaioli, et al., 2012).

         At the same time, intermediaries are far from a panacea. A voluminous literature on the

behavior of banks during the run-up to the financial crisis has highlighted how agency problems

led them to neglect the interests of their capital providers. Mutual funds and insurance companies

have been shown to engage in behaviors that benefit portfolio managers at the expense of their

investors (e.g., Chevalier and Ellison, 1997; Becker and Ivashina, 2012). On the private equity

side, investors have been shown to grow fees at the expense of returns (Kaplan and Schoar,

2005; Lopez-de-Silanes, et al., 2011), invest aggressively at market peaks when expected returns

are modest (Axelson, et al., 2012), and exit transactions prematurely to facilitate fundraising

(Gompers, 1996). Moreover, many classes of institutional investors appear to sub-optimally

choose which private equity groups to invest with (Lerner, et al., 2007; Hochberg and Rauh,

2011).

         It is against this theoretical backdrop that the recent interest among institutional investors

in investing directly in private equity is particularly noteworthy. Private equity might appear to

be a textbook case where the benefits from financial intermediation—in this case, specialized

funds—would be substantial: not only are the transaction costs associated with structuring these

investments large (for example, see Kaplan and Strömberg, 2003, 2004), but substantial

information asymmetries surround the selection, monitoring, and nurturing of the investments,

giving rise to potential information advantages for specialized investors. And yet the interest on

the part of institutional investors in undertaking direct investments—and thus bypassing



                                                                                                     2
intermediaries—appears to have increased substantially, as numerous news stories (as well as

surveys by Coller Capital and Preqin) document. 2

         In this paper, we seek to understand the relative tradeoffs between direct and

intermediated investing in private equity. By understanding these issues in this rich context, we

aim to enhance our understanding of financial intermediaries more generally. Toward this end,

we compile a proprietary dataset of direct investments from seven large institutional investors.

For these investors we have complete coverage of their direct investments programs, including

solo investments and co-investments. Our dataset consists of detailed cash flows for 392 direct

investments made by these institutions between 1991 and 2011. To the best of our knowledge,

this is the first large-sample study that takes a close look at direct investments in private equity

made by institutional investors.

         We examine the investing patterns—e.g., timing and geography—as well as the

performance of these direct investments. When studying the investment performance, we

compare the performance of these investments against the major benchmarks for private equity.

We use three metrics of investment performance: 1) returns net of the fees and carried interest

paid to general partners; 2) returns net of fees, carry, and the added expenses borne by the

limited partners (e.g., internal staff costs); and 3) the market-adjusted returns net of fees and

carry.

         The key findings of our analysis are as follows:


2
   E.g., “South Carolina to Start an Investment Firm for Its Private Equity Bets,”
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/09/28/business/28carolina.html, September 27, 2010;          “Abu
Dhabi Sovereign Wealth Fund Eyes Direct Investment in Indian Real Estate,”
http://www.altassets.net/private-equity-news/by-news-type/firm-news/abu-dhabi-sovereign-
wealth-fund-eyes-direct-investment-in-indian-real-estate.html, March 9, 2012; and “NY State:
Interested in More Direct Private-Equity Investments,” http://online.wsj.com/article/BT-CO-
20120518-713093.html, May 18, 2012.


                                                                                                  3
•   Direct investments are cyclical. As with private equity funds (Kaplan and Schoar, 2005),

    the most direct funds are invested at times when ex post performance is relatively poor.

    As a result, aggregate performance is better when we undertake a simple average of

    annual performance than when years are weighted by the amount of capital invested in

    that year.

•   Direct investments generally outperform fund investments. But the strongest finding is

    that within direct investments, solo transactions, i.e., investments initiated and executed

    by investors alone, significantly outperform co-investments, which are deals done

    alongside private equity funds. These results are robust to the use of various benchmarks

    and lag structures, and provide an economic rationale for the disintermediation trend in

    private equity investing.

•   The impact of years with extensive private equity inflows is less deleterious to the returns

    of solo investments. While returns are lower, solo investments in peak years significantly

    outperform co-investments and partnership investments. Nonetheless, the volume of

    direct investments appears to fall after market peaks.

•   The advantages of solo deals over co-investments are greater in setting where information

    problems are less intense, such as local and later-stage firms that perform less R&D.

•   The underperformance of the co-investments appears to be driven by selection (“lemons

    problem”): institutional investors can only co-invest in deals that are available to them.

    Opportunities for co-investment are likely to be selected based on deal size. We find that

    co-investments deals are substantially larger than an average sponsor’s deal. We also find

    evidence consistent with co-investments being exited later than other investments led by

    the same private equity fund.


                                                                                              4
         As our sample is limited and self-reported, a discussion of the selection bias is in order.

We assess the potential selection bias in detail in the Data Section below. But we should point

out that, within our sample, there is no selection bias; we have the full list of direct

investments—solo and co-investments—for the institutions in our sample. This makes the

difference between co-investments and solo direct investments a particularly strong result. 3

         Our results illustrate the theoretical literature summarized above in several ways. First,

the findings highlight the power of intermediation. While the net returns between direct and

partnership investments are similar, because the partnerships charge higher fees, the

intermediated investments’ gross returns are larger. (We leave the question of whether the fees

charged by private equity funds for their services are appropriate outside the scope of this paper.)

Second, the analyses highlight the power of intermediation in information-rich environments.

The performance of the non-intermediated deals deteriorates sharply in settings where

information problems make either deal selection or monitoring more difficult, consistent with the

depictions by Leland and Pyle (1977) and Diamond (1984). Finally, the results hint at a complex

set of agency problems between intermediaries and the ultimate investors that are not fully

captured by most models of financial intermediation: for instance, the tendency of co-

investments undertaken by these groups to cluster in the most overheated markets and largest

deals.

         The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the economics of

direct investing. In Section 3, we present the data set that was assembled for this study. Sections

4 and 5 evaluate the performance differentials between the direct investment sample and several

benchmarks. Section 6 concludes the paper.
3
 Anecdotally, insiders in some institutional funds have shared with us that their experiences with
solo and co-investments are consistent with our evidence.


                                                                                                  5
   2. The economics of direct investments

       Traditionally, institutional investors make private equity investments by committing

capital to private equity funds. The funds are managed by professional investors (e.g., the

Blackstone Group), known as the general partners (GPs). The institutional investors (e.g., South

Carolina’s pension fund) are known as limited partners (LPs). The general partners are in charge

of the entire investing process, from deal selection, execution, monitoring to exiting. The limited

partners play a passive role as capital provider. In fact, in many nations, they need to remain

passive in order to maintain the limited liability status.

       In recent years, there has been an increasing trend for institutional investors to make

direct investments, bypassing the GPs as intermediaries. These deals include transactions in

which an institutional investor co-invests in a deal that is originated by a general partner (i.e., a

PE fund manager) and ones in which the institutional investor originates and invests in alone. In

addition, there are hybrid cases where an institution co-leads a deal with a general partner or

another institutional investor. Figure 1 depicts different variants of direct investment

arrangements. In this paper, we refer to these various types of investments collectively as “direct

investments”. We use “solo investments” to refer to those deals originated and completed by the

LPs on their own, and “co-investments” to refer to deals where LPs invest alongside GPs. The

key feature of the latter arrangements (relative to investments by partnerships) is that the LP

plays an active role in deciding whether to make the co-investment and typically pays the GPs

reduced fees and carried interest, if any.

                                                 [FIGURE 1]




                                                                                                   6
       Why are LPs increasingly interested in making investments directly? One clear

motivation is the high cost of investing in private equity funds. In the traditional LP-GP setting,

GPs are compensated through a management fee (typically 1.5 to 2% of committed capital or

assets under management) and a “carried interest,” a percentage (typically 20%) of the fund’s

investment profits. This “2-and-20” compensation structure implies a cumulative investment cost

of 5 to 7 percentage points per year under a wide range of performance assumptions, a large

economic magnitude.

       In the years after the private equity boom of 2005 to 2007, the high levels of

compensation that private equity fund managers enjoy (Gompers and Lerner, 1999; Metrick and

Yasuda, 2010) attracted increasing attention. A growing body of evidence suggests that many

private equity LPs do not outperform public market benchmarks (e.g., Kaplan and Schoar

(2005), Gottschalg and Phalippou (2009)). While the aggregate performance of private equity

over public markets is a subject of debate recently—for differing approaches and conclusions,

see for instance Gottschalg and Phalippou (2009), Harris, et al. (2012) and Axelson, et al.

(2013)—it is clear that even if private equity outperforms public equity, not all LPs benefit from

this outperformance: many of the best returns appear concentrated among funds selected by

endowments and foundations, rather than those that dominate the portfolios of banks, insurance

companies, and pension funds (Lerner, et al., 2007).

       Fees in direct deals are different from the “2-and-20” compensation structure. In direct

deals originated by LPs themselves (solo investments), there are typically no fees paid. In the

case of co-investments, any fees and carry are negotiated on a deal-by-deal basis. LPs typically

resent paying additional charges for transactions originated by fund managers with whom they

have invested (see Hoye and Lerner (1996) for an illustrative case). In general, large institutions



                                                                                                 7
(which dominate our sample) have a great deal of market power, and are unlikely to be charged

such fees by their GPs. The significant savings on fees and carry in direct investments imply that

all else being equal, direct investors should enjoy better net returns.

       While cost savings are important, our conversations with institutional investors have

suggested that it is not the sole—or, in some cases, even the primary—motivation behind the

movement towards direct investing. In the traditional LP-GP setting, GPs are in charge of deal

selection as well as the timing of investments, leaving LPs with little control and flexibility.

Direct investments give LPs more control. Investors we interviewed point out that the ability to

selectively invest in (“cherry pick”) deals where the investment opportunities are particularly

attractive and where managers can apply sector expertise and active management skills to add

value is an important reason for solo investing or co-investing. According to our interviews,

some of the institutions pick less than 5% of deals available to them.

       In addition, direct investments might give investors a better ability to time the market.

This is valuable because private equity funds’ performance is highly cyclical (Axelson, et al.,

2012; Kaplan and Schoar, 2005). According to the theories on delegated investing, a principal-

agency problem may arise in the traditional LP-GP setting. (See, for example, Shleifer and

Vishny (1993), which discusses the agency problems in delegated investing; Chevalier and

Ellison (1999) and Hong, et al. (2000) provide empirical evidence.) GPs’ reputational and career

concerns may lead them to “herd” and invest heavily at the peak of the private equity market,

when inflows into private equity funds are high, credit is cheap, and all other GPs are heavily

investing. This cyclical investing behavior may lead to suboptimal performance, as the

investments in peak periods are often entered into at high valuations (Gompers and Lerner, 2000;

Axelson, et al., 2012). By investing directly, LPs may circumvent the agency problem in



                                                                                                8
investing. In particular, LPs may not feel as pressured as GPs do to undertake deals at the peak of

the market, and may be better able to invest in “cold” markets when few are investing. Such

contrarian investing may lead to superior performance. In our interviews, some of the asset

managers had indicated to us that they had suspended their investments relatively early in 2007

and did not start to invest again until 2010.

       Direct investments also give the LPs a better ability to customize their risk exposures.

Because investors can invest selectively, direct investments offer a much sharper tool to manage

targeted risk profiles than fund commitments, where the timing and amount of investments—and

hence the risk exposures—are controlled by the private equity fund.

       Finally, co-investing may also better align the interests between the LPs and GPs to

achieve higher investment quality. GPs can be distracted—for example, by underperforming

portfolio companies or plans for some portfolio companies to go public—and thus not be wholly

focused on investing during potentially attractive times to deploy capital. In co-investments,

because the LPs play a more active role and work closely with the GP, such a principal-agent

problem between the GPs and LPs may be reduced.

       Direct investments, however, have downsides as well. The biggest challenge is

investment skill. In the traditional fund investing, the LPs’ main task is to select the right

managers. Thus, traditionally LPs’ skills should relate to manager selection. But to invest more

directly, the LPs need to step into GP-like roles, needing deal-level due diligence, operational,

and monitoring capabilities that are not in their traditional skillset. To the extent that the LPs’

internal staff is less skilled and/or experienced in transaction-related activities than the GPs,

direct investments may on average be of worse quality than portfolio companies in funds.




                                                                                                 9
       These concerns might be particularly true for co-investments. In these instances, the LP is

typically offered the investment opportunity with only a limited amount of time to undertake due

diligence. It might also be the case that in these instances, the greater information of the private

equity group relative to that of the LP creates a “lemons problem”—i.e., GPs offer LPs

investments in below-average quality deals—which would translate into lower returns.

       Reinforcing this type of equilibrium is the fact that the staff of the LPs typically receives

lower compensation than investment professionals in funds, reflecting the frequent association of

institutional investors with the government or non-profit bodies. Therefore, even if the LPs have

talented internal staff to make direct investments, ultimately these promising investors are likely

to move to traditional partnerships. If the labor market for investment skills is reasonably

efficient, one would expect that direct investments might on average be of worse quality than the

portfolio companies chosen by funds. Not only might this lower investment quality offset the

gains from reduced fees and carry, it may also negate the other rationales cited by LPs for direct

investing, such as “cherry picking the best deals” and “better risk control.”

       In sum, the different approaches to private equity investing—the traditional intermediated

partnerships versus direct investing—present a tradeoff between cost and investment quality.

Fund investing is high cost, but the average deal invested by funds may be of higher quality;

direct investing is lower cost, but the typical transaction may be of worse quality. The benefit of

direct investing, therefore, depends on this tradeoff.

       Despite growing interest among LPs to “go direct,” no empirical evidence exists on this

interesting phenomenon. Do LPs do better with their direct investments than with their fund

investments? Within “direct investments”, do co-investments (which are generated by the GPs)

outperform solo deals (which are generated by the LPs)? One might expect this to be the case if



                                                                                                 10
GPs are more “skilled” in selecting investments and if the higher costs (fees and carry) do not

dissipate all the upside. But the opposite may be true if LPs are just as skilled in deal selection or

if there are agency costs with co-investing. Our study provides the first analysis of these

questions.



   3. Data

       The data used for the analysis was obtained from seven institutional investors. Getting

access to these data posed certain complexities. This information was highly sensitive, and the

institutional investors wanted to be sure that neither the individual transactions nor the investors

themselves could be identified. This concern necessitated negotiating in each case a data

protection agreement. Given these high transaction costs, we focused on eliciting participation

from institutions with long-standing direct investment programs (and typically, considerable

experience with private equity in general). Thus, it can be anticipated that the participating firms

are among the more sophisticated private equity investors in the industry.

       Each of the seven contributing investors provided us the complete history of their direct

investments in private equity. While the groups were generally larger and more sophisticated

than the typical LP, we sought to ensure that they were representative in other respects. The

investors were based in North America, Europe, and Asia. No more than two groups were from

any individual country. They included university, corporate, and government-affiliated entities.

       In each case, the institution provided us with two sets of data:

   •   The first of these was the characteristics of the investments made (date, amount of equity

       and debt invested, etc.). The total sample contains 392 investments made between 1991

       and 2011. In most cases, the firms receiving the funds were identified by name; by two



                                                                                                   11
       cases, only by code number. In the former cases, we researched their characteristics at the

       time of the transaction using CapitalIQ and other business databases. In the latter cases,

       the institution provided us with the characteristics of the transaction (e.g., industry and

       headquarters location).

   •   The second data set consisted of the performance of the investments. This typically

       consisted of a series of cash flows and valuations for each transaction, running from the

       time of the investment until either its exit or the time the data was provided (the second

       or third quarter of 2011). We were able to replicate the performance calculations

       provided us by the LPs, and resolved any discrepancies through discussions with them.

       So the differences in performance cannot be attributed to methodological differences.

       As any self-reported data, our sample is likely not representative of the direct investments

universe. In Table I we evaluate the nature of the reporting bias. Panel A compares basic

statistics of the participating institutions in our sample with all others listed in the Thomson

VentureXpert Limited Partners Database. It should be noted that even the data compiled in this

database are far from an exhaustive depiction of LP activity, reflecting institutional investors’

unwillingness to communicate their investment choices and the lack of a statutory requirement

for most limited and general partners to reveal fundraising activity (see the discussion in Lerner,

et al., 2007, and Hochberg and Rauh, 2011).

       The comparison suggests that the private equity programs in our sample are newer and

larger than the other LPs in the Thomson database. The average year that a private equity

investment program was founded in our sample institutions was 1992, five years after the overall

LP universe. On the other hand, total assets under management in mid-2012 averaged $94 billion

for our participating institutions, more than double the average size of the investors in the overall



                                                                                                  12
Thomson LP universe. Total alternative assets under management averaged $21 billion among

our participating groups, 2.6 times the overall average of $8 billion. The average private equity

allocation was also slightly higher among our sample than overall: 15.8% versus 13.2%. Finally,

our sample investors on average have 31 fund commitments that have been identified by

VentureXpert (their compilations are highly incomplete), more than four times the 7.4 average in

the overall LP universe. Thus, overall, our sample represents large institutional investors who are

particularly active in alternative investing and have significant private equity exposures.

                                                 [TABLE I]

       A specific concern for our sample is that investors who collaborated with our study could

be more experienced than the average LP in pursuing direct investing. This means that the direct

investments in our sample could be better performing than the overall direct investments

population. Note that even in the presence of such a selection bias, there are insights that we can

learn from comparing solo and co-investments by the same investors.

       To understand better if our results are generalizable, we first compared the performance

(proxied for by exit patterns) of our direct investment sample made by the seven contributing

LPs compared to a broader sample of direct investments obtained from Capital IQ made by other

LPs. Results are reported in the top half of Table I Panel B. To do this analysis, we first manually

identified 150 limited partners from over 6,000 private equity investors appearing in Capital IQ.

Then we searched for deals that involve one of these 150 limited partners as a “buyer”. In this

way, we identified 651 direct investment transactions in Capital IQ. (We do not use this sample

for our core analysis because we do not have detailed cash flow data for them; cash-flow data is

unique to the proprietary data that we collected. But they can help us at least partially assess the




                                                                                                 13
sample selection bias problem.) We compare the exit outcomes of this sample with our sample.4

The results show that there are no significant differences in terms of the exit patterns between the

direct investments done by our seven LPs and the other LPs, alleviating the sample selection

concern that our results might be over-stating the general performance of direct investment

programs.

       As our main analysis compares direct investments with traditional fund investments by

our seven LPs, we also sought to check/validate our overall conclusion by comparing the

performance of direct investments made by other LPs identified above with traditional fund

investments. This is again to explore whether our results are generalizable. Specifically, we

compare the exit patterns of the 651 direct investment deals identified from Capital IQ above to

the exit rates of over 20,000 other deals (i.e., traditional PE fund deals) from Capital IQ. Results

are reported in the bottom table in Table I, Panel B. This analysis is admittedly crude, but

directionally consistent with our main finding: Direct investments appear to perform well, having

higher IPO rates (although statistically insignificant) and lower bankruptcy rates (significant at

the 10% level). Interestingly, direct investments are also significantly more likely to have a

secondary buyout as an exit and exits of unknown types (which tend to be poorly performing)

account for a smaller fraction in the direct sample.



    4. Results: Performance comparison

       In this section, we undertake three sets of univariate comparisons between the

performance of direct and partnership investments: First, we undertake the baseline comparison

of the performance net of fees and carried interest. Second, we examine the performance
4
  Exit data was generously provided by Per Strömberg, and is used in Strömberg (2008). We
supplemented this by manual searches of recent exits.


                                                                                                 14
adjusted as well for the estimated internal costs of managing the programs. In a third

comparison, we look at performance adjusted for the contemporaneous returns of public equity

markets.

   A. Net Performance

        The distribution of 392 direct investments in our sample is presented in Table II. The

investments are significant in magnitude, totaling nearly 23 billion dollars. Roughly 73% of the

sample by the number of deals and 61% by the overall amount invested are co-investments. (Of

course, this only represents the activity of seven large investors.) By way of comparison, over the

same period from the beginning of 1991 and the third quarter of 2011, LPs’ total commitment to

private equity funds globally was $1.6 trillion, again as estimated by Thomson Reuters.

        As Figure 2 shows, the majority of the direct investments in our sample are concentrated

in the most recent period. Thus, direct investing represents still a small, but a meaningful and

growing, part of institutional investors’ total private equity investing. One striking pattern is the

manner in which the number, and especially the dollar volume of investments appears to crest

around years that are among the peak of private equity investing more generally, particularly in

2007.

                                          [TABLE II & FIGURE 2]

        We focus on two measures of performance: the ratio of total value, which is the sum of

distributed and residual capital, to the amount paid into the fund (abbreviated TV/PI) and the

internal rate of return, or IRR. We focus on these measures, as most published performance

benchmarks for private equity funds employ these metrics. These measures have significant

limitations, including not adjusting for the risk of the investments. However, in this paper we

will be focusing on the differences between performance of the investments in our sample and



                                                                                                  15
the benchmarks. Thus, we implicitly assume that the leverage and other risk measures for

transactions in our sample are comparable to that of the benchmarks. (Where possible, we will

match the benchmarks by type of investments and geography.)

       Two patterns are apparent in the performance data reported in Table II. First, because the

direct investments are concentrated in years with relatively lower performance—again, similar to

commitments to and investments by private equity partnerships—the performance of direct

investments are considerably better when years are equal weighted than when they are weighted

by the amount invested. For example, for solo investments, TV/PI goes down from an equal-

weighted average of 3.98 across the years to 3.08 when weighted by amount invested; IRR goes

down from 30.17% to 16.82%.

       A second pattern is the disparity of performance between solo and co-investments: the

solo investments made by LPs on their own perform substantially better than co-investments

with GPs. While investment-weighted mean TV/PI and IRR are 3.08 and 16.82% for solo

investments, they are 1.20 and -0.09% for co-investments. The poor performance of co-

investments appears to be highly related to the “hotness” of the PE market, measured by total

fund commitments. In unreported analysis, we find that while the correlation between TV/PI of

solo investments and total fund commitments is -0.18, while it is -0.59 for co-investments. Using

IRRs as the performance metric, the correlation with total fund commitments is -0.04 for solo

investments and -0.51 for co-investments. 5 Thus it is safe to conclude that the under-

performance of co-investments is particularly related to the well-documented cyclicality of PE

performance.

5
 The same conclusion holds if we use total PE fund disbursements as a measure of PE market
“hotness”. For instance, the correlation between TV/PI and fund disbursements for solo deals is -
25%, but it is -67% for co-investments.


                                                                                              16
        An important difference between direct investing and traditional private equity investing

is the absence of a fund structure. Typical performance measures such as those provided by

Thomson VentureEconomics, Preqin, and Burgiss (which we use later to benchmark our results)

use fund, or portfolio performance, whereas in our direct investment sample each investment is

treated individually. Given that we look at capital-weighted averages this does not make a

difference for TV/PI. But this does affect the IRR calculation: the IRR of a portfolio is not the

value-weighted IRR of its investments. Thus we also calculate pseudo “portfolio IRRs” for our

direct investments. This is done by treating investments initiated in the same year by the same

investor as one portfolio regardless of the year of any follow-on investments. The last vertical

panel of Table II reports these “portfolio IRRs”. Once we weight these annual portfolio IRRs by

amount invested, we again observe the under-performance of co-investments (average portfolio

IRR is 9.68%) relative to solo-investments (average portfolio IRR of 14.58%).

        To compare the performance of the investors in our data-set to those of investments in

private equity partnerships, we use three major benchmarks of private equity partnership

performance: Preqin, Thomson VentureXpert, and Burgiss. Which of these benchmarks

accurately reflect the private equity industry as a whole is a controversial issue (see the

discussion in Harris, et al., 2011). Rather than designating one benchmark as the best, we sought

to use all three.

        We obtained the three benchmarks for funds closed in each vintage year, for each distinct

geographic region reported (typically the U.S. and all other, or else the U.S., Europe, and all

other) and deal type (venture capital or buyout). We compute these benchmarks through

September 30, 2011 to most closely match the data we received from our LPs. For each data




                                                                                              17
source and for each vintage year, we downloaded the unweighted and capital-weighted average

rate of return (IRR) and unweighted and capital-weighted average investment multiple (TV/PI).

       One important feature of the data is summarized in Figure 3. The benchmarks computed

by Preqin, Thomson, and Burgiss are reported net of fees and carried interest (profit sharing)

paid to the general partners. The direct investment returns were also universally provided to us

on a net basis, that is, less any transaction fees and carried interest charged by the GPs. So, our

first comparison is of the net returns to the LPs (the third line of Figure 3).

                                                 [FIGURE 3]

       A subtle issue of timing arises when we construct benchmarks. For the direct deals, we

have the dates when the transactions were undertaken. The year of the direct deals, such as in

Table II, corresponds to the actual year of the investment. The performance of private equity

partnerships, however, is compiled by the major data vendors using the date of closing of the

fund. Private equity partnerships do not typically invest all their capital in the year that they

close, but instead the funds are invested in the several years thereafter. To deal with this issue,

we compare the performance of the direct deals to funds raised in the same year as the

transaction (“Lag 0”), as well as funds raised one and two years (“Lag 1” and “Lag 2”) before

the direct investment was made. Overall, however, our findings are robust to the timing of the

benchmark.

       Table III provides an illustration of how a single data source (in this case, Preqin) can

yield multiple benchmarks. The benchmark can be computed using all private equity (e.g.,

venture capital, buyouts, and intermediate transactions) or just buyouts. Another permutation is

to use only U.S. funds, or those worldwide. A simple average can be taken across years, or the

data weighted by the amount invested. (As with the direct investments, weighted fund returns are



                                                                                                18
substantially lower.) Finally, as mentioned earlier, various lags can be taken, to address the

timing issues discussed in the paragraph above.

                                               [TABLE III]

       Table IV presents differences in performance between the direct investment sample and

the various benchmarks. Each number reported in Table IV corresponds to a difference between

the average performance in our sample and a benchmark. Panel A shows results for the TV/PI

comparison, and Panel B shows results for IRR. Shaded cells denote cases where the direct

investments outperform the benchmarks.

       Table IV indicates that the solo direct investments outperform any market benchmark.

For TV/PI, the direct investments’ outperformance ranges from 2.1 to 2.5 of the money paid in

on an unweighted basis, and 1.6 and 1.8 of the money paid in when weighted by capital

invested/funds raised in a given year. For IRR, the outperformance is between 13% and 19% for

a simple average, and 7% and 10% for a weighted average. Though not reported, using the

differences between capital-weighted average IRRs and portfolio IRRs from Table II, one can

easily conclude that the outperformance of solo deals relative to benchmarks is robust to using

either methodology to compute IRRs. For example, the investment-weighted portfolio IRR for

solo deals is 14.58%, 2% lower than capital-weighted average IRR (16.82%). The

outperformance for solo deals over benchmarks, which is roughly 9%, will easily survive this

difference.

       When it comes to co-investments, the picture is more mixed. Given that 288 deals (out of

392) in our sample are co-investments, the mixed results are also reflected in the overall sample.

For TV/PI, the unweighted co-investments outperform the Thomson benchmark (which Stücke

(2011) argues is biased downwards); and the unweighted IRR consistently outperforms all



                                                                                               19
benchmarks. However, the weighted results show consistent underperformance of co-

investments.

       In general, when the results are weighted, the results are more consistent across different

benchmarks. Solo investments outperform the market benchmark, but co-investments

underperform.

                                                   [TABLE IV]


   B. “Net-Net Performance”

       The return metrics studied in the previous sub-section did not net out the LPs’ internal

costs of running the investment programs. In particular, it might be anticipated that the staff

salary and bonus costs incurred per unit of capital in direct investments would be greater than

those associated with a similar-sized partnership investment. The reason is that direct

investments require greater due diligence, more intensive structuring, and ongoing monitoring.

The legal costs may also be greater.

       Several of the institutional investors in our study provided us with detailed data on their

costs of managing direct and partnership investment programs. These data allowed us to

undertake a second calculation, which might be termed a “net-net” comparison of performance,

i.e., an assessment of performance after considering all costs. (This comparison is depicted on

the bottom line of the first panel of Figure 3).

       In particular, we received internal cost data (or at least estimates) from four of our

institutional investors. The estimates from all four were tightly bunched: The mean annual

internal cost for investing in private equity partnerships was 0.11% of committed capital, and the

mean annual cost of direct investing was 0.91% of committed capital. As we expected, investors’

internal cost of running direct investments was much higher than the cost of investing in funds.


                                                                                               20
In order to calculate “net-net” returns on direct investments, we assumed that these costs were

incurred over five years. We based this assumption on the estimates provided by institutional

investors in our sample. 6 For LPs’ investments in private equity funds, we assume the annual

0.11% internal cost will be incurred over five years, which is based on the unpublished

tabulations of the estimated duration of investments in funds by Stücke (2012).

       For multiples (TV/PI), this adjustment involved subtracting 0.0055 (=5*0.0011) or

0.0455 (=5*0.0091) from the multiples for partnership and direct deals respectively. For the

more recent deals, we pro-rate the discount to account for the shorter horizon. For IRR, in cases

where we have cash flow data, we adjust the numbers accordingly and re-compute the IRR. In

cases where we do not have cash flow data, we estimate the impact by first approximating a cash

flow stream that maps to the IRR number (making assumptions based on the data in Robinson

and Sensoy (2011) and then looking at the consequences of the added fee.

       Table V presents the “net-net” comparisons. The subtraction of the larger fees for direct

investments naturally reduces the difference in performance between our sample and the

benchmarks. However, the basic conclusion from these comparisons is the same as in the

previous sub-section. Strikingly, even after subtracting the larger internal cost of running direct

programs, direct investments still generally out-perform fund investments. The out-performance

is particularly strong among solo deals, while co-investments tend to under-perform fund

investments using various benchmarks. These patterns are true whether the results are equally

weighted or value weighted.

                                                [TABLE V]
6
 Strömberg (2008) concluded that the average holding period for exited deals by private equity
partnerships was 49 months. For obvious reasons, the use of a five-year horizon produces more
conservative estimates of differential performance of the direct investments. The overall
conclusions in this paper are qualitatively unaffected by using the Strömberg estimate.


                                                                                                21
    C. Market-Adjusted Net Returns

        We now turn again to a comparison of performance net of fees and carry, as in Section A.

However, now we look at the performance of both the funds and the benchmarks net of the

public market return.

        Our rationale for examining market-adjusted returns is based on the work of Robinson

and Sensoy (2011). These authors argue that even though the absolute returns of private equity

partnership investments in peak years is lower, the returns in these years relative to public market

benchmarks do not differ significantly. This distinction is important, they argue, because of the

way in which institutional investors make investment decisions. In particular, institutions

frequently have a target amount reserved for investments in equities, whether public or private.

The returns of public and private equities are often highly correlated. Thus, the poor performance

of private equity during years with large numbers of investments may be not as damaging,

because the public market investments would be reduced by a corresponding amount. In other

words, for every dollar invested in direct investments, there is one less dollar invested in public

equities.

        We have seen above that direct investments are also concentrated around market peaks. If

in a similar manner to the partnership investments, these investments are offset by reductions in

public market investments, the deleterious of such timing may be reduced. (Indeed, Lerner, et al.

(2013) presents an example of an institution that explicitly reduces public equity holdings when

making direct private investments.) Thus, even though direct investments are concentrated at

market peaks, their impact on overall performance may be less harmful than initially appears

because the funding for them reduces the allocation for public equities.




                                                                                                 22
       One way to empirically address this concern is to examine market-adjusted performance.

In particular, we repeat the analysis in Section 4.A, reducing the returns of both the direct

investments and the corresponding private equity benchmarks by the performance of the public

markets over the same period. The choice of market index depends on whether the deal in

question is a venture capital investment or a buyout, and whether it is a U.S. or global deal. For

U.S. buyout, we use the S&P 500 index; for U.S. venture, we use the Russell 2000. For non-U.S.

buyout and venture, we use MSCI EAFE Standard and Small Cap indices respectively. The

adjustment factor is contemporaneous to the year of the direct investment when we use lagged

benchmarks. 7

       To calculate the adjustment, as in Section 4.B, we assume a holding period of five years

for both the direct investments and the partnerships. The time period over which the benchmark

is calculated for the partnership investments is from July 1 of the vintage year for a period of five

years, again following Stücke (2012). The procedure for the direct deals is similar. For year

where the period of five years exceeded the cut-off date for the index data, we used the index

through the end date of the return series. For example, U.S. buyout funds in 2003 (using Preqin

data) have an IRR of 23.3% and a multiple of 1.95. Direct buyout deals have a return of 28.06%

and a multiple of 2.05. We look at returns on S&P 500 and find a five year annualized return of

5.52% and a total multiple of 1.31. Thus, the market-adjusted numbers for the funds are 17.78%

(=23.3%-5.52%) and 0.64 (=1.95- 1.31); for the direct deals, 22.54% (=28.06% - 5.52%) and

0.74 (=2.05 - 1.31).




7
  This is because the implied year of the investment is the same as the year of the direct
investment sample, regardless of the lag. Although the market adjustment itself does not move
regardless of the lag, the weights in the analyses change due to the lags.


                                                                                                  23
       The reported results correspond to difference in capital-weighted averages. Recall that

the adjustment essentially controls for the uneven distribution of performance and investment.

Had we done a market-adjusted calculation using unweighted data, the results would essentially

be equivalent to those in the left-hand columns of Table IV.

       The results in Table VI show a similar picture to the earlier tables. Solo deals continue to

outperform the relevant benchmarks, while co-investments lag in performance, particularly when

we examine the IRR.

                                               [TABLE VI]


   5. Results: Sources of Performance Differences

       To better understand the drivers of the performance differences, we conduct multivariate

regression analyses of the performance difference between direct investments and their deal-

matched benchmarks. In particular, we match each transaction to the most appropriate industry

and deal type (stage, geography, and year) benchmark. In this way, we sought to understand

which direct investments performed particularly well.

       We first perform a simple assessment of the performance. The results are reported in

Table VII. The dependent variable is the performance difference between direct investments and

the most comparable private equity fund benchmark. For non-U.S. deals, we are missing many of

the benchmarks: for instance, benchmarks by stage of deal are frequently missing from the

commercial data sources. So for each deal, we compute a benchmark in one of two ways. First,

we compute the returns net of (i) the aggregate index for private equity returns of funds of that

investment type, regardless of geography, as well as (ii) the aggregate index for private equity

returns of funds of that region, regardless of investment type. These two sets of corrections are

denoted as “Investment type” and “Region.”


                                                                                                24
       Because the matching of the benchmark is at the deal level, these numbers are not

directly comparable to the ones reported in Tables IV through VI. We report in each case the

benchmark with a one- and two- year lags. In addition to a constant, the specification includes a

dummy variable indicating that a deal is a solo investment (as opposed to a co-investment). The

standard errors are clustered by investor (that is, in seven clusters).

       Consistent with the non-parametric results, Table VII indicates that solo investments

invariably perform better than the co-investments. The performance differentials are statistically

and economically significant in magnitude: the TV/PI multiple is higher by about 4 and IRR is

higher by about 13-15 percentage points. The constant term, which estimates the mean

outperformance of all direct investments relative to their deal-specific benchmarks, is never

significant using TV/PI and always significantly negative using IRR, implying that co-

investments underperform traditional private equity investments. (The results for benchmarks

matched on investment type and region are nearly identical. In the subsequent analyses, we only

focus on the investment type benchmark.)

       We do not observe the set of investments available for co-investments and therefore

cannot directly rule out LPs’ lack of skill in selecting co-investments. However, the fact that the

same LPs outperform the private equity fund benchmarks in their solo investments suggests that

co-investments suffer from either insufficient time and/or other resources to conduct due-

diligence (investments demand) or else a “lemons problem” (investments supply).

                                                 [TABLE VII]

       As discussed in Section 2, the outperformance of solo direct investments could be

consistent with a series of non-mutually exclusive explanations. In Table VIII, we examine the

relative performance of investments in venture deals, which constitute 14% of our sample, as



                                                                                                25
well as targets in high research and development (R&D) industries. Venture deals are often seen

as intrinsically riskier than buyouts and potentially require higher active management skills. The

first two specifications for each benchmark appearing in Table VIII indicate that not only co-

investments, but also solo investments in venture deals, underperform the portfolio benchmark.

The analysis includes fixed effects for the investor, year, and the target’s industry.

       The second set of specifications reported in Table VIII examines information costs of

direct investments, as proxied for by R&D expenses scaled by assets. Industries with high R&D

expenses are likely to be associated with high due diligence and monitoring costs. Similar to

venture deals, investment in such industries may require more active management. We find that

solo investments substantially underperform in industries that face higher information cost

(higher R&D/Assets). This qualitative result holds for both TV/PI and IRR, but is statistically

significant only for IRR. Together with the results for venture (as well as that for proximate deals

below), this finding suggests limits to the ability of LPs to generate value in direct investments.

In particular, the outperformance of solo investments seems limited to settings where

information costs are not too great. In more opaque settings, the difficulties of either investment

screening or active managing/monitoring seem to reduce their ability to add value.

                                                [TABLE VIII]

       In Table IX, we use the proximity between the institutional investor and the investment

target—measured in hundreds of kilometers—as another proxy for information cost/familiarity

with the target company. We find that distance between the investor and the target firm

negatively impacts the investment performance of solo deals. While the distance variable alone is

not significant, its interaction with the solo dummy is consistently negative and statistically

significant for TV/PI regressions, indicating that solo-investments made in targets far away from



                                                                                                 26
the institutional investors’ location perform worse, all else equal. This finding is consistent with

the notion that there is a role for private, local information when making direct investments, and

that investing and deal monitoring becomes less effective when distance increases (for similar

evidence from public markets, see Coval and Moskowitz, 2001).

       Collectively, our evidence on venture deals, higher R&D industries, and proximity leads

to a consistent conclusion: while solo investments generally outperform benchmarks (and co-

investments), investors’ ability to outperform is curtailed for situations where information cost is

high. This conclusion is consistent with the information advantage argument often offered for

using financial intermediaries (in this setting, professions PE fund managers).

                                                [TABLE IX]

       In Table X, we focus on our LPs’ ability to time the market. Earlier analysis included

year fixed effects, which absorb any timing differences. Timing skills and investment skills

(either in investment picking or active management) are not mutually exclusive; but it is well

known that poor investment timing is a main driver of under-performance in private equity. To

measure timing ability, we add indicator variables for peak years of the private equity cycle

(1998 to 2000 and 2005 to 2007). As in earlier tables, given that outperformance is manifested

in solo direct investments, we also include interaction terms between the solo indicator and the

peak year dummies.

       We find that the peak year dummy itself does not affect the relative performance of direct

investments relative to benchmarks. However, the out-performance of solo deals over co-

investments is particularly pronounced in peak years, which is when private equity funds

perform particularly poorly (Kaplan and Schoar, 2005). The interaction between the solo dummy

and the peak year dummy is statistically significant throughout the TV/PI and the IRR



                                                                                                 27
regressions. For IRR results, the outperformance of direct investments is only statistically

significant for the peak years. This result indicates that the normally deleterious effect of poor

investment timing on performance is much less severe for investors’ solo transactions than for

their co-investments. This supports LP’s claims that direct investments offer more flexible

timing of the PE market.

                                              [TABLE X]

          Finally, we focus on co-investments and explore potential sources of their

underperformance. One of the most striking and also intriguing finding of this paper is that the

same LPs can out-perform private equity benchmarks in their solo investments yet they

underperform in their co-investments. This suggests that the under-performance is probably not

due to poor investment skill (lack of good investment professionals). Instead, this suggests that

either LPs are time and resource-constrained when it comes to co-investments, or there are other

agency costs with co-investments. For example, our analysis on timing above indicates that co-

investments under-perform the most during “peak” years when fund commitment and investment

pace in private equity is high in general. This can happen not only because in peak years more

co-investments are done, 8 but also if the deals offered to the LPs by the GPs are of poor quality

(a “lemons” problem). In this section, we want to understand better the role of selection effects:

which deals become available to limited partners for co-investments? And does that help explain

the poor performance? For five of the investors in our sample we know the identity of the

sponsors (the general partner leading the investment). Thus, we can compare these transactions

with the broader sample of the sponsor’s investments.




8
    Graphically, Figure 2 illustrates that more co-investments are indeed done in peak years.


                                                                                                28
       Co-investments typically are done through a separate investment vehicle alongside the

traditional private equity fund investment. So we match co-investments in our sample to the

corresponding fund that invested in the same deal and compare the performance of the deal to the

performance of the fund as a whole from Pitchbook, Preqin and other sources. We are able to

identify 73 co-investments where we know the performance of the associated fund. These

transactions have 114 fund matches because of “club deals,” or transactions with multiple

sponsors.

       The first thing to note it that deals with co-investments are substantially larger than a

typical deal in the GP’s portfolio. Table XI compares the typical co-investment—with a mean

enterprise value of $2,692 million—with the GPs’ other deals as identified in CapitalIQ. (We

restrict the comparison to transactions done two, three, and five years before the transaction to

ensure comparability.) Each of the differences reported is statistically significant, and the

difference is economically meaningful as well: on average, co-investments’ enterprise value is

nearly three times larger than the median contemporaneous deal done by the same GP. The large

size discrepancy between deals with co-investments and GP’s other investments indicates that

there is selection on the GP’s side: LPs are invited to co-invest when GPs need extra capital.

       To understand whether these deals as attractive as the other transactions undertaken by

the fund, we look at their ex-post performance as compared to that of the fund. The results are

shown in Figure 4. On average, IRRs of investments chosen for co-investments are more than

8% lower than the overall fund performance, a difference which is significant at the five percent

confidence level. 9 The difference for TV/PI however is not economically or statistically

significant. Put together, if performance is used as an ex-post (and imperfect) measure of deal
9
  The difference is understated, since the fund performance is not net of the deal where the co-
investment was made.


                                                                                                   29
quality, the result does indicate that co-investments are of lower quality; in particular, although

these investments may generate the same cash multiples as the funds, they take longer to exit

(and hence have significantly lower IRR). 10

                                      [TABLE XI & FIGURE 4]


     6. Concluding remarks

        The impact of financial intermediation has been a subject of considerable examination in

the finance literature. On the one hand, these middlemen should be able overcome transaction

cost and information problems; on the other, they may be prone to agency conflicts which affect

their performance.

        The theoretical literature on intermediation motivated this analysis, which focuses on the

private equity setting, where disintermediation has become increasingly common. Using

proprietary data compiled for this study, this paper offer the first large sample evidence of the

relative performance of direct investments by large institutional investors. Our sample includes

392 deals by a set of institutions, both co-investments and direct investments, covering over

twenty years. We find robust evidence of the outperformance for the solo direct investments in

our sample. However, the same investors show mixed results in their co-investment deals. We

find that outperformance of solo direct investments is due in part to their ability to exploit

information advantages by investing locally and in settings where information problems are not

too great, as well as to their relative outperformance during market peaks. The underperformance

of co-investments appears to be associated with the higher risk of deals available for co-

investments.


10
  Lopez-de-Silanes, et al. (2010) also provide evidence that deals that take longer to exit
typically have the same return multiple as quick exits, but have significantly lower IRR.


                                                                                                30
       Our findings—as striking as they are—must be interpreted cautiously for several reasons.

First, it is not clear whether this result is a reflection of the fact that our sample consists of large

and sophisticated investors: small investors replicating a direct investment strategy may have

different experiences. Even though we tried to assess the sample selection bias, there is a risk of

over-generalizing our result. Nor is it clear whether returns on direct investment deals will

continue to be as successful as institutional investors expand their direct investment programs.

       These limitations notwithstanding, the sharp contrast between the performance of solo

deals and that of co-investment deals indicate that there can be an agency problem when general

partners selectively offer deals to limited partners for co-investing. One question that arises is

whether repeated investment relationships between the LPs and the GPs, and hence the

reputational risk that GPs have vis-à-vis the LPs, helps mitigate this agency problem. To fully

assess this important question, more data and experience with direct investments is needed,

which we leave for future research.




                                                                                                     31
                                         References

Allen, F., 2001, “Do Financial Institutions Matter?,” Working Paper no. 01-04, Wharton
Financial Institutions Center, University of Pennsylvania.

Allen, F. and A. Santomero, 1998, “What Do Financial Intermediaries Do?,” Journal of Banking
and Finance 25, 271-294.

Admati, A., and P. Pfleider, 1994, “Robust Financial Contracting and the Role of Venture
Capitalists,” Journal of Finance 49, 371-402.

Axelson, U., T. Jenkinson, P. Strömberg, and M. Weisbach, 2012, “Borrow Cheap, Buy High?
Determinants of Leverage and Pricing in Buyouts,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Axelson, U., M. Sorensen, and P. Stromberg, 2013, “The Alpha and the Beta of Private Equity,”
Unpublished Working Paper, London School of Economics.

Becker, B., and V. Ivashina, 2012, “Reaching for Yield in the Corporate Bond Market,”
Unpublished Working Paper, Harvard University.

Chan, Y., 1983, “On the Positive Role of Financial Intermediation in Allocation of Venture
Capital in a Market with Imperfect Information,” Journal of Finance 38, 1543-1568.

Chevalier, J., and G. Ellison, 1997, “Risk Taking by Mutual Funds as a Response to Incentives,”
Journal of Political Economy 105, 1167-1200.

Chevalier, J., and G. Ellison, 1999, “Career Concern of Mutual Fund Managers,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 114, 389-432.

Coval, J., and T. Moskowitz, 2001, “The Geography of Investment: Informed Trading and Asset
Prices," Journal of Political Economy, 109, 811-841.

Coval, J., and A. Thakor, 2005, “Financial Intermediation as a Beliefs-Bridge between Optimists
and Pessimists,” Journal of Financial Economics 75, 535-569.

Diamond, D., and P. Dybvig, 1983, “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,” Journal of
Political Economy 91, 401-419.

Diamond, D., 1984, “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring,” Review of Economic
Studies, 51, 393-414.

Gennaioli, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 2012, “Money Doctors,” Working Paper no. 18174,
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gompers, P., 1996, “Grandstanding in the Venture Capital Industry,” Journal of Financial
Economics 42, 133-156.

                                                                                            32
Gompers, P., and J. Lerner, 1999, “An Analysis of Compensation in the U.S. Venture Capital
Partnership,” Journal of Financial Economics 51, 3-44.

Gompers, P., and J. Lerner, 2000, “Money Chasing Deals? The Impact of Fund Inflows on
Private Equity Valuations,” Journal of Financial Economics 55, 281-325.

Gorton, G., and A. Winton, 2003, “Financial Intermediation,” in: The Handbook of the
Economics of Finance: Corporate Finance, edited by G. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz,
New York, Elsevier Science.

Gottschalg, O., and L. Phalippou, 2009, “The Performance of Private Equity Funds,” Review of
Financial Studies 22, 1747-1776.

Gurley, J., and E. Shaw, 1960, Money in a Theory of Finance, Washington, Brookings
Institution.

Lerner, J., M. Rhodes-Kropf, and N. Burbank. 2013, “The Canada Pension Plan Investment
Board: October 2012,” Harvard Business School Case no. 9-813-103.

Lerner, J., A. Schoar, and W. Wongsunwai, 2007, “Smart Institutions, Foolish Choices: The
Limited Partner Performance Puzzle”, Journal of Finance 62, 731-764.

Harris, R., T. Jenkinson, and S. Kaplan, 2011, “Private Equity Performance: What Do We
Know?” Working Paper no. 17874, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hochberg, Y., and J. Rauh, 2011, “Local Overweighting and Underperformance: Evidence from
Limited Partner Equity Investments,” Working Paper no. 17122, National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Hong, H., J. Kubik, and A. Solomon, 2000, “Security Analysts’ Career Concerns and Herding of
Earnings Forecasts,” Rand Journal of Economics 31, 121-144.

Hoye, A., and J. Lerner, 1996, “The Exxel Group: September 1995,” Harvard Business School
Case no. 9-297-068.

Kaplan, S., and A. Schoar, 2005, “Private Equity Performance: Returns, Persistence, and Capital
Flows,” Journal of Finance 60, 1791-1823.

Kaplan, S., and P. Strömberg, 2003, “Financial Contracting Meets the Real World: Evidence
from Venture Capital Contracts,” Review of Economic Studies 70, 281-315.

Kaplan, S., and P. Strömberg, 2004, “Characteristics, Contracts, and Actions: Evidence from
Venture Capitalist Analyses,” Journal of Finance 59, 2177-2210.




                                                                                             33
Leland, H., and D. Pyle, 1977, “Informational Asymmetries, Financial Structure, and Financial
Intermediation,” Journal of Finance 32, 371-387.

Lerner, J., M. Rhodes-Kropf, and N. Burbank, 2013, “Canada Pension Plan Investment Board:
October 2012,” Harvard Business School Case no 9-813-103.

Lerner, J., A. Schoar, and W. Wongsunwai, 2007, “Smart Institutions, Foolish Choices: The
Limited Partner Performance Puzzle,” Journal of Finance 62, 731-764.

Lopez-de-Silanes, F., L. Phalippou, and O. Gottschalg, 2011, “Giants at the Gate: On the Cross-
Section of Private Equity Investment Returns,” Discussion Paper no. 20000, Tinbergen Institute.

Merton, R., 1987, “A Simple Model of Capital Market Equilibrium with Incomplete
Information,” Journal of Finance 42, 483-510.

Metrick, A., and A. Yasuda, 2010, “The Economics of Private Equity Funds,” Review of
Financial Studies 23, 2303-2341.

Robinson, D., and B. Sensoy, 2011, “Cyclicality, Performance Measurement, and Cash Flow
Liquidity in Private Equity,” Working Paper no. 2010-03-021, Fisher College of Business, Ohio
State University.

Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny, 1997, “The Limits of Arbitrage,” Journal of Finance 52, 35-55.

Strömberg , P., 2008, “The New Demography of Private Equity,” In: Globalization of Alternative
Investment Working Papers Volume 1, The Global Economic Impact of, Private Equity Report,
Geneva, World Economic Forum.

Stücke, R., 2011, “Updating History,” Unpublished Working Paper, Oxford University.

Stücke, R., 2012, “Private Equity Tabulations,” Unpublished Working Paper, Oxford University.




                                                                                              34
                      Figure 1
     Different forms of private equity investing


            A. Traditional fund investing



                                                     Portfolio
                                                    company A
LP                    GP
                                                     Portfolio
                                                    company B




                 B. Direct investing

                                      Portfolio
          LP                         company A




                   C. Co-investing



          LP
                                        Portfolio
                                       company A
          GP




                                                                 35
                                                                               Figure 2
                                                                     Direct investments over time

This figure plots the amount of direct investments (solo investments and co-investments) in our sample over time.
We use all PE fund raised globally as a benchmark for direct investment amounts. The benchmark is from Preqin.
                   6,000                                                                                                                                                      250,000

                                         Co-investments: Capital invested

                   5,000                 Direct investments, solo: Capital invested
                                         Benchmark: Funds raised, all PE, global (secondary axis)                                                                             200,000


                   4,000
                                                                                                                                                                              150,000
    Millions USD




                   3,000

                                                                                                                                                                              100,000
                   2,000


                                                                                                                                                                              50,000
                   1,000



                      0                                                                                                                                                       0
                           1991

                                  1992

                                         1993

                                                1994

                                                       1995

                                                              1996

                                                                     1997

                                                                            1998

                                                                                   1999

                                                                                          2000

                                                                                                 2001

                                                                                                        2002

                                                                                                               2003

                                                                                                                      2004

                                                                                                                             2005

                                                                                                                                    2006

                                                                                                                                           2007

                                                                                                                                                  2008

                                                                                                                                                         2009

                                                                                                                                                                2010

                                                                                                                                                                       2011




                                                                                                                                                                                        36
                                            Figure 3
                               Alternative performance measures


   Traditional partnership investment:                                  Direct investment:


                                               Gross return

                                                                               - Fee
                     - Fee                                    (different structure than in traditional
                                                                            investment)
             = Net return                                                  = Net return
(Venture Economics, Preqin, and Burgiss)                                    (Our data)


            - Administrative cost                                - In-house investment cost and
                                                                       administration costs

           (0.11% of committed capital                                (0.91% of committed capital
         incurred annually up to 5 years)                           incurred annually up to 5 years)



                                     = Imputed net return (“net-net”)




                 Market adjustment (capital-weighted performance only):

              Net return                                                    Net return
(Venture Economics, Preqin, and Burgiss)                                    (Our data)



       - Return of public markets                                - Return of public markets
   over typical fund duration (5 years)                  over typical investment duration (5 years)

     (For U.S. buyouts, we use S&P 500 index.                 (For U.S. buyouts, we use S&P 500 index.
   For U.S. venture, we use Russell 2000 index.             For U.S. venture, we use Russell 2000 index.
 For global buyout, we use MSCI Standard index.           For global buyout, we use MSCI Standard index.
For global venture, we use MSCI Small Cap index.)        For global venture, we use MSCI Small Cap index.)




                                       = Market-adjusted net return




                                                                                                             37
                                                                              Figure 4
                                                     Co-investments vs. fund performance by year of investment
Where possible we match co-investments in our sample to the corresponding fund. (Co-investments typically are
done through a separate investment vehicle alongside the traditional private equity fund investment.) The sample has
73 co-investments and 114 fund matches due to transactions with multiple sponsors. The figure plots distribution of
differences in performance between co-investments and the corresponding fund. Data for the funds is compiled from
Preqin. This is the standard box plot: the band inside the box corresponds to the median, bottom and top of the box
are the first and third quartile, dots are the adjoin values. ** indicates statistical significance at the 5% level.
                                  100
                 Co-investment IRR - Fund IRR, (%)
                      -50        0-100      50




                                                      1994 1997 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2010 2011
                                                                            Mean=-8.01%**
                                  6
                 Co-investment TV/PI - Fund TV/PI
                  -2       0      -4 2        4




                                                      1994 1997 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2010 2011
                                                                              Mean=-0.07




                                                                                                                    38
                                                  Table I
                         Sample characteristics and evaluation of the selection bias
Panel A compares basic statistics of the participating institutions in our sample with all others listed in the Thomson
VentureXpert Limited Partners Database. Panel B evaluated our sample based on exit information. We manually
identified out-of-sample limited partners and the direct investment they made from Capital IQ. Initial public offering
(IPO), trade sale, secondary buyout, and bankruptcy are different exit types. “All exits” includes confirmed exits
with unknown type. ***, **, and * indicates statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.


Panel A: Sample characteristics

                                                                         Mean                           Mean
                                                              (7 Investors in our sample)      Other LPs (873 investors)
    Private Equity Program Founded                                      1991.6                         1986.1
    Total Assets Under Management (US$B)                                 94.4                            44.3
    Total Alternative Assets Under Management (US$B)                     20.6                             7.9
    Private Equity (as a % of Assets under Management)                   15.8                            13.2
    Total Identified PE Fund Commitments (Number)                        31.3                             7.4



Panel B: Exit information

                                                                                            Diff.
                                           In sample LPs        Out of sample LPs
                                                                                            t-stat
                   IPO                         23.8%                  23.9%                 -0.01
                   Trade sale                  66.7%                  57.5%                   0.79
                   Secondary buyout             0%                    5.2%                  -1.07
                   Bankruptcy                   0%                    6.0%                  -1.15
                   Unknown exits               9.5%                   7.5%                    0.33

                                                                                             Diff
                                         Direct investments   Non-direct investments
                                                                                            t-stat
                   IPO                          17%                    13%                    1.56
                   Trade sale                   42%                    47%                  -1.62
                   Secondary buyout             27%                    16%                    4.43   ***
                   Bankruptcy                   4%                      7%                    1.84   *
                   All exits                    11%                    17%                  -2.44    **




                                                                                                                           39
                                                                           Table II
                                     Direct investments and co-investments performance (by year of investment), 1991-2011
    This table shows performance of the direct investments by year. All corresponds to the full sample of direct investments. Solo and Co-inv. correspond to the independent direct
    investments and co-investments sub-samples, respectively. TV/PI is the total value (sum of distributed and residual capital) divided by paid in capital. We calculate the capital-
    weighted average TV/PI for investments done in a given year for each investor; the reported numbers are the simple averages across investors. IRR corresponds to value-weighted
    average IRR for investments done in a given year for each investor. Portfolio IRR treats all investments done by the same investor in a given year as one portfolio (regardless of the
    date of other cash flows). Both set of IRR numbers correspond to the simple average across investors in our sample. For seven (out of 392) investments we do not have cash flows
    data, but only the IRR, we include these as separate observations in computing the portfolio IRR.

Deal                                             Total capital invested
          Number of transactions                                                                  TV/PI                              IRR (%)                          Portfolio IRR (%)
year                                                ($million USD)
          All    Solo    Co-inv.             All          Solo        Co-inv.           All      Solo      Co-inv.          All       Solo       Co-inv.          All       Solo      Co-inv.
 1991        4       4           0             54.31        54.31         0.00           0.75     0.75           --        -25.87     -25.87           --         -4.51      -4.51          --
 1992        6       4           2             60.70        43.31        17.38           2.91     3.08        2.56          22.27      21.41       24.00          29.02      31.64      23.91
 1993        6       4           2             38.72        26.58        12.14           2.54     2.29        3.03          89.26      52.18      163.43          36.93      29.66     107.60
 1994      10        7           3            483.25       450.26        32.99           2.32     2.23        2.52          23.78      23.65       24.08          29.88      29.21      27.26
 1995        9       8           1            336.11       335.01         1.10           1.73     1.63        2.56          16.69      16.55       17.80          16.60      16.45      16.90
 1996      19        9          10            255.39       212.59        42.80           2.26     3.50        1.14          70.00      65.93       73.67          31.36     103.71     -20.25
 1997      20        9          11            397.27       259.49       137.78          15.27    32.57        1.12         -11.77       3.26      -22.70          18.30      19.70      10.58
 1998      11        8           3            230.14       206.71        23.42          11.50    14.06        1.26         -19.05     -25.82        4.62          13.87      -4.48      14.44
 1999      13        5           8            457.93       167.60       290.33           2.06     1.86        2.19          15.95      -1.38       26.77          15.35      15.50      30.07
 2000      10        2           8            195.92        26.17       169.75           0.71     0.89        0.67          53.78     388.23      -29.83         -18.17    -100.00     -15.67
 2001      10        1           9            151.09        47.90       103.19           1.41     2.80        1.26           0.99      28.53       -2.07          23.39      27.84      18.46
 2002      12        2          10            442.57       227.80       214.77           2.27     2.41        2.24          32.78      69.75       25.39          46.73     106.55      40.73
 2003      13        4           9            433.80       243.80       190.00           2.05     2.58        1.81          28.06      33.62       25.59          40.64      48.93      49.95
 2004      12        7           5          1,925.30     1,874.30        51.00           2.51     2.83        2.07          34.40      57.63        1.88          43.72      30.79      70.11
 2005      35        7          28          2,397.07     1,608.70       788.37           1.91     1.59        1.98          25.38       8.72       29.70          17.31       6.12      14.99
 2006      41        2          39          2,169.19       316.00     1,853.19           1.15     0.61        1.18         -11.47     -47.16       -9.54           0.24     -18.28       0.31
 2007      59        3          56          4,884.07       662.00     4,222.07           1.13     1.59        1.10          -9.09     -18.29       -8.60           4.18      13.64       1.75
 2008      27        2          25          2,339.13       589.30     1,749.83           0.74     0.31        0.78         -26.85     -43.00      -25.56         -22.09     -66.67     -11.90
 2009      16        2          14            815.17        44.70       770.47           1.20     0.91        1.24          21.97     -15.25       27.70          53.58      26.81      53.03
 2010      41       10          31          3,893.04     1,075.40     2,817.64           1.17     1.15        1.18          12.38      10.70       12.93          18.90       6.01      20.35
 2011      18        4          14            685.49       238.60       446.89           1.01     1.00        1.01           1.70       4.24        0.98          22.55      14.18      21.74
Total:    392      104         288         22,645.68     8,710.55 13,935.13                 --       --          --             --         --          --             --         --         --
Simple average, 1991-2010                                                                2.88     3.98        1.68          17.18      30.17       18.91          19.76      15.93      23.82
Weighted average (by capital invested in the year)                                       1.78     3.08        1.20           6.15      16.82       -0.09          13.61      14.58       9.68




                                                                                                                                                                                       40
                                                                             Table III
                                                            Example of benchmark performance data, Preqin
     This table showcases one of the three samples used as a performance benchmark. The reported benchmark is from Preqin and corresponds to cumulative
     performance as of September 30, 2011 by fund vintage year. Deals invested in 2011 are excluded from the benchmark calculation.

     Panel A: U.S. market, Preqin
                                                 All private equity deals                                                                 Buyouts
                       Number of        PE funds raised       Capital-weighted    Capital-weighted     Number of     Total capital invested Capital-weighted    Capital-weighted
   Fund vintage
                      transactions      ($million USD)              TV/PI            IRR (%)          transactions     ($million USD)             TV/PI            IRR (%)
       1989                     62               10,093.89                2.79                27.1               8                 5,878.12             3.17                33.7
       1990                     43                5,304.46                2.60                24.4               9                 2,652.26             3.04                24.7
       1991                     27                2,252.97                2.97                28.2               5                 1,252.00             3.34                33.2
       1992                     46                8,077.33                2.67                33.1              12                 4,566.14             2.65                44.9
       1993                     57               13,417.55                2.94                24.8              13                 9,295.50             2.44                20.2
       1994                     58               16,001.87                2.59                25.4              18               10,855.95              1.72                22.0
       1995                     69               26,426.46                2.31                22.0              16               18,913.27              1.66                14.1
       1996                     73               21,041.15                1.83                11.8              10               11,451.85              1.59                  9.5
       1997                     83               46,749.60                1.91                20.0              22               31,638.01              1.59                  9.5
       1998                     95               77,925.18                1.41                  7.5             30               50,943.35              1.22                  1.0
       1999                    101               70,128.44                1.28                  4.2             20               30,113.15              1.56                  8.2
       2000                    160              117,110.24                1.41                  8.6             41               57,705.62              1.63                13.6
       2001                    108               74,052.15                1.65                15.9              14               27,862.93              2.19                30.5
       2002                     75               22,673.02                1.63                17.3              14               11,568.34              1.82                19.2
       2003                     81               38,406.41                1.70                17.0              18               25,148.56              1.95                23.3
       2004                    118               41,996.17                1.43                10.8              18               22,267.86              1.64                14.9
       2005                    149               87,122.97                1.27                  6.0             39               62,063.36              1.33                  7.2
       2006                    183              147,631.18                1.07                  1.8             45               94,773.99              1.03                  1.0
       2007                    215              153,219.46                1.11                  4.1             41              108,370.01              1.14                  5.2
       2008                    169              115,891.57                1.16                  8.2             36               72,140.57              1.12                  6.8
       2009                     67               38,731.65                1.16                 n/m               9               16,514.00              1.14                 n/m
       2010                     90               24,089.98                1.02                 n/m              21                 9,927.83             0.95                 n/m
       2011                     61               16,623.98                0.87                 n/m              11               14,534.30              0.80                 n/m
Total (1991-2011):           2,085            1,159,569.33                   --                  --            453              691,906.57                 --                  --
Benchmark:
 1991-2010 (contemporaneous, “Lag 0”), simple average                     1.73               14.82                                                      1.69               15.79
 1990-2009 (“Lag 1”), simple average                                      1.81               15.32                                                      1.79               16.26
 1989-2008 (“Lag 2”), simple average                                      1.89               15.91                                                      1.89               17.14
 1991-2010, weighted average (funds raised in the year)                   1.39                8.54                                                      1.39                8.88
 1990-2009, weighted average (funds raised in the year)                   1.40                8.80                                                      1.40                9.08
 1989-2008, weighted average (funds raised in the year)                   1.43                9.28                                                      1.42                  9.52

                                                                                                                                                                         41
                                                                                 Table III-continued
     Panel B: All countries, Preqin
                                                All private equity deals                                                                   Buyouts
                       Number of       PE funds raised       Capital-weighted      Capital-weighted     Number of     Total capital invested Capital-weighted    Capital-weighted
   Fund vintage
                      transactions     ($million USD)              TV/PI              IRR (%)          transactions     ($million USD)             TV/PI            IRR (%)
       1989                     73              19,690.66                2.69                  24.9              12                 7,969.27             2.81                28.3
       1990                     59               8,404.37                2.14                  19.2              17                 4,710.79             2.16                16.2
       1991                     37               4,071.48                2.83                  26.7               9                 2,456.21             3.21                32.4
       1992                     65               9,046.45                2.53                  29.5              18                 5,308.01             2.60                39.3
       1993                     73              14,567.60                2.89                  24.4              15               10,169.94              2.43                20.2
       1994                     79              19,489.57                2.30                  32.7              28               13,645.59              1.89                34.5
       1995                     89              30,371.62                2.26                  22.1              24               20,786.34              1.66                15.6
       1996                     90              28,805.06                1.85                  12.8              19               17,962.74              1.72                12.1
       1997                    125              60,155.91                1.89                  21.1              37               42,205.49              1.71                15.6
       1998                    136              93,154.73                1.53                    8.3             45               63,556.03              1.47                  4.1
       1999                    128              90,476.30                1.38                    6.1             32               43,426.05              1.61                10.1
       2000                    209             141,462.34                1.44                    9.7             53               70,830.06              1.67                14.7
       2001                    150             102,297.95                1.83                  19.6              26               45,436.77              2.38                32.2
       2002                    109              36,848.23                1.71                  20.4              25               22,739.32              1.89                24.4
       2003                    113              48,593.85                1.72                  17.4              29               32,036.12              1.96                23.5
       2004                    155              62,078.58                1.47                  12.4              33               38,350.94              1.70                18.8
       2005                    222             142,117.84                1.26                    6.5             62              110,172.62              1.35                  9.3
       2006                    277             224,206.75                1.06                    1.7             75              159,340.64              1.04                  1.0
       2007                    330             190,399.58                1.06                    2.1             70              119,769.36              1.09                  3.2
       2008                    270             172,747.71                1.12                    6.3             63              115,337.15              1.05                  2.9
       2009                    107              51,693.63                1.11                   n/m              23               27,944.18              1.07                 n/m
       2010                    119              27,833.46                1.02                   n/m              28               10,455.67              0.95                 n/m
       2011                    104              16,883.27                0.79                   n/m              22               14,559.34              0.72                 n/m
Total (1991-2011):           2,987           1,567,301.89                   --                    --            736              986,488.58                 --                  --
Benchmark:
 1991-2010 (contemporaneous, “Lag 0”), simple average                    1.71                 15.54                                                      1.72               17.44
 1990-2009 (“Lag 1”), simple average                                     1.77                 15.74                                                      1.78               17.37
 1989-2008 (“Lag 2”), simple average                                     1.85                 16.20                                                      1.87               17.92
 1991-2010, weighted average (funds raised in the year)                  1.39                  8.73                                                      1.42                9.57
 1990-2009, weighted average (funds raised in the year)                  1.40                  8.95                                                      1.42                9.70
 1989-2008, weighted average (funds raised in the year)                  1.43                  9.47                                                      1.45               10.15




                                                                                                                                                                          42
                                                                                    Table IV
                                                       Comparative analysis of direct investments performance, net returns
         Each number corresponds to a difference in means of performance measures between deals in our direct investments sample (reported in Table II) and a private
         equity benchmark. The benchmarks—Preqin, Thomson Venture Economics (VE) and Burgiss—correspond to cumulative performance as of September 30, 2011
         by fund vintage year. The first nine columns correspond to simple average across the years, i.e., each year portfolio and the corresponding benchmark are
         compared and averaged, regardless of the amount invested. In the last nine columns, the comparison of the benchmark and the portfolio observations is weighted
         by the amount of capital invested in that year (capital invested for our sample and total funds raised for the benchmark sample). “Lag 0” corresponds to a
         contemporaneous, 1991-2010, comparison of returns. In columns “Lag 1” and “Lag 2,” the benchmark is lagged one year (1990-2009) and two years (1989-
         2008) respectively. Shaded cells are those where the direct investments perform better.
                                                            Simple averages                                         Weighted average (capital invested/funds raised in the year)
                              All direct investments              Solo                Co-investments        All direct investments            Solo                   Co-investments
         Benchmark lag:     Lag 0    Lag 1     Lag 2     Lag 0   Lag 1     Lag 2   Lag 0 Lag 1 Lag 2       Lag 0 Lag 1 Lag 2 Lag 0 Lag 1 Lag 2                  Lag 0      Lag 1 Lag 2
                           Panel A: TV/PI
Direct investment sample        2.88   2.88    2.88        3.98    3.98     3.98    1.68    1.68    1.68    1.78    1.78     1.78    3.08     3.08    3.08      1.20     1.20     1.20
Differences (as compared to):
 Preqin, U.S., all PE          1.15    1.07    0.99        2.26    2.18     2.10   -0.05   -0.13   -0.21    0.39    0.38     0.36    1.69     1.67    1.65      -0.19   -0.20    -0.22
 Preqin, U.S., buyouts         1.19    1.09    0.99        2.30    2.19     2.09   -0.01   -0.11   -0.21    0.39    0.38     0.36    1.69     1.68    1.65      -0.18   -0.20    -0.22
 Preqin, global, all PE        1.17    1.11    1.03        2.27    2.21     2.13   -0.04   -0.09   -0.17    0.40    0.39     0.36    1.69     1.68    1.65      -0.18   -0.19    -0.22
 Preqin, global, buyouts       1.16    1.10    1.01        2.26    2.20     2.11   -0.04   -0.11   -0.19    0.37    0.36     0.34    1.66     1.65    1.63      -0.21   -0.22    -0.24
 VE, U.S., all PE              1.27    1.22    1.14        2.37    2.32     2.25    0.06    0.02   -0.06    0.45    0.44     0.42    1.74     1.74    1.72      -0.13   -0.14    -0.16
 VE, U.S., buyouts             1.36    1.32    1.24        2.47    2.42     2.34    0.16    0.12    0.04    0.48    0.48     0.46    1.78     1.77    1.76      -0.09   -0.10    -0.12
 VE, global, all PE            1.28    1.24    1.20        2.39    2.35     2.31    0.08    0.04    0.00    0.46    0.45     0.44    1.76     1.75    1.74      -0.12   -0.13    -0.14
 VE, global, buyouts           1.34    1.31    1.26        2.45    2.42     2.36    0.14    0.11    0.06    0.47    0.47     0.46    1.77     1.76    1.76      -0.11   -0.11    -0.12
 Burgiss, global, all PE       1.19    1.14    1.06        2.29    2.24     2.17   -0.01   -0.06   -0.14    0.48    0.47     0.45    1.78     1.76    1.75      -0.10   -0.11    -0.13
 Burgiss, global,              1.17    1.11    1.04        2.27    2.21     2.14   -0.03   -0.09   -0.16    0.47    0.46     0.45    1.77     1.76    1.74      -0.11   -0.12    -0.13
                            Panel B: IRR
Direct investment sample     17.18    17.18   17.18       30.17   30.17    30.17   18.91   18.91   18.91    6.15    6.15     6.15   16.82    16.82   16.82      -0.09   -0.09    -0.09
Differences (as compared to):
 Preqin, U.S., all PE          2.36    2.63     1.27      15.35   15.62    14.26    4.09    4.35    3.00   -2.89    -2.65   -3.13    7.78     8.02    7.54     -9.13    -8.90    -9.37
 Preqin, U.S., buyouts         1.39    1.73     0.05      14.38   14.72    13.04    3.11    3.46    1.77   -3.09    -2.93   -3.37    7.58     7.75    7.30     -9.34    -9.17    -9.62
 Preqin, global, all PE        1.64    2.23     0.99      14.63   15.22    13.98    3.36    3.96    2.71   -3.05    -2.80   -3.32    7.62     7.87    7.36     -9.30    -9.04    -9.56
 Preqin, global, buyouts      -0.26    0.68    -0.74      12.73   13.67    12.25    1.47    2.40    0.99   -3.81    -3.55   -3.99    6.86     7.12    6.68    -10.05    -9.80   -10.24
 VE, U.S., all PE              4.53    4.09     3.68      17.52   17.08    16.67    6.25    5.82    5.41   -2.01    -2.07   -2.00    8.66     8.61    8.67     -8.26    -8.31    -8.25
 VE, U.S., buyouts             6.08    5.38     4.83      19.07   18.37    17.82    7.80    7.11    6.56   -1.22    -1.38   -1.37    9.45     9.29    9.30     -7.47    -7.63    -7.62
 VE, global, all PE            4.54    4.18     4.30      17.53   17.17    17.29    6.27    5.90    6.03   -1.59    -1.66   -1.41    9.08     9.02    9.26     -7.84    -7.90    -7.66
 VE, global, buyouts           4.90    4.32     4.45      17.89   17.31    17.44    6.62    6.05    6.18   -1.32    -1.43   -1.07    9.35     9.24    9.60     -7.57    -7.68    -7.32
 Burgiss, global, all PE       3.36    2.50     2.10      16.35   15.49    15.09    5.09    4.23    3.82   -2.08    -2.36   -2.32    8.59     8.31    8.35     -8.33    -8.60    -8.57
 Burgiss, global,              2.66    1.71     1.22      15.65   14.70    14.21    4.38    3.44    2.95   -2.06    -2.23   -2.25    8.61     8.44    8.42     -8.31    -8.48    -8.50



                                                                                                                                                                           43
                                                                                   Table V
                                                  Comparative analysis of direct investments performance, “net-net” returns
          Each number corresponds to a difference in means of performance measures between deals in our direct investments sample (reported in Table II) and a private
          equity benchmark. The returns considered in this table are net of in-house investment cost and administrative cost, or “net-net” returns. (See Figure 3 for
          definitions.) The benchmarks—Preqin, Thomson Venture Economics (VE) and Burgiss—correspond to cumulative performance as of September 30, 2011 by
          fund vintage year. The first nine columns correspond to simple average across the years, i.e., each year portfolio and the corresponding benchmark are compared
          and averaged, regardless of the amount invested. In the last nine columns, the comparison of the benchmark and the portfolio observations is weighted by the
          amount of capital invested in that year (capital invested for our sample and total funds raised for the benchmark sample). “Lag 0” corresponds to a
          contemporaneous, 1991-2010, comparison of returns. In columns “Lag 1” and “Lag 2,” the benchmark is lagged one year (1990-2009) and two years (1989-
          2008) respectively. Shaded cells are those where the direct investments perform better.
                                                           Simple averages                                           Weighted average (capital invested/funds raised in the year)
                               All direct investments            Solo                Co-investments        All direct investments            Solo                     Co-investments
         Benchmark lag:     Lag 0     Lag 1     Lag 2   Lag 0   Lag 1     Lag 2   Lag 0 Lag 1 Lag 2       Lag 0 Lag 1 Lag 2 Lag 0 Lag 1 Lag 2                   Lag 0      Lag 1     Lag 2
                            Panel A: TV/PI
Direct investment sample      2.85     2.85      2.85    3.94     3.94     3.94    1.65    1.65    1.65    1.76     1.76     1.76    3.04     3.04     3.04      1.18       1.18      1.18
Differences (as compared to):
 Preqin, U.S., all PE         1.13     1.05      0.97    2.23     2.15     2.07   -0.08   -0.16   -0.24    0.37     0.35     0.33    1.66     1.65     1.63      -0.21     -0.23     -0.25
 Preqin, U.S., buyouts        1.17     1.06      0.96    2.27     2.17     2.07   -0.04   -0.14   -0.24    0.37     0.36     0.33    1.67     1.65     1.63      -0.21     -0.22     -0.25
 Preqin, global, all PE       1.14     1.08      1.00    2.25     2.19     2.11   -0.06   -0.12   -0.20    0.37     0.36     0.33    1.67     1.66     1.63      -0.21     -0.22     -0.25
 Preqin, global, buyouts      1.13     1.07      0.98    2.24     2.18     2.09   -0.07   -0.13   -0.22    0.34     0.33     0.31    1.64     1.63     1.61      -0.24     -0.25     -0.27
 VE, U.S., all PE             1.24     1.19      1.12    2.35     2.30     2.23    0.04   -0.01   -0.09    0.42     0.42     0.40    1.72     1.71     1.69      -0.16     -0.17     -0.18
 VE, U.S., buyouts            1.34     1.30      1.22    2.44     2.40     2.32    0.13    0.09    0.01    0.46     0.45     0.44    1.76     1.75     1.73      -0.12     -0.13     -0.14
 VE, global, all PE           1.26     1.22      1.18    2.36     2.33     2.28    0.05    0.01   -0.03    0.44     0.43     0.42    1.73     1.72     1.71      -0.15     -0.15     -0.16
 VE, global, buyouts          1.32     1.29      1.24    2.42     2.39     2.34    0.11    0.08    0.03    0.45     0.44     0.44    1.74     1.74     1.73      -0.13     -0.14     -0.15
 Burgiss, global, all PE      1.17     1.11      1.04    2.27     2.22     2.14   -0.04   -0.09   -0.17    0.45     0.44     0.43    1.75     1.74     1.72      -0.13     -0.14     -0.15
 Burgiss, global,             1.14     1.09      1.01    2.25     2.19     2.12   -0.06   -0.12   -0.19    0.45     0.44     0.42    1.74     1.73     1.72      -0.13     -0.14     -0.16
                            Panel B: IRR
Direct investment sample      13.85   13.85    13.85    26.93    26.93    26.93   14.62   14.62   14.62    4.58     4.58     4.58   15.46    15.46    15.46      -1.38     -1.38     -1.38
Differences (as compared to):
 Preqin, U.S., all PE         -0.87   -1.37    -1.96    12.21    11.71    11.12   -0.09   -0.60   -1.19   -4.35    -4.43    -4.59    6.53     6.45     6.29    -10.31     -10.39    -10.55
 Preqin, U.S., buyouts        -1.84   -2.31    -3.19    11.23    10.77     9.89   -1.07   -1.54   -2.41   -4.56    -4.62    -4.84    6.33     6.26     6.04    -10.52     -10.58    -10.80
 Preqin, global, all PE       -1.59   -1.01    -2.25    11.49    12.07    10.83   -0.82   -0.23   -1.47   -4.51    -4.26    -4.78    6.37     6.62     6.10    -10.47     -10.22    -10.74
 Preqin, global, buyouts      -3.49   -3.43    -3.97     9.59     9.65     9.11   -2.72   -2.65   -3.20   -5.27    -5.30    -5.46    5.61     5.58     5.43    -11.23     -11.26    -11.42
 VE, U.S., all PE              1.30    0.87     0.45    14.38    13.95    13.53    2.07    1.64    1.22   -3.47    -3.53    -3.47    7.41     7.35     7.41     -9.43      -9.49     -9.43
 VE, U.S., buyouts             2.85    2.15     1.60    15.93    15.23    14.68    3.62    2.93    2.38   -2.68    -2.84    -2.83    8.20     8.04     8.05     -8.64      -8.80     -8.79
 VE, global, all PE            1.31    0.95     1.08    14.39    14.03    14.16    2.09    1.72    1.85   -3.05    -3.12    -2.87    7.83     7.76     8.01     -9.02      -9.08     -8.83
 VE, global, buyouts           1.67    1.10     1.22    14.75    14.18    14.30    2.44    1.87    2.00   -2.78    -2.89    -2.53    8.10     7.99     8.35     -8.74      -8.85     -8.49
 Burgiss, global, all PE       0.13   -0.73    -1.14    13.21    12.35    11.94    0.91    0.05   -0.36   -3.55    -3.82    -3.78    7.34     7.06     7.10     -9.51      -9.78     -9.74
 Burgiss, global,             -0.58   -1.52    -2.01    12.50    11.56    11.07    0.20   -0.75   -1.24   -3.53    -3.69    -3.72    7.35     7.19     7.16     -9.49      -9.65     -9.68



                                                                                                                                                                             44
                                               Table VI
          Comparative analysis of direct investments performance, market-adjusted returns
Each number corresponds to a difference in means of performance measures between deals in our direct investments
sample and a private equity benchmark. The returns considered in this table are market adjusted. (See Figure 3 for
definitions.) The benchmarks—Preqin, Thomson Venture Economics (VE) and Burgiss—correspond to cumulative
performance as of September 30, 2011 by fund vintage year. The first nine columns correspond to simple average
across the years, i.e., each year portfolio and the corresponding benchmark are compared and averaged, regardless of
the amount invested. In the last nine columns, the comparison of the benchmark and the portfolio observations is
weighted by the amount of capital invested in that year (capital invested for our sample and total funds raised for the
benchmark sample). “Lag 0” corresponds to a contemporaneous, 1991-2010, comparison of returns. In columns
“Lag 1” and “Lag 2,” the benchmark is lagged one year (1990-2009) and two years (1989-2008) respectively.
Shaded cells are those where the direct investments perform better.


                                                   Weighted average (capital invested/funds raised in the year)
                                          All direct investments            Solo                   Co-investments
                 Benchmark lag:        Lag 0      Lag 1 Lag 2      Lag 0    Lag 1    Lag 2    Lag 0    Lag 1      Lag 2
                                  Panel A: TV/PI
  Direct investment sample
   Adjusted by S&P 500 index             0.72     0.72     0.72     1.91     1.91     1.91       0.21       0.21   0.21
   Adjusted by MSCI index                0.91     0.91     0.91     2.08     2.08     2.08       0.41       0.41   0.41
  Differences (as compared to):
   Preqin, U.S., all PE                  0.45     0.48     0.51     1.64     1.66     1.70      -0.06      -0.03    0.00
   Preqin, U.S., buyouts                 0.40     0.41     0.44     1.59     1.59     1.63      -0.11      -0.11   -0.07
   Preqin, global, all PE                0.53     0.59     0.66     1.69     1.76     1.83       0.03       0.09    0.16
   Preqin, global, buyouts               0.38     0.39     0.42     1.55     1.56     1.59      -0.12      -0.11   -0.08
   VE, U.S., all PE                      0.51     0.54     0.58     1.69     1.73     1.77      -0.01       0.03    0.07
   VE, U.S., buyouts                     0.49     0.50     0.54     1.68     1.69     1.73      -0.02      -0.01    0.03
   VE, global, all PE                    0.59     0.65     0.73     1.76     1.82     1.90       0.09       0.15    0.23
   VE, global, buyouts                   0.48     0.49     0.55     1.65     1.66     1.71      -0.02      -0.01    0.05
   Burgiss, global, all PE               0.48     0.52     0.58     1.65     1.69     1.75      -0.02       0.02    0.08
   Burgiss, global, buyouts              0.43     0.46     0.52     1.60     1.63     1.69      -0.07      -0.04    0.02
                                  Panel B: IRR
  Direct investment sample
   Adjusted by S&P 500 index             3.53     3.53     3.53    13.67    13.67    13.67      -2.37      -2.37   -2.37
   Adjusted by MSCI index               10.37    10.37    10.37    18.08    18.08    18.08       5.99       5.99    5.99
  Differences (as compared to):
   Preqin, U.S., all PE                  -3.05    -2.55    0.12     7.09     7.59    10.25      -8.95     -8.45    -5.79
   Preqin, U.S., buyouts                 -4.88    -4.32   -1.45     5.25     5.82     8.69     -10.79    -10.23    -7.35
   Preqin, global, all PE                 0.49     0.97    3.00     8.20     8.68    10.71      -3.89     -3.41    -1.38
   Preqin, global, buyouts               -2.98    -3.14   -2.10     4.73     4.57     5.60      -7.36     -7.52    -6.49
   VE, U.S., all PE                      -2.66    -1.19    1.24     7.47     8.95    11.38      -8.57     -7.09    -4.66
   VE, U.S., buyouts                     -3.37    -2.19    0.55     6.76     7.95    10.69      -9.28     -8.10    -5.35
   VE, global, all PE                     1.48     2.67    4.78     9.18    10.37    12.49      -2.91     -1.71     0.40
   VE, global, buyouts                   -0.88    -0.67    0.82     6.82     7.04     8.52      -5.27     -5.05    -3.57
   Burgiss, global, all PE               -1.56    -0.66    1.42     6.14     7.04     9.13      -5.94     -5.05    -2.96
   Burgiss, global, buyouts              -2.93    -2.24   -0.52     4.77     5.46     7.18      -7.31     -6.62    -4.91




                                                                                                                           45
                                                       Table VII
                     Multivariate analysis of direct investments and co-investments performance
      In this table we look at the cross-section of deals; each observation is a separate direct investment. The dependent
      variable is a deal performance minus the corresponding benchmark. The benchmark is lagged by one year (“Lag 1”
      in the previous tables); i.e., a direct investment in year T is compared to performance of a fund closed in year T-1.
      The Solo independent variable indicates solo direct investments. Standard errors are clustered by the investor from
      which we obtained the data. ***, **, and * indicates statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
      respectively.

                                         Benchmark: Preqin                                  Benchmark: Venture Economics
Return type:                 Net          Net      “Net-net”    “Net-net”           Net           Net      “Net-net”    “Net-net”
Benchmark matched on:     Investment     Region   Investment     Region          Investment     Region     Investment      Region
                             type                    type                           type                      type
                          Panel A: TV/PI
All direct investments    -0.07       -0.06       -0.09        -0.08             -0.04         -0.01       -0.06        -0.03
(constant)                [0.10]      [0.10]      [0.10]       [0.10]            [0.14]        [0.12]      [0.14]       [0.12]
Solo direct investments   3.64**      3.64**      3.63**       3.63**            3.86**        3.84**      3.84**       3.83**
(marginal effect)         [1.45]      [1.45]      [1.45]       [1.45]            [1.37]        [1.35]      [1.37]       [1.35]

Observations              390          390        391          391               386           390         387          391
R-squared                 0.011        0.011      0.011        0.011             0.013         0.013       0.013        0.013
                          Panel B: IRR

All direct investments    -5.91**     -5.65**     -9.33**      -9.07**           -4.61**       -3.99**     -7.86**      -7.20**
(constant)                [1.60]      [1.58]      [2.78]       [2.74]            [1.62]        [1.33]      [2.94]       [2.39]
Solo direct investments   13.67***    13.54***    14.55***     14.42***          13.32***      12.83***    13.85***     13.33***
(marginal effect)         [1.91]      [1.95]      [3.67]       [3.78]            [1.68]        [1.59]      [3.27]       [3.17]

Observations              326         326         326          326               381           385         381          385
R-squared                 0.005       0.005       0.008        0.008             0.006         0.005       0.008        0.008




                                                                                                                           46
                                                  Table VIII
                Factors influencing the performance differences: Venture deals and R&D intensity
      Each observation is a direct investment. The dependent variable is the deal performance minus the corresponding
      benchmark. The benchmark is lagged by one year (“Lag 1” in the previous tables); i.e., a direct investment in year T
      is compared to performance of a fund closed in year T-1. Each coefficient reported in the table is a marginal effect.
      The Solo independent variable indicates solo direct investments. R&D/assets is the average industry research and
      development scaled by assets. Venture deal is a dummy indicating whether the deal is a venture deal (as opposed to
      a buyout investment). All regressions include investment year and investor dummy variables. Two-digit Standard
      Industrial Classification dummy variables are included in the first two specifications for each benchmark. Standard
      errors are clustered by investor from which we obtained the data. ***, **, and * indicates statistical significance at
      the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                            Benchmark: Preqin                                Benchmark: Venture Economics
Return type:                  Net       “Net-net”       Net      “Net-net”            Net        “Net-net”      Net         “Net-net”
                           Panel A: TV/PI
Solo direct investments    2.71*       2.69*         4.33*       4.33*           2.77*          2.74*        4.57**      4.56**
                           [1.30]      [1.30]        [1.99]      [2.00]          [1.31]         [1.31]       [1.81]      [1.81]
Solo DI*Venture deal       -4.37***    -4.40***      --          --              -2.58**        -2.61**      --          --
                           [0.87]      [0.89]                                    [0.86]         [0.88]
Solo DI*Ind. R&D/assets    --          --            -1.42       -1.42           --             --           -1.42       -1.43
                                                     [0.93]      [0.94]                                      [0.91]      [0.91]
Industry: R&D/assets       --          --            1.20        1.19            --             --           1.21        1.20
                                                     [0.83]      [0.84]                                      [0.80]      [0.81]
Venture deal               0.90        0.92          0.36        0.37            0.85           0.87         0.33        0.33
                           [1.15]      [1.14]        [0.28]      [0.28]          [1.26]         [1.25]       [0.21]      [0.21]
Fixed effect:
  Year                     Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes
  Investor                 Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes
  2-digit SIC              Yes         Yes           --          --              Yes            Yes          --          --
Observations               390         391           345         346             386            387          342         343
R-squared                  0.157       0.157         0.072       0.072           0.153          0.153        0.066       0.067
                           Panel B: IRR
Solo direct investments    25.35***    28.16***      30.50***    29.20***        24.31***       25.87***     27.55***    26.21***
                           [6.29]      [0.75]        [6.00]      [5.42]          [6.551]        [3.09]       [6.71]      [5.87]
Solo DI*Venture deals      -45.76**    -45.51**      --          --              -26.35**       -27.12***    --          --
                           [12.88]     [16.11]                                   [9.79]         [7.08]
Solo DI*Ind. R&D/assets    --          --            -45.86***   -44.46***       --             --           -44.05***   -42.68***
                                                     [7.28]      [7.31]                                      [5.94]      [5.97]
Industry: R&D/assets       --          --            45.83***    44.44***        --             --           44.16***    42.80***
                                                     [7.28]      [7.30]                                      [5.95]      [5.99]
Venture deal               -44.05**    -27.84**      -13.09**    -12.53**        -47.60***      -32.57***    -20.57***   -19.97***
                           [12.30]     [8.42]        [3.88]      [3.72]          [7.31]         [4.94]       [3.72]      [3.65]
Fixed effect:
  Year                     Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes
  Investor                 Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes
  2-digit SIC              Yes         Yes           --          --              Yes            Yes          --          --
Observations               326         326           296         296             381            381          338         338
R-squared                  0.227       0.236         0.134       0.134           0.229          0.244        0.150       0.151




                                                                                                                             47
                                               Table IX
                 Factors influencing the performance differences: Distance to the target
Each observation is a direct investment. The dependent variable is the deal performance minus the corresponding
benchmark. The benchmark is lagged by one year (“Lag 1” in the previous tables); i.e., a direct investment in year T
is compared to performance of a fund closed in year T-1. The Solo independent variable indicates solo direct
investments. Distance is the distance between the headquarters of the institutional investor and that of the portfolio
company, in hundreds of kilometers. Venture deal is a dummy indicating whether the deal is a venture deal (as
opposed to a buyout investment). All regressions include investment year, investor, and two-digit Standard
Industrial Classification dummy variables. Standard errors are clustered by the investor from which we obtained the
data. ***, **, and * indicates statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                                  Benchmark:                        Benchmark:
                                                    Preqin                       Venture Economics
                Return type:              Net            “Net-net”         Net            “Net-net”
                                          Panel A: TV/PI
                Solo direct investments
                                          4.71***        4.68***           4.80***        4.76***
                (marginal effect)
                                          [1.12]         [1.12]            [1.12]         [1.12]
                Solo DI*Distance          -0.22**        -0.22**           -0.20**        -0.20**
                                          [0.06]         [0.06]            [0.08]         [0.08]
                Distance (’00 km)         0.00           0.00              0.00           0.00
                                          [0.01]         [0.01]            [0.01]         [0.01]
                Venture deal              1.48           1.50              1.71           1.73
                                          [1.07]         [1.06]            [1.28]         [1.28]
                Fixed effect:
                  Year                    Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes
                  Investor                Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes
                  2-digit SIC             Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes
                Observations              380            381               376            377
                R-squared                 0.179          0.178             0.172          0.172
                                          Panel B: IRR
                Solo direct investments
                                          31.45          32.13*            28.31          28.58*
                (marginal effect)
                                          [17.36]        [13.91]           [18.26]        [14.22]
                Solo DI*Distance          -0.46          -0.40             -0.29          -0.29
                                          [0.31]         [0.28]            [0.20]         [0.19]
                Distance (’00 km)         0.25           0.20              0.18           0.16
                                          [0.16]         [0.14]            [0.11]         [0.10]
                Venture deal              -41.01**       -23.89**          -48.22***      -30.89***
                                          [11.62]        [6.99]            [4.98]         [1.80]
                Fixed effect:
                  Year                    Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes
                  Investor                Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes
                  2-digit SIC             Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes
                Observations              321            321               371            371
                R-squared                 0.221          0.234             0.225          0.243




                                                                                                                   48
                                                  Table X
                        Factors influencing the performance differences: Peak year
Each observation is a direct investment. The dependent variable is the deal performance minus the corresponding
benchmark. The benchmark is lagged by one year (“Lag 1” in the previous tables); i.e., a direct investment in year T
is compared to performance of a fund closed in year T-1. The Solo independent variable indicates solo direct
investments. Peak year indicates investments made between 1998 and 2000 and 2005 and 2007. Venture deal is a
dummy indicating whether the deal is a venture deal (as opposed to a buyout investment). All regressions include
investor and two-digit Standard Industrial Classification dummy variables. Standard errors are clustered by investor
from which we obtained the data. ***, **, and * indicates statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.

                                                   Benchmark:                      Benchmark:
                                                     Preqin                     Venture Economics
                Return type:              Net            “Net-net”        Net            “Net-net”
                                          Panel A: TV/PI
                Solo direct investments
                                          2.32*          2.28*            2.67**         2.62**
                (marginal effect)
                                          [1.05]         [1.03]           [0.82]         [0.81]
                Solo DI*Peak year         2.35**         2.45**           2.13**         2.22**
                                          [0.86]         [0.84]           [0.83]         [0.82]
                Peak year                 0.32           0.26             0.41           0.35
                                          [0.55]         [0.51]           [0.58]         [0.54]
                Venture deal              0.32           0.34             0.44           0.45
                                          [0.65]         [0.64]           [0.71]         [0.70]
                Fixed effect:
                  Investor                Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes
                  2-digit SIC             Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes
                Observations              390            391              386            387
                R-squared                 0.105          0.105            0.107          0.107
                                          Panel B: IRR
                Solo direct investments
                                          11.07          14.66            9.33           8.87
                (marginal effect)
                                          [12.08]        [11.50]          [10.65]        [9.75]
                Solo DI*Peak year         45.69**        33.94*           38.99**        37.42**
                                          [16.36]        [14.94]          [13.68]        [13.74]
                Peak year                 -12.34         -11.30           -10.59         -9.04
                                          [12.35]        [11.71]          [11.78]        [11.44]
                Venture deal              -44.08***      -24.98***        -50.37***      -43.33***
                                          [6.72]         [5.76]           [5.83]         [4.26]
                Fixed effect:
                  Investor                Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes
                  2-digit SIC             Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes
                Observations              321            321              371            375
                R-squared                 0.165          0.174            0.156          0.150




                                                                                                                 49
                                                  Table XI
                                           Co-investments deal size
This table compares the enterprise value of the co-investments in our sample with other deals in the same general
partners’ portfolios. To make this comparison, we look at deals where the GP name or the name of the target is
available. For each co-investment, we construct benchmarks using all of the same GP’s deals from CapitalIQ in the
five-, three-, and two-year window preceding the co-investment. ***, **, and * indicates statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                   GP’s                                         GP’s
 Benchmark window:     Obs.     average deal      Diff.     t-stat           median deal      Diff.      t-stat
                              ($million USD)                               ($million USD)
                                                                     ***                                          ***
   5-year               114          1,841.61    1,291.16    3.10                1,016.68     2,116.08    4.67
                                                                     ***                                          ***
   3-year               109          2,059.68    1,179.98    2.74                1,194.02     2,045.64    4.41
                                                                      **                                          ***
   2-year               104          2,232.04     989.34     2.36                1,313.42     1,907.97    4.17




                                                                                                                  50
