NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHO SAYS YES WHEN THE HEADHUNTER CALLS? UNDERSTANDING EXECUTIVE
JOB SEARCH BEHAVIOR
Peter Cappelli
Monika Hamori
Working Paper 19295
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19295

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

Thanks to seminar participants at the University of Toronto Rotman School, the London Business
School, MIT’s Sloan School, the Wharton Conference on Careers, the NBER workshop on executive
labor markets, and Iwan Barankay for helpful comments. A version of this manuscript will appear
in the journal Organization Science. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Peter Cappelli and Monika Hamori. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Who Says Yes When the Headhunter Calls? Understanding Executive Job Search Behavior
Peter Cappelli and Monika Hamori
NBER Working Paper No. 19295
August 2013
JEL No. M12,M51
ABSTRACT
We examine an aspect of job search in the important context of executive-level jobs using a unique
data set from a prominent executive search firm. Specifically, we observe whether or not executives
pursue offers to be considered for a position at other companies. The fact that the initial call from
the search firm, which we observe, is an exogenous event for the executive makes the context particularly
useful. We use insights from the Multi-Arm Bandit problem to analyze the individual’s decision as
it emphasizes assessments of future prospects in the decision process, which are particularly relevant
for executive careers. More than half the executives we observe were willing to be a candidate for
a job elsewhere. Executives are more likely to search where their current roles are less certain and
where their career experience has been broader. Search is more likely even for broader experience
within the same employer. In the latter case, the array of likely opportunities is also broader, making
search more useful.

Peter Cappelli
The Wharton School
Center for Human Resources
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6358
and NBER
cappelli@wharton.upenn.edu
Monika Hamori
IE Business School
IE University
monika.hamori@ie.edu

Introduction
We examine an important aspect of executive search, an institution of growing
importance in business. Specifically, when approached by a leading search firm about
becoming a candidate for a position elsewhere, do the executives say yes or no? The
decision, which is reported by the search firm (i.e., not self-reported), has real costs and
consequences. Beyond helping us understand executive search processes per se, the response
of the executives helps us understand something more general about job search. What makes
the question from the search consultant particularly interesting is first, that the individual does
not initiate the process. It is for all practical purposes exogenous to the individual. Second,
saying yes and agreeing to search has to be answered before the individuals learn much, if
anything, about the job in question, and the ultimate terms and conditions of an alternative job
in any case result from negotiations after a job offer has been extended. As a result, their
decision addresses concerns about establishing causation: those more inclined to say yes are
not necessarily already searching, and the nature of the opportunity cannot be driving the
outcome because it is not yet known. We describe these issues in detail below.
From the perspective of the potential applicant, the context mirrors the classic
“exploitation vs. exploration” choice in the Multi-Arm Bandit problem: Respondents either
stay with their current employer, hoping to exploit opportunities in their current organization,
or agree to explore a less certain opportunity elsewhere. A central feature of Bandit models is
that there is uncertainty about future prospects in one’s current situation as well, something
that is crucial in contemporary executive roles where career advancement in their current
organization cannot be assumed.
We examine this question empirically with a unique data set from a prominent
executive search firm and test hypotheses derived from the exploitation-exploration literature.
Perhaps surprisingly, a majority of the executives contacted were willing to become
candidates for a new job elsewhere.

As other studies have found, potential candidates

working in more attractive positions where compensation is higher are less likely to say yes.
We also find that those with more uncertainty about the prospects in their current employer
are more likely to say yes. Those with broader experiences who have moved across functions
and business sectors, even within the same company, are also more likely to search because
they have more to learn from search about the broader set of opportunities that might be
presented to them.
Job Search and Executive Search
3

The literature on job search, which dates from Stigler (1961) and in its more formal
context from McCall (1970) and Mortensen (1970), is far too broad ranging and extensive to
be reviewed in detail here, but some summary conclusions are in order. First, the focus of this
research, both at its beginning and even more so in recent years, has been on the unemployed
worker and the decisions they make to find a job. In the standard model:
W(w) = w + bW(w) where W(w) represents what one earns from accepting a job with wage
w while working (W). An individual has a reservation wage wr such that w(wr) = U where U
is the utility associated with not working.
Individuals are offered jobs with wages wi drawn from F(wi|w) where each offer is an i.i.d.
draw from that distribution of jobs and wages.
They accept a job with wage w when w> wr .
The decision for a worker is whether to accept an offer or keep sampling job/wage
offers and wait for something better to come along. In this context, the idea of “search” is in
a passive process for the individual where offers come to them, and their decision is how long
to wait before taking a job offer, enduring the opportunity cost of lost income in the process.
In the simplest of these models, the game is over once the worker accepts a job.
Arguably the central aspect of research in the job search literature has been to
calculate the optimal search strategy, or the conditions describing when they give up waiting
and take a job offer. Rogerson, Shimer, and Wright (2005) describe more recent research in
this area as being dominated by matching models, which are agnostic as to how workers and
firms meet up. As with earlier search models, the idea is to explain broad patterns of labor
market outcomes, such as unemployment and wage dispersion. (See also Davidson &
Woodbury, 2002, for a survey.)
A subset of the literature has addressed the issue of transitions from one employer to
another, the concern here. Such transitions represent the most typical form of job search.
Akerlof, Rose, and Yellen (1988) calculated that about two-thirds of workers who leave their

4

employer transition directly into another job; Fallick and Fleischman (2004) more recently
report a similar finding.
Burdett (1978) pioneered research on job search that takes place where one is
already employed. The basic idea is similar to the above in that employed individuals also
sample wage offers and take up a new position when they are offered a wage above their
reservation price. The main conceptual issue is identifying the individual’s reservation price. 1
The empirical research examining why an individual currently employed undertakes
active search is much more limited. DellaVigna and Passerman (2004) consider a series of
variables including dispositional attributes related to personality (e.g., whether the respondent
acts in an impatient manner) to predict the length of job search for a cross section of the labor
force. Lise (2013) examines how savings decisions affect on-the-job search; Hagedorn and
Manovskii (2013) explore how on-the-job search affects wage outcomes. There is a
psychology-based literature on why individuals engage in job search (see, e.g., Schwab,
Rynes, & Aldag, 1987; Turban et al. 2013) that mainly focuses on individual dispositions
associated with personality. Research on the related topic as to what keeps employees from
quitting is voluminous and far too extensive to review here (see, e.g., Griffeth, Hom, &
Gaertner, 2000). Virtually all of that literature focuses on the relative attractiveness of one’s
current situation.2
1

Subsequent papers added details about employed individuals that affect their decision to search.
Jovanovic (1979), for example, argued that individuals learn about their competencies over time such
that the longer they have been in a job, the less they have to learn about their capabilities and therefore
the less they have to gain from trying other jobs. Albrecht and Axell (1984) consider the fact that
workers differ in the value they place on leisure, so they have different reservation wages and search
differently. Jovanovic (1987) also considers the case where workers care about leisure as well as the
income from work and can decide to search if not satisfied with their current wage. Burdett, Lagos,
and Wright (2003) outline a search model where firms pay higher wages in part to reduce quits. The
logic is identical to earlier efficiency wage arguments from the perspective of the employee, although
the conclusions for employers are more specific.
There is a behavioral literature that examines intentions to quit, where individuals indicate whether
they would like to quit irrespective of labor market opportunities. Whether stated intentions to quit
accurately proxy one’s behavior when actually confronted with the opportunity to quit is an open
question. Research on these behavioral intentions constructs by Hom, Griffeth, and Sellaro (1984),
Lee and Mowday (1987), and Hom and Griffeth (1991) find statistically significant relationships
between turnover intentions and actual turnover, although the former explain relatively little of the
latter (about six percent of the total variance in quits). Other research shows that employees do not
have an accurate sense of their odds of changing jobs (Nicholson, West, & Cawsey 1985), and
cognitive research has demonstrated that decision making is different when confronted by actual
opportunities than when considering hypothetical choices
2

5

The context of executive labor markets is distinct from other jobs, which makes job
search there distinctive as well. Firms looking to hire executives rarely post advertisements,
and employed executives interested in moving rarely circulate resumes (Capell, 2001; Howell
2004). Executive jobs are much less standardized than other jobs. The functions an
individual will perform and the terms and conditions of employment, especially pay, are
virtually always subject to negotiation (Citrin & Smith 2003, pp. 256-257). Job search that
leads to a new position for executives ultimately involves detailed discussions and
negotiations with potential employers. Because executive loyalty is still valued by
organizations, it may be damaging to the prospects of an executive in their current
organization to appear to be searching for jobs elsewhere (Khurana 2002, pp.32-35).
Opportunities for promotion are especially important for executive careers. They are uncertain
in part because vacancies are not very predictable, and because the performance of executives,
which depends on the performance of their operations, are also hard to predict.
Job search among executives has become especially prominent in recent years.
Cappelli and Hamori (2005) note, for example, a 25 percent decline in tenure of Fortune 100
top executives in their company between 1980 and 2001. Especially at the executive and more
senior managerial levels, the transitions across employers are managed by executive search
firms that operate as intermediaries between the client firms and the candidates (Britton &
Ball 1999; Khurana 2002, pp. 137-150). From 2001 to 2003, large employers in the US used
executive search firms to fill 54 percent of jobs paying above $150,000 (IACPR 2003). Many
of the remaining vacancies would have been filled through internal promotion, which
suggests that the percentage of outside hiring that does not use executive search firms may be
quite small. Retained search (in which the search firm works under an exclusive contract with
the client and is paid a fee even if no placement is secured) has become a fixture in the labor
market for executives and other highly skilled workers, with companies spending an
estimated $10.4 billion in search fees in 2011 alone (AESC 2011). Most important for our
purposes, responses from 2,430 executives reveal that the number one trigger for job search
by executives is receiving a call from an executive recruiter (AESC 2011).
Aside from descriptive accounts (Khurana 2002), we know little about the executive
search process. There are studies of the characteristics of the executive search industry
(Britton, Clark and Ball 1992a and b; Britton and Ball 1994; Feldman, Sapienza and Bolino
1997) and how that industry has grown (Beaverstock, Faulconbridge, and Hall 2010), as well
as of the various roles and functions that executive search firms take over from client
6

companies (Ammons and Glass 1988; Britton and Ball 1999; Clark and Salaman 1998;
Khurana 2002), but little on the search process per se and the interaction with candidates.
One purpose of this study is to learn more about key aspects of that process.
While there is a substantial body of research on executive turnover, most of this
literature is also limited by the difficulty in identifying voluntary turnover from dismissals,3
and only a handful of empirical papers are able to address that question.4 As noted above,
quitting is not identical to job search. To our knowledge, only four studies have examined job
search behavior in the executive context, all of which use the same sampling frame and
similar data drawn from a sample of executives. Bretz et al. (1994) explored the drivers of the
job search behaviors for employed managers; Boudreau et al. (2001) use the same data to look
at the “Big Five” personality traits and cognitive ability as predictors of executive job search;
Bingham, Boswell and Boudreau (2005) use a resurvey of the same sampling frame to
examine the ways in which job demands altered job search behaviors; Dunford, Boudreau
and Boswell (2005) use the Bingham, Boswell, and Boudreau (2005) data and find a positive
association between the percentage of underwater stock options in executives' portfolios and
job search. These studies do not include the most important path to new executive jobs,
which is search initiated by an employer or search firm. With the exception of Tae Heon,
Gerhart, Weller and Trevor 2008, who study the role of job satisfaction in turnover for a
cross-section of the US workforce, we have no studies that examine the context of unsolicited
job offers.
The challenges in studying actual job search behavior begin simply with measuring it.
Self-reported data are subject to a number of biases. Search costs may also constrain the
ability to search among those inclined to do so. Factors used to predict search behavior, such
as the attributes of current jobs, may be the result of prior search behavior. The fact that
individuals can either be “pushed” to search by their current circumstances or “pulled” to
search by new opportunities means that sorting out the causes can be difficult. We address
these issues below.

3

Most of this research combines voluntary and involuntary turnover into an overall measure (Wiersema &
Bantel 1993). Studies that attempt to distinguish between voluntary and involuntary turnover note the difficulty
in doing so in part because organizations go to substantial lengths to cover up executive dismissals (DeFond &
Park 1999; Krug & Hegarty 2001; Lubatkin et al. 1999).
4
Veiga (1981) used self-reported measures similar to intentions to quit as the measure of the propensity of
managers to leave. Gaertner and Nollen (1992) explore the variables that distinguish four groups of executives
based on their intent to leave. Weil and Kimball (1995) use retrospective, self-reported data on the causes for
leaving.

7

The Executive Search Context: 5
The specific context of our study is the “retained search” business, where search firms
are paid a retainer by clients to help them find candidates to fill executive vacancies, and they
are paid whether or not they find an acceptable candidate (Spencer Stuart 2004). A retained
search firm does not contact potential job candidates unless it has a specific vacancy to fill.
Executives know that when these firms call, the position is real, and the executive is being
seen as a potential candidate for it. The search firm secures an engagement from a client that
includes a job description of the position to be filled. The search firm then begins assembling
a pool of prospective candidates. Large search firms like the one considered here have their
own staff of researchers who maintain a database of executives who could be contacted about
vacancies. Candidates do not nominate themselves for these candidate pools (see below).
A search consultant then approaches individuals whom the consultant believes could
be a good match for the vacancy and asks whether they are willing to be considered for the
position. At this first point of contact, executives are given so little information about the
potential job that it is very difficult to make an assessment of the value it represents (Citrin
and Smith 2003, p. 255). It would be unusual at this initial point if the consultant even
mentioned the client company by name (Jupina1992).6 The other reason why candidates learn
little about the opportunity is because the terms and conditions of the position, such as rates of
pay and in most cases the scope and definition of the jobs, are virtually always subject to
negotiation (Spencer Stuart 2004) and are not finalized until an agreement to hire has been
reached (Citrin and Smith 2003, pp. 256-7.). Because the attributes of the open position are
not yet known, those attributes cannot be driving the individual’s initial decision to say yes to
the search process. (The academic job market tends to be different in this regard, perhaps
because so many are governed by public sector disclosure rules.)
When executive search consultants approach executive candidates, therefore, they are
essentially offering them the opportunity to begin a search process which, if successful, will

5

In addition to reviewing published materials on executive search, one of the authors spent more than a hundred
hours interviewing executive search consultants and experts within that industry, participating in the training
program for new associates in one of the major search firms, and learning the process through which executive
job search takes place from the inside.
6

One of the search consultants in the firm whose data we use described the initial conversation with a
potential candidate as follows: I typically try to say: Hello, I’m working for [search firm] we are doing
a senior search. What is your feeling at looking at other opportunities? What is your current
situation?

8

lead to a negotiated package that is attractive enough to cause them to leave their current job
(Citrin and Smith 2003, p. 255).
From the perspective of the individual executive in this database, the call from the
search firm is an exogenous event. Retained search consultants call candidates, not vice
versa. Consultants have a good idea which individuals could fill a given position and do not
approach candidates about positions that they believe would obviously be unattractive, such
as those representing an apparent step down in pay and title (Howell 2004). The consultants
we interviewed also indicated that attempts by executives to “market” themselves to
consultants were rarely effective and may actually turn off the consultants. One obvious
reason is adverse selection: Candidates who are anxious to leave their current position may
well be troublesome. And while it may well be overconfidence, the search consultants also
believe that they can persuade candidates to take up opportunities to search. In terms of
identification, therefore, the likelihood of saying “yes” does not drive the invitation to search.
The decision to say “yes” to this initial request and become a candidate involves some
costs, including the time and energy to prepare for an interview and meet with the consultant,
think through and brief appropriate references, etc. There is also the anticipated
psychological costs of rejection should the search not be successful, something that is difficult
to quantify but is no doubt real, and the less tangible concern about disillusionment with one’s
current position that may result from looking elsewhere. While search consultants are very
discrete, there is also the chance through references or one’s own attempts to secure
information that word of the candidate’s search might get back to the current employer.
Because search involves some costs, we should not expect that everyone will take up the
opportunity.
As noted above, the quasi-experimental context of this study helps address some of the
more difficult problems in estimation. Because the call is exogenous with respect to at least
the immediate behavior of the executives, the variables we measure are not driving the
immediate call. We also observe a yes or no response for each respondent, avoiding selection
bias problems that occur where we can only observe those who are searching as well as some
of the missing responses that are common in self-report data. The fact that the details of the
job opening are not revealed when the search question is asked also makes it easier to be sure
that the individual’s response is driven by their current circumstances and not by the nature of
the position being offered. Because all respondents here are given more or less the same
invitation to search, we avoid the omitted variable complication that some individuals might
find it more difficult to search than others.
9

Multi-Arm Bandit Models and Executive Search:
A formalization of executive search that tracks the experience realistically is the
“Bandit” model that is used extensively in statistics and operations research (see Thompson
1933 and Robbins 1952 for the seminal work). As is well-known, this approach draws an
analogy with slot machines (i.e., “one-armed bandits”) where different arms offer different
and unknown probabilities of rewards. The odds of winning with each arm are independent
from each other, so pursuing one avenue gives one no information about other avenues. One
learns more about the rewards and the likelihood of receiving them that are associated with
each arm the more one plays that arm. This model is particularly appropriate for examining
executive search first because the value of opportunities for those who remain with their
current employer (the exploitation choice) is far from certain. Promotions, compensation,
assignments may all change suddenly and unpredictably. But one has a better sense about
those opportunities the longer they remain with their employer. Second, opportunities
elsewhere (the exploration choice) are even more uncertain, and the uncertainty is not
eliminated when one gets a job offer.7
Jovanovic (1979b) examines quits or voluntary turnover as an optimal stopping
problem where the choice is to keep working in one’s current employer or quit to pursue jobs
elsewhere, essentially a two-arm problem. Miller (1984) considers job search across multiple
7

More formally, the exploitation vs. exploration decision considered by bandit models is an intertemporal optimization problem where the decision maker evaluates alternatives based on the
discounted value of expected rewards. Gittins and Jones’ (1979) optimization theorem converts the
standard Bandit problem into a stopping rule that tells us when it no longer makes sense to pursue a
particular avenue or approach. The result is intuitive: continue to exploit the current approach until
the returns fall below those expected from the alternative approach associated with exploration. If the
value of the exploration approach cannot be estimated, as is the case here for the opportunity offered
by the search firm at the time the executive is approached, then the decision to move on comes when
the returns from the current arm exceed the opportunity costs of that approach. (McCall and McCall
1987 use this interpretation to examine migration decisions.)
The index as defined in Gittins and Jones tells us the value of the current arm or job as v:

where

is a stochastic process, R(i) is the utility associated with state i, β < 1 is the probability

that the stochastic process does not end, and

is the conditional expectation operator given c:

10

occupational options as an explicit example of a MAB problem. Among other things, Miller
finds that less experienced workers are more likely to try out jobs that are more risky and
apparently have low expected return while those with more labor market experience and
presumably a better understanding of the probability of success with such occupations do not.
We return to this idea below. McCall and McCall (1987) model the decision to migrate (i.e.,
change jobs and also locations) across multiple locations as an MAB.
As a practical matter, the decision as to which arm of the bandit problem to choose is
determined by the arm with the highest Gittens and Jone’s index. The intuition here is to
choose the approach with the highest present discounted value over the time period in
question. The decision as to whether to abandon the current arm and pursue another approach
is solved if the present discounted value of the expected returns in the current arm falls below
the index for the other arms.8
Following the Bandit view, the individual executive in this context has two sets of
calculations to make as the basis of their decision. The first has to do with the value of
staying/exploiting their current role. That is based on the desirability of future prospects there
and the uncertainty concerning those prospects, both of which are improved with experience.
The second has to do with the possible value of the search process, which is best measured by
how much they are likely to learn from search. The answer varies depending on how much
they already know about other roles they might be offered, which is reflected in the breadth of
their prior experience.
Hypotheses
Executives should be more likely to take up the invitation to search and become a
candidate when their current job is more attractive, other things equal.
HYPOTHESIS 1 (H1). There is a negative relationship between the relative attractiveness of
one’s current position and job search.
One of the reasons why positions may be attractive is compensation. The idea that
one’s compensation relative to jobs elsewhere in the labor market is negatively associated
with job search is well-established empirically, including in the executive context (Bretz et al.
8

Alternatively, where the index of other arms cannot be estimated, the decision to quit the current
approach happens when the current returns fall below the price paid to use that arm. As we will see
below, in the case of labor markets where the cost of pursing a given arm is the opportunity cost, these
two approaches yield the same answer.

11

1994). Another measure of attractiveness for executives is the financial performance of the
firm as executives typically receive part of their total compensation based on firm
performance and in general are more likely to see better future career opportunities in a
company that is doing well. Other studies have shown that firm performance in terms of net
income and operating margins are negatively related to voluntary turnover among executives
(Weil and Kimball 1995). Firms with more positive reputations in the business world may
represent more attractive jobs, other things equal, reducing the interests of employees to look
elsewhere. Similarly, the good social reputation of an organization increases the identification
of organization members with the organization (Mael and Ashforth 1992; Dutton, Dukerich
and Harquail 1994; Bhattacharya et al. 1995) arguably making it more difficult to leave.
A second hypothesis follows from Hypothesis 1 and addresses uncertainty in one’s
current role. Given the standard assumption that individuals are risk averse, if prospects for
exploitation in their current role are less certain, that role is also less valuable.
HYPOTHESIS 2 (H2). There is a positive relationship between the uncertainty associated
with one’s current job and job search.
We test uncertainty in one’s current position in two ways. The first approach echoes
the standard conclusion from Bandit models, that more experience with one’s current
employer, other things equal, reduces uncertainty about the future there. That reduction in
uncertainty makes staying put more attractive. Therefore, we propose that the longer is
executives’ tenure in their organization, the lower is their likelihood to engage in job search.
The limitation to the above test is that standard search theory also predicts something similar,
that longer tenure is associated with a lower incidence of search because the individuals have
decided that overall, their current job is a better match for them than prospects elsewhere. In
other words, tenure with the employer is also a proxy for H1, independent of greater certainty
about the current role.
We also test the hypothesis about uncertainty in executives’ current role in a different
way by examining shocks to the employer that may affect uncertainty around future career
prospects, as Kambourov and Manovskii (2004) find in the context of changes in
occupation. We use a clear measure of such shocks that is likely to be exogenous to the
individual’s decision to search: whether their current employer has recently been engaged in a
merger or acquisition (M&A). Prior research shows that M&As break implicit contracts for
executives and other employees on employment and pay (Shleifer and Summers 1988) and
12

lead to net job cuts in the US (Bhagat, Shleifer, and Vishny 1990; Haveman and Cohen 1994)
and UK (Conyon et al. 2002). These studies also show that the consequences of M&As take
years to play out, so that recent M&A’s add uncertainty to future prospects, especially for
executives, whose positions are often consolidated or restructured as a result.
The third hypothesis relates to the value of the information one might gain from
search. Executives hired through search firms are almost always brought in to do jobs that
are similar to the ones they have performed elsewhere: marketing jobs go to those with
marketing backgrounds, not legal backgrounds, e.g. (see Hamori 2010 for evidence.) The
more focused one’s career has been, the easier it is to have information about prospects
elsewhere because those opportunities are quite likely to be in one’s narrow labor market.
To illustrate, compare an executive with focused experience - a career in the
marketing function in US insurance companies - to one with broad experience - an executive
who worked in different industries in different countries and crossed functions in the process.
The former executive is likely to be contacted about marketing positions in US insurance
companies while the latter could be contacted about a wide range of jobs. S/he knows much
less about the market for any one of those possible roles because, as compared to their more
focused counterpart, s/he has had less experience in any one of them. As Lucas and Prescott
(1974) note, information about jobs and prospects in them is highly specific to each
occupation’s labor market. Executives with broader, less focused experience about jobs for
which they are likely to be recruited are therefore likely to learn more from search and to take
up the search consultant’s invitation.
We measure the breadth of an executive’s experience using an index of the changes in
their roles (changing industry, changing segments within the financial industry, changing
occupations). We also examine whether they have had an international assignment because
we know from prior research that individuals who have had expatriate roles often express
uncertainty about what their next position will be. Their information has been shown to be
less certain because they are far removed from the social networks in company headquarters
(Kraimer, Shaffer, & Bolino 2009).
HYPOTHESIS 3 (H3). There is a positive relationship between career breadth and job search.
Because this experience should be true for individuals who have experienced changes in roles
even within the same employer, we also examine the following:

13

HYPOTHESIS 3a (H3a). There is a positive relationship between career breadth inside the
same employer and job search.
The Data
We examine the hypotheses with unique data from one of the world’s largest and most
influential retained executive search firms. Their databases identify the most prominent
executives in the search firm’s target markets. This dataset is limited to financial service
companies in the New York area: asset management companies, banks, consumer finance
companies, and investment banks. This helps to control for other sources of variation across
jobs at the expense of the generalizability of the findings to other industries and occupations.
In addition to executives who hold jobs in prominent companies listed in industryspecific rankings such as those by the American Banker Magazine or Institutional Investor,
potential candidates may also find their way into the database through references from
industry experts.
In terms of representativeness of the sample, we believe it is large enough to capture a
substantial percentage of the target population. The Bureau of Labor Statistics (2011 and
2012) reports that there are 740,000 people employed in “financial activities” (a label that
seems to approximate the financial services industry) in New York-Northern New JerseyLong Island MSMA, which is also the focus of our database. The sample here contains
14,000 executives, roughly two percent of that population. Interestingly, Bureau of Labor
Statistics data suggests that “executive” jobs account for about two percent of the private
sector workforce, (in a large financial firm like Citibank, for example, that would be the
equivalent of 5200 jobs), closer to five percent in companies with more than 500 employees,
which are large enough to have true executive titles.
The search firm makes no claim that its database is representative of all executives in
the industry, however. Its claim is that it includes executives who would be attractive as
candidates for positions elsewhere. Nevertheless, the database does contain a large proportion
of executives in the industry.
We limited the logistical challenges of coding the data and adding information to it by
drawing a random sample of 2,000 executives from the original 14,000. (This figure was well
in excess of statistical power issues and was determined by exhausting available resources for
the study.) Confidentiality constraints prevented us from learning the identity of the
executives in the database or from contacting them to collect further information. Available
data includes information on the executive’s current job and most recent previous job (the
14

name of the employing organization, the executive’s title, function and function segment,
industry affiliation, industry segment and the month and year when the executive started and
ended the job) as well as the executive’s educational background and international experience.
Additional data on the executives’ employer, which is included in the database, were
collected from the Hoover’s and Compustat databases.
As described in more detail below, executives in the top echelon (CEOs and
Chairpersons) represent 13 percent of our dataset, Chief Financial Officers 5 percent,
Executive and Senior Vice Presidents 18 percent, Senior Managers including directors, vice
presidents and managing directors, as well as partners and principals 48 percent. Managers
and professionals account for most of the remainder of the entries. The executives are
employed in four segments of the financial services industry: investment banks and securities
(45 percent), asset and money management firms (23 percent), banks (20 percent) and finance
companies (12 percent). Ninety-two percent of the executives work for a U.S. company, the
others for financial institutions situated in Europe, Canada, South America, and East Asia
(mostly Japan and Hong Kong). The executives have extensive educational experience: 55
percent earned a Master’s degree (76 percent of which were MBA degrees), 6 percent were
Ph.D.s, and 0.1% had only a high school diploma. Based on their human capital attributes, the
executives in this sample are comparable to the executives that were sampled by an executive
search firm in Bretz et al. (1994), Judge et al. (1995), and Boudreau et al. (2001).
A second selection bias concern associated with endogeneity is whether the database
disproportionately represents executives who want to move. This would constrain the
variance of the sample and make it more difficult to find statistically significant results. If
those already inclined to say yes respond differently than those inclined to say no, then the
appropriate conclusions would be applicable only for the kind of candidates visible to search
consultants. That situation would not be so limiting, given that conclusions about executive
search by definition apply to those candidates who could be approached by search
consultants.
But there is no evidence that the search firm selects into the database executives it
believes are more inclined to move. The firm says that it is looking for candidates that are
attractive to clients and that an individual’s willingness or interest in moving plays no role in
the decision to include them in the database. There is compelling evidence that the firm does
what it says: it is in the firm’s interest to have as broad and as high-quality a database of
possible candidates as possible. This firm maintains a research department whose job it is to

15

create and maintain the database.9 The four largest executive search firms – Korn/Ferry,
Heidrick and Struggles, Spencer Stuart, and Russell Reynolds – all report that they have
databases that are used in this same way. The firms have an incentive to make the
information in the database as accurate as possible because it enables them to target potential
candidates better and save effort and cost on sourcing calls (Howell 2004).
More to the point, it is hard to imagine how one would identify those who are a priori
willing to move because individuals change their view about the desirability of moving over
time and across contexts. Unless executives were continually asked, it would be impossible to
keep such a database up to date. It is easier and more sensible to have a database of candidates
who are desirable because of their experience and accomplishments.
Further, there is no reason to constrain the database to candidates interested in moving
even if it was possible to do so. The search firm can simply ask them whether they will
consider changing employers at the point when each search takes place, which is in fact what
they do. As representatives in this firm and in others report, they also believe that virtually all
candidates can be moved if the right fit comes along, so there is no reason to exclude any
otherwise promising candidate from initial consideration based on a priori statements about
willingness to move.
Variables
Dependent variable: Job search. In order to identify the executives who have agreed
to be considered for a search assignment, we follow the search firm’s own internal
classification of candidates, which is based on the most recent type of contact that it had with
the executive. Of the 2,000 executives in our sample, there were 875 executives for whom
there was no information about their response to a search invitation. According to the firm,
this should be because they had yet to be contacted, but we cannot rule out other factors, such
as missing responses. One approach for addressing this situation would be to examine who
says yes subject to having been contacted. Results using that approach are available on
request. Another approach is to model the contact explicitly through a two-stage Heckman
estimation technique where the first stage estimates the decision to contact the candidate and
the second estimates the decision to say yes given that contact. The advantage of this
9

In response to a more general question about whether the ability to move a candidate enters into the search
process at all, one of the search consultants told us: “We never think about that (in identifying candidates). We
think about who is the best person, first. We do not think about it up front. First you think about who the best
person is, and after that, can you catch them? But do we come up with a target list based on who we can get?
No.”

16

approach is that it is then possible to generalize conclusions to the broader pool of candidates,
not just to those who have been contacted.
We classify executives who agreed to share their resumes and be interviewed by the
search consultant for a position as “searchers” (=1) and “stayers” (=0) if they turned down the
invitation.
Independent variables. We examine Hypothesis 1 with a series of variables that
measure the attractiveness of one’s current position. These are:
Reputation. Reputation is the sum of two variables: Best employer and Most admired
employer. “Best employer” (0 to 10) measures the perception of the executives’ employer in
the business world as obtained from Fortune magazine’s 100 Best Companies to work for
rankings, which rank candidate organizations based on their trustworthiness (credibility,
fairness, and socially friendly atmosphere) and ten HRM practices (recruiting, development
and learning, work/life programs, etc.). “Most admired employer” (0 to 10) was obtained
from the score of the organization on Fortune Magazine’s “America’s most admired” and
“Global most admired” rankings. The Fortune rankings ask 10,000 executives, directors, and
securities analysts to rate the ten largest companies (by revenues) in 58 industries based on
eight criteria: innovation, financial soundness, employee talent, use of corporate assets, longterm investment value, social responsibility, quality of management, and quality of products
and services (Sung and Tkaczyk 2002).
Compensation. We do not have information on the pay of each executive in our
sample. As a proxy, we use the total annual compensation received by the CEO in the
company as reported by Compustat. This information is only available for publicly held
companies, an issue we consider further below. We measure the extent to which executives
in each company are paid above or below prevailing levels by constructing a standard wage
equation (see Appendix 1) where industry, organization size, and financial performance are
regressed against the logarithm of annual total compensation. Positive residuals suggest that
the executive’s organization pays a premium and, as a result, that jobs elsewhere will not pay
as well while negative residuals suggest the opposite and that search should be more
worthwhile. We include these residuals as an independent variable in the analysis.
Financial performance of one’s employer is measured by its Return-on-Equity (ROE).
This information is also only available for publicly held companies.
Hypothesis 2 states that uncertainty in one’s current employer should increase one’s
willingness to search. We measure uncertainty with tenure in one’s current employer where
17

greater tenure should be associated with better information and greater certainty about future
prospects. Tenure since last employer change stands for the number of years with the current
employer. In order to control for the fact that some employer changes were missing from the
data, we include a dummy, Employer change observed. “1” signifies that the executive made
an across-employer move that is recorded by the dataset. 0 values indicate executives whose
current and previous jobs were with the same employer. The binary variable M&A indicates
the employers that were involved in a merger or acquisition in the past two years.
Hypothesis 3 proposes that search is less likely where potential candidates have
broader prior experience. We examine breadth of experience with an index. Career breadth is
the simple sum of the following items: Change in job function (0/1) indicates whether the
current job represents a change in job functions (e.g., a job change from the sales to the
finance function) from the previous job. Change in industry (0/1) represents moves that take
place across industries. Change in industry segment (0/1) represents moves that take place
across different industry segments within the financial services industry. International
assignments (0/1) identifies whether executives have had a work assignment outside the
United States in their current or previous job.
Control Variables. There are many variables that might be relevant that we cannot
control for here, the most important of which are attributes of the individuals that have been
shown as relevant in prior studies. We have no reason to believe that those attributes are
related to the independent variables we consider here, however, and we can control for a
range of variables that identify separate labor markets where search attributes and behavior
may differ:
Executives are grouped into five binary categories by job title, which may represent
separate labor markets: 1. Non-managers and managers (omitted category), 2. Senior
managers including Directors, Vice Presidents and Managing Directors, also principals and
partners 3. Executive and Senior Vice Presidents 4. Chief Financial Officers (also includes the
few other types of officers such as Chief Information or Chief Operation Officers 5. Top
Echelon: CEOs, Chairpersons and Presidents.
Functional background. One can think of this variable as identifying occupational
labor markets: finance, general management, sales, marketing, IT, human resources, legal,
operations, planning and development, research and development and other. We condense
these into three (0/1) categories: general management (omitted category), finance, and
support functions (human resource management, IT, sales, marketing, law, etc.).

18

Industry segment. We group employers into four sub-categories of the financial
industry: 1. asset and money management firms, 2. domestic and international banks, 3.
consumer finance companies, and 4. investment banks (omitted category). There is a strong
perception in the search industry that investment banking is a segment of the economy with
extremely low executive loyalty, a perception we can test. Both functional background and
industry segment may represent different labor markets with different supply and demand
characteristics.
Organizational size is the logarithm value of the total annual sales of the organization.
Variables in the selection equation. Because the individuals who were contacted by
the search firm and those who may not have been contacted may differ in certain ways, we
use Heckman two-stage Probit models to control for selection bias with respect to who is
contacted. In order to obtain the variables used in the selection equation, we begin with t-tests
to compare these two groups of executives across observable characteristics, such as the
characteristics of their current and previous jobs and their education. Individuals working in
the finance function (Finance Function, 0/1) were more likely to be contacted, those working
at investment banks (Investment Banks, 0/1) and those with longer Tenure in their current job
were less likely to be contacted by the search firm (Tenure in current job is the number of
years that the executives have spent in their current position.) The search firm’s favorite target
was Senior and Executive Vice Presidents, Chief Financial Officers and the Top Echelon. We
created a compound measure out of these three dummy variables: Target population (0/1).
Results
Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 displays the means, standard deviations and Pearson correlations of the
dependent variable and the key independent variables in the analysis. Table 1a displays the
means, standard deviation and correlations for the subset of publicly held companies on which
financial data were available.
-- Insert Tables 1 and 1a about here -Descriptive statistics for the key variables reveal intriguing insights concerning the
mobility of executives. Over half of the executives (52 percent) in the sample were willing to
consider a job opportunity when the executive search firm contacted them. As a comparison,
empirical studies of actual job search in the U.S. find that the percentage of employees across

19

all job titles who are actively searching for alternative jobs is rather small – about five percent
in the late 1990s, the period with the most recent, reliable data (Meisenheimer 2000).
A large majority (68 percent) of executives changed employers to get into their current
job. The average executive has spent about 5 years with their current organization. In terms of
tenure in their current job, the figure here of 4.06 years is remarkably close to an Execunet
(2002) survey of executives in the same year (2002), where tenure in their current role was
4.1 years. Table 2 presents additional descriptive data about who says yes to search. It is
interesting that senior executives are more inclined to say yes (“other” category includes titles
below VP level).
-Insert Table 2 about here The companies represented in the database reveal a great deal about the type of firms
that clients of search consultants see as desirable sources for talent. Thirty-six percent of the
executives in the database are employed by a Fortune 500 employer. Thirty-four percent of
the executives have an employer who was in Fortune’s America’s or Global most admired
companies. Only six percent of those employers have been included on Fortune’s 100 Best
Places to Work list: Being admired appears to be much more important than being a good
place to work for being included in the database.
Table 3 begins the tests of the hypotheses and shows the results of probit regression
models that predict executives’ willingness to engage in job search (DV: Job search). As
shown in the Heckman selection models, except for Investment banks, all the other selection
variables (Target population, Tenure in current job and Finance function) are significant
predictors in our analyses.
-- Insert Table 3 about here –
In the second stage models, positive coefficients suggest greater likelihood of taking
up the invitation to search. Model I enters the control variables. Compared to the investment
banking segment (omitted category), executives in the asset and money management segment
are less likely to engage in job search (Z=-.22, p<.05). Compared to individuals working in
general management, those in the support functions are less likely to engage in search (Z=.22, p<.1). Compared to those in non-managerial and managerial positions, Senior managers
(Z=.21, p<.1) and Executive and Senior Vice Presidents (Z=.28, p<.1) are slightly more likely
to engage in search.

20

Hypothesis 1 proposes that executives are less likely to search the more attractive their
current position is compared to positions elsewhere. Model II reveals that executives affiliated
with organizations that have a good social reputation and that are renowned for their
excellence are more likely to decline an invitation to explore a new opportunity by the search
firm (Reputation, Z=-.03, p<.01). Model III adds firm financial performance and CEO
compensation relative to peers.10 Above-par financial performance (ROE, Z=-.02, p<.05)
creates attachment, and so do higher levels of compensation relative to peers (Compensation,
Z=-.22, p<.01). Reputation, however, is not significant when financial performance (ROE)
and Compensation enter the equation11. Overall, these results find support for Hypothesis 1.
Hypothesis 2 assessed the influence of current position uncertainty on job search.
Model IV in Table 2 shows that more years with the same employer (Time since last employer
change, Z=-.12, p<.1) reduces the probability of job search. Because the dataset records the
current and the previous jobs of each executive and given that 32 percent of the individuals
did not change employers between these jobs, the analyses control for Employer change
observed. This suggests that time in one’s current role in the same organization also reduces
the likelihood of search, a result that is independent of employer match effects. Alternatively,
we also run these analyses without Employer change observed. These results are shown in
Table 4.
-- Insert Table 4 here -Overall, the coefficients for the main predictors are larger and the significance levels improve,
too: in Model I of Table 4 Time since last employer change has a significant negative
relationship to job search (Z=-.28, p<.05), indicating that the more time elapsed since
executives changed employers, the lower is the likelihood that they will engage in job search.
Hypothesis 2 also implies that shocks that affect the prospects for one’s future career
increase uncertainty as well as the likelihood of job search. Mergers and acquisitions
represent such a shock, and Model VII of Table 3 shows that M&A within the past two years

10

We attempted a similar analysis replacing CEO pay with the compensation for the top five highest paid
employees in each of the public companies. The drawback to this approach is that the jobs held by the top five
vary considerably across companies, making them not strictly comparable. We find no significant effects with
this approach.
11
We also ran Model III of Table 3 without the three industry controls, since the three coefficients were all far
from statistical significance levels and including them in the models would have made the Wald statistics
considerably worse.

21

increases the odds that an executive will engage in job search (M&A, Z=.31, p<.1).12 Overall,
these findings lend support to Hypothesis 2.
Hypothesis 3 states that individuals with a broader experience set are more likely to
search. Model IV of Table 3 finds support for Hypothesis 3: the index that measures four
types of changes: job function change, change across industries and industry segments, and
international experience, is positive and significant (Job change compound. Z=.26, p<.001)13,
meaning that those with more changes, i.e. with a broader experience set are more likely to
engage in search. Model II in Table 4 that shows the regression equation without the control
Employer change observed has almost identical results: Z=.29, p<.001.
Model V reveals that - controlling for change in employer - taking a job in a different
industry (Change in industry; Z=.25, p<.05) and in a different country (International
assignments; Z=.51, p<.001) also increase the willingness to search, while Job function
change and Change in industry segments do not seem to have a significant influence. As
Model III in Table 4 reveals, the coefficients for Change in industry and International
assignments are larger when we do not control for Employer change observed: they are Z=.32
(p<.05) and Z=.53 (p<.001) respectively.14
H3a states that there is a positive relationship between career breadth inside the same
employer and job search. To test H3a, we looked at the relationship between Career breadth
and the dependent variable Job search in a split sample that included only moves within the
same employer.
-

Insert Table 5 about here -

Model I in Table 5 includes the control variables, while Model II adds the independent
variable Career breadth. Model II in Table 5 reveals that Career breadth is positively related
to Job search (Z=.19, p<.1), which provides support for H3a.
12

We also attempted to examine the effects of variability in firm performance on the search decision with
various measures of financial performance, including Black-Scholes measures and found no relationships. One
reason might be that share price volatility might actually be a good thing for executives receiving stock options,
especially if there is a chance that underwater options are repriced or replaced with new ones.
13
Alternatively, we operationalized Career breadth as the sum of Change in industry, Change in industry
segments and Change in job functions. The alternative operationalization thus excludes International
assignments. The conclusions from this alternative model are similar, although the coefficient for the alternative
Career breadth loses both in size and in significance level (Coeff=.129*; p=.019).
14
Based on a comment by an anonymous reviewer, we also tested whether “Career breadth” has a different
relationship with the dependent variable Job search, depending on whether the executive’s most recent job
change took place within the same employer or across employers. In these analyses we used “Employer change
observed” as the moderator variable between Career breadth and Job search. “Employer change observed” was
not a significant moderator in the alternative analyses.

22

Discussion and Conclusions
Previous studies have shown how search firms structure labor markets and influence
executive mobility patterns. As gatekeepers to corporate executive positions, they
underrepresent women and non-white applicants from lower socioeconomic backgrounds
(Dreher, Lee, & Clerkin 2011; Judge, Cable, & Bretz 1995) and certain skill sets. Specifically,
they are less likely to consider professionals with longer experience in the labor market and
with more previous employers (King, Burke, and Pemberton 2005). Salient and “elite” human
capital resources (i.e., human capital gained at reputable, well-performing corporations or at
reputable educational institutions) gain more importance as predictors of executive mobility
because executive search firms take a conservative approach that targets “defendable”
candidates (Khurana, 2002). Further, that research also shows that the intensity and the
history of an individual’s relationship with the mediating agency (Dreher et al. 2011;
Fernandez-Mateo 2007; King et al. 2005) and the agency’s reputation and situation in the
industry (Bielby & Bielby 1999) shapes who gains access to new jobs and, ultimately, career
advancement.
We find something similar here in that the pool of executives that the search firm
tracks disproportionately includes executives from large, well-performing organizations.
Two-stage Heckman models also show that the search firm tends to target potential
candidates at the executive vice president and senior vice president levels, with certain types
of functional and industry experience, and from firms with high reputations.
Despite the fact that executive jobs are often associated with promotion from within
systems and organization-specific careers, we find that executives are quite willing to take
concrete steps to change employers. Bandit models and the exploitation/exploration
dichotomy are particularly appropriate for considering executive job search decisions because,
in contrast to other models, they are built on the realistic assumption that executives face
uncertainty in their future career with their current employer as well as uncertainty about
opportunities elsewhere. Specifically, the uncertainty around one’s current circumstances, as
measured by shocks like M&A activity but also by prior experience that gives one better or
less accurate information about current prospects and those elsewhere, affects the decision to
look for a new job. This holds even for individuals who have remained with the same
employer.
Perhaps most importantly, we show that career breadth is positively associated with
the likelihood of job search. Focused experience may reduce uncertainty about future
23

prospects in one’s current role, and broader experience that opens up possibilities for a
broader set of alternative jobs makes search more informative. Executive programs that seek
to broaden the experience of promising executives may also have the effect of increasing their
willingness to search for positions elsewhere.
More generally, the study identifies a highly credible measure of search that is not
self-reported and that has real consequences for the individual: do executives say yes when
presented with an opportunity to become a candidate for a current job opening. The fact that
the process is initiated by the search firm and not by the candidate also helps to address
concerns about endogeneity and omitted variables. We know relatively little about how
individuals holding these important executive jobs get into them, and the results here advance
our understanding.
References
Aguiar, M.; Hurst, E.; & Karabarbounis, L. 2013. The life-cycle profile of time spent
on job search. American Economic Review, 103(3): 111-116.
Ammons, D. N., Glass, J. J. 1988. Headhunters in local government: Use of executive search
firms in managerial selection. Public Administration Review, 1988(3): 687-693.
Association of Executive Search Consultants (AESC). 2011. Executive search: An industry
transformed. http://www.stjobs.sg/career-resources/job-seeking-guide/executivesearch-an-industry-transformed/a/72103
Arruda, W., & Dixson, K. 2007. How to build the 'brand called you' in an online era.
Advertising Age, 78(27), 28-28.
Beaverstock, J. B., Faulconbridge, J. R. & Hall, S. J. E. 2010.
Professionalization, legitimization and the creation of executive search markets in
Europe. Journal of Economic Geography, 10: 825–843
Benner, M. J., & Tushman, M. L. 2003. Exploitation, exploration, and process management:
The productivity dilemma revisited. Academy of Management Review. 28 238-256.
Bhagat, S., Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R., 1990. Hostile takeovers in the 1980s: the returns to
corporate specialisation. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics:
1–72.
Bhattacharya, C. B., Rao, H., & Glynn, M. A. 1995. Understanding the bond of identification:
An investigation of its correlates among art museum members. Journal of Marketing,
59(4): 46-57.

24

Bielby, W. T., & Bielby, D. D. 1999. Organizational mediation of project-based labor
markets: Talent agencies and the careers of screenwriters. American Sociological
Review, 64, 54–85.
Bingham, J. B., Boswell, W. R., & Boudreau, J. W. 2005. Job demands and job search among
high-level managers in the United States and Europe. Group & Organization
Management, 30(6), 653-681.
Blau, G. 1993. Further exploring the relationship between job search and voluntary
individual turnover. Personnel Psychology, 46(2), 313-330.
Bolles, R. N. 2001. What Color is Your Parachute? Ten Speed Press
Boudreau, J. W., Boswell, W. R., Judge, T. A., & Bretz, R. D. Jr. 2001. Personality and
cognitive ability as predictors of job search among employed managers. Personnel
Psychology, 54: 25-50.
Bretz, R. D. Jr., Boudreau, J. W., & Judge, T. A. 1994. Job search behavior of employed
managers. Personnel Psychology, 47(2): 275-293.
Britton L.C., & Ball, D. F. 1994. Executive search and selection consultancies in France.
European Business Review, 94(1): 24-29.
Britton, L. C., Clark, T. A. R., & Ball, D.F. 1992. Modify or extend? The application of the
structure conduct performance approach to service industries. Service Industries
Journal. 12(1): 34-43.
Britton, L.C., Clark, T.A.R., & Ball, D.F. 1992. Executive search and selection: Imperfect
theory or intractable industry? Service Industries Journal. 12(2): 238-250.
Britton, L. C., & Ball, D. F. 1999. Trust vs. opportunism. Striking a balance in executive
search. Service Industries Journal, 19(2): 132-149.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2011. Occupational Outlook Handbook.
http://www.bls.gov/ooh/management/top-executives.htm
Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2012. Current Employment Statistics (National).
http://www.bls.gov/ces/cessizeclass.htm
Capell, P. 2001. What you should expect from executive recruiters, The CareerJournal,
www.careerjournal.com/recruiters/profiles/20010703-felix.html.
Cappelli, P. 1999. The new deal at work. Harvard Business Review Press: Boston, MA.
Cappelli, P. and Hamori, M. 2005. The New Path to the Top. Harvard Business Review
Citrin, J. M., & Smith, R. A. 2003. The 5 patterns of extraordinary careers. New York:
Crown Business.

25

Clark, T.; Salaman, G. 1998. Creating the “right” impression: Towards a dramaturgy of
management consultancy. The Service Industries Journal, 18(1): 18-38.
Conyon, M. J., Girma, S., Thompson, S., & Wright, P. W. (2002). The productivity and wage
effects of foreign acquisition in the United Kingdom. Journal of Industrial
Economics, 50(1), 85-102.
Cyert, R. M., & March, J. G. 1963. A Behavioral Theory of the Firm. Blackwell: Oxford.
Davidson, C., & Woodbury, S. A. 2002. Search theory and unemployment. Boston: Kluwer
Academic Publishing.
DeFond, M. L., & Park, C. W. 1999. The effect of competition on CEO turnover. Journal of
Accounting and Economics, 27: 35-56.
Dreher, G. F., Lee, J., & Clerkin, T. A. 2011. Mobility and cash compensation: The
moderating effects of gender, race and executive search firms. Journal of
Management, 37, 651–681.
Duncan, B. L. 1976. Differential social perception and attribution in intergroup violence:
Testing the lower limits of stereotyping of Blacks. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 34(4): 75–93.
Dunford, B., Boudreau, J. & Boswell, W. 2005. Out-of-the-money: The impact of underwater
stock options on executive job search. Personnel Psychology, 58(1), 67-101.
Dutton, J. E., Dukerich, J. M., & Harquail, C. V. 1994. Organizational images and member
identification. Administrative Science Quarterly, 39: 239-263.
Execunet. 2002. Average executive tenure less than four years.
http://www.execunet.com/m_releases_content.cfm?id=3096
Feldman, D.C., Sapienza, H.J., & Bolino, M. C. 1997. Patterns of growth and specialization in
the executive search industry. Journal of Managerial Issues. 9(2): 176-186.
Felps, W., Mitchell, T., Hekman, D., Lee, T., Holtom, B., & Harman, W. 2009. Turnover
contagion: how coworkers' job embeddedness and job search behaviors influence
quitting. Academy of Management Journal, 52(3), 545-561.
Fernandez-Mateo, I. 2007. Who pays the price of brokerage? Transferring constraint through
price setting in the staffing sector. American Sociological Review, 72, 291–317.
Gaertner, K. N., & Nollen, S. D. 1992. Turnover intentions and desire among executives.
Human Relations, 45(5): 447-459.
Gibson, C. B., & Birkinshaw, J. 2004. The antecedents, consequences, and mediating role of
organizational ambidexterity. Academy of Management Journal, 47 209-226.
Gittins, J.C. & Jones, D. M. 1979. A Dynamic Allocation Index for the Discounted
26

Multiarmed Bandit Problem, Biometrika, 66(3): 561-565.
Griffeth, R. W., Hom, P. W., & Gaertner, S. 2000. A meta-analysis of antecedents and
correlates of employee turnover: Update, moderator tests, and research implications
for the millennium. Journal of Management, 26: 463-488.
Groysberg, B., & Lee, L. 2009. Hiring Stars and Their Colleagues: Exploration and
Exploitation in Professional Service Firms. Organization Science, 20(4), 740-758.
Gupta, A. K., K. G Smith, C. E. Shalley. 2006. The interplay between exploration and
exploitation. Academy of Management Journal, 49: 693-706.
Hagedorn, M., & Manovskii, I. 2013. Job selection and wages over the business
cycle. American Economic Review, 103(2): 771-803.
Hall, R., & Krueger, L. B. 2012. Evidence on the Incidence of Wage Posting, Wage
Bargaining, and On-the-Job Search. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
4: 56-67.
Hamori, M. 2010. Who Gets Headhunted--and Who Gets Ahead? The Impact of Search Firms
on Executive Careers. Academy of Management Perspectives, 24(4), 46-59.
Harrison, G. A., & List, J. W. 2004. Field experiments. Journal of Economic Literature,
XLII: 1009-1055.
Haveman, H. E., & Cohen, L. 1994. The Ecological Dynamics of Careers. The Organizational
Impact of Foundings, Disolutions, and Mergers on Job Mobility. American Journal
of Sociology, 100(1): 104-152.
Hom, P. W., & Griffeth, R. W. 1991. Structural Equations Modeling Test of a Turnover
Theory: Cross-Sectional and Longitudinal Analyses. Journal of Applied Psychology,
76(3), 350-366.
Hom, P. W., Griffeth, R. W., & Sellaro, L. 1984. The Validity of Mobley's (1977) Model of
Employee Turnover. Organizational Behavior & Human Performance, 34(2), 141174.
Howell, N. 2004. Working with recruiters.
http://www.spencerstuart.com/yourcareer/management/633/
International Association of Corporate and Professional Recruiters, www.iacpr.org.
Jovanovic, B. 1979. Job Search and the Theory of Turnover. Journal of Political Economy,
87: 972-990.
Judge, T. A., Cable, D. M., Boudreau, J. W., & Bretz Jr., R. D. 1995. An Empirical
Investigation of the Predictors of Executive Career Success. Personnel Psychology,
48(3), 485-519.
27

Jupina, A. A. 1992. The Handbook of Executive Search Research. New York: Kennedy
Information
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. 2000. Choices, values and frames. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Kambourov, G., & Manovskill, I. 2004. Occupational Mobility and Wage Inequality.
Philadelphia: Penn Institute for Economic Research, Working Paper
Kanfer, R., Wanberg, C. R., & Kantrowitz, T. M. 2001. Job Search and Employment: A
Personality-Motivational Analysis and Meta-Analytic Review. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 86(5), 837-855.
Khurana, R. 2002. Searching for a corporate savior: The irrational quest for charismatic
CEOs. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
King, Z., Burke, S., & Pemberton, J. 2005. The "bounded" career: An empirical study of
human capital, career mobility and employment outcomes in a mediated labor market.
Human Relations, 58, 981–1007.
Kraimer, M. L.; Shaffer, M. A.; & Bolino, M. 2009.The influence of expatriate and repatriate
experiences on career advancement and repatriate retention. Human Resource
Management, 48(1): 27-47.
Krug, J. A., & Hegarty, W. H. 2001. Predicting who stays and leaves after an acquisition: A
study of top managers in multinational firms. Strategic Management Journal, 22:
185-196.
Lee, T. W. & Mitchell, T. R. 1994. An alternative approach: The unfolding model of
voluntary employee turnover. Academy of Management Review, 19(1): 51-79.
Lee, T. W., & Mowday, R. T. 1987. Voluntarily Leaving an Organization: An Empirical
Investigation of Steers and Mowday's Model of Turnover. Academy of Management
Journal, 30(4), 721-743.
Levinthal, D. & March, J. 1993. The myopia of learning, Strategic Management Journal, 14:
95–112.
Lise, J. 2013. On-the-Job Search and Precautionary Savings. Review of Economic Studies,
80(3): 1086-1113.
Lubatkin, M., Schweiger, D., & Weber, Y. 1999. Top management turnover in related
M&A’s: An additional test of the theory of relative standing. Journal of
Management, 25(1): 55-73.
Lucas, R. E., Jr. and Prescott, E. C. 1974. Equilibrium Search and Unemployment. Journal
of Economic Theory, 7(2): 188-209.
28

Mael, F. A., & Ashforth, B. E. 1992. Alumni and their alma mater: A partial test of the
reformulated model of organizational identification. Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 13: 103-123.
March, J. G. 1991. Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning. Organization
Science, 2: 71-87.
McCall, J.J. 1970. Economics of Information and Job Search. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 84(1): 113-126.
McCall, B.P. & McCall, J. J. 1987. A Sequential Study of Migration and Job Search.
Journal of Labor Economics, 5(4): 452.
Meisenheimer, J. R., & Ilg, R.E. 2000. Looking for a “better” job: Job search activity of the
employed. Monthly Labor Review, 123(9): 3-15.
Miller, R. 1984. Job Matching and Occupational Choice, Journal of Political Economy, 92:
1086-1120.
Mom, T. J. M., van den Bosch, F. A. J., & Volberda, H. W. 2009. Understanding variation in
managers' ambidexterity: Investigating direct and interaction effects of formal
structural and personal coordination mechanisms. Organization Science, 20(4) 812828.
Mortensen, D.T. 1970. A Theory of Wage and Employment Dynamics.” In E.S. Phelps et al.
(eds.). Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and inflation Theory. New
York: W.W. Norton, 12
Nicholson, N., West, M., & Cawsey, T. F. 1985. Future uncertain: Expected versus
attained job mobility among managers. Journal of Occupational Behavior, 58: 313320.
O'Reilly, C, & Tushman, M. 2008. Ambidexterity as a dynamic capability: resolving the
innovator's dilemma. Research in Organizational Behavior, 28: 185-206.
Robbins, H. 1952. Some Aspects of the Sequential Design of Experiments, Bulletin of the
American Mathematical Society, 55: 527-535.
Rogerson, R., Shimer, R., & Wright, R. 2005. Search-Theoretic Models of the Labor Market:
A Survey. Journal of Economic Literature, 43: 959-988.
Schwab D. P.. Rynes S. L. & Aldag R. J. 1987. Theories and research on Job search and
choice. Research in Personnel and Human Resources Management, 5: 129-166.
Shleifer, A., & Summers, L. 1988. Breach of trust in hostile take-overs. In: A.J. Auerbach,
(Ed.), Corporate Take-Overs: Causes and Consequences. University of Chicago Press,
London.
29

Siggelkow, N. (2001). Change in the presence of fit: the rise, the fall, and the renaissance of
Liz Claiborne. Academy of Management Journal, 44(4), 838-857.
Simon, H. A. 1947. Administrative Behavior. The Free Press: New York.
Spencer, S. 2004. How executive recruiting works. Available at:
http://www.spencerstuart.com/yourcareer/management/695/
Stigler, G. 1961. The Economics of Information. Journal of Political Economy, 69(3): 213225.
Sung, J. & Tkaczyk, J. 2002. Who’s on Top and Who Flopped, Fortune, 4 March.
Tae Heon, L., Gerhart, B., Weller, I. & Trevor, C. 2008. Understanding voluntary turnover:
path-specific job satisfaction effects and the importance of unsolicited job offers.
Academy of Management Journal, 51:651-671.
Tams, S., & Arthur, M. B. 2010. New directions for boundaryless careers: Agency and
interdependence in a changing world. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 31(5),
629-646.
Thompson, W.R. 1933. On the likelihood that one unknown probability exceeds another in
view of the evidence of two samples. Biometrika, 25: 275-294.
Turban, D. B.; Lee, F. K.; Da Motta Veiga, S. P.; Haggard, D. L.; & Wu, S. Y. 2013. Be
happy, don't wait: The role of trait affect in job search. Personnel Psychology, 66 (2):
483-514.
Veiga, J. F. 1981. Plateaued versus nonplateaued managers: Career patterns, attitudes, and
path potential. Academy of Management Journal, 24(3): 566-578.
Weil, P. A., & Kimball, P.A. 1995. A model of voluntary turnover among hospital CEOs.
Hospital & Health Services Administration, 40(3): 362-383.
Wiersema, M. F., & Bantel, K. A. 1993. Top management team turnover as an adaptation
mechanism. Strategic Management Journal, 14: 485.

30

Table I. Means, Standard deviations and correlations
Variable

Mean

S. D.

1

2

3

4

5

1. Job search

.52

.50

1.00

2. Asset mgmt firms

.23

.42

-0.11***

1.00

3. Banks

.20

.40

0.09**

-0.30***

1.00

4. Finance comps

.12

.33

0.04

-0.20***

-0.18***

1.00

5. Investment banks

.45

.50

0.00

-0.51***

-0.44***

-0.30***

1.00

6. Support function

.22

.42

-0.01

-0.03

0.11***

0.13***

-0.14***

1.00

7. Finance function

.64

.48

-0.05

0.07*

-0.08**

-0.18***

0.12***

-0.71***

1.00

8. General mgt

.14

.34

0.07*

-0.05*

-0.02

0.09**

0.00

-0.21***

-0.53***

1.00

9. Mgrs and non-mgs

.16

.36

-0.06

0.15***

-0.07**

-0.08**

-0.03

0.01

0.13***

-0.16***

1.00

10. Senior managers

.48

.50

-0.03

-0.06*

-0.02

-0.04

0.10***

0.06**

0.06**

-0.16***

-0.41***

1.00

11. EVPs and SVPs

.18

.38

0.08*

-0.00

0.17***

0.11***

-0.21***

0.08***

-0.05

-0.03

-0.20***

-0.46***

1.00

12. Chief Fin Offs

.05

.22

-0.01

0.04

0.02

-0.01

-0.04

-0.02

0.02

-0.00

-0.10***

-0.23***

-0.11***

1.00

13. Top Echelon

.13

.33

0.04

-0.06*

-0.02

0.10***

0.00

-0.15***

-0.28***

0.55***

-0.17***

-0.38***

-0.13***

-0.07*

1.00

14. Organization size

3.06

1.64

-0.05

-0.19***

0.27***

0.05

-0.08*

0.9***

-0.01

-0.09**

-0.09***

0.16***

0.10***

-0.05

-0.09**

*** p<0.001; **p<0.01; *p<0.05

31

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

Table 1. continued
Variable
15. Reputation
16. Time_er chg
17. Er change
18. Career breadth
19. Change_ind
20. Change_segm
21. Ch job function
22. Intl assignment
23. M&A
24. Target pop.
25. Current tenure

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

-0.11***

-0.11***

0.01

-0.00

0.09***

0.05*

0.04

-0.07***

-0.06***

0.02

-0.00

-0.04

-0.04

0.48***

-0.13***

0.01

0.03

-0.00

-0.03

0.03

-0.01

0.01

-0.04

-0.06*

0.06*

-0.04

-0.02

0.13***

0.14***

0.02

-0.08**

-0.03

0.06*

0.02

0.02

-0.06*

0.09***

0.00

-0.09**

-0.03

-0.05

-0.28***

0.18***

-0.01

-0.04

0.09**

-0.02

0.09**

-0.23***

0.21***

-0.04

-0.05

-0.05

0.01

0.11***

-0.12***

0.08**

-0.03

-0.05

0.09**

0.01

0.20***

-0.19***

0.02

0.05

-0.05

-0.07*

0.02

0.06*

-0.17***

0.04

0.09**

-0.04

0.06*

-0.09**

-0.01

0.00

0.02

-0.00

-0.01

0.05

-0.02

0.00

0.02

0.07*

-0.04

-0.05

0.05

0.04

0.01

-0.23***

0.29***

-0.10***

0.08*

-0.03

0.01

0.13***

-0.11***

0.18***

-0.04

0.09**

-0.02

-0.03

-0.03

-0.02

0.07

-0.04

0.03

-0.01

0.02

0.02

0.04

0.05

-0.09**

0.22***

-0.09**

-0.04

0.02

0.04

-0.07

-0.04

-0.01

0.08**

-0.00

-0.04

0.18 ***

0.08**

-0.02

0.07*

0.09**

-0.09**

-0.08***

-0.18***

0.35***

-0.22***

-0.41***

0.27***

0.45***

0.56***

-0.03

-0.06

0.05

0.03

-0.01

-0.06*

0.01

-0.01

0.01

0.00

-0.01

0.01

-0.04

-0.02

-0.05

32

Table 1 continued
Variable

Mean

S.D.

15

16

17

18

19

15. Reputation

2.51

3.93

1.00

16. Time_er change

5.01

3.66

0.07***

1.00

17. Employr change

.68

.47

-0.23***

-0.49***

1.00

18. Career breadth

1.06

.84

-0.12***

-0.18***

0.26***

1.00

19. Change_industry

.29

.45

-0.11***

-0.19***

0.31***

0.45***

1.00

20. Ch_segments

.23

.42

0.01

-0.02

0.09**

0.33***

-0.35***

1.00

21. Ch job function

.33

.47

-0.11***

-0.08**

0.08**

0.65***

0.18***

-0.01

1.00

22. Intl assignment

.20

.40

0.00

-0.05

0.01

0.49***

-0.02

0.05

0.00

1.00

23. M&A

.07

.26

0.16***

-0.02

-0.09**

-0.07*

-0.06*

0.02

-0.07*

-0.02

1.00

24. Target pop.

.36

.43

-0.04*

-0.03

-0.08**

0.07*

0.04

0.01

0.08**

0.03

0.00

1.00

25. Current tenure

3.69

2.83

-0.08***

0.72***

0.03

-0.03

-0.01

0.02

-0.03

-0.07*

-0.05

-0.05

33

20

21

22

23

24

25

1.00

Table 1a. Correlation table for the sample of public companies where financial and compensation data are available
Variable

Mean

SD

1

1. Job search

.45

.50

1.00

2. Asset mgmt firms

.17

.38

-.11***

1.00

3. Banks

.35

.48

.09**

-.30***

1.00

4. Finance comps

.10

.29

.04

-.20***

-.18***

1.00

5. Investment banks

.38

.49

.00

-.51***

-.44***

-.30***

1.00

6. Support function

.25

.43

-.01

-.03

.11***

.13***

-.14***

1.00

7. Finance function

.65

.48

-.05

.07*

-.08***

-.18***

.12***

-.72***

1.00

8. General mgt

.10

.30

.07*

-.05

-.02

.09***

.00

-.21***

-.53***

1.00

9. Mgrs and non-mgs

.12

.32

-.06*

.16***

-.07**

-.08***

-.03

-.01

.13***

-.16***

1.00

10. Senior managers

.55

.50

-.03

-.06*

-.03

-.05*

.10***

.06**

.06**

-.16***

-.41***

1.00

11. EVPs and SVPs

.22

.42

.07*

-.00

.17***

.11***

-.20***

.08***

-.05*

-.03

-.20***

-.46***

1.00

12. Chief Fin Offs

.05

.22

-.01

.04

.02

-.01

-.04

-.02

.02

-.00

-.10***

-.23***

-.11***

1.00

13. Top Echelon

.06

.24

.02

-.09***

-.10***

.03

.14***

-.15***

-.19***

.44***

-.17***

-.38***

-.18***

-.09***

1.00

14. Organization size

4.29

.60

-.05

-.19***

.27***

.05*

-.08***

.09***

-.02

-.09***

-.09***

.16***

.10***

-.05*

-.24***

1.00

15. Reputation

5.47

4.69

-.11***

-.11***

.01

-.00

.09***

.02

.04

-.07***

-.07**

.15***

.00

-.04

-.12***

.48***

1.00

16. ROE

13.41

7.45

-.12***

.18***

.01

.22***

-.28***

.07*

-.13***

.10**

.02

-.11***

.08*

.03

.02

-.09**

.02

1.00

.00

.85

-.16***

.00

-.01

.00

.00

-.08

.13***

-.09*

.05

-.02

-.02

-.02

-.09*

.19***

.27***

-.08*

17. Compensation

2

3

4

5

6

7

34

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

TABLE 2 Frequencies of responses to search request

No to search (% of total)
By function
General management

Yes to search (% of total)

Total

71
39.7%

108
60.3%

179
100.0%

Finance

112
50.7%

109
49.3%

221
100.0%

Support functions

334
49.6%

339
50.4%

673
100.0%

173
56.7%

132
43.3%

305
100.0%

Banks

90
39.5%

138
60.5%

228
100.0%

Finance companies

56
43.1%

74
56.9%

130
100.0%

Investment banks

222
48.1%

240
51.9%

462
100.0%

91
44.8%

112
55.2%

203
100.0%

EVP

24
35.3%

44
64.7%

68
100.0%

SVP

166
45.9%

196
54.1%

362
100.0%

VP

110
53.2%

97
46.8%

207
100.0%

Other

118
50.2%

117
49.8%

235
100.0%

By industry segment
Asset mgmt

By position
CEO

35

Table 3. Two-stage Heckman probit models. DV=Job search
I
Control variables
Asset management firms
-0.22*
(0.09)
Banks
0.15
(0.11)
Finance companies
0.00
(0.12)
Support function
-0.25+
(0.14)
Finance function
-0.11
(0.13)
Senior managers
0.21+
(0.12)
Executive and Senior Vice Presidents
0.28+
(0.15)
Chief Financial Officers
-0.03
(0.18)
Top Echelon: Presidents, CEOs,
-0.04
(0.16)
Chairmen
Organization size
-0.06*
(0.03)

II

III

-0.22*
0.09
-0.03
-0.25+
-0.10
0.22+
0.27+
-0.05

(0.09)
(0.11)
(0.12)
(0.14)
(0.13)
(0.12)
(0.14)
(0.18)

-0.45+
-0.17
0.42+
0.53+
0.33

(0.27)
(0.22)
(0.26)
(0.13)
(0.17)

-0.03

(0.15)

-0.18

(0.26)

-0.02

(0.03)

0.13

(0.10)

-0.03***

(0.01)

-0.01
-0.02*
-0.22**
0.36

(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.10)
(0.62)

0.29**
-0.01
-0.06***
-0.25**
-0.22*
17.18+
-.73

(0.10)
(0.08)
(0.02)
(0.08)
(0.10)

Independent variables
Reputation index
ROE
Compensation
Constant

0.85***

(0.19)

0.83***

(0.18)

Selection equation
Target population
Finance function
Tenure in current job
Investment Banks
Constant
Wald chi-square
Rho

0.35***
-0.12+
-0.03***
-0.11+
0.22***
20.15*
-.78

(0.08)
(0.07)
(0.02)
(0.07)
(0.09)

0.35***
-0.12+
-0.03***
-0.11+
0.22***
25.40**
-.82

(0.08)
(0.07)
(0.01)
(0.06)
(0.07)

N (total)
N (selection equation)
N (main equation)

1561
809
752

1561
809
752

36

1168
809
359

Table 3. continued
Asset management firms
Banks
Finance companies
Support function
Finance function
Senior managers
Executive and Senior Vice Presidents
Chief Financial Officers
Top Echelon: Presidents, CEOs,
Chairmen
Organization size
Independent variables
Time since last employer change
Employer change observed
Career breadth
Change across industries
Change across industry segments
Job function change
International assignments
Mergers and acquisitions
Constant
Selection equation
Target population
Finance function
Tenure in current job
Investment Banks
Constant
Wald chi-square
Rho
N (total)
N (selection equation)
N (main equation)

IV
-0.18+
0.16
0.02
-0.19
-0.00
0.15
0.20
-0.14

(0.10)
(0.13)
(0.13)
(0.15)
(0.15)
(0.14)
(0.17)
(0.20)

V
-0.17
0.19
0.03
-0.16
0.11
0.14
0.22
-0.14

(0.11)
(0.13)
(0.14)
(0.16)
(0.15)
(0.15)
(0.18)
(0.22)

VI
-0.16
0.17
0.05
-0.18
0.08
0.14
0.25
-0.13

(0.11)
(0.13)
(0.15)
(0.16)
(0.15)
(0.15)
(0.18)
(0.22)

VII
-0.14
0.16
0.08
-0.18
0.08
0.14
0.25
-0.12

(0.11)
(0.13)
(0.15)
(0.16)
(0.15)
(0.15)
(0.18)
(0.22)

-0.15

(0.17)

-0.21

(0.20)

-0.18

(0.20)

-0.17

(0.20)

-0.04

(0.03)

-0.03

(0.03)

-0.03

(0.03)

-0.03

(0.03)

-0.12+
0.10*

(0.07)
(0.04)

-0.12+
0.06
0.26***

(0.06)
(0.04)
(0.07)

-0.12+
0.08+

(0.06)
(0.04)

-0.11+
0.08+

(0.06)
(0.04)

0.25*
0.13
0.13
0.49***

(0.12)
(0.11)
(0.10)
(0.13)

(0.46)

0.47

(0.34)

0.25*
0.12
0.14
0.51***
0.31+
0.45

(0.12)
(0.11)
(0.10)
(0.13)
(0.17)
(0.34)

0.41***
-0.14*
-0.05***
-0.10
0.20*
42.72***
-.61
1561
809
752

(0.08)
(0.07)
(0.01)
(0.07)
(0.08)

0.88***

(0.25)

0.41***
-0.14*
-0.05***
-0.10
0.19*
26.78**
-.78
1561
809
752

(0.08)
(0.07)
(0.01)
(0.07)
(0.08)

0.43
0.41***
-0.15*
-0.05***
-0.10
0.20*
37.98***
-.60
1561
809
752

37

(0.08)
(0.07)
(0.01)
(0.07)
(0.08)

0.41***
-0.15*
-0.05***
-0.10
0.20*
41.14***
-.62
1561
809
752

(0.08)
(0.06)
(0.01)
(0.06)
(0.08)

Table 4. Analyses without Employer change observed. DV=Job search
Control variables
Asset management firms
Banks
Finance companies
Support function
Finance function
Senior managers
Executive and Senior Vice Presidents
Chief Financial Officers
Top Echelon: Presidents, CEOs, Chairmen
Organization size
Independent variables
Time since last employer change
Career breadth
Change across industries
Change across industry segments
Job function change
International assignments
Constant
Selection equation
Target population
Finance function
Tenure in current job
Investment Banks
Constant
Wald chi-square
Rho
N (total)
N (selection equation)
N (main equation)

I

II

III

-0.18
0.22
0.05
-0.23
-0.07
0.18
0.28
-0.07
-0.12
-0.06+

(0.12)
(0.14)
(0.16)
(0.17)
(0.18)
(0.17)
(0.20)
(0.27)
(0.22)
(0.03)

-0.17
0.21
0.04
-0.16
0.10
0.14
0.24
-0.13
-0.21
-0.04

(0.12)
(0.14)
(0.15)
(0.17)
(0.16)
(0.16)
(0.20)
(0.24)
(0.21)
(0.03)

-0.16
0.20
0.05
-0.19
0.07
0.14
0.28
-0.11
-0.19
-0.04

(0.12)
(0.14)
(0.16)
(0.18)
(0.16)
(0.16)
(0.20)
(0.25)
(0.22)
(0.03)

-0.28*

(0.11)

-0.22*
0.29***

(0.10)
(0.07)

-0.22*

(0.10)

0.32*
0.18
0.15
0.53***
0.65+

(0.12)
(0.12)
(0.11)
(0.13)
(0.36)

0.40***
-0.15*
-0.05***
-0.10
0.21*
44.03***
-.41
1561
809
752

(0.08)
(0.07)
(0.01)
(0.07)
(0.08)

10.06**

(0.40)

0.63+

(0.36)

0.40***
-0.15*
-0.05***
-0.10
0.21*
25.84**
-.29
1561
809
752

(0.08)
(0.07)
(0.01)
(0.07)
(0.09)

0.40***
-0.15*
-0.05***
-0.10
0.20*
40.00***
-.42
1561
809
752

(0.08)
(0.07)
(0.01)
(0.07)
(0.08)

38

Table 5. Two-stage Heckman models in the split sample (if Employer change observed=0). DV=Job search
I

II

Control variables
Asset management firms
Banks
Finance companies
Support function
Finance function
Senior managers
Executive and Senior Vice Presidents
Chief Financial Officers
Top Echelon: Presidents, CEOs, Chairmen
Organization size
Time since last employer change

0.12
0.41*
0.31
-0.44
-0.10
0.12
0.40+
0.00
-0.02
0.06
-0.24

(0.21)
(0.21)
(0.24)
(0.29)
(0.24)
(0.21)
(0.22)
(0.37)
(0.39)
(0.06)
(0.19)

0.13
0.44*
0.31
-0.38
0.00
0.05
0.40+
-0.05
-0.04
0.06
-0.21

(0.22)
(0.21)
(0.24)
(0.29)
(0.26)
(0.22)
(0.22)
(0.38)
(0.40)
(0.07)
(0.20)

Independent variables
Career breadth
Constant

-0.32

(0.58)

0.19+
-0.58

(0.11)
(0.60)

Selection equation
Target population
Finance function
Tenure in current job
Investment Banks
Constant
Wald chi-square
Rho
N (total)
N (selection equation)
N (main equation)

0.56***
-0.24*
-0.09***
-0.08
0.03
15.79
.45
770
503
267

(0.12)
(0.10)
(0.02)
(0.10)
(0.13)

0.55***
-0.23*
-0.09***
-0.08
0.02
20.34+
.41
770
503
267

(0.12)
(0.10)
(0.02)
(0.10)
(0.13)

39

Appendix 1. Regression model to determine Compensation
DV: Ln(total compensation of the CEO)
Variables
ROE compared to industry average
Ln(number of employees)
Asset management companies
Banks
Finance companies
Net income per employee
Constant
R-squared
F(6, 661)

β
.016**
.315***
-.190*
-.472***
-.337*
-.019
5.346***
.198
27.16***

Stand. error
(.004)
(.026)
(.096)
(.080)
(.125)
(.022)
(.274)

40

