                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, AGGLOMERATION ECONOMIES, AND THE BIG PUSH:
       100 YEARS OF EVIDENCE FROM THE TENNESSEE VALLEY AUTHORITY

                                             Patrick M. Kline
                                              Enrico Moretti

                                          Working Paper 19293
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w19293


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       August 2013




  We thank the referees, two editors, Daron Acemoglu, Raj Chetty, Janet Currie, Donald Davis, Yuriy
  Gorodnichenko, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Rick Hornbeck, Costas Meghir, Evan Rawley, Stephen Redding,
  Chris Udry and seminar participants at Berkeley, Columbia, UC Davis, the Econometric Society Summer
  Meetings, Harvard, Humboldt, LSE, Maryland, Michigan, the NBER Summer Institute, Paris Sciences
  Po, Pompeu Fabra, Princeton, Stanford, Tinbergen, Yale, Wharton, Wisconsin, UBC, and UCLA for
  useful comments. We are grateful to Andrew Garin for pointing out a mistake in an earlier version
  of this article. We thank Olivier Deschenes and Alan Barreca for providing us with some of the data.
  We gratefully acknowledge the Berkeley Center for Equitable Growth for funding support. We thank
  Michel Serafinelli, Valentina Paredes, Juan Pablo Atal, Edson Severnini and Owen Zidar for excellent
  research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
  the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
  reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
  NBER publications.

  © 2013 by Patrick M. Kline and Enrico Moretti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
  two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
  is given to the source.
Local Economic Development, Agglomeration Economies, and the Big Push: 100 Years of
Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority
Patrick M. Kline and Enrico Moretti
NBER Working Paper No. 19293
August 2013, Revised June 2014
JEL No. J0,R1,R12

                                              ABSTRACT

We study the long run effects of one of the most ambitious regional development programs in U.S.
history: the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA). Using as controls authorities that were proposed but
never approved by Congress, we find that the TVA led to large gains in agricultural employment that
were eventually reversed when the program’s subsidies ended. Gains in manufacturing employment,
by contrast, continued to intensify well after federal transfers had lapsed – a pattern consistent with
the presence of agglomeration economies in manufacturing. Because manufacturing paid higher wages
than agriculture, this shift raised aggregate income in the TVA region for an extended period of time.
Economists have long cautioned that the local gains created by place based policies may be offset
by losses elsewhere. We develop a structured approach to assessing the TVA’s aggregate consequences
that is applicable to other place based policies. In our model, the TVA affects the national economy
both directly through infrastructure improvements and indirectly through agglomeration economies.
The model’s estimates suggest that the TVA’s direct investments yielded a significant increase in national
manufacturing productivity, with benefits exceeding the program’s costs. However, the program’s
indirect effects appear to have been limited: agglomeration gains in the TVA region were offset by
losses in the rest of the country. Spillovers in manufacturing appear to be the rare example of a localized
market failure that cancels out in the aggregate.


Patrick M. Kline
Department of Economics
UC, Berkeley
508-1 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
pkline@econ.berkeley.edu

Enrico Moretti
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
moretti@econ.berkeley.edu
I.    Introduction
     Like most countries, the United States exhibits vast differences in income across cities and
regions. After adjusting for skill composition, average wages in the highest and lowest paying
U.S. metropolitan areas differ by nearly a factor of three (Moretti, 2011). Such disparities have
prompted governments to create a variety of place based economic development policies aimed at
reducing regional inequality. These programs, which target public resources towards disadvantaged
geographic areas rather than towards disadvantaged individuals, are widespread. In the U.S., it is
estimated that federal and local governments spend roughly $95 billion per year on such programs,
significantly more than Unemployment Insurance in a typical year.1
     In many cases, place based policies seek to attract manufacturing plants to a specific jurisdiction.
Such programs have arguably become the de-facto industrial policy in the United States, and are
also widespread in Europe and Asia. A fundamental concern often raised by economists is that
spatially targeted policies may simply shift economic activity from one locality to another, with
little impact on the aggregate level of output. In such a case, the benefits enjoyed by the target
locality may come at the expense of other (possibly quite distant) areas. Echoing this concern,
Glaeser and Gottlieb (2008) conclude in a recent review that “any government spatial policy is as
likely to reduce as to increase welfare.” Likewise, a recent analysis by the New York Times describes
such policies as a “zero sum game” among American communities (Story, 2013).
     In this paper, we evaluate one of the most ambitious place based economic development policies
in the history of the United States: the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA). Charged by President
Roosevelt with “touching and giving life to all forms of human concerns” the program was intended
to modernize the economy of the Tennessee Valley region via a series of large scale infrastructure
investments including electricity generating dams and an extensive network of new roads, canals,
and flood control systems.
     The TVA makes for a particularly interesting case study for at least two reasons. First, because
of its large size and ambitious goals, the TVA program is perhaps the best example of a “big
push” development strategy in the history of the United States. Such strategies are predicated
on the notion that economic development exhibits threshold effects, so that large enough public
investments in a severely underdeveloped region may generate huge increases in productivity and
welfare (Rosenstein-Rodan, 1943; Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1989; Azariadis and Stachurski,
2005). An important channel through which this process might occur when output is traded on
national markets involves agglomeration forces, particularly productive spillovers between workers
and firms, which have received a growing amount of theoretical and empirical attention in the
literature (Ellison and Glaeser, 1999; Rosenthal and Strange, 2004; Greenstone, Hornbeck and
Moretti, 2010). At the time of the TVA’s inception in 1933, its service region was among the
poorest, least developed, areas in the nation. If the program’s large localized investments in public
infrastructure failed to yield a sustained boost in local productivity, it is hard to imagine what
programs might have succeeded.
     Second, the timing of federal investments in the TVA provide an opportunity to examine whether
a lapsed development policy may have persistent effects. At the program’s peak in the period 1950-
1955, the annual federal subsidy to the region amounted to $750 for the typical household (roughly
   1
     The federal government spends about $15 billion annually (GAO, 2012). Story (2013) estimates that state
and local governments spend at least $80 billion annually. In addition to the direct provision of subsidies, states
often compete on income and corporate taxes and labor and environmental regulations. Bartik (1991) provides a
comprehensive taxonomy of place based policies.


                                                        2
10% of household income). By 1960 however, that figure had become negligible, as Congress made
the TVA a fiscally self-sustaining entity. Big push models of development typically suggest the
positive effects of an initial subsidy on the local economy may be long lasting provided the initial
investment is large enough. The TVA provides us with an opportunity to scrutinize this prediction
empirically. In doing so, we contribute to a growing literature on the persistence and uniqueness of
spatial equilibria (Davis and Weinstein, 2002, 2008; Redding, Sturm, and Wolf, 2011).
     Our analysis proceeds in two steps: we first conduct a reduced form evaluation of the TVA’s
local impacts. We then use a more structured approach to assess the program’s national impacts.
     The first part of the paper uses a rich panel data set of counties to conduct an evaluation of
the dynamic effects of the TVA on the regional economy in the seventy year period following the
program’s inception. The manufacturing and agricultural sectors are analyzed separately, as there is
a long standing presumption in the literature that manufacturing exhibits agglomeration economies
but little reason to expect such effects in agriculture (Hornbeck and Naidu, 2012). To identify
regional counterfactuals, we exploit the fact that in the years following the program’s inception,
Congress considered creating six additional regional authorities modeled upon the TVA. Due to
political infighting, these additional authorities were never approved. We use the counties covered
by authorities that were proposed but never implemented as controls for TVA counties with similar
observable characteristics. Two other controls groups with similar characteristics are also considered.
Placebo tests indicate that our covariates are successful at balancing economic trends in TVA and
control counties in the two decades before the program began.
     We find that between 1930 and 1960 – the period during which federal transfers were greatest –
the TVA generated gains in both agricultural and manufacturing employment. However, between
1960 and 2000 – during which time federal transfers were scaled down – the gains in agriculture were
completely reversed, while the gains in manufacturing employment continued to intensify. Thus,
forty years after TVA became financially self-sufficient, manufacturing employment in the region was
still growing at a significantly faster pace than the comparison group. Because the manufacturing
sector paid higher wages than agriculture, this shift raised aggregate income in the TVA region for
an extended period of time.
     A key question for policy purposes is whether the local gains associated with the TVA came
at the expense of other parts of the country. In the second part of the paper, we seek to quantify
the impact of the TVA on national welfare. This exercise is complicated by the difficulty of con-
structing a credible counterfactual for the entire nation. Put simply, we don’t observe the entire
U.S. economy in the absence of the TVA. We address this problem by developing an equilibrium
model to structure our empirical analysis. Methodologically, our approach has the advantage of
being extremely tractable and is easily adapted to the evaluation of other placed based policies.
     In the model, the TVA affects the national economy in two ways. First, the TVA directly raises
labor productivity due to the improvement in public infrastructure. With mobile workers, these
localized productivity gains will yield national labor market impacts. Second, the program may
have an indirect effect through agglomeration economies, if they exist. This second channel allows
for the possibility – highlighted by the big push literature – that the effects of a one-time localized
public investment might become self sustaining due to agglomeration economies. In our setting,
agglomeration economies are technological externalities that arise through social interactions and
learning (Moretti, 2004) or thick market effects (Marshall, 1890).2 Building on Glaeser and Gottleib
   2
     The big push literature has traditionally focused on models with demand externalities, whereby income growth
in an area causes increases in the demand for local goods and services and stimulates entry of firms with better



                                                       3
(2008), the model clarifies the conditions under which place based policies can affect aggregate
output. Reallocating economic activity from one region of the country to another results in a long
run increase in total output only when the elasticity of agglomeration with respect to economic
density is greater in the receiving region.
    We develop a dynamic panel approach to estimating both the direct and indirect productivity
effects of the TVA. The model parameters governing agglomeration are identified using restrictions
on the timing and serial dependence of unobserved productivity shocks. Corroborating these re-
strictions, the estimated model yields predictions quantitatively consistent with the results of our
reduced form program evaluation of the TVA’s dynamic effects.
    We find that the TVA’s direct productivity effects were substantial. The investments in produc-
tive infrastructure resulted in a large increase in local manufacturing productivity, which in turn
led to a 0.3% increase in national manufacturing productivity. By contrast, the indirect effects of
the TVA on manufacturing productivity were limited. While we do find strong evidence of localized
agglomeration economies in the manufacturing sector, our empirical analysis clearly points to a
constant agglomeration elasticity. When the elasticity of agglomeration is the same everywhere in
the country, spatially reallocating economic activity has no aggregate effects, as the benefits in the
areas that gain activity are identical to the costs in areas that lose it. Thus, we estimate that the
spillovers in the TVA region were fully offset by the losses in the rest of the country. Spillovers
in manufacturing appear to be the rare example of a localized market failure that “cancels out” in
the aggregate. Notably, this finding casts doubt on the traditional big push rationale for spatially
progressive subsidies.
    Using our model estimates to conduct a cost-benefit analysis, we find the net present value of the
TVA program’s long run benefits and costs to be $23.8B and $17.3B, respectively. This positive rate
of return to the TVA’s federal investments is entirely explained by the direct productivity effects of
the program’s infrastructure investments. We caution, however, that our calculation of net benefits
depends on conditions that are likely specific to the inception of the TVA program.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the program. Section
III provides estimates of the impact of the TVA on the region’s economy. Section IV develops our
spatial equilibrium model. Section V estimate the model’s parameters and the program effects on
the national economy. Section VI concludes.


II.     The Tennessee Valley Authority Program
II.A.     Brief History
    The TVA is a federally owned corporation created by Congress on May 18, 1933 with the
passage of the Tennessee Valley Authority Act. At the time of its inception, the Authority’s primary
objective was to invest in, and rapidly modernize, the Tennessee Valley’s economy. The TVA service
area, pictured in Figure I, includes 163 counties spanning several states, including virtually all of
Tennessee, and substantial portions of Kentucky, Alabama, and Mississippi. The federal effort to
modernize the TVA region’s economy entailed one of the largest place based development programs
in U.S. history. Large investments were made in public infrastructure projects including a series
of hydroelectric dams, a 650-mile navigation canal, and an extensive road network, with additional
technologies, ultimately resulting in higher aggregate productivity (Rosenstein-Rodan, 1943; Murphy, Shleifer, and
Vishny, 1989).



                                                        4
money flowing to the construction of new schools and flood control systems.3
    Probably the most salient changes prompted by the TVA came from the electricity generated
by the Authority’s dams. Electricity was intended to attract manufacturing industries to what
was a heavily agricultural region. While, in principle, electricity could have been exported outside
the region, the Authority primarily sold to municipal power authorities and cooperatives inside its
service area at reduced rates.
    Between 1934 and 2000, federal appropriations for the TVA totaled approximately $20 billion
(2000 dollars). The size of these transfers varied significantly across decades. A time series of federal
transfers to the Authority is shown in Figure II. Only a small fraction of total federal appropriations
were actually used in the program’s first seven years. The bulk of federal investment occurred over
the period 1940-1958, during which time approximately 73% of federal transfers took place. This
manifested in a correspondingly frenzied pace of TVA activity over this interval. Construction of the
navigation canal began in 1939, and was completed in 1945, while most of the roads were built during
the 1940s and 1950s. With the onset of World War II, construction of the dams became a national
priority due to the increased demand for aluminum; by 1942, 12 dams were under construction. By
the end of the war, the Authority had become the largest single supplier of electricity in the country.
Peak transfers occurred over the period 1950-1955, during which time the federal government was
transferring approximately $150 to each resident in each year in the form of subsidies to TVA. Since,
at the time, the typical household in TVA counties had 5 members, the per household transfer was
roughly $750 per year, or about 10% of average household income.
    In 1959, Congress passed legislation making the TVA power generation system self-financing.
From that year on, federal subsidies declined sharply. Figure II shows that the magnitude of
the overall federal transfer dropped significantly in the late 1950’s –both in absolute and per-
capita terms–and remained low in the following four decades. Currently, TVA no longer receives a
substantial net federal transfer.

II.B.     Selection into the TVA and Summary Statistics
     In order to understand the sorts of selection bias that might plague an evaluation of the TVA,
it is important to understand how the geographic scope of the program was determined. Arthur
E. Morgan (the Authority’s first chairman) and other contemporary sources list several criteria
that were used to determine the TVA service region (Morgan, 1934; Barbour, 1937; Boyce, 2004;
Kimble, 1933; Menhinick, and Durisch, 1953; Satterfield, 1947). These criteria prioritized counties
which (i) were heavily rural and required additional electric power; (ii) experienced severe flooding
and/or had misguided land use; (iii) experienced heavy deficits; (iv) lacked public facilities such as
libraries, health services and schools; (v) were willing to receive technical and advisory assistance
from the TVA; (vi) had planning agencies and enabling legislation and agreed to experiment with
new fertilizers; and (vii) were within reasonable transmission distance of power plants.4
     Based on these criteria, it is reasonable to expect TVA counties to have been less developed
than other parts of the country. The data generally confirm this impression. Our data come from
a county-level panel covering the years 1900 to 2000 which we constructed using both microdata
    3
      Funds were also spent on a hodgepodge of smaller programs including malaria prevention, soil erosion mitigation
programs, educational programs, health clinics, the distribution of cheap fertilizers to farmers, reforestation and forest
fire control, and provision of federal expertise for local economic development.
    4
      The list of counties to be included in the service region was first drafted by geographers at the Division of Land
Planning and Housing based on the above criteria and later approved by the TVA Board of Directors



                                                            5
and published tables from the Population Census, the Manufacturing Census and the Agricultural
Census. We also use topographic variables collected by Fishback, Haines, and Kantor (2011). The
quality of some of the key variables is not ideal. Details on data construction and quality issues are
provided in the Online Appendix.
    In Table I we compare the average mean county characteristics in 1930 (i.e. before the start of
the program) for TVA counties (column 1), all non-TVA counties (column 2), and non-TVA counties
in the South (column 3). Based on 1930 levels, TVA counties appear to have had worse economic
outcomes than other U.S. counties and other Southern counties. In particular, in 1930 the economies
of TVA counties were significantly more dependent on agriculture and had a significantly smaller
manufacturing base, as measured by the share of workers in the two sectors. Manufacturing wages,
housing values and agricultural land values were all lower, pointing to lower local productivity. TVA
counties also tended to be less urbanized, had lower literacy rates and, in contrast with the rest
of the country, had virtually no foreign immigrants. The lower fraction of households with a radio
likely reflects both the lower local income level and the lack of electricity. TVA counties had a
higher fraction of white residents than the rest of the South. The lower panel of Table I reports the
average 10-year percentage changes between 1920 and 1930 for our covariates and suggests that the
TVA region also exhibited somewhat different trends over the 1920s than the rest of the country.
    Overall, Table I confirms that the Tennessee Valley was, at the time of the Authority’s inception,
an economically lagging region, both relative to the rest of the nation and, to a lesser extent, the
South. This backwardness in levels coincides with some trend differences consistent with simple
models of regional convergence (e.g. Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 1991). In particular, the TVA region
exhibited greater growth in manufacturing share than the rest of the country accompanied by a
faster rate of retrenchment in agriculture, issues which we are careful to address in the next section’s
empirical evaluation of TVA’s long run impact.

II.C.     Proposed Authorities
    From the beginning, TVA was supposed to be the first of many regional Authorities. In a
1933 message to Congress urging passage of the Tennessee Valley Authority legislation, President
Roosevelt stated that: “If we are successful here we can march on, step by step, in a like development
of other great natural territorial units within our borders.” In the next few years, reports of the
alleged success of the TVA moved many members of Congress and regional leaders – especially
Senator George W. Norris of Nebraska – to support the creation of additional Authorities in other
parts of the United States. This effort culminated in the introduction by Senator Morris on June
3, 1937 of a Senate bill that envisioned the creation of seven new Authorities, one for each region
of the country.
    At the time, the bill was considered likely to pass.5 But a split within the FDR administration
on the exact nature of the power to be granted to the Authorities led to delays, postponements
and the ultimate failure of the bill.6 The push for new authorities, suspended by the onset of
   5
      In his detailed account of the events, Leuchtenburg (1952) notes that “throughout the spring of 1937, newspaper
dispatches left little reason to conclude anything but that Roosevelt and Norris were one in attempting to extend the
TVA pattern to several other regions” and that Congress appeared generally supportive.
   6
     Specifically, Leuchtenburg (1952) reports that Agriculture Secretary Henry Wallace and War Secretary Harry
Woodring objected to the plan. Wallace and Woodring told Roosevelt that they would approve of regional planning
authorities only if they were limited to a planning role. In addition, planners in Roosevelt’s advisory National
Resources Committee opposed features of the Norris bill that conflicted with their own proposals, which they never
introduced as legislation. Power companies and Senator Copeland of New York opposed power production by valley


                                                         6
World War II, gathered new momentum towards the end of the war. In 1945, ten bills proposing
the establishment of “valley authorities” comparable to the Tennessee Valley Authority were before
Congress. Contemporary accounts suggest that approval was again considered likely.7 But none of
the bills mustered enough support for final approval and they were ultimately dropped.
    In our empirical analysis, we use these failed attempts to create additional Authorities to con-
struct a set of counterfactual regions. These authorities offer a credible counterfactual because
they were modeled on TVA, and were therefore likely to be economically similar by design. The
proposed authorities had a reasonable ex-ante chance of getting implemented but ultimately failed
due to largely exogenous political reasons. Thus, economic changes in these regions may be infor-
mative of the changes that might have occurred to the TVA regional economy had TVA not been
implemented.
    A limitation is that while the proposed legislation identified the general geographical scope of the
regional authorities, it did not specify exactly which counties were going to belong to each authority.
This requires us to make some assumptions on their exact geographical definition. We end up using
six Authorities: an Atlantic Seaboard Authority, a Great Lakes-Ohio Valley Authority, Missouri
Valley Authority, Arkansas Valley Authority, Columbia Authority, and a Western authority. They
include 828 counties in 25 states. In the Online Appendix, we provide details on the algorithm used
to impute their borders and a map of the regions.
    Column 4 in Table I presents summary statistics for counties belonging to the proposed authori-
ties. Since the proposed authorities were chosen with criteria similar to TVA, they have pre-program
characteristics generally closer to the TVA counties than the average U.S. county. Among the key
variables of interest, a comparison of columns 1 and 4 reveals that 7.5% and 7.7% of workers are
employed in manufacturing in 1930 in the proposed authorities and in the TVA region, respectively.
The corresponding figure for the average U.S. county outside the TVA region is significantly higher
at 9%. In the case of agricultural employment share, the means in TVA, proposed authorities, and
the non-TVA U.S. are 61%, 51% and 45%, respectively. More importantly, the change over time
in the manufacturing share between 1920 and 1930 in the proposed authorities and in the TVA is
respectively -.010% and -018%, vs. a nationwide change of -0.035%. However, trends in population,
employment, and housing units in the counterfactual authorities differ somewhat from trends in the
TVA.


III.     The Effects of the TVA on the Local Economy

    The literature evaluating the effects of place based economic development policies has typically
focused on credibly identifying short run effects on job creation and investment. Establishing that
subsidies which target an area raise contemporaneous employment is a useful first step. However,
the contemporaneous effects of these policies are likely to provide an incomplete assessment of the
costs and benefits of such an intervention. Our interests center on estimating the long run effects
authorities. Roosevelt asked his staff to redraft Norris’s bill with the watered-down planning features that Wallace and
Woodring had suggested. Senator Joseph J. Mansfield, chair of the House Rivers and Harbors Committee, introduced
a competing watered down bill with a different set of provisions. Ultimately, the Norris bill and the Mansfield bills
failed to overcome opposition.
    7
      For example, Clark (1946) observes that “it seems almost a certainty that within a few years the regional authority
idea which has received so much publicity as a result of the success of the TVA will be given further impetus by the
enactment of additional valley authority laws.”


                                                           7
of the TVA. In particular, we wish to learn what happened to the TVA regional economy after the
federal subsidies associated with the program lapsed.
    The existing evidence on the long run effects of location based policies is scant, which may be
one of the reasons why such programs tend to be so controversial. Critics argue that these policies
are a waste of public money, while officials of localities that receive transfers are often supportive.
In 1984, the influential urban thinker Jane Jacobs published a scathing critique of the Authority
– and, by extension, of many similar programs – with an unambiguous title: “Why TVA Failed.”
However, systematic empirical evidence on the long run effects of the TVA program on economic
activity is limited.

III.A.     Econometric Model
     To identify the long run effect of TVA on local economies, we compare the economic performance
of TVA counties with the performance of counties with similar pre-program characteristics located:
(i) in the rest of the country; (ii) in the rest of the South; (iii) in the proposed Authorities. We control
for pre-program differences between TVA counties and controls using Oaxaca-Blinder regressions.
That is, we first fit regression models to the non-TVA counties of the form:
                                     yit − yit−1 = α + βXi + (it − it−1 )                                       (1)
where yit − yit−1 is the change in the relevant dependent variable between year t − 1 and t for
county i and Xi is a vector of preprogram characteristics. We then use the vector β̂ of estimated
coefficients to predict the counterfactual mean for the treated counties. Our vector of covariates
includes a rich set of 38 economic, social, demographic and geographical variables measured in 1930
and in 1920.8 These covariates control not only for differences in levels between TVA and non-TVA
counties before the program, but also for differences in trends. Because it is possible that counties
outside but near TVA are directly affected by the program, we drop from the sample all non-TVA
counties that border the TVA region.9
    The Oaxaca-Blinder regression has the advantage over standard regression methods of identifying
the average treatment effect on treated counties in the presence of treatment effect heterogeneity.10
Another appealing characteristic is its dual interpretation as a propensity score reweighting estima-
tor (Kline, 2011). Each control county is implicitly assigned a weight in providing an estimate of
the counterfactual TVA mean: counties that look more similar to TVA counties in the years before
TVA receive more weight. This weight is proportional to an estimate of the odds of treatment. The
weights generated by a Oaxaca regression in the set of all non-TVA counties satisfying our selec-
tion criteria are depicted in Figure III. The map indicates that in generating a counterfactual, our
   8
      In particular, controls incude a quadratic in 1920 and 1930 log population and interactions; 1920 and 1930 urban
share; 1920 and 1930 log employment; a quadratic in 1920 and 1930 agricultural employment share; a quadratic in
1920 and 1930 manufacturing employment share; 1920 and 1930 log wages in manufacturing; 1920 and 1930 log wages
in trade (retail + wholesale); dummies for 1920 and 1930 wages in manufacturing or trade being missing; 1920 and
1930 farm values, owner occupied housing values and rental rates; a quadratic in 1920 and 1930 white share; the
share of the population age 5+ that are illiterate in 1920 and 1930; the 1920 and 1930 share of whites who are foreign
born; the 1930 share of households with a radio; the 1930 unemployment rate, maximum elevation, and elevation
range (to capture mountainous terrain).
   9
     In principle, this spillover could be positive or negative. On the one hand, border counties may benefit from
higher demand for labor because of demand leakages from infrastructure construction inside TVA. On the other hand,
border counties may experience a decline in labor demand if the program induces firms that would have located there
to locate in the TVA region instead.
  10
     In practice, standard regression models yield similar results.


                                                          8
estimates place more weight on Southern counties, which tend to be substantially more comparable
to TVA counties in terms of their pre-intervention characteristics.
    When comparing TVA to the rest of the country and the South, we further increase comparability
of TVA and control counties by dropping from our models control counties which, based on their
pre-program characteristics, appear to be substantially different from TVA counties (see Angrist
and Pischke, 2008 for a similar exercise). In practice, we estimate a logit model of the probability of
being included in the TVA service area based on the aforementioned vector of regressors. We drop
from the analysis all non-TVA counties with a predicted probability of treatment in the bottom 25
percent. This criterion leads us to drop 584 non-TVA counties (25% of the total–by construction),
16 of which are located in the South (2% of the Southern total). Appendix Figure A1 provides a map
of counties in our trimmed estimation sample.11 Columns 5 and 6 in Table I show the unconditional
averages in the trimmed estimation sample. While the exclusion of counties with low probability of
treatment reduces some of the differences with TVA counties, other important differences remain,
both in levels and trends. When comparing TVA to the failed authorities, we do not drop counties
with low propensity scores because we want this identification strategy to be based only on the
historical accident of the failed authorities.
    An important concern in estimating equation 1 is that the residual is likely to spatially corre-
lated. We deal with this possibility by presenting two sets of standard errors. First, we compute
standard errors clustered by state. These variance estimates allow for unrestricted spatial corre-
lation across counties within each state, but assume no correlation across states. Second, we use
a spatial Heteroscedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent (HAC) variance estimator based upon
the method of Conley (1999), which allows for correlation between counties that are geographically
close but belong to different states.
    Of course, the TVA was not the only spatially biased intervention occurring over our sample
period. Since the 1930’s, the federal government has adopted a wealth of policies that affect the
geography of economic activity. This is obviously true of explicitly location based policies like
Empowerment Zones (Busso, Gregory, and Kline, 2013) but also of other federal interventions that
affect local labor demand, like the construction of the federal highway system (Michaels, 2008) or
military expenditures (Blanchard and Katz, 1992). More generally a variety of government policies
may have had uneven geographic impacts including federal taxation (Albouy, 2009), environmental
regulation (Chay and Greenstone, 2003, 2005) or labor regulation (the Taft-Hartley Act, for example,
effectively allowed Southern states to become right-to-work states). Thus, our estimates are to be
interpreted as the impact of the TVA on the TVA region, allowing for the potentially endogenous
response of other federal and local policies that might have occurred over the time period in question.

III.B.       Placebo Test
    In order to evaluate the effectiveness of our controls in matching the pre-treatment growth pat-
terns of the TVA region, Table II shows the results of a placebo analysis, where we estimate the
“effect” of the TVA on 1900-1940 changes in population, employment, housing units, manufacturing
wages, industry structure and agricultural land values. This false experiment tests whether, con-
ditional on controls, our outcome variables are trending differently in TVA counties and non-TVA
counties in the decades leading up to the policy intervention. Because the period 1900-1940 is
temporally prior to the TVA treatment, the finding of significant differences between TVA counties
 11
      All appendix figures and tables can be found in the Online Appendix.



                                                         9
and controls would be evidence of selection bias.12
    Column 1 shows the unconditional difference between TVA counties and non-TVA counties,
while column 3 shows the difference conditioning on our vector of controls. Columns 2 and 4
report standard errors clustered by state. Column 5 reports standard errors obtained from a spatial
Heteroscedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent (HAC) variance estimator (Conley, 1999), where
we use a bandwidth of 200 miles. Throughout the paper, we report decadalized growth rates to aid
comparability across tables. In Table II, for example, the 1900-1940 changes are divided by four.
Thus, entries are to be interpreted as average differences in 10-year growth rates experienced by
TVA counties relative to non-TVA counties in the four decades between 1900 and 1940.
    A comparison of Columns 1 and 3 in panel A highlights the importance of our controls in the
sample of all U.S. counties. Column 1 indicates that while trends in population, employment,
housing units and manufacturing wages are similar in TVA and non-TVA counties, statistically
different trends are present in manufacturing and agricultural share and the value of agricultural
land. Though they are statistically significant, the differential trends in manufacturing and agricul-
tural share are relatively small. The trend in agricultural land values however is quite large. These
differences may be evidence that, in the absence of treatment, TVA counties would have caught up
with the rest of the country, at least along some dimensions. However, column 3 shows that, after
conditioning on 1920 and 1930 covariates, all of these differences become statistically indistinguish-
able from zero. Notably, this is due to the point estimates shrinking substantially rather than an
increase in the standard errors.
    Panel B reports analogous figures for the sample of Southern counties. In this panel, we focus on
spatial HAC standard errors because state clustered standard errors are unlikely to be valid when
considering just one region of the country. In this case, both the unconditional differences and the
conditional differences are statistically indistinguishable from zero. Thus, even before controlling
for any covariates, the economic and demographic trends in TVA counties are not different from
the rest of the South. This suggests that Southern counties may represent a good counterfactual
for the TVA region.
    Panel C presents the result of a placebo experiment based on the proposed authorities. Only the
change in agricultural land values appears to be statistically different before conditioning (column
1). Like for panel A, the difference in land value trends is economically very large. However,
the difference becomes considerably smaller and statistically insignificant after conditioning on our
controls (column 3).
    Overall, we interpret the evidence in Table II as broadly supportive of the notion that our
controls capture the bulk of the selectivity biases associated with a comparison of TVA to non-TVA
counties. In the case of the South, TVA counties seems comparable even before conditioning on our
controls.
    Of course, the tests in Tables II are based on features of local economies that we can observe.
They cannot tell us whether there are unobserved features of the TVA region that differ from
our comparison groups. Thus we can not completely rule out the possibility that TVA counties
experienced unique unobserved shocks between 1940 and 2000. However, we think it unlikely that
the three sets of comparison groups (the U.S., the South, and the proposed authorities) would suffer
from identical selection biases. Hence, we focus on conclusions that appear robust across the three
  12
    All our controls are measured in 1920 and 1930. We focus on the 1900-1940 change in order to avoid the possibility
of a spurious mechanical correlation between the regressors and outcomes due to measurement error. As we argued
before, the vast majority of the federal investment took place after 1940.



                                                         10
sets of controls.

III.C.     Estimates of the Local Effects of the TVA
    Long Run Estimates. Panel A in Table III provides estimates of the effect of TVA on long run
growth rates, using all U.S. counties as a comparison group. Column 1 reports the unconditional
difference between TVA counties and non-TVA counties in the 1940-2000 decadalized change in
the relevant outcome. Column 3, our preferred specification, shows the corresponding conditional
difference. As was the case in Table II, the substantial differences between our unconditional and
conditional estimates illustrate the importance of controlling for pre-treatment characteristics in the
entire U.S. sample. The TVA region appears to have been poised for greater growth, along several
dimensions, even in the absence of the program. Many of these effects, however, are eliminated by
our covariate adjustments.
    After conditioning, the most pronounced effects of the TVA appear to be on the sectoral mix
of employment. TVA is associated with a sharp shift away from agriculture toward manufactur-
ing. Specifically, column 3 in Panel A indicates that the 1940-2000 growth rate of agricultural
employment was significantly smaller and the growth rate of manufacturing employment was signif-
icantly larger in TVA counties than non-TVA counties. These estimated impacts on growth rates
are economically large, amounting to −5.6% and 5.9% per decade, respectively.
    Perhaps surprisingly, manufacturing wages do not respond significantly to the TVA intervention.
These small wage effects suggest that, in the long run, workers are quite mobile across sectors and
space, allowing the employment mix to change without large corresponding changes in the price of
labor. Similarly, the lack of an effect on housing prices may reflect the lack of supply constraints.
The estimated effect on median family income (available only since 1950) is statistically insignificant,
but quantitatively sizable.
    Panel B provides estimates of the effect of TVA on long run growth rates, using only Southern
counties as a comparison group. Consistent with the findings in panel B in Table II, we find evidence
that selection is less of a concern in this sample, as our conditional and unconditional estimates are
more similar. Reassuringly, many of the estimated impacts in column 3 are similar to those in the
corresponding column of Panel A in Table III. The estimated impact on agricultural employment
and manufacturing employment are -0.51 and .063, respectively. Unlike Panel A in Table III,
however, the effect on family income is statistically significant at conventional levels, while the
effect on agricultural employment falls to marginal significance and that on manufacturing wages
to statistical (and economic) insignificance.
    Panel C provides estimates of the effect of TVA on long run growth rates using proposed author-
ities as a comparison group.13 The conditional estimates in column 3 appear to be similar to the
ones in Panel A and, especially, the ones in Panel B. The estimated impact on agricultural employ-
ment is -0.071, while the estimated impact on manufacturing employment is 0.053. Like in Panel
B, median family income in the TVA region appears to increase faster than in the counterfactual
areas.
    In general, results based on a comparison of TVA with the rest of the U.S., the rest of the South,
and the proposed authorities all yield a consistent picture. The strongest effect of the program was
on jobs in agriculture and manufacturing. There is little evidence that local prices, particularly
  13
    Like for the models that include only Southern counties, we rely on a HAC variance estimator for inference due
to the limited number of states in this sample.



                                                       11
manufacturing wages and housing prices, changed significantly. But median family income seems
to have improved, driven presumably by the replacement of agricultural jobs with better paying
manufacturing jobs.
    Data limitations prevent us from separately identifying the impact of each feature of the TVA
program. Kitchens (2011) provides some preliminary evidence on this question. Using archival data
on contracted electricity rates, he finds that residents of counties with a TVA electricity contract
faced electricity prices comparable to those elsewhere, although large manufacturing firms faced
lower rates. He also finds a limited effect of TVA electricity contracts on manufacturing value
added. These findings suggest that changes in the local electricity market may not solely account
for the program’s impacts that we uncover.14
    It is interesting to know what happened to the counties outside, but near, the TVA region.
On one hand, it is possible that the TVA led to some displacement of economic activity from
geographically proximate regions. On the other hand, it is possible that economic growth within
TVA spilled over into neighboring counties. In unreported results, we tried estimating the effects
of TVA on adjacent counties using the same models as in Table III. This exercise failed to detect
any significant spillover effects (see Table A1 in the Online Appendix).


    Estimates by Period. In Table IV, we present separate estimates for the period 1940-1960
and 1960-2000. Specifically, we estimate Oaxaca-Blinder models analogous to those in column 3
of Table III. We report estimates based on the comparison of TVA counties with all other U.S.
counties in columns 1 and 2; with Southern counties in columns 3 and 4; and with counties in
proposed authorities in columns 5 and 6.
    Recall that 1940-1960 is the period of maximum generosity of the federal subsidies to TVA.
In this period, the TVA region experienced a major increase in transportation infrastructure and
electricity supply relative to the rest of the country, paid for by federal funds. By contrast, the four
decades after Congress makes TVA financially self-sustaining in 1959 are characterized by limited
federal transfers to TVA.
    Empirically, the differences between the two periods are striking. In the earlier period the 10-year
growth rate of employment in both agriculture and manufacturing is 10.6 - 11.9 percentage points
larger in the TVA region than in the rest of the U.S. and the rest of the South. When estimated
relative to the proposed authorities, these figures are 11.9 and 9.7 percentage points respectively.
These are remarkably large employment effects, probably explained by an increase in labor demand
due to the rapid electrification of the region and the addition of new transportation infrastructure.
The impacts on growth rates of population and farm land values also appear substantial, however
the estimates are very imprecise and preclude definitive conclusions. The value of farm production
increases significantly.
    In the later period the estimated impacts on manufacturing and agricultural employment are
quite different. Consistent with the end of federal investment, and the lack of important agglomer-
  14
     Our paper and Kitchens’ paper seek to answer different questions. Kitchens’ models include state by year
dummies and use an instrumental variable based on distance to TVA dams to identify program effects. Identification
comes from the comparison of counties near TVA dams with other counties within the same state and year that are
further away from the dam. Therefore, Kitchens’ approach aims to estimate the heterogeneity in the TVA treatment
effect resulting from the supply of electricity. By contrast, our approach compares the entire TVA region with other
areas and seeks to estimate the overall effect of the TVA program on the regional economy, abstracting from the
heterogeneity of the effect within the region and irrespective of the specific channel.



                                                        12
ation economies, employment growth in agriculture falls behind, reversing the gains of the previous
period. Estimates range between -13 and -16 percentage points, depending on the comparison group.
    By contrast, even after the cessation of federal outlays, manufacturing employment keeps growing
significantly faster in TVA counties (although less fast than in the early period). Estimates that use
as a comparison group the entire U.S., the South or the proposed authorities, are 3.3, 3.5 and 3.2
percentage points, respectively. We see little evidence of an impact on population or agricultural
land values during this period.

III.D.     Discussion
    Comparisons of TVA counties against our three control groups yield a picture that is qualita-
tively and quantitatively very similar. In 1930, the counties of the TVA service area were largely
agricultural and their share of manufacturing was significantly lower than the corresponding share
in non-TVA counties. The reduced-form evidence indicates that the Authority deeply affected the
local economy of treated counties by dramatically accelerating the pace of industrialization, shifting
employment out of agriculture and into manufacturing over and above the trends experienced by
similar counties outside TVA.
    This was accomplished with limited long run impact on local wage rates. Lack of significant wage
effects points to a large supply of potential workers capable of moving to the local manufacturing
sector from outside the TVA region, the local agricultural sector or the local home sector. The
effect on housing values and agricultural land prices also appears to be rather modest. This is
consistent with an elastic supply of housing and land – certainly plausible in a region traditionally
characterized by limited legal and political constraints to development and very permissive land use
regulations.
    Importantly, our analysis uncovered a striking degree of temporal heterogeneity in this employ-
ment response. Over the period 1940-1960 – when TVA enjoyed large federal transfers – we find a
sharp increase both in manufacturing and agricultural employment. While over the period 1960-2000
– when the TVA subsidies were scaled back – we find a retrenchment in agriculture. Manufacturing
employment, by contrast, continued to grow even after the end of federal investment.
    Of course, the TVA dams and public infrastructure did not disappear when transfers to the
region stopped. Rather, the value of these investments gradually depreciated. Our finding that
agricultural employment growth collapses after 1960 is consistent with the notion that, without
maintenance, the infrastructure put in place between 1930 and 1959 would have fully depreciated
by 2000.15 In practice, of course, the TVA infrastructure was not allowed to fully depreciate. But
from 1959 onwards maintenance of the TVA capital stock was paid for by local taxpayers and local
users of electricity.
    The resilience of manufacturing employment in the face of this depreciation of the initial capital
infusion indicates that firms in the region enjoyed a competitive advantage even after the subsidies
lapsed. This is suggestive of agglomeration effects in manufacturing of the type documented by
Greenstone, Hornbeck and Moretti (2010). By contrast, the retrenchment of the agricultural sector
after 1960 suggests agglomeration effects in agriculture are limited, a view consistent with recent
evidence by Hornbeck and Naidu (2012) who conclude that “agricultural production does not appear
to generate local economic spillovers.” Because the manufacturing sector paid higher wages than
  15
    We find this degree of depreciation reasonable. In fact, it is not inconsistent with the rate of depreciation for
roads, dams and other public capital estimated by engineers and actually used by planners and governmental agencies
in the South, which is often around 5%. See for example, Mississippi State Auditor (2002).


                                                         13
agriculture, these sectoral shifts raised aggregate income in the TVA region for an extended period
of time.


IV.      A Framework to Evaluate the Effect of TVA on the National
         Economy
    While the evidence provided in the previous section indicates that the TVA program generated
benefits for its service region, its aggregate impact is unclear. A key concern with place based
policies is that they may simply reallocate economic activity across space without raising national
income. Lack of knowledge of their aggregate impact precludes any assessment of whether these
policies are effcient from the point of view of the nation.
    We now turn to estimates of the effect of the TVA program on the entire U.S. national economy.
Doing so requires adopting a different methodology than the previous section, as we cannot find
a suitable control group to serve as an estimate of the counterfactual for the entire U.S. economy
in the absence of the TVA. Like other researchers seeking to identify general equilibrium impacts
(Donaldson, 2012; Donaldson and Hornbeck, 2012; Ahlfeldt et al., 2012), we need to impose some
structure on the data. In the following two sections, we lay the groundwork for a structured cost-
benefit analysis of the TVA’s national labor market impacts. Our framework is sufficiently general
that it can easily be adapted to other place based policies.
    In this Section, we develop a simple spatial equilibrium model that can rationalize the reduced
form impacts of the TVA uncovered thus far. Our model allows the TVA to affect labor productivity
in two ways. First, the TVA may directly raise labor productivity via public infrastructure invest-
ments. Second, it may indirectly raise labor productivity due to agglomeration economies. The
magnitude of this second effect hinges on the exact form of the agglomeration economies (Glaeser
and Gottlieb, 2008). Using the model, we derive the conditions under which endogenous reallocation
of manufacturing activity can raise aggregate output through agglomeration effects. In the next
Section, we take the model to the data, estimate its key structural parameters and use them to
compute the economic rate of return on the TVA federal investment.

IV.A.      Model
    We model U.S. counties as small open economies with price taking behavior on capital, labor,
and output markets. Heterogeneity in county level outcomes results from three fundamental sources:
amenity differences, unobserved locational productivity advantages, and endogenous agglomeration
externalities. Capital and labor are assumed to be perfectly mobile across counties at decadal
frequencies. This assumption is in keeping with evidence from Blanchard and Katz (1992) who find
that labor and capital adjustment to local shocks completes within a decade. Likewise, workers are
assumed to possess homogenous tastes as in the classic model of Roback (1982).16 The mobility
and homogeneity assumptions imply that utility, which we model as a Cobb-Douglas function of
  16
     The homogeneity assumption is a strong one and, in many cases, would not be appropriate for modeling place
based policies as argued by Kline (2010) and Moretti (2011). We employ it here because our focus is on long run
changes – so that the process of regional adjustment may in fact span generations – and, especially, because we found
little empirical evidence of wage impacts in our evaluation despite large effects on manufacturing employment. As in
Roback, we additionally assume that the amount of labor supplied by each worker is fixed.




                                                         14
wages wit and amenity levels Mit , is equalized across counties in each year. Hence we have that:

                                          ln wit + Mit = ut                                        (2)

where the reservation utility level ut varies only across years. As detailed in section V.E., ut is an
equilibrium object, determined by aggregate supply and demand in the national labor market.
    Manufacturing output (Yit ) is produced in each county using capital, labor, and a fixed factor
via a Cobb-Douglas production technology,

                                       Yit = Ait Kitα Fiβ L1−α−β
                                                           it

where Ait is a local productivity level, Lit is the number of manufacturing workers, Kit is the local
capital stock, and Fi is a fixed factor leading the derived demand for labor to slope down each
period.
    Normalizing the price of manufacturing output (which is assumed to be sold on global markets)
to 1, price taking behavior on the part of firms implies the usual first order conditions and the
following inverse labor demand curve:
                                 β            β           α           1
                 ln wit = C −       ln Lit +     ln Fi −     ln rt +     ln Ait                    (3)
                                1−α          1−α         1−α         1−α
                                                                           α
where rt is the (natiomnwide) price of capital and C ≡ ln (1 − α − β) + 1−α  ln α.
    Consistent with much of the growth and urban economics literature on agglomeration economies,
we assume that the productivity of firms in a county depends upon both fixed locational funda-
mentals and endogenous agglomeration effects. Specifically, we assume that the log productivity
level (ln Ait ) may be decomposed into a locational advantage component, a component due to
agglomeration effects, an effect of TVA, and an idiosyncratic component as follows:
                                                
                                           Lit−1
                              ln Ait = g           + δt Di + ηi + γt + εit                   (4)
                                            Ri
where Di is a dummy for whether a county is exposed to TVA and δt is a measure of the direct effect
of TVA investments on local productivity in year t. This specification offers a deliberately simplified
representation of how TVA investment in local infrastructure –new roads, canals and electricity –
increase productive in manufacturing. (An alternative would be a model where transportation
infrastructure and electricity explicitly enter the production function and TVA investment increases
their supply. This model would be notationally more complicated but yield identical results.) The
fixed effect ηi captures the time invariant suitability of the county for manufacturing due to, for
example, proximity to a body of water. Heterogeneity in this factor leads manufacturing steady
states to differ across counties based upon locational fundamentals. The decade effect γt captures
national changes in productivity common to all counties. The error εit represents the idiosyncratic
component of county productivity. Following Blanchard and Katz (1992), who study the persistence
of local employment changes, we assume εit contains a unit root, so that:

                                           εit = εit−1 + ξit                                       (5)

where ξit , which may itself be serially or spatially correlated, represents unobserved shocks to
productivity. Such shocks could include unobserved changes in local infrastructure, shifts in the
preferences of consumers, changes in the regulatory environment, or technological innovations.

                                                  15
                      
    The term g Lit−1Ri    captures the local agglomeration effects of manufacturing activity. The
variable Ri is the square mileage of the county. Hence, we assume agglomeration effects vary as a
function of the density of manufacturing employment per square mile and operate with a decade
lag. As discussed in a similar context by Adsera and Ray (1998), allowing the agglomeration effect
to operate with a lag, no matter how short, ensures that the model yields deterministic predictions
each period. This determinism is desirable as it rules out implausible situations where a county
could take on, in any given period, wildly different levels of manufacturing activity by chance (see
Krugman, 1991; Matsuyama, 1991 for further discussion).
    In our model, agglomeration forces drive the persistent local impacts of the TVA on productiv-
ity and manufacturing employment. This is in contrast to much of the big push literature which
has traditionally focused on models with demand externalities, whereby income growth in an area
causes increases in the demand for local goods and services and stimulates entry of firms with better
technologies, ultimately resulting in higher aggregate productivity (Rosenstein-Rodan, 1943; Mur-
phy, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1989). Such models are better suited to explaining productivity growth
in the local non-traded sector than the manufacturing sector whose demand is arguably national in
scope. Explanations for agglomeration economies that are relevant to our context are technological
externalities that may arise through social interactions and learning (Glaeser et al., 1992) or through
thick market effects either in the labor market or the intermediate input market (Moretti, 2011).17
Our choice to allow agglomeration to operate through the density of manufacturing employment
per square mile is consistent with both types of technological externalities. Distinguishing between
these two type of externalities is behind the scope of this paper.

IV.B.      The Effect of TVA on Aggregate Output
    Our model allows for both direct and indirect effects of TVA on national output. The direct
effects operate through the impact of TVA’s public infrastructure on local productivity as captured
by the δt coefficients. The indirect effects of TVA operate through the agglomeration channel, as
increases in employment may feed back into further increases in productivity.
    To study these effects in more detail it is useful to consider the properties of the model’s deter-
ministic steady state. We write steady state productivity as:
                                                 
                                                  Li
                                    ln Ai = g          + ηi + δDi .                                 (6)
                                                 Ri
Likewise, steady state output can be written:

                    α          1−α−β                β             α           1
             ln Yi =    ln α +            ln Li +        ln Fi −     ln r +       ln Ai .
                  1−α             1−α             1−α            1−α        1−α
The impact of a marginal increase in the productivity of TVA’s investments on the output of county
i is:

                                                                          
                                dYi          1          1 − α − β + σi dLi
                                       =        Yi Di +                      ,
                                dδ          1−α               Li       dδ
  17
    In principle, input-output linkages may further increase the effect of technological externalities, but in the absence
of agglomeration economies of some type they would not generate persistent effects.



                                                           16
                                           
                d ln
                    Ai               Li       Li
where σi ≡           L      = g0       Ri       Ri   is the local agglomeration elasticity (i.e. the elasticity of county
              d ln Ri
                     i
productivity with respect to manufacturing density). Note      that σi , may vary across counties de-
                                                            Li
pending on the shape of the agglomeration function g Ri and the density of local manufacturing
employment.
    Thus, a scaling up of TVA has two effects. First, a direct effect, which is to raise output in
                     1
affected areas by 1−α   percent.18 Second, an indirect effect that operates through endogenous labor
adjustment. This indirect effect has two components. Adding manufacturing workers mechanically
raises output
           by an amount proportional to labor’s share and average labor productivity in the
county LYii . It also raises output through agglomeration, as represented by the agglomeration
elasticity σi .
    This result is useful because it allows us to better understand the aggregate impact of place based
policies, and TVA in particular. Summing across all counties, we obtain the nationwide impact of
TVA on U.S. output. It is straightforward to see that the direct effect of TVA on nation-wide
manufacturing output is unambiguously positive. Intuitively, an exogenous increase in productive
infrastructure paid for by the federal government can only raise total output in the sector.19 By
contrast, the indirect effect due to labor reallocation is ambiguous and depends on whether the
agglomeration benefits in the counties that gains workers outweigh the costs in counties that lose
workers. More precisely, endogenous reallocation of a worker from county i to county j raises
aggregate output if and only if:

                                        Yi                     Yj
                                           (1 − α − β + σi ) <    (1 − α − β + σj ) ,
                                        Li                     Lj
which depends upon the average labor productivity and agglomeration elasticity in each county.
    Consider first the special case when amenities are equal across the two communities, in which
case wages must also be equal. In our setting, equal wages imply equal average labor productivity.
Hence, reallocation from county i to j raises output only when the agglomeration elasticity is greater
in community j. When the agglomeration elasticities are everywhere equal (σi = σ), spatially
reallocating labor has no aggregate effects. Intuitively, a constant elasticity implies that the benefits
in the counties that gain workers are identical to the costs in the counties that lose workers.
    When the agglomeration elasticity is constant but amenity levels differ across communities,
aggregate output can be raised by moving workers to lower amenity areas where wages (and hence
average labor productivity) are higher. However, this comes at a utility cost to workers who must
make do with worse amenities. One can show that this utility cost perfectly offsets the value of any
increases in aggregate output.20 Thus, although agglomeration economies generate market failures
at the local level, these inefficiencies may “cancel out” in the aggregate if agglomeration elasticities
are constant. A similar point was made by Glaeser and Gottleib (2008) in a static model of spatial
equilibrium with agglomeration.
    To preview our results, our empirical analysis in section V. will point to a constant agglomeration
elasticity. Because we care about national welfare rather than output per se, this finding casts
  18
     The productivity-output elasticity is greater than one because capital adjustment augments a productivity change.
When capital’s share is zero, the elasticity becomes 1.
  19
     Of course, we have ignored the issue of how the federal funds were raised, a concern to which we will return
below.
  20
                                           that when σi = σ, the decentralized allocation of workers across communities
     More precisely, it is possible to showP
maximizes aggregate utility, defined as i Li (ln wi + Mi ). We provide a local version of this result in section V.E..


                                                                   17
doubt on the efficiency rationale for government policies aimed at shifting the spatial distribution
of economic activity.

IV.C.      Dynamic Behavior
    Figure IV contrasts a hypothetical county’s dynamic behavior when the agglomeration elasticity
is constant with its behavior when the elasticity is not constant. Specifically, Figure IVa depicts
the case where g (.) is log-linear – so that σi is the same in all counties – while Figure IVb depicts
the case where g (.) is substantially nonlinear in logs – so that σi varies significantly across counties
depending upon the local manufacturing density.
    Consider first Figure IVa. Our assumption of perfect labor mobility yields a horizontal county
labor supply locus at the going wage w. The SR curve depicts the standard short run inverse
                                                                                         β
demand curve given in (3), when Ait is taken as given. This curve has slope − 1−α           equal to the
inverse of the short run elasticity of labor demand. The slope is negative because of the fixed factor
Fi . The long run inverse demand curve LR incorporates the agglomeration effects of changes in
local manufacturing activity given in (4). The LR curve is flatter than the SR curve because the
agglomeration economies dampen the effects of the fixed factor on labor productivity.
    The first panel depicts the initial equilibrium: the intersection of the LR curve with the horizontal
labor supply curve determines the steady state level of manufacturing employment which, in this
setting, is unique.21 The second panel shows what happens with the introduction of TVA. Because
the new infrastructure makes firms in TVA more productive, the new LR curve is to the right of the
initial LR curve. Specifically, the Authority shifts both the SR and LR curves up by an amount δt ,
which motivates a series of employment increases as manufacturing employment converges towards
its new steady state. The one period lag in agglomeration yields geometric adjustment to the
steady state, depicted in the final panel of Figure IVa. Hence, the model exhibits conditional
convergence of the sort found in traditional growth models (Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 2004), albeit
due to agglomeration forces rather than capital adjustment.22
    In this setting, a constant agglomeration elasticity has two implications. First, there can be
no aggregate effect of TVA on manufacturing productivity other than through the direct effects of
the TVA infrastructure. As argued above, the productivity gains to this region associated with the
additional workers must equal the losses in the counties from which those workers came.
    Second, given positive depreciation, the TVA can have only temporary effects on employment.
Once the direct productivity effects of TVA lapse, the LR curve slowly reverts back to its original
position as the initial infrastructure investment depreciates (the δt coefficients go negative) and the
employment gains are gradually reversed.
    Contrast this setting with Figure IVb. Here g (.) exhibits strong threshold effects so that produc-
tivity increases rapidly once the sector reaches some critical level of density but begins to decrease
afterward due to the presence of the fixed factor.
    Two key differences emerge here relative to the log-linear case. First, and most importantly
for our purposes, the influx of workers to the TVA region can have a positive effect on aggregate
productivity. Due to the nonlinearity, the productivity gains to the TVA region may be much larger
than the losses in the rest of the country. In fact, if workers come from developed regions on the
  21
     Note however that this “steady state” is in fact conditional on the idiosyncratic component of productivity εit .
Because εit contains a unit root, the intercept of the LR curve is itself non-stationary.
  22
     Convergence is conditional because each county may possess a different intercept for its LR demand curve based
upon locational fundamentals (ηi in our setting) and the current state of the idiosyncratic component εit .


                                                         18
downward sloping portion of the LR curve, productivity in those areas may actually rise as they
lose workers because outmigration alleviates crowding of the fixed factor.
    An important goal of our empirical analysis in the next section is to determine whether Figure
IVa or Figure IVb provides a better approximation to the dynamics of county growth. Uncovering
the shape of the function g (.) is critical to understanding whether place based policies like TVA
can be welfare improving for the U.S. as a whole.
    The second difference with the log-linear case is that now the program has long lasting effects,
even after the end of the federal investment. In Figure IVb, multiple steady state equilibria are
present, two of which are stable and one of which is an unstable tipping point. Consider the
prospects of a county stuck in the low employment “poverty trap.” If the direct productivity effects
of the TVA are sufficiently large for the tipping point depicted in the final panel of Figure IVb
to be crossed, manufacturing employment will fall within the basin of attraction of the developed
equilibrium.
    Recall that our estimates in Table IV in the previous section pointed to a long lasting effect
of TVA on manufacturing employment growth. We note that either form of agglomeration may
yield long lasting effects qualitatively consistent with the evidence uncovered in Table IV, since
even the log-linear model exhibits momentum due to the convergence process. Structural estimates
are necessary to determine whether truly permanent effects underlie the qualitative patterns of the
previous section or whether simple slow adjustment is at work.


V.     Structural Estimates and Cost Benefit Analysis
    We now use the model outlined in Section IV to estimate the effects of TVA on the U.S. econ-
omy and compare them to the program’s costs. Specifically, we develop an instrumental variables
approach to estimating the magnitude of the direct productivity effects of the TVA program and the
parameters governing the shape of the local agglomeration forces, which are important for quanti-
fying the indirect benefits of the program. These estimates are then used to conduct a quantitative
cost-benefit analysis of the TVA program.

V.A.     Estimating Equation
   A key object of interest in our model is the agglomeration function g (.). The shape of this
function is unknown with, to our knowledge, no compelling prior evidence on functional form. As
such, we approximate it with a three piece linear spline in manufacturing density:
                                                          3                      
                                          Lit               X                 Lit
                                  g           ;θ       =          θk gk                            (7)
                                          Ri                                  Ri
                                                            k=1

where the gk (.) are the spline basis functions. We consider two choices for these functions: In the
“levels” specification, g (.) is piecewise linear in the level of manufacturing density and the θk give
the proportional effect on manufacturing productivity of increasing manufacturing density by one
worker per square mile. In the “logs” specification, g (.) is piecewise log linear and the θk give the
elasticity of manufacturing productivity with respect to manufacturing density – that is, they give




                                                           19
the local agglomeration elasticity.23 Note that a constant agglomeration elasticity requires that g (.)
be concave in density levels and linear in logs.
    We introduce covariates into the model by assuming the productivity shocks ξit in (5) may be
written:
                                           ξit = Xi0 λ + νit ,
where Xi contains the vector of covariates used in our earlier reduced form analysis of TVA.
   With these additions, we can rewrite (3) in terms of the direct demand relationship to obtain
our key estimating equation:


                                                                 1−α                          δt − δt−1
                        ln (Lit ) − ln (Lit−1 ) = −                    (ln wit − ln wit−1 ) +           Di          (8)
                                                                   β                              β
                                                                  3                              
                                                                 X   θk        Lit−1           Lit−2
                                                               +         gk            − gk
                                                                     β          Ri              Ri
                                                                k=1
                                                               +Xi0 λ
                                                                    e    et − γ
                                                                        +γ    et−1 + νeit .

where we have removed county fixed effects by differencing over time and we use tilde’s over variables
to indicate they have been renormalized by β1 . The primary objects of interest are:
                              δt −δt−1
       • The coefficients         β         which give the change in the direct effects of TVA between decades;

       • The spline coefficients θβk which determine the indirect effects of the program since they give
         the labor demand effects of increasing manufacturing density within the relevant density range.
         We refer to θβ1 as the agglomeration effect at “low” density, θβ2 the effect at “medium” density,
         and θβ3 the effect at “high” density.

V.B.        Identification
    Estimation of (8) is challenging for several reasons. To see why, consider the response of a typical
U.S. county to a permanent increase in local manufacturing productivity brought on, say, by an
improvement in the local transportation infrastructure. With higher productivity, more manufac-
turing jobs will be created, thereby attracting more manufacturing workers. But if agglomeration
forces are important, this inflow will feed back into further increases in local productivity, thereby
  23
       More formally:
                                                     (
                                                         min {x, q1 }                                  if k = 1
                             gklevels (x)       ≡
                                                         min {x − qk−1 , qk − qk−1 } 1[x > qk−1 ]      if k > 1

                                            (
                                                min {ln x, ln q1 }                                       if k = 1
                           gklogs   (x) ≡
                                                min {ln x − ln qk−1 , ln qk − ln qk−1 } 1[x > qk−1 ]     if k > 1
where the qk ’s are the spline knots We choose q1 = 5.26, q2 = 15.28,q3 = ∞. The points q1 and q2 are knots
corresponding to the 60th and 85th percentiles of the 1980 distribution of county manufacturing density measured
in workers per square mile. These percentiles were chosen in order to yield approximately equal variation in the
first difference of each spline component over our sample period. For reference, the median county in our estimation
sample has a 1980 manufacturing density of approximately 3.8 (the corresponding figure for TVA counties is 7.1).


                                                                        20
generating more jobs and attracting even more workers. To isolate the strength of the agglomeration
channel then, one must be able to separate a county’s initial employment response to a shock from
the feedback effects of that response – the stronger the feedback, the stronger the agglomeration.
In addition, detecting nonlinearities in the agglomeration forces requires inferring whether these
feedback effects are stronger in underdeveloped counties than in counties with more established
manufacturing bases.
    Ideally, one would like to be able to investigate this question by randomly assigning manufac-
turing plants to counties and measuring how many additional workers are subsequently attracted
to areas awarded plants. Recent research by Greenstone, Hornbeck and Moretti (2010) attempts to
approximate such an experiment by examining the consequences of the siting decisions of million
dollar manufacturing plants. Though the authors find evidence of substantial agglomeration effects,
they lack the statistical power necessary to detect subtle nonlinearities of the sort necessary for
setting policy. Moreover, their study restricts attention to a small subset of U.S. counties that bid
for manufacturing plants.
    To address these shortcomings, we will analyze four decades worth of observational changes
in manufacturing employment in the baseline sample of U.S. counties considered in our earlier
analysis. The fundamental difficulty confronting such an exercise is that the shocks leading county
manufacturing to change in the first place may be persistent across decades, in which case we
may mistake the persistence of the shocks for the feedback effects of increases in manufacturing
density. Thus, we face the traditional econometric challenge of separating state dependence from
serial correlation in unobservables.
    More precisely, OLS estimation of (8) is problematic because νit may be serially correlated, which
would lead to bias in OLS estimates of the θ coefficients (Nickell, 1981; Arellano and Bond, 1991).
This bias emerges because a regression will attribute all of the serial correlation in employment
changes to state dependence (agglomeration) when some of it is actually the result of additional
shocks. If the νit are positively correlated any agglomeration effects will be overstated. If, on the
other hand, the shocks are negatively correlated, agglomeration effects will be understated. While
some interpretations of the distribution of city sizes (e.g., Gabaix, 1999; Eeckhout, 2004) suggest
that local growth may be the result of a series of uncorrelated permanent shocks, we think it prudent
to consider seriously the possibility that shocks are correlated. To address this problem, we employ
an instrumental variables strategy relying on lagged manufacturing changes. Our instruments are
of the form:                                                     
                                     (k)       Lit−2          Lit−3
                                   Zit ≡ gk            − gk                                        (9)
                                                Ri             Ri
for k ∈ {1, 2, 3}. That is, the instruments are changes in the spline components of manufacturing
density lagged by two decades. This functional form mirrors that of the endogenous variables in
(8).24
    In the context of our model, these instruments induce exogenous variation in employment
changes through the process of agglomeration. That is, regardless of why the manufacturing base
changes in a period, that change should affect manufacturing growth in subsequent periods through
                                                                                     
  24                                                             Lit−1         Lit−2
    To avoid any mechanical correlation with the elements of g    Ri
                                                                       ;θ −g    Ri
                                                                                     ; θ that might result from mea-
surement errors in Lit−2 , we construct these instruments using manufacturing employment data from the Economic
Census while the endogenous variables are measured using employment data from the Decennial Census.




                                                        21
its effects on local productivity. For the instruments to be valid we need that:25
                                                          (k)
                                                  E[νit Zit ] ∀k.                                                (10)

A sufficient condition for this restriction to hold is that the shocks to productivity νit be inde-
pendent over a horizon of 20 years. Note that this prohibits counties from possessing long lasting
heterogeneous trends in productivity growth.
    One important reason why trends might be present is if counties exhibit conditional conver-
gence in manufacturing activity for reasons having little to do with agglomeration (e.g., as in the
capital mobility arguments of Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1991, 1992a, 1992b)). Several points are
worth highlighting in this respect. First, as mentioned, we condition on the vector Xi of 38 baseline
controls, which include 1920 and 1930 population and quadratics in 1920 and 1930 agricultural and
manufacturing shares. These variables ought to absorb a significant fraction of the heterogeneity
in initial conditions that could give rise to convergence. Second, in some specifications, we also
condition on 1940 manufacturing density. If conditional convergence were still present after con-
trolling for the vector Xi of covariates, counties with lower 1940 manufacturing density would have
faster growth in the following decades. In this case, controlling for 1940 manufacturing density
would absorb additional heterogeneity in initial conditions, which should significantly change our
estimates. We find instead that our results are insensitive to this control. Third, we also examine
the robustness of our results to the inclusion of fixed regional trends, and find that our estimates
are not very sensitive. Finally, we have also estimated models where the instruments are changes in
the spline components of manufacturing density lagged by three decades instead of two. The first
stage in these models was not statistically significant, lending further credibility to the assumption
that our instrument is not picking up long run trends.
    While these robustness exercises do not guarantee that all trend heterogeneity has been removed,
we believe they suggest our results are not spurious. Moreover, we note that many of our conclusions
rest on the relative magnitude of the three θβk parameters. Even if assumption 10 were violated, we
see little reason for omitted trends to induce (or suppress) any nonlinearities in the agglomeration
process. As we shall see in section V.E., our cost-benefit analysis hinges more on the shape of the
agglomeration function than the estimated strength of any agglomeration effects.
    A separate impediment to the estimation of (8) is the potential endogeneity of ln wit − ln wit−1
which might be correlated with νit if amenity shocks are contemporaneously correlated with produc-
tivity shocks. This regressor also faces a potential division bias (Borjas, 1980) due to measurement
errors in manufacturing employment which are used as the denominator in our manufacturing wage
measure. To deal with this potential correlation, in our baseline model we calibrate − 1−α   β , which
                                                         26
represents the (short-run) elasticity of labor demand. Based on Hamermesh (1993)’s influential
review, we use 1.5 as the most plausible estimate of the relevant labor demand elasticity.27 We use
  25
     Identification also requires that the instruments have sufficient predictive power. Our tables report first stage
partial F-statistics which indicate a strong relationship between the instruments and each of the spline components.
We note however that, if treated as a truly nonparametric problem, identification of g (.) is inherently untestable
without further assumptions (Canay, Santos, and Shaikh, 2013). Testability would follow however if we were to
assume the innovations in our model are normally distributed, see Newey (2013) for discussion.
  26
     We also use a five year lagged wage measure to break any mechanical correlation between the wage and the
quantity measures in (8).
  27
     Hamermesh (1993) documents a variety of estimates of national labor demand elasticities, centered in the range
1 to 1.5. Since we are interested in regional demand, we pick a parameter on the high end of the spectrum for our
baseline specification.


                                                         22
this as our starting point, and then assess the sensitivity of our estimates to different values of the
elasticity.

V.C.        Structural Estimates
    Table V provides estimates of (8) based on four decades of changes in log manufacturing den-
sity.28 This table assumes that g (.) is piecewise linear in density. The first three columns provides
baseline OLS estimates which exhibit evidence of modest agglomeration effects and a concave re-
lationship with density. Columns 4 through 6 instrument for density changes using twice lagged
density changes. Instrumenting raises the magnitude of the estimated agglomeration effects and
induces a strikingly concave pattern of marginal effects. For example, column 4 indicates that
raising manufacturing density by one worker per square mile in a low density county is associated
with a 9.7% increase in labor demand while a corresponding increase in a medium density county is
associated with a 4.2% increase in demand. Raising density in a high density county has essentially
no effect. These coefficients are estimated quite precisely – we easily reject the null that the ag-
glomeration effects are equal across density levels, with a p-value of 0.002 (see bottom of the table).
The results are also robust to changes in specification, with only very minor effects on the point
estimates of controlling for 1940 population density and/or regional trends (columns 5 and 6). In
Appendix Tables A2 through A4, we show that our results are also robust to different assumptions
on the short run elasticity of labor demand and the spline knots.
    Overall, these findings point to significant non-linearities in the agglomeration function. The
pattern that emerges is one of marked concavity in g(.), whereby increases in manufacturing density
are estimated to have significantly stronger effects in counties with a weak manufacturing presence
than in counties with a more established presence. One might be tempted to infer that place
based policies should reallocate manufacturing employment from high density areas to low density
areas. However, as discussed in section IV.B., this intuition is incorrect. Reallocating workers
to low density areas only raise aggregate worker welfare if lower density counties have a greater
agglomeration elasticity.
    Thus, we turn now to direct estimates of agglomeration elasticities. Table VI repeats our analysis
using a three piece spline in the log of manufacturing density. This specification provides estimates
of elasticities for counties with low, medium, and high levels of density respectively and it enables us
to directly test for constant elasticities. We find similar estimates across the three density groups,
with a 10% increase in density estimated to yield a 4%-4.7% increase in labor demand. As with
the levels specification, the estimates are robust to controlling for baseline density and regional
trends. Notably, we cannot reject a constant elasticity relationship in any of the IV specifications.
The p-values reported at the bottom of the table for the null hypothesis of equal elasticity are all
above 0.66, and the point estimates are tightly clustered in the range 0.40-0.45. We conclude that
manufacturing productivity exhibits a nearly constant elasticity relationship with manufacturing
density.
    We turn now to the direct productivity effects of the TVA, which result from the program’s
federally financed public investments. Because the model is in differences, the coefficient on the
TVA dummy in equation (8) reflects the change over time in the direct effects. In the specifications
reported in Tables V and VI, the estimated coefficient on the TVA dummy is statistically indistin-
guishable from zero, suggesting the direct productivity effects of TVA were roughly constant over
 28
      Specifically, the data consist of changes over the intervals 1960-1970, 1970-1980, 1980-1990, and 1990-2000.



                                                           23
the sample interval (1960-2000).
    Table VII examines this finding more closely by recomputing the direct effects over three distinct
horizons.29 We consider both the specification where g (.) is piecewise linear and where it is piecewise
log linear. Reassuringly, the two specifications yield very similar results. Consistent with our reduced
form findings in Section III, the TVA is estimated to have substantially boosted productivity over the
period 1940-1960. If we assume capital’s share in manufacturing α is in this period approximately
0.3 (Griliches, 1967), and that the elasticity of demand 1−α     β   is 1.5, then we expect β ≈ 0.47.
Taking β = 0.47, we have that TVA raised local productivity by approximately 8.7% over the 1940-
1960 period. This was followed by insignificant negative direct effects in later periods, which is in
keeping with the earlier evidence that TVA transfers scaled down over this horizon and that local
infrastructure began to depreciate.

V.D.       Discussion
    Four points are worth noting regarding our structural estimates. First, the estimates can be used
to predict the dynamic effects of the TVA on manufacturing activity. In the appendix, we show that
these predictions are closely in line with the reduced form estimates of Table IV. Specifically, we show
that the estimated sequence of direct effects and the agglomeration function yield predicted changes
in manufacturing employment over the 1940-1960 and 1960-2000 intervals close to the reduced form
impacts reported in Table IV. This finding is important: using a substantially different source of
variation, it corroborates our modeling strategy and the exclusion restrictions necessary for our
instruments to be valid.
    Second, the magnitude of the implied agglomeration economies is in line with existing estimates
in the literature. With β = 0.47, the agglomeration elasticities θk implied by Table VI are in the
neighborhood of 0.2. A recent meta-analysis of 34 different studies of agglomeration economies
(Melo et al., 2009) indicates that our estimates are squarely in the middle of the distribution of
existing estimates, and well within the range of elasticities reported in several of the most prominent
recent studies.30
    Third, our estimates strongly suggest that agglomeration economies are concave in manufactur-
ing density and that this concavity is well-approximated by a logarithmic function. This finding has
important policy implications. As discussed in section (IV.B.), a near constant elasticity severely
proscribes the ability of governments to raise welfare via pure reallocations of manufacturing ac-
tivity. Though agglomeration economies have external effects not captured by the price system,
our finding of constant elasticity indicates that these effects cancel out in the aggregate. Thus,
our estimates suggest manufacturing agglomeration is an interesting case where the existence of a
market failure does not generate efficiency losses in the aggregate.
    Fourth, according to our estimates, the effects of TVA will eventually die out. Figure V depicts
   29
    h The estimates
                     in
                        the Table
                               i    were
                                       h  computed
                                                   viaa regression
                                                               i      of
                                                                       h residuals
                                                                                                   Qit ≡ ln Lit − ln Lit−2 −
                                                                                     of the form i
θ1        Lit−1          Lit−3      θ2      Lit−1        Lit−3      θ3        Lit−1           Lit−3
c
β
     g 1   Ri
                  − g1    Ri
                                  − c
                                    β
                                        g2   Ri
                                                   − g 2  Ri
                                                                  − c
                                                                    β
                                                                         g3    Ri
                                                                                      −  g3     Ri
                                                                                                      + 1.5 (ln wit − ln wit−2 )
on baseline covariates and a TVA dummy. Hats denote estimated coefficient values, which come from column (4) of
Table V in the “Spline in levels” specification and column (4) of Table VI in the “Spline in logs” specification.
  30
     For example, Henderson (2003) obtains an elasticity of productivity with respect to density of same industry
plants of 0.01-0.08. Estimates for France in Combes et al. (2010) and Combes et al. (2012) imply elasticities of
0.029 and 0.032, respectively. At the other extreme, Greenstone, Hornbeck and Moretti (2010)’s estimates imply an
elasticity in the range 1.25-3.1. Of course, part of the variation in these estimates is due to the fact that models,
data, time periods and industries used in the studies are vastly different.



                                                              24
our calibrated short run inverse labor demand function along with the estimated long run inverse
labor demand function and its 95% confidence interval. This Figure is the empirical equivalent of
Figure IV.31 Based on the discussion in Section IV.C it is clear that the estimated shape of the curve
implies the system admits a unique steady state equilibrium so that the TVA region will ultimately
revert back to its pre-program equilibrium.

V.E.     Cost Benefit Analysis
    We now use our structural parameter estimates to conduct a quantitative cost-benefit analysis
of the TVA’s long run effects. Our goal is to assess whether the program was welfare enhancing from
the point of view of the United States as a whole. Computing the program’s costs is straightforward:
we use the 1940 present value of the year by year stream of federal appropriations to the TVA listed
in Figure I. Computing program benefits is more challenging and relies upon the structure of our
model. To quantify the nationwide benefits of the productivity gains associated with the TVA,
we compute the steady state elasticity of worker utility with respect to the TVA’s productivity
effects. This elasticity is combined with our estimates of the direct productivity effects of the
TVA to compute an impact on worker welfare which is then converted to dollars terms. In the
on-line Appendix we show that the aggregate elasticity of worker utility with respect to TVA’s local
investments can be written:

                                                         P        Di Li
                                            du         1  i       β−σi
                                                 =                 Li
                                                                          .
                                            dδ        1−α i
                                                         P
                                                                  β−σi

Our finding of a roughly constant agglomeration elasticity (σi = σ) implies this expression simplifies
to:
                                                    P
                                      du        1      i Di Li
                                          =           P        .                                 (11)
                                      dδ      1−α        i Li
Note that this formula doesn’t depend upon the strength of agglomeration forces σ. This is because,
with a constant elasticity, the agglomeration effects of worker reallocation cancel out. Hence, worker
utility simply increases in proportion to the TVA region’s share of the manufacturing workforce.
In essence, this expression tells us that TVA should be thought of as only nominally place based
in nature. Rather, it is a national investment that raises welfare through its direct effects on the
productivity of a fraction of the manufacturing workforce.
    Using this formula, we find that the net present value of this stream of benefits using a real annual
discount rate of 3% is $23.8-$36.5B, depending on what assumptions are made on the elasticity of
labor supply (see the on-line Appendix for a detailed explanation of the methodology and the
results). This is to be compared with the present value of federal transfers which amount to $17.3B.
Hence, we find a positive rate of return to the TVA’s public investments.


VI.      Conclusions
    This paper makes two primary contributions. Our substantive contribution is to estimate the
local and aggregate effects of one of the largest place based policies in U.S. history. To our knowledge,
  31
    As expected, the estimated long run curve is less steep than the short run curve because the presence of agglom-
eration economies reduces the limiting effect of the fixed factor on worker productivity.


                                                        25
we are the first to empirically quantify the long run social costs and benefits of such a place based
policy. A second contribution is methodological: we have developed a tractable empirical framework
for evaluating the aggregate welfare effects of placed based policies, with the potential to be applied
to many other settings.
    Our empirical findings are policy relevant. The evaluation design of Section III. provides strong
evidence that the TVA sped the industrialization of the Tennessee Valley and provided lasting
benefits to the region in the form of high paying manufacturing jobs. Notably, the impact on man-
ufacturing employment persisted well beyond the lapsing of the regional subsidies, suggesting the
presence of powerful agglomeration economies. By contrast, the agricultural sector, which is unlikely
to exhibit substantial agglomeration forces, retracted dramatically once subsidies terminated.
    Our analysis in Section V.E. suggests the TVA raised the productivity of the U.S. manufacturing
sector by roughly 0.3% between 1940 and 1960. We estimate that the stream of benefits associated
with this increase exceeded the program’s costs, though this conclusion rests on several unverifiable
assumptions regarding the functioning of labor markets.
    Most of the national impact of the TVA on worker welfare is accounted for by the direct ef-
fects of the program’s vast investments in public infrastructure. Our finding of a roughly constant
agglomeration elasticity suggests the program’s indirect effects were minimal. A noteworthy impli-
cation is that although agglomeration economies represents an important market failure at the local
level, this failure does not provide a rationale for federal intervention in the spatial distribution of
manufacturing activity.
    We caution, however, that our findings do not necessarily apply to all contexts, as the strength
and shape of agglomeration economies may well vary across industries, periods and levels of ag-
gregation. Our results are specific to the manufacturing sector and a period of U.S. history when
manufacturing employment was expanding and earnings were relatively high. An important task
for future work is to assess whether similar qualitative results hold for modern development efforts,
such as those centered on building high tech clusters.
    Department of Economics, University of California, Berkeley and NBER
    Department of Economics, University of California, Berkeley, NBER, CEPR and IZA




Bibliography
    Adsera, Alicia and Debra Ray. “History and Coordination Failure”, Journal of Economic Growth
3: September (1998), 267-276.
    Ahlfeldt, Gabriel M., Stephen J. Redding, Daniel M. Sturm, and Nikolaus Wolf. “The Economics
of Density: Evidence from the Berlin Wall.” working paper, 2012.
    Angrist, J.D. and Pischke, J. Mostly Harmless Econometrics, Princeton University Press, 2010.
    Arellano, Manuel and Bond, Stephen. “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte
Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations,” Review of Economic Studies, Wiley
Blackwell, vol. 58(2), April (1991), pages 277-97.
    Azariadis, Costas and Allan Drazen. “Threshold Externalities in Economic Development,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, MIT Press, vol. 105(2), (1990)
    Azariadis, Costas and John Stachurski. “Poverty Traps,” Ch. 5 in Handbook of Economic
Growth, eds. by P. Aghion and S. Durlauf, Elsevier Publishers (2005).


                                                  26
    Barbour, George B. The Tennessee Valley Project. The Royal Geographical Society (1937).
    Barro, Robert J and Sala-i-Martin, Xavier. “Convergence Across States and Regions,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 22(1) (1991) 107-182.
    Bateman, Fred; Jaime Ros, and Jason E. Taylor. “Did New Deal and World War II Public
Capital Investments Facilitate a Big Push in the American South?” in Journal of Institutional and
Theoretical Economics JITE, Volume 165, Number 2, (35) (2009) 307-341.
    Bartik, Timothy J, 1991. Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?
W.E. Upjohn Institute, Kalamazoo, MI.
    Blanchard, Olivier, Katz, Larry. “Regional evolutions.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
(1992).
    Boyce, Ronald R. “Geographers and the Tennessee Valley Authority.” Geographical Review,
Vol. 94, No. 1. American Geographical Society (2004).
    Busso, Matias, Jesse Gregory and Patrick Kline. “Assessing the Incidence and Efficiency of a
Prominent Place Based Policy” American Economic Review, 103(2) (2013) 897-947.
    Canay, Ivan, Andres Santos, and Azeem Shaikh. “On the Testability of Identification in Some
Nonparametric Models with Endogeneity” Econometrica. (2013).
    Chay, Kenneth Y. and Michael Greenstone. 2003. “The Impact Of Air Pollution On Infant
Mortality: Evidence From Geographic Variation In Pollution Shocks Induced By A Recession,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, MIT Press, vol. 118(3), pages 1121-1167, August.
    Chay Kenneth Y. and Michael Greenstone, 2005. “Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from
the Housing Market,” Journal of Political Economy, University of Chicago Press, vol. 113(2), pages
376-424, April.
    Clark, Wesley C. “Proposed ’Valley Authority’ Legislation.” American Political Science Review,
40(1) (1946) 62-70.
    Combes, P.-P., G. Duranton, L. Gobillon, and S. Roux. “Estimating Agglomeration Effects With
History, Geology, and Worker Fixed-Effects,” in Agglomeration Economics, Vo l. 1, ed. by E. L.
Glaeser. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press (2010) 15-65.
    Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gilles Duranton, Laurent Gobillon, Diego Puga, and Sebastien Roux.
“The productivity advantages of large cities: Distinguishing agglomeration from firm selection”
Econometrica (2012).
    Conley, T. G. “GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence,” Journal of Econometrics,
Elsevier, vol. 92(1), September (1999) pages 1-45.
    Davis, Donald R. and David E. Weinstein. “Bones, Bombs, and Breakpoints: The Geography
of Economic Activity,” American Economic Review, 92(5) (2002) 1269-1289.
    Donaldson, David. “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infrastruc-
ture” Working paper (2012).
    Donaldson, Dave and Richard Hornbeck. 2012. “Railroads and American Economic Growth:
New Data and Theory.” Working paper
    Duranton, Gilles and Diego Puga. “Micro-foundations of urban agglomeration economies.” in
Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, J. V. Henderson & J. F. Thisse (ed.), Vol 4. Elsevier
(2004) 2063-2117.
    Duranton, Gilles and Overman, Henry G., 2002. “Testing for Localization Using Micro-Geographic
Data,” CEPR Discussion Papers 3379, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.
    Duranton, Gilles and Laurent Gobillon. 2011. “The identification of agglomeration economies,”
Journal of Economic Geography, Oxford University Press, vol. 11(2), pages 253-266, March


                                               27
   Eeckhout, Jan. 2004. “Gibrat’s Law for All Cities.” American Economic Review 94(5): 1429-
1451.
   Ellison, Glenn, Glaeser, Edward L . “Geographic concentration in US manufacturing industries:
a dartboard approach.” Journal of Political Economy 105 (5) (1997) 889-927.
   Fishback, Price and Michael Haines, and Shawn Kantor. “Births, Deaths, and New Deal Relief
During the Great Depression.” forthcoming in the Review of Economics and Statistics (2011).
   Gabaix, Xavier. 1999. “Zipf’s Law for Cities: An Explanation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
114(3): 739-767.
   Glaeser, Edward and Joshua Gottlieb. “The Economics of Place-Making Policies.” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 2 (2008) 155-239.
   Glaeser, E.L, H.D. Kallal, J.A. Scheinkman and A. Shleifer. “Growth in Cities.” Journal of
Political Economy, 100 (1992) 1126-1152.
   Government Accountability Office. “Federal Economic Development Grants to Communities
with High Rates of Poverty and Unemployment.” GAO-12-938R (2012).
   Greenstone, Hornbeck and Moretti. “Identifying Agglomeration Spillovers: Evidence from Win-
ners and Losers of Large Plant Openings” Journal of Political Economy, 118(3) (2010).
   Griliches, Zvi. “Production Functions in Manufacturing: Some Preliminary Results,” NBER
Chapters, in: The Theory and Empirical Analysis of Production, 1967, pp. 275-340 National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
   Hamermesh, Daniel. Labor Demand Princeton University Press, 1993.
   Henderson, Vernon. “Industrial Development in Cities,” Journal of Political Economy, 103,
(1995) 1067-1090.
   Henderson, Vernon. “Marshall’s Scale Economies” Journal of Urban Economics, 53, (2003) 1-28.
   Hodge, Clarence Lewis (PhD). The Tennessee Valley Authority: A National Experiment in
Regionalism. The American University Press. Washington, D. C., 1938.
   Hornbeck, Richard and Suresh Naidu. “When the Levee Breaks: Labor Mobility and Economic
Development in the American South,” NBER Working Paper #18296, 2012
   House of Representatives - Bill No. 1824. “The Conservation Authorities Act.” Introduced by
Representative John E. Rankin, Jan. 29, 1945.
   Jacobs, Jane. “Why TVA Failed.” New York Review of Books, 1984
   Kimble, Ellis. “The Tennessee Valley Project.” The Journal of Land and Public Utility Eco-
nomics Vol. 9 No. 4. University of Wisconsin Press (1933).
   Kitchens, Carl. “The Role of Publicly Provided Electricity in Economic Development: The
Experience of the Tennessee Valley Authority 1929 - 1955.” Working paper, 2011.
   Kline Patrick and Enrico Moretti. “Local Economic Development, Agglomeration Economies,
and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority”, NBER WP, 2013.
   Kline, Patrick. “Oaxaca-Blinder as a Reweighting Estimator” American Economic Review: Pa-
pers and Proceedings 101, (2011) pp. 532-537.
   Kline, Patrick. “Place Based Policies, Heterogeneity, and Agglomeration.” American Economic
Review: Papers and Proceedings 100, pp. 383-387, 2010.
   Kline, Patrick and Enrico Moretti. “Local Economic Development, Agglomeration Economies,
and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority.” NBER Working
paper, 2013.
   Krugman, Paul. “History Versus Expectations.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(2)
(1991) 651-667.


                                              28
    Leuchtenburg, William E. “Roosevelt, Norris and the Seven Little TVAs.” The Journal of
Politics, 14(3) (1952) 418-441.
    Leuchtenburg, William E. The FDR Years: On Roosevelt and His Legacy. Columbia University
Press, 1997.
    Marshall, Alfred. Principles of Economics. Macmillan and Co. London. 1890.
    Mccarty, Charles. “TVA and the Tennessee Valley.” The Town Planning Review Vol. 21, No.2.
July, Liverpool University Press, 1950.
    Melo, P. C., D. J. Graham, and R. B. Noland. “A Meta-Analysis of Estimates of Urban Ag-
glomeration Economies,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 39 (3) (2009) 332-342.
    Mississippi State Auditor. “Capitalization and Depreciation of Infrastructure.” Office of the
State Auditor, Division of Technical Assistance, October 22, 2002.
    Morgan, Arthur E. “Purposes and Methods of the Tennessee Valley Authority.” American
Academy of Political and Social Science (1934).
    Moretti, Enrico. “Workers’ Education, Spillovers and Productivity: Evidence from Plant-Level
Production Functions”, American Economic Review (2004a) 94(3).
    Moretti, Enrico. “Estimating the Social Return to Higher Education: Evidence From Longitu-
dinal and Repeated Cross-Sectional Data”, Journal of Econometrics 121(1-2) (2004b).
    Moretti, Enrico. “Local Labor Markets.” Chapter 14 in Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume
4b, eds. David Card and Orley Ashenfelter, New York: Elsevier, (2011) pp. 1237-1313.
    Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. “Industrialization and the Big Push”
Journal of Political Economy 97(5) (1989) 1003-1026.
    Roback, Jennifer. “Wages, rents and the quality of life.” Journal of Political Economy 90
(1982)1257-1278.
    Rosenthal, Stuart S. and William Strange. “Evidence on the Nature and Sources of Agglom-
eration Economies.” in Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics, Volume 4, pp. 2119-2172,
Elsevier, eds. Vernon Henderson and Jacques Thisse. 2004.
    Story, Louise. “As Companies Seek Tax Deals, Governments Pay High Price”, New York Times,
Dec 1, 2013.
    Tennessee Valley Authority, Department of Regional Planning Studies, Social and Economic
Research Division. “Local Social and Economic Effects of the Norris Dam Project.” Knoxville,
Tennessee, August, 1938.




                                               29
                                                        Table	  I:	  Summary	  Statistics	  
                                                                           Overall                                                 Trimmed	  Sample
                                              TVA          Non-­‐TVA	         Non-­‐TVA	  	  South    Non-­‐TVA	  	     Non-­‐TVA	   Non-­‐TVA	  	  South
                                                                                                         Proposed	  
                                                                                                        Authorities
                                               (1)               (2)                    (3)                 (4)                  (5)                 (6)
1930	  Characteristics
Log	  Population                            9.991             9.977                  9.989                9.940               9.905               9.979
Log	  Employment                            8.942             8.967                  8.959                8.908               8.881               8.947
Log	  #	  of	  Houses                     8.445             8.508                  8.455                8.466               8.442               8.445
Log	  Average	  Manufacturing	  Wage      1.406             1.802                  1.545                1.685               1.728               1.538
Manufacturing	  Employment	  Share         0.075             0.090                  0.080                0.077               0.080               0.078
Agricultural	  Employment	  Share          0.617             0.455                  0.541                0.510               0.487               0.547
%	  White                                   0.813             0.885                  0.722                0.830               0.863               0.724
%	  Urbanized                               0.153             0.280                  0.233                0.216               0.242               0.215
%	  Illiterate                              0.088             0.045                  0.092                0.060               0.051              0.092
%	  of	  Whites	  Foreign	  Born         0.002             0.059                 0.013                 0.020               0.030              0.011
Log	  Average	  Farm	  Value             5.252             5.646                  5.386                5.552               5.579               5.370
Log	  Median	  Housing	  Value           9.271             9.581                  9.360                9.452               9.516               9.358
Log	  Median	  Contract	  Rent           8.574             9.030                  8.679                8.834               8.934               8.672
%	  Own	  Radio                           0.079             0.296                  0.114                0.210               0.256               0.112
Max	  Elevation	  (meters)               1576.190          2364.531               1068.943             1758.893            2044.656            1070.334
Elevation	  Range	  (Max-­‐Min)          1127.761          1521.322               712.336              1083.293            1251.074            715.253
%	  Counties	  in	  South                1.000             0.342                  1.000                0.554               0.447               1.000

Changes	  1920-­‐1930
Log	  Population                              0.051             0.049                  0.067                0.004              0.037                0.060
Log	  Employment                              0.082             0.096                  0.111                0.045              0.083                0.103
Log	  #	  of	  Houses                       0.078             0.092                  0.108                0.046              0.078                0.100
Log	  Average	  Manufacturing	  Wage        0.117             0.217                  0.108                0.172              0.197                0.103
Manufacturing	  Employment	  Share         -­‐0.010          -­‐0.035               -­‐0.018             -­‐0.018           -­‐0.026             -­‐0.018
Agricultural	  Employment	  Share          -­‐0.047          -­‐0.036               -­‐0.047             -­‐0.046           -­‐0.042             -­‐0.047
%	  White                                     0.012           -­‐0.011               -­‐0.010               0.000            -­‐0.006             -­‐0.004
%	  Urbanized                                 0.047             0.064                  0.080                0.042              0.054                0.069
%	  Illiterate                              -­‐0.030          -­‐0.014               -­‐0.029             -­‐0.019           -­‐0.015             -­‐0.028
%	  of	  Whites	  Foreign	  Born         -­‐0.001          -­‐0.023               -­‐0.016             -­‐0.012           -­‐0.015             -­‐0.012
Log	  Average	  Farm	  Value              -­‐0.013          -­‐0.076                0.025               -­‐0.182           -­‐0.102              0.013

#	  of	  Observations                       163               2326                   795                   828               1744                  779
#	  of	  States                              6                 46                     14                    25                43                    14
Notes: The unit of observation is a county. The trimmed sample is obtained by dropping control counties which, based on their pre-
program characteristics, have a predicted probability of treatment in the bottom 25 percent. All monetary values are in constant 2000
dollars. Data are from the 1920 and 1930 Census of Population and Housing, with the exception of farm value data, which are from the
1920 and 1930 Agricultural Census, and elevation data, which were collected by Fishback, Haines, and Kantor (2011). Manufacturing
wage is obtained by dividing the total annual wage bill in manufacturing by the estimated number of workers in the industry. Details on
data construction and limitations are provided in the online Appendix.
                                                  Table	  II:	  Decadalized	  Growth	  Rates	  in	  TVA	  Region	  vs.	  Conterfactual	  Regions	  1900-­‐1940
                                                                            Point	  Estimate	           Clustered	  S.E.         Point	  Estimate	   Clustered	  S.E.              Spatial	  HAC               N
                                   Outcome                                   (Unadjusted)                                             (Controls)
                                                                                     (1)                          (2)                        (3)                  (4)                          (5)                   (6)
            PANEL	  A:	  TVA	  Region	  vs	  Rest	  of	  US
   (1)      Population                                                                0.007                   (0.016)                     0.010                     (0.012)                 (0.016)                1776
   (2)      Total	  Employment                                                       -­‐0.009                (0.016)                     0.005                     (0.013)                 (0.016)                1776
   (3)      Housing	  Units                                                          -­‐0.006                (0.015)                     0.007                     (0.011)                 (0.013)                1776
   (4)      Average	  Manufacturing	  Wage                                          0.009                   (0.018)                     0.010                     (0.021)                 (0.016)                1428
   (5)      Manufacturing	  Share                                                 0.007*                     (0.004)                     0.005                     (0.004)                 (0.005)                1776
   (6)      Agricultural	  Share                                                 -­‐0.007*                   (0.004)                     -­‐0.001                  (0.005)                 (0.005)                1776
   (7)      Average	  Agricultural	  Land	  Value                             0.078***                     (0.021)                     0.025                     (0.018)                 (0.018)                1746


            PANEL	  B:	  TVA	  Region	  vs.	  U.S.	  South
   (1)      Population                                                                -­‐0.018                (0.018)                     0.003                                             (0.016)                 850
   (2)      Total	  Employment                                                       -­‐0.028                (0.018)                     0.001                                             (0.016)                 850
   (3)      Housing	  Units                                                          -­‐0.025                (0.016)                     0.005                                             (0.013)                 850
   (4)      Average	  Manufacturing	  Wage                                          0.001                   (0.015)                     0.001                                             (0.016)                 687
   (5)      Manufacturing	  Share                                                    0.005                   (0.005)                     0.005                                             (0.005)                 850
   (6)      Agricultural	  Share                                                     0.003                   (0.004)                     -­‐0.002                                          (0.005)                 850
   (7)      Average	  Agricultural	  Land	  Value                                  -­‐0.009                (0.020)                     -­‐0.007                                          (0.017)                 839


            PANEL	  	  C:	  TVA	  Region	  vs.	  Proposed	  Authrorities	  
   (1)      Population                                                                0.026                   (0.019)                     0.011                                             (0.016)                 926
   (2)      Total	  Employment                                                       -­‐0.012                (0.017)                     0.006                                             (0.015)                 926
   (3)      Housing	  Units                                                          -­‐0.014                (0.016)                     0.006                                             (0.013)                 926
   (4)      Average	  Manufacturing	  Wage                                          0.012                   (0.015)                     0.008                                             (0.017)                 734
   (5)      Manufacturing	  Share                                                    0.007                   (0.006)                     0.005                                             (0.006)                 926
   (6)      Agricultural	  Share                                                     -­‐0.005                (0.006)                     0.004                                             (0.006)                 926
   (7)      Average	  Agricultural	  Land	  Value                             0.080***                     (0.026)                     0.017                                             (0.018)                 908

Notes:	  Column	  (1)	  gives	  the	  unconditional	  difference	  between	  TVA	  and	  non-­‐TVA	  counties	  in	  the	  1900-­‐1940	  change	  in	  the	  log	  of	  the	  relevant	  outcome	  
divided	  by	  four	  (shares	  not	  converted	  to	  logs).	  Column	  (3)	  adjusts	  for	  pre-­‐program	  differences	  between	  TVA	  counties	  and	  controls	  via	  a	  Oaxaca-­‐Blinder	  
regression	  as	  in	  Kline	  (2011).	  Covariates	  include	  time	  invariant	  geographic	  characteristics	  and	  levels	  and	  trends	  in	  pre-­‐program	  industrial	  mix,	  population,	  
and	  demographic	  characteristics	  (see	  Section	  III.A	  for	  full	  list	  of	  covariates).	  Clustered	  S.E.	  columns	  provide	  standard	  errors	  estimates	  clustered	  by	  state.	  
Spatial	  HAC	  column	  provides	  standard	  error	  estimates	  based	  upon	  technique	  of	  Conley	  (1999)	  using	  bandwidth	  of	  200	  miles.	  	  Stars	  based	  upon	  clustered	  
standard	  errors.	  Legend:	  *	  significant	  at	  10%	  level,	  **	  significant	  at	  5%	  level,	  ***	  significant	  at	  1%	  level.
                                                     Table	  III:	  Decadalized	  Impact	  of	  TVA	  on	  Growth	  Rate	  of	  Outcomes	  (1940-­‐2000)

                                                                                  Point	  Estimate	                                Point	  Estimate	  
                                      Outcome                                                               Clustered	  S.E.                                   Clustered	  S.E.       Spatial	  HAC           N
                                                                                   (Unadjusted)                                        (Controls)


                                                                                          (1)                       (2)                       (3)                       (4)                   (5)               (6)
        PANEL	  A:	  TVA	  Region	  vs	  Rest	  of	  US
 (1) Population                                                                         0.004                   (0.021)                     0.007                   (0.020)                (0.018)            1907
 (2) Average	  Manufacturing	  Wage                                                0.027***                   (0.006)                     0.005                   (0.004)                (0.005)            1172
 (3) Agricultural	  Employment                                                      -­‐0.130***                (0.026)                   -­‐0.056**                (0.024)                (0.027)             1907
 (4) Manufacturing	  Employment                                                     0.076***                   (0.013)                  0.059***                   (0.015)                (0.023)             1907
 (5) Value	  of	  Farm	  Production                                                 -­‐0.028                 (0.028)                     0.002                   (0.032)                (0.026)             1903
 (6) Median	  Family	  Income	  	  (1950-­‐2000	  only)                         0.072***                   (0.014)                     0.021                   (0.013)                (0.011)             1905
 (7) Average	  Agricultural	  Land	  Value                                        0.066***                   (0.013)                    -­‐0.002                 (0.012)                (0.016)             1906
 (8) Median	  Housing	  Value                                                       0.040**                   (0.017)                     0.005                   (0.015)                (0.015)             1906


        PANEL	  B:	  TVA	  Region	  vs.	  U.S.	  South
 (1) Population                                                                        -­‐0.007                 (0.018)                     0.014                                          (0.019)             942
 (2) Average	  Manufacturing	  Wage                                                   0.003                   (0.006)                     0.001                                          (0.005)             610
 (3) Agricultural	  Employment                                                      -­‐0.097***                (0.030)                   -­‐0.051*                                        (0.027)             942
 (4) Manufacturing	  Employment                                                     0.079***                   (0.023)                  0.063***                                          (0.024)             942
 (5) Value	  of	  Farm	  Production                                                 -­‐0.005                 (0.025)                    -­‐0.006                                        (0.026)             939
 (6) Median	  Family	  Income	  	  (1950-­‐2000	  only)                         0.041***                   (0.012)                   0.024**                                          (0.011)             942
 (7) Average	  Agricultural	  Land	  Value                                          0.031*                   (0.018)                    -­‐0.003                                        (0.017)             942
 (8) Median	  Housing	  Value                                                         0.019                   (0.017)                     0.007                                          (0.016)             942


        PANEL	  	  C:	  TVA	  Region	  vs.	  Proposed	  Authrorities	  
 (1) Population                                                                         0.011                   (0.018)                     0.001                                          (0.017)             991
 (2) Average	  Manufacturing	  Wage                                                0.018***                   (0.007)                     0.005                                          (0.006)             618
 (3) Agricultural	  Employment                                                      -­‐0.101***                (0.029)                  -­‐0.071***                                       (0.027)             991
 (4) Manufacturing	  Employment                                                     0.066***                   (0.024)                   0.053**                                          (0.024)             991
 (5) Value	  of	  Farm	  Production                                                  0.002                   (0.026)                     0.011                                          (0.035)             989
 (6) Median	  Family	  Income	  	  (1950-­‐2000	  only)                         0.060***                   (0.012)                   0.025**                                          (0.011)             991
 (7) Average	  Agricultural	  Land	  Value                                        0.060***                   (0.019)                    -­‐0.003                                        (0.016)             991
 (8) Median	  Housing	  Value                                                       0.033**                   (0.016)                     0.009                                          (0.016)             991


Notes:	  Point	  estimates	  obtained	  from	  regression	  of	  1940-­‐2000	  change	  in	  outcomes	  divided	  by	  six	  on	  TVA	  dummy.	  All	  outcomes	  besides	  share	  
variables	  are	  transformed	  to	  logarithms	  before	  taking	  difference.	  In	  specification	  titled	  controls,	  counterfactual	  change	  in	  TVA	  sample	  computed	  via	  
Oaxaca-­‐Blinder	  regression	  as	  in	  Kline	  (2011).	  Covariates	  include	  time	  invariant	  geographic	  characteristics	  and	  levels	  and	  trends	  in	  pre-­‐program	  
industrial	  mix,	  population,	  and	  demographic	  characteristics	  (see	  Section	  III.A	  for	  full	  list	  of	  covariates).	  Clustered	  S.E.	  column	  provides	  standard	  errors	  
estimates	  clustered	  by	  state.	  Spatial	  HAC	  column	  provides	  standard	  error	  estimates	  based	  upon	  technique	  of	  Conley	  (1999)	  using	  bandwidth	  of	  200	  
miles.	  Stars	  based	  upon	  clustered	  standard	  errors.	  Legend:	  *	  significant	  at	  10%	  level,	  **	  significant	  at	  5%	  level,	  ***	  significant	  at	  1%	  level.
                             	  	  Table	  IV:	  Decadalized	  Impact	  of	  TVA	  on	  Growth	  Rate	  of	  Outcomes	  Over	  Two	  Sub-­‐Periods
                                                                                    Entire	  U.S.	                           South                               Proposed
                                                                                                                                                                  Authorities
                                                                      1940-­‐1960 	  1960-­‐2000 	  1940-­‐1960 	  1960-­‐2000 1940-­‐1960 	  1960-­‐2000
                              Outcome                                      (1)                  (2)                   (3)                   (4)                  (5)                   (6)
 (1)                         Population                                 0.037                 -­‐0.008              0.042                -­‐0.000              0.028                -­‐0.013
 (2)           Average	  Manufacturing	  Wage                         -­‐0.005             0.014*                -­‐0.003               0.010                0.007                0.012
 (3)              Agricultural	  Employment                          0.106***             -­‐0.134***           0.106***             -­‐0.130***           0.119***             -­‐0.166***
 (4)            Manufacturing	  Employment                           0.114***              0.033**              0.116***                0.035*              0.097**               0.032**
 (5)              Value	  of	  Farm	  Production                     0.076*                -­‐0.030            0.081**                -­‐0.044            0.118**                -­‐0.033
 (6)                Median	  Family	  Income	                          N/A                 0.017                  N/A                  0.016                 N/A                0.019*
 (7)         Average	  Agricultural	  Land	  Value                   0.027                 -­‐0.017              0.018                -­‐0.015              0.029                -­‐0.021
 (8)                Median	  Housing	  Value                          0.019                 -­‐0.003              0.010                 0.005                0.020                0.003
Notes:	  Full	  set	  of	  controls	  included	  in	  all	  specifications.	  Point	  estimates	  obtained	  from	  Oaxaca-­‐Blinder	  regression	  of	  1940-­‐1960	  or	  
1960-­‐2000	  change	  in	  log	  outcomes	  divided	  by	  two	  or	  four	  respectively	  on	  TVA	  dummy	  and	  interacted	  controls	  as	  in	  Kline	  (2011).	  
Covariates	  include	  time	  invariant	  geographic	  characteristics	  and	  levels	  and	  trends	  in	  pre-­‐program	  industrial	  mix,	  population,	  and	  
demographic	  characteristics	  (see	  Section	  III.A	  for	  full	  list	  of	  covariates).	  Stars	  based	  on	  standard	  errors	  clustered	  by	  state	  (entire	  
U.S.)	  or	  spatial	  HAC	  estimates	  (South	  and	  Proposed	  Authorities)	  using	  technique	  of	  Conley	  (1999)	  with	  bandwidth	  of	  200	  miles.	  
Legend:	  *	  significant	  at	  10%	  level,	  **	  significant	  at	  5%	  level,	  ***	  significant	  at	  1%	  level.
            Table	  V:	  Structural	  Estimates	  of	  Agglomeration	  Function	  (linear	  basis)
                                                                  (1)                         (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)
                                                                 OLS                          OLS               OLS             2SLS             2SLS              2SLS
Change	  in	  Manufacturing	  Density	  Spline	  Components:
                                                                0.066                        0.060            0.060            0.097             0.084            0.082
                          Low                                  (0.010)                      (0.010)          (0.010)          (0.037)           (0.037)          (0.037)
                                                                                                                             [129.06]          [122.25]         [121.07]
                                                                           0.021            0.022            0.022             0.042             0.043            0.042
                             Medium                                       (0.0045)         (0.0044)         (0.0044)          (0.011)           (0.011)          (0.011)
                                                                                                                             [116.87]          [114.87]         [116.66]
                                                                         -­‐0.000075 0.000031 -­‐0.00011                      0.0019            0.0021           0.0018
                                High                                      (0.00074) (0.00075) (0.00071)                      (0.0020)          (0.0020)         (0.0020)
                                                                                                                              [41.82]           [40.96]          [32.04]
                Log	  Manufacturing	  Wages                                -­‐1.5           -­‐1.5           -­‐1.5            -­‐1.5           -­‐1.5           -­‐1.5
                                                                               0.0033               0.0081       0.0026           -­‐0.0052        0.0012       -­‐0.0043
                                TVA
                                                                               (0.015)              (0.015)      (0.015)           (0.017)         (0.016)       (0.016)
Regional	  Trends                                                                no                   no          yes                 no             no             yes
1940	  Manufacturing	  Density                                                  no                   yes         yes                 no             yes            yes
Decade	  Effects                                                                yes                   yes         yes                 yes            yes            yes
Controls	  for	  1920	  and	  1930	  characteristics                        yes                   yes         yes                 yes            yes            yes
P-­‐value	  equal	  slopes                                                   2.7e-­‐11            1.1e-­‐10    9.5e-­‐11        7.1e-­‐04        6.0e-­‐04    6.4e-­‐04
P-­‐value	  slopes	  equal	  zero                                           1.5e-­‐10            6.0e-­‐10    4.8e-­‐10           .0022          .0015          .0019
N                                                                               6057                  6057        6057                5952           5952           5952
Notes:	  Dependent	  variable	  is	  change	  in	  log	  county	  manufacturing	  employment.	  Manufacturing	  density	  is	  manufacturing	  
employment	  per	  square	  mile.	  Standard	  errors	  clustered	  by	  state	  in	  parentheses.	  Angrist-­‐Pischke	  cluster	  robust	  first	  
stage	  F-­‐stat	  in	  brackets.	  All	  estimates	  weighted	  by	  1950	  county	  population.	  "Low"	  refers	  to	  spline	  component	  
corresponding	  to	  density	  below	  60th	  percentile	  of	  1980	  distribution,	  "Medium"	  to	  density	  between	  60th	  and	  85th	  
percentile	  of	  1980	  distribution,	  and	  "High"	  to	  density	  above	  85th	  percentile	  of	  1980	  distribution.	  Spline	  coefficients	  give	  
the	  proportional	  effect	  on	  labor	  demand	  of	  an	  increase	  in	  lagged	  manufacturing	  density	  of	  one	  worker	  per	  square	  mile	  
over	  the	  relevant	  range.	  	  	  The	  instruments	  are	  changes	  in	  the	  spline	  components	  of	  manufacturing	  density	  lagged	  by	  
two	  decades.
              Table	  VI:	  Structural	  Estimates	  of	  Agglomeration	  Function	  (log	  basis)
                                                                    (1)                       (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)
                                                                    OLS                       OLS              OLS             2SLS              2SLS             2SLS
Change	  in	  Log	  Manufacturing	  Density	  Spline	  Components:
                                                                   0.173                    0.147             0.146            0.443            0.400            0.396
                             Low                                  (0.037)                  (0.037)           (0.037)          (0.102)          (0.108)          (0.107)
                                                                                                                             [177.17]         [159.14]         [157.20]
                                                                           0.221            0.227             0.226            0.456            0.440            0.438
                             Medium                                       (0.045)          (0.044)           (0.045)          (0.124)          (0.123)          (0.124)
                                                                                                                             [106.74]         [109.55]         [110.13]
                                                                           0.143            0.151             0.141            0.466            0.467            0.453
                                High                                      (0.051)          (0.050)           (0.050)          (0.150)          (0.150)          (0.151)
                                                                                                                             [206.66]         [204.69]         [200.36]
                Log	  Manufacturing	  Wages                                -­‐1.5           -­‐1.5           -­‐1.5           -­‐1.5           -­‐1.5           -­‐1.5
                                                                                0.007            0.012           0.008             -­‐0.003         0.002         -­‐0.002
                                TVA
                                                                               (0.014)          (0.014)         (0.014)           (0.012)          (0.013)       (0.012)
Regional	  Trends                                                                no               no              yes                 no             no               yes
1940	  Manufacturing	  Density                                                  no               yes             yes                 no             yes              yes
Decade	  Effects                                                                 yes              yes             yes                 yes            yes              yes
Controls	  for	  1920	  and	  1930	  characteristics                         yes              yes             yes                 yes            yes              yes
P-­‐value	  equal	  slopes                                                    .2483            .1298           .1038              .9545            .669          .7171
P-­‐value	  slopes	  equal	  zero                                           1.9e-­‐07        5.1e-­‐07       6.9e-­‐07       1.5e-­‐04          7.4e-­‐04         .001
N                                                                                6057             6057            6057                5935          5935             5935
Notes:	  Dependent	  variable	  is	  change	  in	  log	  county	  manufacturing	  employment.	  Manufacturing	  density	  is	  manufacturing	  
employment	  per	  square	  mile.	  Standard	  errors	  clustered	  by	  state	  in	  parentheses.	  Angrist-­‐Pischke	  cluster	  robust	  first	  
stage	  F-­‐stat	  in	  brackets.	  All	  estimates	  weighted	  by	  1950	  county	  population.	  "Low"	  refers	  to	  spline	  component	  
corresponding	  to	  log	  density	  below	  60th	  percentile	  of	  1980	  distribution,	  "Medium"	  to	  log	  density	  between	  60th	  and	  
85th	  percentile	  of	  1980	  distribution,	  and	  "High"	  to	  log	  density	  above	  85th	  percentile	  of	  1980	  distribution.	  Spline	  
coefficients	  give	  the	  elasticity	  of	  labor	  demand	  with	  respect	  to	  lagged	  manufacturing	  density	  over	  the	  relevant	  range.	  	  
The	  instruments	  are	  changes	  in	  the	  spline	  components	  of	  log	  manufacturing	  density	  lagged	  by	  two	  decades.
                Table	  VII:	  Direct	  Effects	  of	  TVA	  on	  Labor	  Demand,	  by	  Period
                                                                         (1)               (2)                 (3)
                                                                1940-­‐1960 1960-­‐1980 1980-­‐2000
                                                                   0.225***            -­‐0.011            -­‐0.004
                 Spline	  in	  Levels
                                                                    (0.070)           (0.041)             (0.039)
                                                                    0.185**            -­‐0.036             0.033
                  Spline	  in	  Logs
                                                                    (0.081)           (0.033)             (0.035)
         Controls	  for	  1920	  and	  1930	  
                                                                  yes                  yes                  yes
               characteristics
                            N                                    1587                 1498                 1533



Notes:	  Dependent	  variable	  is	  residualized	  change	  in	  log	  county	  employment	  over	  
specified	  horizon	  (see	  text	  for	  details).	  Coefficients	  obtained	  from	  regression	  of	  
residual	  on	  TVA	  dummy	  and	  baseline	  controls.	  'Spline	  in	  levels'	  specification	  forms	  
residual	  assuming	  agglomeration	  function	  is	  three	  piece	  spline	  in	  levels	  with	  
coefficients	  from	  column	  (4)	  of	  Table	  V.	  'Spline	  in	  Logs'	  specification	  assumes	  
agglomeration	  function	  is	  three	  piece	  spline	  in	  log	  of	  manufacturing	  density	  with	  
coefficients	  from	  coulmn	  (4)	  of	  Table	  VI.	  Standard	  errors	  clustered	  by	  state.
                                                     Figure	  I:	  The	  TVA	  Service	  Area	  




                                                                                                         	  
Notes: Figure depicts TVA service area as of 2010.
                                       Figure	  II:	  Federal	  Transfers	  to	  TVA	  by	  Year	  (2000	  Dollars)	  
                                                                                   	  




                                                                                                                                    	  



Notes: Federal transfers defined as net federal outlays plus property transfers minus repayments (see Data Appendix for sources).
                                                                               	  	  

                                                 Figure	  III:	  Weight	  on	  Untreated	  Counties	  

                                                                               	  




                                                                                                                                                              	  
	  
Notes: In a Oaxaca-Blinder regression, each control county is implicitly assigned a weight: counties that look more similar to TVA counties in the years before
TVA receive more weight. The weight, which may be negative, is proportional to an estimate of the odds of treatment. See Kline (2011) for discussion.	  

	  
                                             Figure	  IVa:	  Dynamics	  under	  Linear	  Agglomeration	  




                                                                                                                                                       	  

                                          Figure	  IVb:	  Dynamics	  under	  Nonlinear	  Agglomeration	  




                                                                                                                                                                  	  

Notes: In each figure, the horizontal axis is log manufacturing density and the vertical axis is the log manufacturing wage. SR and LR refer to short run and long
run inverse demand curves respectively (see section IV.C of text). Figure IVa depicts convergence from initial condition to the new unique steady state under
linear agglomeration after a permanent productivity shift. Figure IVb depicts effects of transitory productivity shift on steady state in the presence of nonlinear
agglomeration effects.
                                             Figure	  V:	  Short	  and	  Long	  Run	  Inverse	  Labor	  Demand	  Functions	  
                                                                                         	  




                               2       1
                      Log Productivity
                      −1      0−2




                                               −2                             0                      2                                    4
                                                                            Log Manufacturing Density

                                                                95% Confidence Interval                             LR (estimated)
                                                                SR (calibrated)
                                           Level normalized to zero at zero log manufacturing density
                                                                                                                                              	  


Notes: This figure depicts the short and long run inverse labor demand functions implied by our estimates from column (4) of Table VI, together with a 95%
confidence interval for the long run inverse demand function. The short run inverse demand function is calibrated with slope of -1.5 based on Hamermesh (1993).
    Online Appendix to Kline and Moretti (2013)



Contents
1 Data                                                                                                       1
  1.1 Data on TVA Appropriations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                              .   .   .    1
  1.2 Data Used in the Empirical Analysis and Their Limitations                                 .   .   .    3
  1.3 Geographic Definition of TVA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                            .   .   .    7
  1.4 Geographic Definition of Proposed Authorities . . . . . . .                               .   .   .    7

2 Comparison of structural predictions with reduced form esti-
  mates                                                                       10
  2.1 Unrestricted Direct Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
  2.2 Capital Accumulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

3 Cost Benefit Analysis                                                                                     12
  3.1 TVA and Worker Utility .        . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   12
  3.2 Comparing Aggregate Costs       and Benefits      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   14
  3.3 Relaxing Fixed Supply . .       . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   15
  3.4 Caveats . . . . . . . . . . .   . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   16

4 Appendix Tables and Figures                                                                               17


1     Data
1.1    Data on TVA Appropriations
Data on federal appropriations for the TVA plotted in Figure II of the paper
was collected using financial statements from the TVA’s Annual Reports. From
1934 to 1976, these are Reports to Congress. From 1977 onwards, they are the
usual reports released by corporations in the U.S. The actual names of those
reports changed over time as follows:


                                       1
• 1934/1939: Annual Report of the Tennessee Valley Authority for the Fis-
  cal Year Ended June 30, of the relevant year.

• 1945: Audit of Tennessee Valley Authority for Fiscal Year Ended June 30,
  1945. It contains information from 1938 until 1945.

• 1946-47: Report on the Audit of Tennessee Valley Authority for the Fiscal
  Year Ended June 30, 1946 and 1947.

• 1948-1950: Report on the Audit of Tennessee Valley Authority for the
  Fiscal Year Ended on June 30 pof the relevant year.

• 1951-1957: Audit Report of Tennessee Valley Authority for the Fiscal Year
  Ended June 30 of the relevant year.

• 1958: Audit Report of Tennessee Valley Authority Fiscal Year 1958.

• 1959-1962: Report on Audit of the Tennessee Valley Authority.

• 1963: Report on Audit of Financial Statements of Tennessee Valley Au-
  thority Fiscal Year 1963.

• 1964: Report on Audit of the Financial Statements of the Tennessee Valley
  Authority, Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 1964.

• 1965: Report on the Examination of Financial Statements, Tennessee Val-
  ley Authority, Fiscal Year 1965.

• 1966: An Audit of the Tennessee Valley Authority, Fiscal Year 1966.

• 1967: An Examination of Financial Statements of the Tennessee Valley
  Authority, Fiscal Year 1967.

• 1968-1969: An Examination of Financial Statements Tennessee Valley
  Authority.

• 1970-1976: Examination of Financial Statements of the Tennessee Valley
  Authority.

• 1977-1986: Annual Report of the Tennessee Valley Authority, Volume II
  Appendix, For the Fiscal Year Ending September 30 of the relevant year.

• 1987-1989: Tennessee Valley Authority, Financial Statements for the Fis-
  cal Year Ended September 30 of the relevant year.

                                   2
   • 1991-1993: Annual Report TVA.

   • 1994: Tennessee Valley Authority 1994 Annual Report.

   • 1995: We did not find report for this year, but we recovered the informa-
     tion for it using the reports of 1994 and 1996. That was possible because
     each of those reports presents information comparing the financial situa-
     tion in the current and in the previous year.

   • 1996: 1996 Annual Report, Tennessee Valley Authority.

   • 1997: Tennessee Valley Authority Financial Statements 1997.

   • 1998-1999: We did not find report for these years, but we got the infor-
     mation for them in the Amended 2002 Information Statement Tennessee
     Valley Authority. This amendment provides annual information for the
     period 1998-2002.

   • 2000: TVA Annual Report 2000.


1.2    Data Used in the Empirical Analysis and Their Limi-
       tations
We work with county level data for the years 1900 to 2000. The data for the
years 1900 to 1930 was obtained from Historical, Demographic, Economic, and
Social Data: The United States, 1790-2000, ICPSR 2896 (Parts 20, 22, 24, 26
29 and 85 which correspond to the 1900 Census, 1910 Census, 1920 Census,
1930 Census Part I, 1930 Census Part IV Families and the 1910 Census of
Agriculture) with the exception of the variables manuf, agr, and other, which
were built from individual level data from IPUMS from a 1% extract from the
1900, 1910, 1920 and 1930 Census respectively.
    For 1940 to 1970 each variable was built from two alternative data sources:
the County and City Data Book [United States] Consolidated File: County
Data, 1947-1977, from ICPSR 7736; and from Historical, Demographic, Eco-
nomic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-2000, ICPSR 2896 (Parts
70, 72, 74 and 76, which correspond to the 1947 County Data Book, the 1952
County Data Book, the 1962 County Data Book and the 1972 County Data
Book). In most cases the variable definitions are the same using these two al-
ternative data sources. When the definitions are different, we use the one from
ICPSR 2896.


                                      3
    The data for year 1980 to 2000 was obtained from census extracts from
the National Historical Geographic Information System (NHGIS), with the ex-
ception of variables mwage and vfprod, which were obtained from ICPR 2896
(Parts 79, 80 and 81, which correspond to the 1988 County Data Book, the 1994
County Data Book and the 2000 County Data Book).
    Additionally, we use data on county topography and demographics from the
paper “Data Set for Births, Deaths, and New Deal Relief During the Great
Depression” by Price Fishback, Michael Haines, and Shawn Kantor generously
made available on Price Fishback’s website.
    To avoid issues with county splits and merges we drop areas with more than
a three percent change in square mileage between 1930 and 2000 and we drop the
state of Virginia where splits and merges are common. We also drop counties in
Hawaii or Alaska and underpopulated counties with population less than 1,000
in any decade in the 20th century.
    The quality of some of the key variables is not ideal. Substantial mea-
surement error is likely to be present at the beginning of our sample period.
Moreover, in early years, direct data on workers wages are unavailable at the
county level. As an expedient, we proxy for the average wage in manufacturing
by dividing the total annual wage bill in manufacturing by the estimated num-
ber of workers in the industry. This is unlikely to provide a perfect measure of
the marginal product of labor as it fails to account for differences in the number
of hours worked and quality of workers. Moreover, in some counties, the wage
bill is missing. For agriculture, the county wage bill is not available, so there is
no good way to compute an average agricultural wage.
    More specifically, the key variables are the following:

   • Pop: Total population of each county.

   • Popurb: Urban population in each county. For 1900 to 1920 it was calcu-
     lated as population residing in places of 2,500 or more persons. For 1930,
     1940, 1950 and 2000, calculated directly as total urban population. For
     1960 and 1970, defined as percentage urban times the total population.
     For 1980 and 1990 it was calculated as urban population inside urbanized
     areas plus urban population outside urbanized area.

   • White: Share of Population of White Race. For 1900-1940 and 1970-2000
     defined as total white population over total population. For 1950 and
     1960, it was defined as 1 minus the share of black and races other than


                                         4
  white.

• Emp: Total Employment. Missing for 1900-1920. For 1930, defined as
  the number of “gainful workers” in a county, for 1940 and 1950 defined as
  the total employed workers, for 1960 and 1980 defined as the total civilian
  labor force employed and for 1970 defined as the total civilian force aged
  16 or more employed. For 1990, defined as the male civilian labor force
  employed plus the female labor force employed. For 2000, defined as the
  population 16 and over who worked in 1999.

• Manuf: Share of employment in manufacturing. For 1900 to 1920 defined
  from individual level data as the number of individuals who reported work-
  ing on manufacturing over the total number of individuals with reported
  industry. For 1930, defined as the average number of wage earners in
  manufacturing in 1929 over total employment. For 1940 defined as work-
  ers in manufacturing over total employment. For 1950-1970, defined both
  directly as share of employment in manufacturing and also as workers in
  manufacturing over total employment for 1950, as labor force employed in
  manufacturing of durable goods plus labor force employed in manufactur-
  ing of nondurable goods over total employment for 1960, and as civilian
  labor force aged 16+ employed in manufacturing for 1970. For 1980-1990,
  defined as workers in manufacturing of durable goods plus workers in man-
  ufacturing of nondurable goods, over total employment. For 2000, defined
  as female workers in manufacturing plus male workers in manufacturing,
  over total employment.

• Manuftot: Manufacturing total employment. For 1900-1940 it was defined
  as the average number of manufacturing wage earners and for 1947-1997
  as manufacturing production workers.

• Agr: Share of employment in agriculture. For 1900 to 1930 defined from
  individual level data as the number of individuals who reported working
  on agriculture over the total number of individuals with reported industry.
  For 1940-1960, defined as workers in agriculture over total employment.
  Missing for 1970. For 1980 and 1990 it was defined as the number of work-
  ers employed in agriculture, forestry and fisheries over total employment.
  For 2000, defined as the sum of males and females employed in agriculture,
  forestry, fisheries and hunting and mining over total employment.



                                    5
• Medfaminc: Median family income. Missing for 1900 to 1940. For 1980
  defined as Median family income in 1979. For 1990 defined as Median
  family income in 1989. For 2000 defined as Median income in 1999.

• Mwage: Total county level manufacturing wages in thousands of dollars.
  For 1900, 1920, 1930, given in dollars, so divided by 1,000. For 1940
  defined as 1939 wages. For 1950 defined as 1947 wages of manufacturing
  production workers. For 1960 defined as 1958 wages of manufacturing
  production workers. For 1970 defined as 1967 wages of manufacturing
  production workers, given in millions of dollars, so multiplied by 1,000. For
  1980 defined as 1982 wages of manufacturing production workers, given
  in millions of dollars, so multiplied by 1,000. For 1990 defined as 1987
  wages of manufacturing production workers, given in millions of dollars,
  so multiplied by 1,000. For 2000, defined as 1997 wages of manufacturing
  production workers.

• Pcmwage: per capita county level manufacturing wage. Defined as mwage
  over manuftot.

• Lagged pcmwage: For 1940 defined as 1930 per capita county level man-
  ufacturing wages. For 1960 defined as 1952 per capita wages. For 1970
  defined as 1962 per capita wages. For 1980 defined as 1972 per capita
  wages. For 1990 defined as 1982 per capita wages. For 2000 defined as
  1992 per capita wages from the County Business Patterns.

• House: Total number of housing units. For 1900-1930 defined as total
  dwellings. For 1940-2000 defined as total housing units.

• Vfprod: Value of farm products in thousands of dollars. Total value of
  farm products for each county in thousands of dollars. For 1900, defined
  as the value of miscellaneous crops with acreage reported in 1899 plus the
  value of miscellaneous crops without acreage reported in 1899. For 1910-
  1930, defined as value of all crops divided by 1,000. For 1940, defined as
  value of all farm products sold, traded or used. For 1950-1960, defined as
  value of all farm products sold, in thousands of dollars. For 1970, we use
  the value of farm products sold in farms with sales of $2,500 or more in
  1969. For 1980, defined as value of farm products sold in 1982 in millions of
  dollars, so multiplied by 1000. For 1990, defined as value of farm products
  sold in 1987 in thousands of dollars. For 2000, defined as value of farm
  products sold in 1997 in thousands of dollars.

                                     6
   • Vfland: Value of land. For 1900-1910 defined directly as average value of
     land per acre. For 1920 and 1930 defined as value of land in farms divided
     the number of acres in farms. For 1940-1970, value of farmland in 1945,
     1954, 1959 and 1969.


1.3    Geographic Definition of TVA
The service area expanded over time, though by 1940 TVA already served most
of its final area. In our analysis below we use the most recent and therefore
most comprehensive definition of the TVA service area. A handful of counties
were only partially covered by the TVA service area. For the purpose of our
analysis, we include these counties in the list of TVA counties.


1.4    Geographic Definition of Proposed Authorities
Here we describe the process used to identify the most likely geographical scope
of the proposed authorities. We rely on the historical account of the deliber-
ations in Leuchtenburg (1952, 1997) and on bill HR 1824, titled “The Conser-
vation Authorities Act,” introduced on Jan. 29, 1945, by Representative John
E. Rankin of Mississippi. Among the 10 bills in front of Congress in 1945, HR
1824 appears to be the most detailed. We assume that within each region, the
exact boundaries of each authority would have have been identified using the
same criteria used by TVA geographers and listed in Section 2.2.
    In practice, we started with the definition of the broad regional authorities
enumerated in bill HR 1824:

  1. Atlantic Seaboard: Drainage basins of rivers flowing into the Atlantic
     Ocean and the Gulf of Mexico from the east

  2. Great Lakes-Ohio Valley: Drainage basins of rivers flowing into or from
     the Great Lakes, the Niagara River, the St. Lawrence River and the Ohio
     River (except drainage basins of Tennessee and Cumberland Rivers) and
     of the rivers flowing into the Mississippi River above Cairo, Illinois, from
     the east

  3. Missouri Valley: Drainage basins of the Missouri River and Red River
     of the North and rivers flowing into the Mississippi River above Cairo,
     Illinois, from the west




                                       7
  4. Arkansas Valley: Drainage basins of the Arkansas River, Red River, White
     River, Rio Grande River and rivers flowing into the Mississippi River below
     Cairo, Illinois, from the west and rivers flowing into the Gulf of Mexico
     west of the Mississippi River

  5. Columbia Valley: Drainage basins of the Columbia River and rivers flowing
     into the Pacific Ocean north of the California-Oregon line

  6. Great Basin: Drainage basins of rivers flowing into the Great Basin (have
     no outlet to the sea)

  7. California: Drainage basins of rivers flowing into the Pacific Ocean below
     the California-Oregon line

  8. Colorado: Drainage basin of the Colorado River

While HR 1824 splits the Western authority into three separate authorities:
Great Basin Authority, California Authority, and Colorado Authority, Leucht-
enburg presents as more likely the scenario where these three authorities are
merged into one. Following Leuchtenburg, we merge the last three into one
authority, called Western authority. For each authority, we merged the relevant
hydrology polygons (HUC-2, hydrologic unit code 2) on ArcGIS and obtained
the relevant area. We then merged the data with the Administrative Counties
Boundaries with the area. HUC-2 polygons were obtained from the U.S. Geo-
logical Survey. The polygons are aggregations of Basins and Sub-Basins in this
USGS map http://viewer.nationalmap.gov/viewer/nhd.html?p=nhd.
    As explained in the main text, the proposed legislation broadly identified
the regions that each authority was supposed to belong to, but did not identify
precisely which set of counties within each region would have belonged to each
authority. This is consistent with the process that was adopted for TVA. Recall
that when Congress passed legislation to create TVA, it defined its regional scope
only broadly. The precise list of counties that ended up belonging to the TVA
service area was identified by geographers at the Division of Land Planning and
Housing only later. The geographers defined the borders of service area based
a number of criteria provided by Congress. In Section 2 of the paper we list the
main criteria. The map of TVA drafted by geographers was ultimately approved
by the TVA Board of Directors.
    In order to come up with a concrete definition of the geographic scope of
each proposed authority, we had to select subregions within each authority area,


                                        8
just like the TVA geographers did. To make our selection the least arbitrary as
possible, we sought to replicate the criteria originally used by the geographers
at the Division of Land Planning and Housing to define the TVA borders. For
each of the six regions, we defined each authority as encompassing the subregion
with land mass equal to a third of the region that matches most closely the TVA
geographers’ criteria.
    Specifically, we used the following algorithm:

   1. For each of the 6 proposed authorities, we used a Python script to generate
      all possible sets of spatially adjacent counties within the region.1

   2. For the Western authority, we removed all sets that included counties
      within the Bonneville Power Administration (BPA) service area. The
      BPA is a federal nonprofit agency created by Congress in 1937. Its area
      includes parts of Oregon and Washington states. Similarly to TVA, BPA
      was charged by Congress to built dams and roads, with most of the federal
      investment taking place between the 1940’s and the 1960’s. The BPA
      region is clearly not a good counterfactual, since it did receive treatment
      similar to that of TVA. Additionally, we removed all sets that contained
      counties that touch the boundary of a region. This was done in order to
      prevent the authority subregions from touching each other. For authorities
      1 to 4, we also removed all the counties touching counties belonging to
      TVA, and all the counties touching counties that touch counties belonging
      to TVA. This was done in order to assure that there are at least two “rings”
      of counties between the authority subregions and TVA.

   3. We kept all subregions that had an area equal to a third of the total area
      in the region.2 The resulting number of counties is 227 for region 1; 233
      for region 2; 179 for region 3; 250 for region 4; and 43 for region 5 and
    1 More specifically, starting from the list of all counties, the Python script gen-

erated all combinations of “seed clusters” within that list.           The seed clusters con-
sisted of 4 adjacent counties.The information on adjacent counties is obtained from the
Contiguous County File, 1991 [United States], available from the ICPSR archive at
http://dx.doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR09835.v1
    2 We expanded the seed clusters by attaching the set of all contiguous counties until the

final cluster size is such that the resulting authority subregion has an area that is equal to a
third of the total area in the region. More specifically, in order to determine the final cluster
size, we started from the county that contains the centroid of a region. We attached the set
of counties contiguous to that county, then the set of counties contiguous to those counties
and so on up to the point when the total area of the sub-region reaches a third of the are of
the region. To achieve the exact final cluster size, the Python script grows the cluster until it
exceeds that size, then randomly chooses counties to remove from the last layer added.



                                               9
      6. (Counties in the West are much larger than counties in the rest of the
      country.)

    4. We used the following vector of (standardized) variables measured in 1920
       and 1930 to proxy for the criteria used by the TVA geographers:
      - urban share and share of agriculture over total employment (To identify
      areas that are particularly rural);
      - percent illiterate (to identify areas that lack schools and libraries);
      - manufacturing wage, manufacturing share, population, employment, av-
      erage farm value, median housing value and median rent (to identify areas
      that are economically underdeveloped);
      An important limitation is that we have no way of measuring other criteria
      used by TVA geographer, such as willingness to receive technical and
      advisory assistance from the Authority; existence of planning agencies
      and enabling legislation; willingness to experiment with new fertilizers.

    5. Of all subregions within each region, we selected the subregion that mini-
       mized the Euclidean distance between each subregion’s vector and TVA’s
       vector.

The resulting six authorities are shown in Appendix Figure A2.


2     Comparison of structural predictions with re-
      duced form estimates
We can use our estimated parameters from Tables VI and VII of the paper to
compute impulse responses to the TVA intervention. These predictions can be
compared to the reduced form impacts of Table IV as a check on the model’s
assumptions. We will conduct this exercise in two ways: first without restrict-
ing the direct effects and then assuming that the direct effects obey a capital
accumulation equation.


2.1     Unrestricted Direct Effects
From Table VII, the direct effect of TVA on local labor demand over the 1940-
1960 period is roughly 9% per decade on average. Table VI reports autore-
gressive coefficients ranging over the interval 0.4-0.45 with a standard error of


                                        10
roughly 0.10. Given an autoregressive coefficient of 0.4, one expects a composite
change between 1940 and 1960 in direct demand of .09 × 1.4 + .09 = .216 which
is very close to the reduced form 22.8% impact in column 1 of Table IV.3 Table
VII reports no significant difference in direct effects between 1960 and 1980 or
between 1980 and 2000. The implied impact on growth over the subsequent
1960-2000
           period, assuming nofurther changes in the direct impacts of TVA, is
             2        3        4
  0.4 + (0.4) + (0.4) + (0.4) × .216 = .140 which is very close to the 13.2%
growth impact implied by column 2 of Table IV. This finding is reassuring and
lends additional credibility to our structural estimates. Despite using completely
different sources of variation for identification, our structural estimates are in
line with the reduced form impacts of section III.


2.2    Capital Accumulation
The above calculations assume the direct effects of TVA don’t depreciate af-
ter 1960. An alternative approach is to assume the direct effects δt obey the
recursion:

                                δt = (1 − d) δt−1 + It ,

where d ∈ (0, 1) is a decadal rate of depreciation and It a flow rate of infras-
tructure accumulation between decade t − 1 and t. Supposing that the direct
investment effects of TVA cease after 1960, we have three unknown parame-
ters (I50 , I60 , d). These parameters can be fit to our three estimated moments
(δ60 − δ40 , δ80 − δ60 , δ2000 − δ80 ) reported in Table VII. Assuming, as usual, that
δ40 = 0, we have that:

                            δ60 − δ40 = I60 + (1 − d) I50



                      δ80 − δ60 = [−d − d (1 − d)] (δ60 − δ40 )



                     δ2000 − δ80 = [−d − d (1 − d)] (δ80 − δ60 ) .

From Table VII, (δ60 − δ40 , δ80 − δ60 , δ2000 − δ80 ) = (0.185, −0.036, 0.033) with
  3 The estimates in Table IV are decadalized. Throughout this section we multiply by the

appropriate number of decades to infer the total change over the specified period.



                                           11
corresponding standard errors (0.081, 0.033,0.035). A variance weighted nonlin-
ear least squares fit to these moments yields Iˆ50 , Iˆ60 , dˆ = (0.053, 0.131, 0.021).4
                                                                                      1/10
Note that this estimate implies an annual depreciation rate of 1 − (1 − 0.021)     = 0.002.
    Using these parameter estimates (and continuing with our autoregressive
point estimate of 0.4) we predict an increase in log manufacturing employment
over the 1940-1960 period of I60 + (1 + .4 − d) I50 = 0.206 which is slightly be-
low the reduced form estimate of 0.228 from column 1 of Table IV and almost
identical to the estimate of 0.194 derived from column 5 of Table IV which relies
on proposed authorities for controls. Over the 1960-2000
                                                 P         period, we predict an
                                                    4            k
increase in manufacturing employment of 0.206       k=1 (.4 − d)     = 0.123. This
compares favorably with the corresponding reduced form figure from column 2
of Table IV which is 0.132. This exercise suggests TVA’s direct effects are con-
sistent with infrastructure investments obeying a small but positive depreciation
rate.


3     Cost Benefit Analysis
To quantify the nationwide benefits of the productivity gains associated with
the TVA, we compute the steady state elasticity of worker utility with respect to
the TVA’s productivity effects. This elasticity is combined with our estimates
of the direct productivity effects of the TVA to compute an impact on worker
welfare which is then converted to dollars terms.
    We begin in subsection 3.1 by deriving the formula for the elasticity of worker
utility with respect to TVA’s local investments under the assumption of fixed
sectoral labor supply. In subsection 3.2 we compare costs and benefits of the
program under this assumption. In subsection 3.3 we generalize our analysis to
the more plausible case of elastic supply. In subsection 3.4 we highlight some
key limitations.


3.1     TVA and Worker Utility
We begin by developing the additional general equilibrium assumptions neces-
sary to conduct our analysis. In particular, we add to our model the following
sectoral market clearing condition:
   4 Although there are three moments and three parameters, the estimated moments do

not exactly obey the parametric restrictions. This necessitates the nonlinear least squares
approach which searches for the best fitting set of parameters.




                                            12
                                     LSt (ut ) = LD
                                                  t (ut )                                   (1)

where LSt denotes the aggregate supply of manufacturing workers in period t
which is increasing in the utility level ut . LD
                                                   P
                                               t ≡  i Lit denotes aggregate labor
demand which is decreasing in manufacturing wages and hence, also in ut .
    A useful baseline assumption for our analysis is to assume that the supply
of manufacturing workers is fixed at each moment in time (LSt (ut ) = Lt ). We
will relax this assumption below. With fixed supply, gains in the TVA region
must be offset by losses elsewhere and increases in aggregate demand must be
offset by changes in wages.
    Though our model is dynamic, our structural estimates indicate the rate of
adjustment to the steady state is relatively rapid, which suggests that a steady
state analysis should provide a good approximation to a full dynamic solution.5
The steady state of our model is given by equation (6) in the paper and the
following equations:

                                          P
                                             i   Li =L                                      (2)


                                      ln wi + Mi = u


                           β           β           α          1
         ln wi = C −          ln Li +     ln Fi −     ln r +     ln Ai
                          1−α         1−α         1−α        1−α

We are interested in the elasticity of worker utility with respect to TVA’s local
investments, which can be written:


               du          d ln wi      1 1              dLi    1
                      =            =−          (β − σi )     +     Di
               dδ             dδ      1 − α Li            dδ   1−α
              dLi
Solving for    dδ   yields:

                                  dLi   Di − (1 − α) dudδ
                                      =    1
                                          Li (β − σi )
                                   dδ
   5 In addition to its simplicity, a steady state analysis has the advantage of formalizing our

intuition from section IV of the paper that a constant agglomeration elasticity renders the
magnitude of agglomeration economies irrelevant for welfare purposes.




                                                 13
But (2) implies:

                       X dLi         X Di − (1 − α) du
                                                                dδ
                                 =             1                     =0
                        i
                            dδ           i     Li   (β − σi )

Hence, the elasticity of interest can be written:

                                                P       Di Li
                            du                1  i      β−σi
                                     =                   Li
                                                                 .
                                             1−α i
                                                P
                            dδ                          β−σi


With a constant agglomeration elasticity (σi = σ), this expression simplifies to:

                                                 P
                            du                1   i Di Li
                                     =            P       .                        (3)
                            dδ               1−α    i Li

Note that this formula doesn’t depend upon the strength of agglomeration forces
σ. This is because, with a constant elasticity, the agglomeration effects of worker
reallocation cancel out. Hence, worker utility simply increases in proportion
to the TVA region’s share of the manufacturing workforce. In essence, this
expression tells us that TVA should be thought of as only nominally place
based in nature. Rather, it is a national investment that raises welfare through
its direct effects on the productivity of a fraction of the manufacturing workforce.
    While it is certainly possible that agglomeration elasticities do vary across
communities, our point estimates of g (.) are so close to log-linear that we expect
the effects of small nonlinearities to be trivial. Hence, we turn now to using the
simple expression in (3) to assess TVA’s benefits.


3.2    Comparing Aggregate Costs and Benefits
We now have all the pieces that are needed to compare the TVA’s costs to
its benefits. TVA’s share of national manufacturing employment
                                                     P            in 1940 was
                                                         Di Li
approximately 3.3% which we use as our estimate of    Pi
                                                               . This number, Li
                                                                          i
along with our estimates from Table VII, allow us to quantify TVA’s impact
on national productivity. Specifically, we find that the program raised national
productivity by .087×.033×100=.3% between 1940 and 1960. This is a plausible
magnitude that will be shown to imply important effects on worker utility.
                 1
   Given that 1−α   ≈ 1.43, our estimate of the utility elasticity of TVA produc-



                                              14
tivity is du
          dδ ≈ 1.43 × .033 = .047. From Table VII, we know that δ increased by
roughly .087 between 1940 and 1960 and may have declined slowly in subsequent
years. Interpolating linearly, we assume δ grew by .0044 per year between 1940
and 1960 and then fell by .0002 per year afterward due to depreciation. Ap-
pendix Table A5 details this calculation. Multiplying dudδ by each year’s level of δ
yields the proportional utility gain in the manufacturing sector in that year. We
then multiply this figure by the manufacturing wage bill in that year in order to
value the utility gain measured in 2000 dollars. This yields the flow of program
benefits in column 4 of Appendix Table A5. The net present value of this stream
of benefits using a real annual discount rate of 3% is roughly $33.8B.6 This is to
be compared with the present value of federal transfers which amount to $17.3B.
Hence, we find a substantial rate of return to the TVA’s public investments, with
benefits nearly double program costs.


3.3     Relaxing Fixed Supply
The fixed supply assumption upon which the above estimates are predicated is a
strong one. If sectoral labor supply is not fixed, manufacturing gains in the TVA
region need not crowd out the manufacturing bases of other geographic areas.
Rather, workers will be diverted, in part, from other sectors (e.g. agriculture or
home production). Suppose we replace (2) with the assumption that

                                        X
                                            Li = L (u)
                                        i


This implies that

                     X dLi         X Di − (1 − α) du               0      du
                                                           dδ
                               =            1                   = L (u)
                      i
                          dδ        i       Li   (β − σ)                  dδ

Some algebra yields a new expression for the utility elasticity of the TVA’s
productivity effects:
                                                 P
                          du           1          i Di Li
                             =                    P       ,
                          dδ   1 − α + (β − σ) ψ    i Li

               0
where ψ ≡ L (u) /L is the elasticity of labor supply to the manufacturing sec-
tor. Note that now the level of the agglomeration elasticity is relevant for our
   6 This figure assumes the benefits end discretely in the year 2000, when our data end. If

one assumes a permanent effect after 2000, our estimate rises slightly to $36.5B.


                                                 15
calculation. This is because increases in market size lead to additional agglom-
eration everywhere and hence additional productivity. This force is offset by the
fixed factor which yields declining marginal products as market size increases.
Given the basic regularity condition that β > σ, this expression has the intu-
itive property that the utility consequences of TVA on manufacturing workers
dissipate as the elasticity of labor supply to the sector increases.7 Moreover, if
the elasticity is zero, we return to the expression for the fixed supply case.
    To assess the impact of a reasonable degree of elasticity to the manufacturing
sector we set ψ = 1. And following our earlier calibrations, we take β − σ = .33.
                      1
This gives us 1−α+(β−σ)ψ      ≈ 1 and hence dudδ ≈ .033. The stream of benefits
associated with this choice of parameters is reported in columns (5) and (6)
of Table VIII. Under this calibration, the net present value of benefits in the
manufacturing sector falls to approximately $23.8B – still above program costs
but significantly lower than before.


3.4     Caveats
Several caveats are worth keeping in mind when interpreting our results. First,
with variable supply, the outflow of workers from other sectors may yield wage
increases in those sectors which are not captured in our accounting of benefits.
However, if the sectors from which workers are diverted exhibit roughly constant
returns to scale, then wages may remain stable in the face of outflows, provided
workers are not too heterogeneous in their tastes for sectors.
    Second, for a variety of reasons, labor market impacts probably capture
only a fraction of the true general equilibrium impact of TVA. For example,
with transport costs or trading frictions, it is possible that the productivity
enhancements associated with TVA would depress the national price of manu-
factured goods. This would result in increased consumer surplus ignored in our
calculation.
    In the other direction, we have ignored the social costs associated with raising
the federal funds transferred to TVA via taxation. Feldstein (1999), for example,
estimates the marginal cost of funds at thirty cents on the federal dollar. We are
not aware of econometric estimates of the marginal cost of funds for the 1940-
1960 period during which TVA received the bulk of its transfers but can imagine
   7 If β < σ the model would become unstable as the steady state demand curve for labor

would slope up globally. This would lead to an equilibrium where all labor locates at a single
point.




                                             16
that the costs were substantial. This dead weight loss is likely to increase
substantially the ultimate social costs of the program.
    Finally, our analysis relies on steady state approximations to the time path of
welfare impacts on manufacturing workers. These approximations simplify our
analysis dramatically, but a more sophisticated analysis taking into account out
of steady state dynamics would be interesting, if tedious. In particular, such an
analysis would have the advantage of capturing interactions (which we ignore)
between national shocks to manufacturing and TVA’s dynamic productivity
effects.


4    Appendix Tables and Figures




                                        17
                                     	  Table	  A1:	  Decadalized	  Impact	  of	  TVA	  on	  Growth	  Rate	  of	  Outcomes	  of	  Counties	  Around	  TVA	  (1940-­‐2000)
                                                                                         Point	  Estimate	                           Point	  Estimate	  
                                                                                                                 Clustered	  S.E.                             Clustered	  S.E.       Spatial	  HAC                             N
                                                                                          (Unadjusted)                                     (Controls)
                                             Outcome                                               (1)                     (2)                      (3)                (4)                 (5)                                  (6)
      (1)                                  Population                                          -­‐0.022                (0.022)                  -­‐0.020             (0.024)             (0.025)                               1881
      (2)                                 Employment                                           -­‐0.030                (0.028)                  -­‐0.022             (0.029)             (0.030)                               1880
      (2)                   Average	  Manufacturing	  Wage                                 0.024***                  (0.006)                    0.004              (0.004)             (0.004)                               1101
      (3)                        Agricultural	  Employment                                -­‐0.115***                 (0.027)                  -­‐0.030             (0.024)             (0.021)                               1881
      (4)                    Manufacturing	  Employment                                       -­‐0.006                (0.025)                    0.015              (0.029)             (0.025)                               1881
      (5)                     Value	  of	  Farm	  Production                                -­‐0.027                (0.025)                    0.017              (0.030)             (0.028)                               1877
      (6)               Median	  Family	  Income	  	  (1950-­‐2000	  only)             0.062***                   (0.013)                   0.011               (0.013)             (0.011)                               1877
      (7)                  Average	  Agricultural	  Land	  Value                         0.070***                   (0.026)                  -­‐0.006             (0.027)             (0.029)                               1880

Note:	  Counties	  arriound	  TVA	  are	  defined	  as	  counties	  neighboring	  TVA	  and	  counties	  neighboring	  counties	  neighboring	  TVA.	  Column	  (1)	  gives	  the	  unconditional	  
difference	  between	  counties	  around	  TVA	  and	  non-­‐TVA	  counties	  in	  the	  1940-­‐2000	  change	  in	  the	  log	  of	  the	  relevant	  outcome	  divided	  by	  six.	  Column	  (3)	  adjusts	  for	  
pre-­‐program	  differences	  between	  counties	  around	  TVA	  and	  controls	  via	  a	  Oaxaca-­‐Blinder	  regression	  as	  in	  Kline	  (2011).	  Covariates	  include	  time	  invariant	  geographic	  
characteristics	  and	  levels	  and	  trends	  in	  pre-­‐program	  industrial	  mix,	  population,	  and	  demographic	  characteristics	  (see	  Section	  III.A	  for	  full	  list	  of	  covariates).	  
Clustered	  S.E.	  columns	  provide	  standard	  errors	  estimates	  clustered	  by	  state.	  Spatial	  HAC	  column	  provides	  standard	  error	  estimates	  based	  upon	  technique	  of	  
Conley	  (1999)	  using	  bandwidth	  of	  200	  miles.	  	  Stars	  based	  upon	  clustered	  standard	  errors.	  Legend:	  *	  significant	  at	  10%	  level,	  **	  significant	  at	  5%	  level,	  ***	  
significant	  at	  1%	  level.
    	  Table	  A2:	  Alternative	  Structural	  Estimates	  of	  Agglomeration	  Function	  (Wage	  
                             Coefficient	  is	  Estimated	  Instead	  of	  Calibrated)
                                                                  (1)                              (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
                                                                 OLS                               OLS               OLS              2SLS              2SLS              2SLS
Change	  in	  Manufacturing	  Density	  Spline	  Components:
                                                                0.028                           0.024             0.023                    0.060          0.051                0.050
                          Low                                 (0.0084)                         (0.0085)          (0.0084)                (0.023)        (0.023)              (0.023)
                                                                                                                                        [129.23] [122.25] [121.08]
                                                                                  0.0098           0.011                0.011              0.022          0.023                0.022
                              Medium                                             (0.0033) (0.0033) (0.0033) (0.0069) (0.0068) (0.0069)
                                                                                                                                        [115.89] [114.05] [115.82]
                                                                               -­‐0.00019 -­‐0.00010 -­‐0.00016 0.00037                                 0.00058             0.00043
                                  High                                       (0.00067) (0.00068) (0.00064) (0.0011) (0.0011) (0.0011)
                                                                                                                                         [42.46]        [41.60]              [32.52]
Log	  Manufacturing	  Wages                                                      -­‐0.046       -­‐0.049            -­‐0.050            -­‐0.063       -­‐0.065             -­‐0.066
                                                                                  (0.036)        (0.035)            (0.035)              (0.038)        (0.037)              (0.038)
TVA                                                                               0.0079           0.012                0.011            0.00092        0.0059               0.0044
                                                                                  (0.013)        (0.012)            (0.013)              (0.013)        (0.013)              (0.014)
Regional	  Trends                                                                     no             no                  yes                 no              no                   yes
1940	  Manufacturing	  Density                                                       no             yes                 yes                 no              yes                  yes
Decade	  Effects                                                                      yes            yes                 yes                 yes             yes                  yes
Controls	  for	  1920	  and	  1930	  characteristics                              yes            yes                 yes                 yes             yes                  yes
P-­‐value	  equal	  slopes                                                      0.0002         0.0003             0.0004               0.0016         0.0022               0.0040
P-­‐value	  slopes	  equal	  zero                                              0.0006         0.0010             0.0012               0.0038         0.0064               0.0109
N                                                                                    6,057          6,057               6,057               5,952          5,952                5,952
Notes:	  This	  table	  reports	  estimates	  of	  models	  similar	  to	  the	  ones	  in	  Table	  V,	  but	  here	  the	  coefficient	  on	  wages	  is	  
estimated,	  not	  calibrated.	  Dependent	  variable	  is	  change	  in	  log	  county	  manufacturing	  employment.	  Manufacturing	  
density	  is	  manufacturing	  employment	  per	  square	  mile.	  Standard	  errors	  clustered	  by	  state	  in	  parentheses.	  Angrist-­‐
Pischke	  cluster	  robust	  first	  stage	  F-­‐stat	  in	  brackets.	  All	  estimates	  weighted	  by	  1950	  county	  population.	  "Low"	  refers	  to	  
spline	  component	  corresponding	  to	  density	  below	  60th	  percentile	  of	  1980	  distribution,	  "Medium"	  to	  density	  between	  
60th	  and	  85th	  percentile	  of	  1980	  distribution,	  and	  "High"	  to	  density	  above	  85th	  percentile	  of	  1980	  distribution.	  Spline	  
coefficients	  give	  the	  proportional	  effect	  on	  labor	  demand	  of	  an	  increase	  in	  lagged	  manufacturing	  density	  of	  one	  worker	  
per	  square	  mile	  over	  the	  relevant	  range.
Table	  A3:	  Alternative	  Structural	  Estimates	  of	  Agglomeration	  Function	  (Alternate	  
                         Values	  for	  Short	  Run	  Elasticity	  of	  Demand)
                                                                  (1)                               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
                                                                2SLS                               2SLS              2SLS              2SLS              2SLS              2SLS
Change	  in	  Manufacturing	  Density	  Spline	  Components:
                                                                0.084                             0.073             0.071              0.11             0.096             0.094
                          Low                                  (0.031)                           (0.031)           (0.031)           (0.044)           (0.044)           (0.044)
                                                              [129.06]                          [122.25]          [121.07]          [129.06]          [122.25]          [121.07]
                                                                0.035                             0.036             0.035             0.049             0.049             0.049
                        Medium                                (0.0093)                          (0.0090)          (0.0089)           (0.013)           (0.013)           (0.013)
                                                              [116.87]                          [114.87]          [116.66]          [116.87]          [114.87]          [116.66]
                                                               0.0014                            0.0016            0.0013            0.0024            0.0027            0.0023
                          High                                (0.0016)                          (0.0016)          (0.0016)          (0.0024)          (0.0025)          (0.0024)
                                                               [41.82]                           [40.96]           [32.04]           [41.82]           [40.96]           [32.04]
Log	  Manufacturing	  Wages
                                                                   -­‐1                              -­‐1              -­‐1              -­‐2              -­‐2              -­‐2
TVA                                                                             -­‐0.0030         0.0029           -­‐0.0013          -­‐0.0073 -­‐0.00036 -­‐0.0074
                                                                                 (0.015)          (0.015)           (0.015)            (0.019)       (0.018)               (0.018)
Regional	  Trends                                                                   no             no                   yes               no              no                    yes
1940	  Manufacturing	  Density                                                     no             yes                  yes               no              yes                   yes
Decade	  Effects                                                                   yes             yes                  yes              yes              yes                   yes
Controls	  for	  1920	  and	  1930	  characteristics                           yes             yes                  yes              yes              yes                   yes
P-­‐value	  equal	  slopes                                                     0.0004           0.0004            0.0004             0.0013         0.0011               0.0011
P-­‐value	  slopes	  equal	  zero                                             0.0013           0.0011            0.0014             0.0034         0.0022               0.0027
N                                                                                  5,952           5,952                5,952            5,952         5,952                5,952
Notes:	  This	  table	  reports	  estimates	  of	  models	  similar	  to	  the	  ones	  in	  Table	  V,	  using	  alternative	  values	  for	  th	  short	  run	  
elasticity	  of	  demand.	  Dependent	  variable	  is	  change	  in	  log	  county	  manufacturing	  employment.	  Manufacturing	  density	  is	  
manufacturing	  employment	  per	  square	  mile.	  Standard	  errors	  clustered	  by	  state	  in	  parentheses.	  Angrist-­‐Pischke	  cluster	  
robust	  first	  stage	  F-­‐stat	  in	  brackets.	  All	  estimates	  weighted	  by	  1950	  county	  population.	  "Low"	  refers	  to	  spline	  
component	  corresponding	  to	  density	  below	  60th	  percentile	  of	  1980	  distribution,	  "Medium"	  to	  density	  between	  60th	  
and	  85th	  percentile	  of	  1980	  distribution,	  and	  "High"	  to	  density	  above	  85th	  percentile	  of	  1980	  distribution.	  Spline	  
coefficients	  give	  the	  proportional	  effect	  on	  labor	  demand	  of	  an	  increase	  in	  lagged	  manufacturing	  density	  of	  one	  worker	  
per	  square	  mile	  over	  the	  relevant	  range.
Table	  A4:	  Alternative	  Structural	  Estimates	  of	  Agglomeration	  Function	  (Tercile	  Knots	  
                                       Different	  from	  Baseline)
                                                                                   (1)                 (2)               (3)                  (4)                 (5)               (6)
                                                                                   OLS                 OLS               OLS                 2SLS                2SLS              2SLS
Change	  in	  Manufacturing	  Density	  Spline	  Components:
                                                                                  0.12               0.094              0.093                0.31                0.27              0.27
                          Bottom	  Tercile                                     (0.042)             (0.044)            (0.043)             (0.089)             (0.093)           (0.094)
                                                                                                                                          [105.36]             [86.76]           [86.31]
                                                                                0.039               0.037              0.037                 0.11                0.11              0.10
                          Middle	  Tercile                                    (0.0080)            (0.0081)           (0.0079)             (0.031)             (0.030)           (0.030)
                                                                                                                                           [81.21]             [80.58]           [79.64]
                                                                              -­‐0.000030         0.000048 -­‐0.000091                     0.0022              0.0024            0.0020
                             Top	  Tercile                                    (0.00078)          (0.00079) (0.00075)                     (0.0019)            (0.0020)          (0.0020)
                                                                                                                                           [42.97]             [42.34]           [33.03]
Log	  Manufacturing	  Wages
                                                                                   -­‐1.5              -­‐1.5            -­‐1.5              -­‐1.5              -­‐1.5             -­‐1.5
TVA                                                                             0.0097               0.014                0.0098          -­‐0.0047 -­‐0.0000050 -­‐0.0040
                                                                                (0.015)             (0.015)              (0.015)           (0.016)               (0.016)           (0.016)
Regional	  Trends                                                                no                     no                 yes                 no                    no               yes
1940	  Manufacturing	  Density                                                  no                     yes                yes                 no                    yes              yes
Decade	  Effects                                                                 yes                    yes                yes                yes                    yes              yes
Controls	  for	  1920	  and	  1930	  characteristics                         yes                    yes                yes                yes                    yes              yes
P-­‐value	  equal	  slopes                                                    0.0000              0.0000                0.0000           0.0000                0.0000            0.0000
P-­‐value	  slopes	  equal	  zero                                            0.0000              0.0001                0.0001           0.0000                0.0001            0.0002
N                                                                                6,057               6,057                 6,057              5,952               5,952             5,952
Notes:	  This	  table	  reports	  estimates	  of	  models	  similar	  to	  the	  ones	  in	  Table	  V,	  using	  different	  values	  for	  the	  spline	  knots	  .	  
Dependent	  variable	  is	  change	  in	  log	  county	  manufacturing	  employment.	  Manufacturing	  density	  is	  manufacturing	  
employment	  per	  square	  mile.	  Standard	  errors	  clustered	  by	  state	  in	  parentheses.	  Angrist-­‐Pischke	  cluster	  robust	  first	  stage	  F-­‐
stat	  in	  brackets.	  All	  estimates	  weighted	  by	  1950	  county	  population.	  "Bottom	  Tercile"	  refers	  to	  spline	  component	  
corresponding	  to	  density	  below	  33rd	  percentile	  of	  1980	  distribution,	  "Middle	  Tercile"	  to	  density	  between	  33rd	  and	  66th	  
percentile	  of	  1980	  distribution,	  and	  "Top	  Tercile"	  to	  density	  above	  66th	  percentile	  of	  1980	  distribution.	  Spline	  coefficients	  
give	  the	  proportional	  effect	  on	  labor	  demand	  of	  an	  increase	  in	  lagged	  manufacturing	  density	  of	  one	  worker	  per	  square	  mile	  
over	  the	  relevant	  range.
                                                              Table	  A5:	  Estimated	  Benefits	  of	  TVA
      (1)                   (2)                           (3)                      (4)                                 (5)                             (6)                                   (7)
                          Log	                                              Utility	  Gain	  in	                                             Utility	  Gain	  in	  
                                                     Direct	                                                  Dollar	  Value                                                      Dollar	  Value
                    Manufacturing	                                          Manufacturing	                                                    Manufacturing	  
     Year                                         Productivity                                                (Fixed	  Supply)                                                   (Variable	  Supply)
                    Wage	  Bill	  (2000	                                      Sector                                                              Sector
                                                     Effect
                            $)                                               (Fixed	  Supply)                                                 (Variable	  Supply)
    1940               25.558                          0.000                     0.00%                             $0                                0.00%                               $0
    1941               25.614                          0.004                     0.02%                         $27,508,733                           0.01%                           $19,314,642
    1942               25.670                          0.009                     0.04%                         $58,184,951                           0.03%                           $40,853,263
    1943               25.726                          0.013                     0.06%                         $92,302,193                           0.04%                           $64,807,922
    1944               25.782                          0.018                     0.08%                        $130,154,996                           0.06%                           $91,385,422
    1945               25.838                          0.022                     0.10%                        $172,060,406                           0.07%                          $120,808,370
    1946               25.894                          0.026                     0.12%                        $218,359,593                           0.09%                          $153,316,310
    1947               25.950                          0.031                     0.14%                        $269,419,579                           0.10%                          $189,166,939
    1948               26.006                          0.035                     0.17%                        $325,635,083                           0.12%                          $228,637,399
    1949               26.062                          0.040                     0.19%                        $387,430,492                           0.13%                          $272,025,665
    1950               26.118                          0.044                     0.21%                        $455,261,973                           0.15%                          $319,652,024
    1951               26.174                          0.048                     0.23%                        $529,619,722                           0.16%                          $371,860,656
    1952               26.230                          0.053                     0.25%                        $611,030,372                           0.17%                          $429,021,325
    1953               26.285                          0.057                     0.27%                        $700,059,562                           0.19%                          $491,531,182
    1954               26.341                          0.062                     0.29%                        $797,314,685                           0.20%                          $559,816,693
    1955               26.397                          0.066                     0.31%                        $903,447,819                           0.22%                          $634,335,703
    1956               26.453                          0.070                     0.33%                       $1,019,158,862                          0.23%                          $715,579,626
    1957               26.509                          0.075                     0.35%                       $1,145,198,872                          0.25%                          $804,075,804
    1958               26.565                          0.079                     0.37%                       $1,282,373,642                          0.26%                          $900,390,004
    1959               26.621                          0.084                     0.39%                       $1,431,547,512                          0.28%                         $1,005,129,104
    1960               26.677                          0.088                     0.41%                       $1,593,647,438                          0.29%                         $1,118,943,946
    1961               26.706                          0.088                     0.41%                       $1,635,676,500                          0.29%                         $1,148,453,713
    1962               26.734                          0.088                     0.41%                       $1,678,805,278                          0.29%                         $1,178,735,621
    1963               26.762                          0.087                     0.41%                       $1,723,062,275                          0.29%                         $1,209,809,682
    1964               26.791                          0.087                     0.41%                       $1,768,476,722                          0.29%                         $1,241,696,422
    1965               26.819                          0.087                     0.41%                       $1,815,078,603                          0.29%                         $1,274,416,891
    1966               26.847                          0.087                     0.41%                       $1,862,898,664                          0.29%                         $1,307,992,679
    1967               26.875                          0.087                     0.41%                       $1,911,968,441                          0.29%                         $1,342,445,927
    1968               26.904                          0.086                     0.41%                       $1,962,320,277                          0.29%                         $1,377,799,344
    1969               26.932                          0.086                     0.41%                       $2,013,987,341                          0.28%                         $1,414,076,218
    1970               26.960                          0.086                     0.40%                       $2,067,003,650                          0.28%                         $1,451,300,435
    1971               26.989                          0.086                     0.40%                       $2,121,404,089                          0.28%                         $1,489,496,488
    1972               27.017                          0.086                     0.40%                       $2,177,224,436                          0.28%                         $1,528,689,498
    1973               27.045                          0.085                     0.40%                       $2,234,501,382                          0.28%                         $1,568,905,226
    1974               27.074                          0.085                     0.40%                       $2,293,272,553                          0.28%                         $1,610,170,091
    1975               27.102                          0.085                     0.40%                       $2,353,576,536                          0.28%                         $1,652,511,185
    1976               27.130                          0.085                     0.40%                       $2,415,452,903                          0.28%                         $1,695,956,293
    1977               27.159                          0.085                     0.40%                       $2,478,942,232                          0.28%                         $1,740,533,907
    1978               27.187                          0.084                     0.40%                       $2,544,086,137                          0.28%                         $1,786,273,245
    1979               27.215                          0.084                     0.40%                       $2,610,927,291                          0.28%                         $1,833,204,268
    1980               27.243                          0.084                     0.39%                       $2,679,509,456                          0.28%                         $1,881,357,703
    1981               27.224                          0.084                     0.39%                       $2,620,450,037                          0.28%                         $1,839,890,451
    1982               27.204                          0.084                     0.39%                       $2,562,677,758                          0.28%                         $1,799,326,936
    1983               27.184                          0.083                     0.39%                       $2,506,164,823                          0.28%                         $1,759,647,641
    1984               27.164                          0.083                     0.39%                       $2,450,884,033                          0.27%                         $1,720,833,470
    1985               27.144                          0.083                     0.39%                       $2,396,808,773                          0.27%                         $1,682,865,735
    1986               27.124                          0.083                     0.39%                       $2,343,912,997                          0.27%                         $1,645,726,147
    1987               27.104                          0.083                     0.39%                       $2,292,171,218                          0.27%                         $1,609,396,812
    1988               27.084                          0.082                     0.39%                       $2,241,558,494                          0.27%                         $1,573,860,219
    1989               27.064                          0.082                     0.39%                       $2,192,050,420                          0.27%                         $1,539,099,231
    1990               27.044                          0.082                     0.39%                       $2,143,623,114                          0.27%                         $1,505,097,080
    1991               27.025                          0.082                     0.38%                       $2,096,253,205                          0.27%                         $1,471,837,357
    1992               27.005                          0.082                     0.38%                       $2,049,917,825                          0.27%                         $1,439,304,005
    1993               26.985                          0.081                     0.38%                       $2,004,594,595                          0.27%                         $1,407,481,311
    1994               26.965                          0.081                     0.38%                       $1,960,261,618                          0.27%                         $1,376,353,902
    1995               26.945                          0.081                     0.38%                       $1,916,897,466                          0.27%                         $1,345,906,731
    1996               26.925                          0.081                     0.38%                       $1,874,481,170                          0.27%                         $1,316,125,077
    1997               26.905                          0.081                     0.38%                       $1,832,992,214                          0.27%                         $1,286,994,534
    1998               26.885                          0.080                     0.38%                       $1,792,410,521                          0.27%                         $1,258,501,004
    1999               26.865                          0.080                     0.38%                       $1,752,716,443                          0.26%                         $1,230,630,694
    2000               26.845                          0.080                     0.38%                       $1,713,890,758                          0.26%                         $1,203,370,106

Notes:	  Column	  (1)	  reports	  the	  natural	  logarithm	  of	  totals	  from	  the	  Decennial	  Census	  and	  linearly	  interpolates	  inter-­‐censal	  years.	  
Column	  (2)	  provides	  interpolated	  estimates	  of	  the	  direct	  productivity	  effects	  of	  the	  TVA	  as	  described	  in	  the	  text.	  Column	  (3)	  
multiplies	  column	  (2)	  by	  0.047,	  which	  is	  the	  utility	  elasticity	  under	  fixed	  labor	  supply,	  in	  order	  to	  arrive	  at	  the	  proportional	  impact	  on	  
worker	  wages.	  Column	  (4)	  multiplies	  column	  (3)	  by	  the	  manufacturing	  wage	  bill	  in	  order	  to	  arrive	  at	  a	  dollar	  value.	  Column	  (5)	  
multiplies	  column	  (2)	  by	  .033,	  which	  is	  the	  utility	  elasticity	  when	  labor	  supply	  to	  the	  manufacturing	  sector	  exhibits	  a	  unit	  elasticity.	  
Column	  (6)	  multiplies	  column	  (5)	  by	  the	  wage	  bill	  in	  order	  to	  arrive	  at	  a	  dollar	  value.
                                                         Figure A1 – Estimation Sample




Notes: Map depicts the main estimation sample used in analysis. Counties in Virginia were dropped because of changes in county boundaries. Other non-TVA
counties were dropped because of pre-program characteristics putting them in the bottom quartile of estimated propensity scores. Ring of counties adjacent to TVA
were also dropped.
                                                Figure A2: Map of Proposed Authorities




Notes: The map displays in black the six proposed authorities: the Atlantic Seaboard Authority, the Great Lakes-Ohio Valley Authority, the Missouri Valley
Authority, the Arkansas Valley Authority, the Columbia Authority, and the Western Authority. The TVA region is displayed in gray.
