                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE INCENTIVE EFFECT OF SCORES:
                 RANDOMIZED EVIDENCE FROM CREDIT COMMITTEES

                                          Daniel Paravisini
                                          Antoinette Schoar

                                        Working Paper 19303
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19303


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2013


Previously circulated as "The Incentive Effect of IT: Randomized Evidence from Credit Committees."
We are grateful to Heski Bar-Isaac, Greg Fischer, Luis Garicano, Danielle Li, Ulrike Malmendier,
Andrea Prat, Anjan Thakor, John Van Reenen, and the Arizona State University, Boston University,
Columbia University, Darmouth College - Tuck School of Business, HEC School of Management,
Imperial College Business School, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, Helsinki Center of Economic Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
- Sloan School of Business, Northwestern University - Kellogg School of Management, Nova School
of Business and Economics, Queen Mary School of Economics and Finance, Swiss Finance Institute
- USI, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, University of Lausanne, University of London - Royal
Holloway College, University of Namur, University of Oxford - SAID Business School, University
of Toulouse, and Washington University seminar participants; and the CEPR Workshop on Incentives,
Management and Organization, CEPR/AMID Development Economics Symposium, the NBER Corporate
Finance Workshop, the NBER Productivity, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship Workshop, and the
NBER Organizational Economics Workshop participants for helpful comments and discussions. We
wish to thank BancaMia for their support, and Gustavo Caballero, Ximena Cadenas, Isabela Echeverry,
Santiago Reyes and Lucia Sanchez for excellent research assistance. We thank IPA for the funding
that made this study possible. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Daniel Paravisini and Antoinette Schoar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Incentive Effect of Scores: Randomized Evidence from Credit Committees
Daniel Paravisini and Antoinette Schoar
NBER Working Paper No. 19303
August 2013, Revised July 2015
JEL No. D23,G21,L23,O33

                                            ABSTRACT

We design a randomized controlled trial to evaluate the adoption of credit scoring with a bank that
uses soft information in small businesses lending. We find that credit scores improve the productivity
of credit committees, reduce managerial involvement in the loan approval process, and increase the
profitability of lending. Credit committee members' effort and output also increase when they anticipate
the score becoming available, indicating that scores improve incentives to use existing information.
Our results imply that credit scores improve the efficiency and decentralize decision-making in loan
production, which has implications for the optimal organization of banks.


Daniel Paravisini
Department of Finance
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
d.paravisini@lse.ac.uk

Antoinette Schoar
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-638
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
aschoar@mit.edu
1         Introduction

The use of statistical models to analyze the determinants of borrower repayment and
default behavior is standard in consumer and small business lending.1 The trade-offs
involved in summarizing complex, multidimensional information into a single summary
statistic —a credit score— are well understood in theory. On the benefits side, credit
scoring has a direct effect on productivity by reducing the transaction cost of analyzing
information. It can have a complementary effect through reducing the cost of incentivizing
the agents who evaluate loans by making the information they possess easier to monitor
by the principal. On the costs side, relevant information may be lost in score-based
lending. This could occur either because the information is difficult to incorporate into
statistical models (soft information), or because reliance on the score encourages agents
to only consider the information captured in the score but to ignore any other information
(multitasking problems).2 Thus, from a theoretical standpoint scores may affect lending
quantity and quality through different mechanisms, and the sign of the effect is ambiguous.
        In the present paper we assess empirically whether and through which channel does
credit scoring affect lending in environments where soft information is a crucial input
in the lending decision. It is typically difficult to evaluate empirically the trade-offs in
adopting credit scoring technologies because adoption occurs in response to changes in
the environment and is bundled with other organizational innovations, such as changes
in job descriptions or compensation structures.3 Since these also affect productivity and

    1
     Proprietary credit scoring models are widespread in the banking, credit card, crowd-funding, and
other consumer lending sectors. There is also a worldwide credit scoring industry for consumer and busi-
ness lending, with Equifax, Transunion, Dun and Bradstreet, and Experian as some its most prominent
players.
   2
     Rajan, Seru & Vig (2013) argue more generally that credit scoring is subject to the Lucas Critique:
since models predict default on the basis of historical data, they may fail to account for agents’ behavioral
responses to the use of scores.
   3
     This is the case, for example, in the study by Einav, Jenkins & Levin (2013), which compares the
change in lending practices by a large auto finance company before and after the adoption of automated
credit scoring. The problem of endogenous and bundled adoption is not unique to the credit industry.
See Milgrom & Roberts (1990) for examples in manufacturing and other industries.

                                                     2
incentives directly, they confound the evaluation of the net effect of the introduction of
credit scores, or of whether scores are substitutes or complements with effort provision by
the workers involved in the screening process.
       We address these identification challenges by conducting a randomized control trial
(RCT) with a for-profit bank in Colombia where we were able to change the credit eval-
uation process of the bank. We also were able to obtain direct measures of the inputs to
the lending decision, including committee effort. The RCT approach allows us to evalu-
ate the effect of credit scoring ceteris paribus, holding constant all other determinants of
lending outcomes. We also design a novel treatment arm that allows us to measure the
effect of the score holding constant the information set of the committee. The design,
which we explain in more detail below, measures how committee behavior changes when
its members anticipate the score becoming available, but before actually observing it.4
       We conduct the research with a for-profit bank in Colombia specialized in loans to
small enterprises. Since most of the prospective borrowers do not have audited financial
statements, the bank’s screening process begins when loan officers collect borrower infor-
mation in the field (e.g., measures of sales, costs, demand volatility). This implies that
most of the information is only verifiable by the loan officer who collects it. The informa-
tion is then evaluated by a credit committee that includes the loan officer who collects the
information and the local branch manager. When committees cannot reach a decision,
they can take actions that create substantial transaction costs for the bank: they either
refer the application to the regional manager who will then make the credit decision, or
send the officer to collect additional information and make the decision in a second round


   4
     More information may affect agents’ behavior directly (the agent reacts to becoming more informed
herself) and indirectly (the agent reacts to the principal becoming more informed). Our treatment design
evaluates how the agents’ react to the expectation of the principal becoming more informed, and is similar
in spirit to the empirical strategy used in Hertzberg, Liberti & Paravisini (2011). That paper evaluates
how one of the lenders to a firm reacts to the expectation that the private information it possesses about
the firm will become publicly observable by the other lenders to the same firm, but before the information
actually becomes public.

                                                    3
of evaluation. Since committee compensation depends only on the size and performance
of the loan portfolio, both actions represent a potential source of agency conflicts: com-
mittee members may free-ride on regional managers by referring too many applications or
engage in many rounds of wasteful information collection to build a reputation of being
dilligent.
       The bank developed a credit scoring model with the objective of reducing the infor-
mation processing and monitoring costs resulting from the evaluation of applications.5
To test the impact of the scoring model, we design the trial with a control group and
two treatments. In the control, group the committees make decisions using the detailed
information collected by the loan officer but without observing the applicant’s score. For
the bank, this is the usual screening process. In the first treatment (T 1), we provide
the applicant’s score to the credit committee as it evaluates the application. We use this
treatment to evaluate the overall effect of scores on committee output, through informa-
tion as well as incentives. In the second treatment group (T 2), we aim to separate the
information effect of the score, from its effect through incentives. For that purpose, we
ask the committee to make an evaluation of the application before observing the value of
the score (interim decision), but knowing that the score would be observable immediately
after the interim decision has been made. Although committees could revise the interim
decision after seeing the score to make a final decision, we find that committees almost
never do so. Comparing the interim decision in T 2 and the control group allows us to
evaluate whether scores affect the committee members’ incentives, even when there is no
change in the information they posses.
       In a four-month pilot including eight urban branches, we rolled out the scoring model
and randomly assigned loan applications within a committee to one of the three treatment

   5
    This model was developed independently from the present research by a financial service consulting
firm specializing on credit scoring models. A statistical default model was calibrated using historical
application and loan repayment information and generates a statistic for the expected default probability
—a credit score— for each new loan application.

                                                   4
arms. Randomizing within committees, after the borrower’s information is collected, as-
sures that the treatment is not correlated with the information content of the applications
(e.g., if loan officers knew which treatment arm an application was assigned to before-
hand, they could adjust their information collection effort depending on the treatment
arm). This design comes at the potential cost of spillover effects, if credit committees learn
over time to infer the score even in applications that do not include it. This could lead
to an attenuation bias over time. For this reason, we exploit the timing of the pilot and
complement the experimental results with difference-in-differences estimates that compare
outcomes in the eight pilot branches with matched control branches. The identification
assumptions of the difference-in-differences approach are plausible since the researchers,
and not the bank, selected the timing and the identity of the pilot branches.
   The main findings can be summarized as follows. First, the availability of a credit score
has a positive effect on committee effort (time spent per application) and output (frac-
tion of applications where the committee reaches a decision). The increase in effort and
output is concentrated in marginal—difficult to evaluate—applications (e.g., applications
for larger amounts). The output gain is economically large: the fraction of non-decisions
drops by more than 40% when committees observe a score. We also find evidence sugges-
tive of learning spillovers —committee output also increases in control applications by the
fourth month of the trial— which implies that the estimates represent a lower bound on
the size of the true effect on output. This first set of results implies that scores and com-
mittee effort are complementary inputs in the evaluation of marginal applications, and
that scores and worker effort substitute for other expensive inputs in loan production,
such as manager time.
   The second set of findings is obtained from the analysis of treatment T 2. Interim
output—decisions made before observing the score— also increases relative to the control
group: 75% of the total output increase in T 2 occurs before the committee observes the



                                              5
score. Interim decisions are never reverted after observing the score, and the quality of
the decisions (loan amount, default rate) is not different from the decisions made under
treatment T 1. These findings imply that the expectation of a score becoming public
induces committees to produce more output, holding their information set constant. Most
of the change in output occurs before the committee observes the score and is thus not
driven by information in the score that is otherwise unknown or difficult to process by the
committee.6 This implies that the main channel through which scores affect committee
behavior in our setting is by improving its members’ implicit incentives to work.
       Finally, we compare pilot and control branches to evaluate the effect on borrower
selection, total output, and capital allocation. Rolling out scores does not affect the pool of
borrowers along observable (average credit score, requested loan amount) or unobservable
(predictive power of scores in a default model) characteristics. This suggests that the
introduction of scores did not have a significant impact on loan officers’ incentive to
collect information. Total branch output (number of loans approved, average loan size)
is also unaffected. This implies that all the additional output generated by committees
substitutes for output that would have been otherwise produced by regional managers or
by committees after a second round of information collection.
       Comparisons between pilot and control branches also show that the introduction of
scores reduces the probability of default, increases the realized loan profitability, and
reduces the cross-sectional dispersion of loan profitability. These results imply that credit
scores improve capital allocation efficiency. This final result is important because it implies
that the use of scores does not lead to a loss of information in the credit evaluation process,
for example, because committee members cater to the score and ignore soft information.
On the contrary, capital allocation efficiency increases in treatment branches even though


   6
    The pure information gains from observing the score are bounded in our empirical setting given that
a score is calculated using the same borrower-specific information that the committees observe in the
application file.

                                                  6
the observable measures of risk, as reflected by credit scores and their ability to predict
default, do not change. Thus, the introduction of scores and their effect on committee
effort result in an improvement of the quality of the information effectively used in credit
evaluation decisions.
       The results in this paper contribute to several strands of the literature in finance
and economics. In an influential paper on the organization of financial intermediaries,
Stein (2002) argues that the adoption of technologies that harden information in bank
lending can lead to larger, more centralized, banks. The reason is that these technologies
substitute for loan officer discretion and inputs, crowding out the use of soft information.
Our results highlight a countervailing effect, noted in Aghion & Tirole (1997): hardening
soft information may make lower-level loan officers easier to incentivize, which might
allow for greater decentralization of decision-making. We are not able to pin down the
exact mechanism through which scores enhance incentives. But we are able to show that
since scores are not tied to compensation, the mechanism must be of a non-contractual
nature. It may be related, for example, to career concerns and the way scores interact
with committee members’ concern of being perceived as good evaluators.7
       More generally, our results present causal evidence on the role of information tech-
nologies in shaping the optimal organization of production. Our empirical setting is close
to the theoretical setting in Garicano (2000), where workers solve routine problems inde-
pendently, but ask managers for advice on difficult ones. Our findings provide the first
direct corroboration of the main prediction of the model: innovations that lower the infor-
mation processing costs for workers lead to more decentralized decision-making inside the


   7
     In a specific example, committee members may be reluctant to make a decision based on soft in-
formation, even if it is the right decision ex ante, because a negative outcome ex post will negatively
affect their reputation. In this example scores embolden decision-makers by providing a summary of
the soft information that is easy to interpret and communicate. It is important to emphasize, however,
that in theory more information does not lead unambiguously to better decisions. When agents want to
“conform” to the norm (Prendergast 1993), or have private information about the productivity of their
actions (Prat 2005), innovations that improve transparency may reduce performance.

                                                  7
firm. Consistent with the delegation theory in Dessein (2002), our results also indicate
that these information processing costs may, at least in part, result from agency problems
between workers and the principal.8
       Existing work attempting to identify the incentive effect of information technology
adoption using administrative data has had to rely on ad hoc assumptions on whether
the technology has an incentive effect or not. For example, Hubbard (2000) identifies
two classes of on-board computers in the trucking industry, classifying one as incentive-
enhancing and the other as resource-allocation-improving.9 A key methodological contri-
bution of our paper is to provide a research design that allows evaluating the incentive
effect of a technological innovation that does not rely on the researcher’s judgement.
       Finally, our results are related to a literature that associates technological change with
broad changes in worker productivity, skill composition, and the wage structure of indus-
tries. This work has shown that the diffusion of information technologies is accompanied
by increases in productivity and the skill premium across firms and industries (Katz &
Murphy 1992, Autor et al. 2003, Autor & Dorn 2013).10 For the reasons stated above, it
has been difficult to identify empirically the channel through which information adoption
affects productivity and its heterogeneity across worker skill levels. The results in this
paper show that information technology can increase the productivity of both low and
high skill individuals by inducing higher worker effort and increasing managers’ span of
control, respectively.
       The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we provide a description of the
tasks and incentives of the credit committees and the characteristics of the credit scoring

   8
     In theory, decentralization implies in the long-run a lower unit cost of loan production, a larger
optimal span of control, and an increase in total output. However, the empirical approach limits us to
studying the short-term effects of score adoption, holding loan prices and the size of the firm fixed.
   9
     Also, Baker & Hubbard (2004) assume that the introduction of an on-board computer system im-
proves performance through better monitoring. Bloom, Garicano, Sadun & Van Reenen (2011) classify
technologies into communication-enhancing and information-enhancing.
  10
     For early surveys on information technology adoption, see Brynjolfsson & Yang (1996) and Brynjolf-
sson & Hitt (2000).

                                                  8
system. Section 3 describes the experimental design and provides descriptive statistics on
the loan applications. Section 4 presents the experimental results of introducing the score
on committee output and productivity, and Section 5 presents the difference-in-differences
results comparing pilot to control branches. Section 6 concludes.




2        Setting

The study was implemented with BancaMia, a for-profit bank in Colombia that focuses on
issuing unsecured loans to micro and small enterprises. The business model of BancaMia,
similar to those of other for-profit micro and small business lenders, is based on issuing
large numbers of small loans. During October 2010, the month prior to the roll-out of
the pilot, the bank issued 20,119 loans totalling $US25.9 million through its 143 branches
(average size below $US1,300). The bank makes lending decisions based on information
about prospective borrowers collected first-hand by loan officers in the field. This infor-
mation collection mechanism is costly but necessary, since micro and small enterprises in
Colombia do not have audited financial statements or other secondary data that a bank
could use for credit assessment.11
       The loan screening process has three unique features. First, in the absence of audited
financial statements, most field-collected information is soft according to the definition
in Stein (2002): it is difficult to verify by anyone other than the individual that collects
it. For example, the loan officer may gather the sales figures for a small restaurant by
counting the number of tables served during lunchtime and multiplying by the average
price of a meal. Thus, it is impossible to ascertain by third parties the accuracy or
veracity of the sales figure in the application. Second, the loan officer makes an active

  11
    BancaMia also offers very small loans to borrowers with high ex ante default probabilities to elicit
information about their true ex post propensity to repay in a manner consistent with Rajan (1992) and
Petersen & Rajan (1995). However, a very low fraction of the study’s sample applications are first-time
borrowers, so we ignore this learning aspect of lending in the analysis.

                                                   9
decision to fill out an application and bring it to the committee for consideration. Thus,
applications that reach the committee do not represent the universe of potential borrowers,
but only those that pass the initial screening by the officer in the field.12 Third, officers
advise prospective borrowers on how to fill out the application and may encourage riskier
borrowers to request small loan amounts to improve the probability of approval. Thus,
application loan amounts do not represent the borrower’s unconditional demand for credit.
A consequence of prescreening and ex ante risk adjustments in requested loan amounts is
that the rejection rate of loans that reach the committee is very low.
       Due to the selection occurring at the loan prospecting stage, we must consider the
possibility that the introduction of scores changes the officers’ incentives to gather infor-
mation and select applicants in the field. Our experimental design, discussed in Section 3,
randomizes at the application level once the application reaches the committee to ensure
that changes in the application pool do not affect the internal validity of the results. In
the results section, we also explore how the observable characteristics of the applicant
pool change during the pilot week and find little evidence of changes in the prospecting
effort.



2.1       Credit Committees

Loan officers upload borrower information and the bank’s management information system
compiles in a single application file all the available borrower information for review by the
committee: the first-hand information collected by the loan officer, the borrower’s past
credit history in BancaMia, and any available third-party information (e.g., the borrower’s
credit score from a private credit bureau).
       The application file is reviewed by a credit committee composed of the loan officer
who collects the information, the branch manager (the loan officer’s immediate superior),
  12
    All the information regarding potential applicants that do not reach the committee review stage is
discarded by BancaMia and is not available for this study.

                                                 10
and one or two additional credit specialists. The committee’s main task is to reach a
decision on an application (accept the application and set the terms, or reject it). The
committee may make modifications to the amount and maturity of the requested loan to
improve its expected profitability. For example, the committee may only approve $US500
of a $US1,000 requested amount if the borrower is deemed to be too unlikely to repay
the latter amount. Alternatively, the committee may approve an amount larger than
the application amount when it deems that the loan officer was too conservative in his
recommendation to the borrower. The committee has no discretion to set the interest
rate of loans, which is determined by headquarters based on the type of loan (first-time
versus repeat borrower, urban or rural loan).
       When the members of the committee cannot reach a decision, because they cannot
agree on the terms of the loan or on whether to reject or accept the application, they
have two alternative courses of action. The first is to refer the application to a regional
manager, who evaluates the application and reaches a decision.13 Upper-level managers
are more skilled and experienced than committee members and are expected to be more
likely to reach the correct decision on difficult applications. The second option is to
send the officer to collect additional information about the borrower. In this case, the
committee must review the application again after the information is collected and reach
a decision (or send the application to the regional manager).
       BancaMia managers expressed during informal interviews that referrals and additional
rounds of information collection represent a substantial cost to the bank in terms of man-
agers’ and officers’ opportunity cost of time. It is difficult to quantify these costs precisely.
The base fixed wage of a regional manager is four to eight times that of a loan officer,
which gives a lower bound on the incremental cost of a referral to upper management.


  13
    Loans above 8 million pesos go directly to the regional manager for approval. Randomization insures
that this mechanical relationship between loan size and approval level is orthogonal to the scores. Also,
adding the application amount as a control does not change the estimated effect of scores.

                                                   11
Further, since the regional manager must evaluate the application without the officer that
collected the information present, she must incur additional communication costs to access
any information not reflected in the application. Referrals imply additional delay costs.
This is in part due to the large volume of referred applications and the time constraints
of regional managers who supervise between 15 and 80 offices.
       Committee member bonus compensation is an increasing function of the number,
amount, and value-weighted performance of the loans issued by a branch. Performance pay
to loan officers based on lending amount and loan performance is common in most types
of lending institutions.14 Bonuses are calculated on the basis of loans issued, regardless
of whether the decision was made by the committee or referred to the manager.15



2.2       Credit Scores

In 2010, BancaMia contracted with an external consulting firm the development of a
credit risk model that uses the historical information in the credit applications to predict
the repayment performance of prospective borrowers. The scoring model uses both quan-
titative (gender, age, location, number of years in business, frequency of late payments in
past three years) and qualitative (overall knowledge of business, general sense of the level
of organization, quality of information provided, quality of business location, stability and
diversity of income) information in the applications. The risk model would be used to
produce a credit risk score to be included in the application file. Management’s stated
objective is to “improve identification of the best and worst clients, decentralize the loan
approval process, and reduce the labor costs involved in loan application evaluation.”16 It
  14
     The combination of bonuses based on the number of loans and value-weighted loan performance are
meant to provide incentives to issue small loans to the riskiest borrowers—compensation based solely on
the dollar volume of lending would discourage officers from making small loans.
  15
     There are two potential reasons for compensating committees for loans issued. First, pay based on
decisions made penalizes committees for referrals, which may lead to too many bad decisions at the
committee level. Second, pay based on decisions made would eliminate the officer’s incentives to monitor
the borrower after the loan has been issued.
  16
     Source: interviews with management.

                                                  12
is important to note that the credit score relies entirely on information that loan officers
would also have had anyway, since the score relies on the information collected by loan
officers.
    The score is a proxy for the expected default probability of the loan. Figure 1, panel
(a), plots the out-of-sample relationship between the default probability and score in the
population of loans issued during October 2010 (the scoring model is calibrated using
data for loans issued in 2009). A loan is considered to be in default if interest or principal
payments are more than 30 days overdue at six or twelve months after the loan is issued.
There is a strong positive association between credit scores and default probabilities. The
tight standard error band implies that scores have a good out-of-sample predictive power
for future default, and that the data in the application is informative about borrowers’
repayment prospects.
    There is a negative relationship between requested loan amounts and default proba-
bility in the loan population (Figure 1, panel (b)). This relationship is consistent with
loan officers screening large applications by risky borrowers, or recommending risky bor-
rowers to request smaller loan amounts. This relationship suggests that loan officers form
an estimate of the borrower’s default probability before bringing the application to the
committee.



3     Research Design and Descriptive Statistics

We design a randomized controlled trial (RCT) with two goals. The first is to measure
the causal effect of scores on committee effort and output, as well as overall loan output
and performance. The second goal is to decompose the causal effect of scores into two
broad mechanisms: the provision of information and, holding information constant, the
provision of incentives.
    In the pure information provision mechanism, scores provide a signal of borrower

                                             13
quality that reduces the cost of committee deliberation. For example, the population-
based score may provide a more precise signal of the creditworthiness of the borrower
than the committee can gather based on their own assessment. Alternatively, the score
may provide the same information that the committee can gather from the application,
but at a lower cost. Also, the score may reduce the cost of communicating the information
collected by the loan officer to the other committee members by providing a simple to
interpret summary statistic.
   The score may also affect the committee members incentives to divulge and use the
information they already possess by providing a publicly observable and verifiable measure
of the creditworthiness of the borrower. For example, scores may deter the committee
from overstating the creditworthiness of family, friends, or acquaintances of its members.
A score may also embolden the committee to make decisions in marginal cases because
its members can use the score to justify the decision if the loan defaults ex post. On the
other hand, precisely because the score may justify decisions ex post, it may discourage
committee members from using valuable private information in the deliberation (catering
to the score). Thus, not only is it an empirical question whether there is an incentive
effect at all, but if there is, the direction of the effect is ambiguous.
   The fundamental feature of the incentive mechanism is that it affects outcomes holding
the information set of the committee constant. Thus, to isolate the incentive effect, we
design a treatment that allows us to measure how the committee’s actions change when
its members expect the score to become available, but before observing it.



3.1    Pilot Design

We implement a four-month pilot program with an RCT design in eight urban branches.
In each pilot branch, we randomly select the treatment applications for which the com-
mittee will be able to see the applicant’s score. Randomization occurs in real time when

                                              14
the committee begins to discuss an application but after the information of the client
has been collected. This process guarantees that treatment is orthogonal to applicant
characteristics and the information gathering effort by the loan officer. The committee
members are informed of the group assignment at the beginning of the discussion.17
       We randomize in real time at the application level to guarantee that treatment is
orthogonal to applicant characteristics and the information gathering effort by the loan
officer. The main disadvantage of our design is the potential for learning spillovers from
treatment to control applications. In the extreme case where committee members even-
tually would learn perfectly the algorithm that maps borrower characteristics into scores,
then there will be no difference between treatment and control application outcomes.
Thus, our estimates can be interpreted as lower bounds on the treatment effect of scores.
       In the control group, the committee evaluates the application without observing the
score. In the first treatment group (T 1), the committee receives the score before evaluating
the application. This first treatment allows us to measure the overall effect of scores
on committee effort, output, and productivity. In the second treatment group (T 2),
the committee makes an interim, non-binding, decision before receiving the score. The
committee makes the interim decision knowing that the score will become available to the
supervisor. But the committee members have no additional information relative to control
applications, and they know that the interim decision can be amended after observing the
score. The interim decision in treatment T 2 allows measuring how committee behavior
changes through incentives alone, holding the information set constant. The difference
between the interim and the final decision allows measuring the incremental effect of the
information content of the score.
       Consider the two extreme cases in which the effect of the score is purely through the


  17
    To ensure that there was no migration of applications between control and treatment groups, a
research assistant sitting in the committee performed the randomization in real time using a random
number generator on the computer and informed the committee of the outcome.

                                                15
information channel or purely through the incentive channel. If the score affects behavior
through its information content alone, then it will be optimal for the committee to wait
until the score is revealed to make a full evaluation of the application. In this case, interim
decisions will be uninformed and often revised. On the other hand, if the score changes
the incentives of the committee members to use the information they already possess, then
interim decisions will be informed and not frequently changed. In this case, committee
output will increase before the score is revealed.
   The main advantage of the design of T 2 is that it allows measuring the incentive effect
regardless of the nature of the underlying agency problem that the score mitigates (or
creates) between committee members. The interim action is non-binding and unobservable
to anyone outside the committee, and thus the interim action in T 2 is more likely to affect
conflicts of interest amongst members of the committee than those between the committee
and the rest of the organization.
   In a short training workshop before the roll-out of the scores, we provide branch
managers and loan officers at the eight pilot bank branches with a general explanation of
the credit risk model, the scores, the objective of the study (researching the usefulness of
the score as an input to the credit evaluation process), and a detailed description of the
three treatment groups and the randomization procedure. We report in Appendix Table
A.1 the number of applications in each group per branch in the study sample.



3.2    Descriptive Statistics

We present descriptive statistics of the applications in the control and treatment groups
in Table 1, as well as the p-values of difference of means tests between the three groups.
Predetermined application characteristics—characteristics determined before the random-
ization takes place—are shown in Panel A. In the control group, average loan amount is
US$1,551, average maturity is 20.9 months, average risk score is 0.151, and the fraction

                                              16
of first-time borrowers is 14.6%. Randomization implies that any differences in predeter-
mined variables between the treatment and control groups are purely by chance. Table
1 corroborates that randomization created groups that are comparable in terms of pre-
determined characteristics, with the only significant difference in means occurring for
application maturity, which is one month shorter in treatment group T 1 than in the con-
trol group. Our main specification will include pre-determined characteristics to account
for chance differences between groups.18
       Table 1, Panels B through E, presents the statistics for committee and loan outcomes.
Some outcomes, such as the time the committee needs to take an action, are measured for
all applications. Others are measured conditional on a particular action of the commit-
tee. For example, the approved loan amount is measured conditional on the committee
approving the loan.
       The average time spent evaluating an application in the control group, measured as
the difference in the time stamp assigned by the research assistant to the beginning and
end of each evaluation, is 4.68 minutes (Std. Dev. 3.28). Committees reach a decision
(accept or reject a loan) in 89% of the control applications, and conditional on reaching
a decision, in 0.3% of decisions the committee rejects a loan in the control group.
       Conditional on loan approval, the committee approves a loan amount different than
the requested one in 92% of the applications. The average ratio of approved to requested
loan amount is 0.975, indicating that the mean size of approved loans differs little from the
mean application amount. Nevertheless, there is substantial variance (Std. Dev. 0.419),
and the average absolute value of the difference between the approved and requested
amount is $US266, or 17% of the average requested loan amount. Similar patterns can be


  18
    The application amount and score distributions are indistinguishable between the treatment and
control groups in a two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for equality of distributions, with corrected
p-values of 0.81 and 0.94, respectively. We do not perform a test for maturity because the maturity
distribution is highly non-normal, with many observations concentrated in whole year numbers (12, 24,
and 36 months).

                                                 17
found for loan maturity, although the proportion of cases in which the committee modifies
the loan application maturity is lower (26.2% of the applications in the control group).
   The low rejection rate and frequent rate of loan size and loan maturity adjustments
suggest that committees’ decisions occur mostly in the intensive margin, e.g., on how
much to lend as opposed to whether or not to lend. In addition, the fact that the average
requested and approved loan amounts are close indicates that loan officers’ evaluation of
the borrowing capacity of the applicant is in line, on average, with that of the committee.
In other words, loan officers do not seem to be systematically aggressive or conservative
relative to the committee in their assessments of borrowers’ risk.
   Not all approved loans are issued: only 83.5% of the loans approved during the pilot
program appear as issued in the bank’s information system. The bank does not record
the reason why the borrower decides not to take up the approved loan. The default rate
among the issued loans—fraction of loans more than 30 days late in repayment measured
six (twelve) months after the loan was issued—is 3.3% (9.5%) in the control group.
   Comparing the unconditional outcomes in the treatment and control groups in Table
1, shows that, on average, committees spend more time reviewing applications in the
treatment groups, although the difference is only significant for treatment T 2 (the differ-
ence in average time between T 1 and T 2 is not significant). Committees were more likely
to reach a decision in both treatment groups than in the control. None of the loan char-
acteristics or outcomes conditional on approval are statistically different in the treatment
and control groups, except for the average absolute value of the change in maturity.
   Table 2 shows the descriptive statistics for applications in the control group conditional
on the action taken by the committee—made decision, referred application to the regional
manager, or sent the officer to collect additional information. On average, the applications
for which the committee reaches a decision are for smaller amounts and are more likely
to be submitted by first-time applicants than applications where the committee does not



                                            18
reach a decision. Applications where the committee reaches a decision are no different in
their credit risk from those referred to the manager (as measured by the score), but they
have a smaller credit risk than those that required additional information. Committees
spend less time evaluating applications where they reach decisions than when they refer an
application or collect additional information. If one equates evaluation time with effort,
this implies that the committee members employ a substantial amount of effort before
being able to ascertain that a decision cannot be reached.
       We can track final outcomes for applications when the committee did not make a
decision using BancaMia’s information system. This allows us to measure the disbursed
amount and the default rate of loans approved by the manager, or loans approved after
a second round of information collection.19 Loan outcomes differ substantially depending
on the action taken by the committee. For example, loans approved by the manager
default with a probability of 8.3% after 12 months and have an approved amount that
is 95% of the application amount, while loans approved by the committee after a second
round of information collection default with a probability of 13.3% and have an approved
amount that is 148% of the application amount.
       The complexity of the task of reaching a decision is unobservable by the econometri-
cian. In theory, in the presence of task heterogeneity, committees should make decisions
on the easy-to-evaluate applications and refer to the manager or collect additional infor-
mation on the difficult-to-evaluate ones (Garicano 2000). The statistics in Table 2 suggest
that difficult applications take more time to evaluate and that time spent evaluating an
application can be used as a measure of effort. Also, the statistics suggest that applica-
tions for larger amounts, and with longer maturities, are more difficult to evaluate, while
the risk of an applicant (as measured by the score) is uncorrelated with difficulty.


  19
    Note, however, that because not all approved loans are issued, we cannot measure the fraction of the
applications rejected by the manager or in a second round by the committee (rejected applications and
approved but non-issued applications are confounded in the ex post data).

                                                  19
4       Experimental Results

We use the following reduced form equation to estimate the effect of credit scores on
committee and loan outcomes:


                                  Yi = β · T reatmenti + Xi0 · η + εi ,                    (1)


where Yi is an outcome related to loan application i. The variable T reatmenti is an
indicator for whether the application is in either treatment group T 1 or T 2. In some
specifications, we also include an indicator equal to one if the application is in treatment
T 2 to evaluate differential effects of the two treatments (we do not find any). The vector Xi
contains predetermined application characteristics: applicant’s credit score, application
loan amount, application loan maturity, a dummy if it is the first loan application of the
potential borrower, and the date of the application (in weeks).20
      We begin by presenting the results for outcomes that are measured unconditionally,
such as the action taken by the committee or the application evaluation time. The esti-
mated β using these outcomes measures the Average Treatment Effect (ATE) of having
a score as an input to the credit evaluation process.



4.1       Committee Output

We present in Table 3 the estimated effect of introducing a score on committee output,
measured as the fraction of applications in which the committee makes a decision (accepts
or rejects an application). This is a good measure of committee output because the
bank can significantly save on transaction costs, without reducing the quality of the loan
portfolio, if the committee reduces the number of applications it sends to upper managers
or those it collects information on (we discuss and measure the effect on quality later). The
 20
      Results without controls are not significantly different, see Appendix Table A.2.

                                                     20
point estimate is 4.6 percentage points, statistically significant at the 5% level (column 1).
This implies that when scores are added as an input in the decision process, the number
of cases in which committees cannot decide is reduced by 41.8% relative to the baseline
proportion of 11% in the control group. The difference in the effect between T 1 and T 2
is positive but not significant (Table 3, column 2).
       The data allows identifying two distinct margins through which scores increase com-
mittee output: 1) by reducing the need to collect additional information from applicants,
and 2) by reducing the need to use upper-level manager time in evaluating loan applica-
tions. We present in Table 4 the results of estimating a multinomial logistic specification
to model committee choice between between approving a loan, rejecting it, collecting ad-
ditional information, or sending the application to a manager in a higher hierarchical level
to make the decision.21
       Treatment has a negative and statistically significant effect on the probability of send-
ing the application to the manager and on the probability of collecting additional infor-
mation.22 To evaluate the economic significance of the effects, we report on the bottom
rows of Table 4 the implied marginal effect of treatment on the probability of each choice.
Observing a score decreases the probability of referring the application to the manager
by 2.3 percentage points, a 48% decline reduction in the baseline probability that an
application is sent to the manager in the control group. Scores reduce the probability of
collecting additional information by 1.7 percentage points, a 27% decline relative to the


  21
       We estimate:
                                   P (Di = m)
                              ln              = βm · Scorei + Xi0 · χm + εmi ,                         (2)
                                   P (Di = 1)
where Di represents the committee choice. We use the committee’s decision to approve a loan, Di = 1,
as the reference category. All right-hand side variables are as in equation (1). There is one predicted log
odds equation for each choice relative to the reference one, e.g., there is a βm for rejecting a loan, one
for collecting more information, and one for sending the application to the manager. A positive estimate
for βm implies that committees are more likely to take action m than to approve a loan in the treatment
group relative to the control group.
  22
     The coefficients on the treatment regressors βm are significant at the 1% level in a joint test across
the four choices.

                                                     21
baseline.
   The results suggest that scores reduce the cost of decision-making by committees.
Consistent with the prediction in Garicano (2000), lower decision-making costs by com-
mittees lead to fewer referrals to managers in upper levels of the hierarchy. Scores also
substitute for additional costly information collection by loan officers.



4.2    Spillovers

Scores are a mapping between information in the application and default probabilities.
Committee members may learn how to infer this mapping during the course of the pilot
since all the borrower-specific information used to construct the score is available to the
committee. After observing a number of treatment applications, committee members may
develop a heuristic that allows them to infer the score even when one is not provided. If
this occurs, control applications will be affected by the pilot, committee output in control
applications will tend to converge to output in treatment applications, and the comparison
of treatment and control applications will lead to a downward biased estimate of the effect
of treatment.
   To evaluate the degree of such learning by committees, we plot in Figure 3 the measure
of committee output (fraction of applications in which the committee reached a decision)
in treatment and control applications, by pilot month. The plots shows that committee
output in treatment applications was significantly higher than in control applications
during the first month of the pilot. The difference in output between treatment and
control applications shrinks as the pilot progresses and becomes indistinguishable from
zero by the third month of the pilot.
   Thus, the dynamics of committee output in treatment and control applications strongly
suggests that committee members learn within two months how to infer scores from ap-
plication files. During the first month of the pilot, the raw difference between treatment

                                             22
and control application output implies that treatment increased the probability of making
a decision by 8 percentage points, almost double the estimate obtained in Table 3.
       This discussion implies that our estimates are a very conservative measure of the true
effect of scores on committee output. We expect the same downwards bias to be present
in the measurement of the effect of scores on other outcomes, which implies that we need
to be cautious when interpreting results that suggest there is no effect. In Section 5we
present difference-in-differences estimates that compare across branches that are less likely
to be contaminated by spillovers.23



4.3       Committee Effort

The estimated effect of introducing a score on the time it takes to evaluate and application
is 0.76 minutes, statistically significant at the 1% level (Table 5, column 1). This implies
that committees spend, on average, 16.2% more time per application when scores are
available, measured at the mean evaluation time in the control group of 4.7 minutes.
Treatment T 2 has a larger effect on evaluation time than T 1, but the difference is not
statistically significant (column 2). Some difference is expected since committees must
make two decisions in T 2: an interim one without observing the score and then a final
decision after observing the score. This result implies that the additional time it takes
to make an additional decision in T 2 is not statistically different from zero. Although
we cannot use these results to distinguish how evaluation time is split between interim
and final decisions and T 2, committees rarely amend interim decisions (we discuss this in
more detail below) which suggests that proportionally more time must be spent in interim
decisions.
       Assuming that time evaluating applications is a measure of committee effort, these

  23
    The potential spillover bias in the difference-in-differences setting is inter-temporal: if the committees
learn to infer the score in pilot branches, then the pilot branches will continue to be ”treated” even after
the pilot is over.

                                                     23
results suggest that scores and committee effort are complements. However, this assump-
tion requires some validation because the additional time spent evaluating the applications
may be waste and not a necessary input for production. More time spent per application
could also be a symptom of the committee becoming less productive, for example, if scores
are a source of distraction. To shed some light on how to interpret the results, we turn
to a specific prediction in Garicano (2000): lower decision costs will lead committees to
tackle more difficult problems. If time spent is correlated with effort, we should observe
that scores increase the time spent on applications that are more difficult based on ex
ante measures.
   We observe from the subsample of control group applications in Table 2 that com-
mittees spend more time in applications where they cannot reach a decision (difficult
applications) relative to those in which they do (easy applications). If the additional time
spent due to the scores shown in Table 3 is related to effort, we expect the effect to be
concentrated on applications that take longer to evaluate to begin with. Put differently,
scores should shift right the upper tail of the evaluation time distribution, while they
should have little or no effect on the lower tail.
   To evaluate this, we characterize the effect of scores on the distribution of decision
time by estimating specification (1) using simultaneous quantile regressions for the 25th,
50th, and 75th quantiles of evaluation time. The results, shown in Table 3, columns
3, 5, and 7, indicate that only percentiles at or above the median are affected by the
introduction of scores, and the point estimates increase monotonically with the quantile.
This heterogeneous effect is consistent with the effort interpretation of the results in Table
3. In contrast, the additional effect of T 2 relative to T 1 on evaluation time appears to
be constant across all quartiles (columns 4, 6, and 8), suggesting that any difference in
evaluation time between T 2 and T 1 is not related to problem difficulty.
   The descriptive statistics for control group applications in Table 2 also indicate ap-



                                             24
plications for larger amounts are more difficult to evaluate (committees are less likely to
reach a decision for larger applications). We confirm this non-parametrically in Figure 2.
In control group applications, the probability of making a decision declines (panel (a))
and the time spent per application increases (panel (b)) with the application amount.
Again, if time spent in applications is related to the effort put into evaluating them, we
would expect the effect of scores on evaluation time to be larger specifically for those
applications where scores lead to more decisions. Turning to treatment applications in
Figure 2, scores indeed induce a larger increase in the probability of making a decision
and on the time spent evaluating applications for larger application amounts. The coin-
cidence of the effect of scores on output and decision time on difficult-to-evaluate (large
amount) applications is consistent with the effort interpretation and with the predictions
in Garicano (2000).24
       We have remained purposely agnostic regarding what “difficult” means in this setting.
It may relate to the cognitive costs of reaching a decision, the cost of exposing the pay
to a larger risk (bonuses are negatively related to the value of defaulted loans), or the
reputational costs involved in reaching consensus in applications where there is more at
stake. The cross-sectional patterns documented in this subsection imply that the roll-out
of scores reduces the cost of reaching decisions on such difficult applications, as measured
by the counterfactual time they would have required to solve in the absence of treatment,
or by the requested amount.



4.4       Conditional Outcomes

The only loan outcome that we can measure unconditionally is whether or not the loan
was issued. All other outcomes—e.g., amount issued, default probability—are measured
  24
    We also perform a parametric exploration of treatment heterogeneity by augmenting specification
(1) with interactions between the treatment dummy and application size. These interaction terms are
not statistically significant at the standard levels. This is to be expected given the non-linear patterns
observed in non-parametric plots.

                                                   25
only conditionally on the loan being issued. For outcomes that are measured conditionally,
the interpretation of β in specification (1) is complicated by the fact that it captures a
combination of two effects: 1) a direct causal effect of treatment on the outcome, and 2)
a selection effect driven by the effect of treatment on the conditioning variable. Given
that treatment affects the probability of making a decision, the selection component may
be important when measuring committee outcomes.
   To illustrate the complication introduced by measuring the effect of treatment on
conditional outcomes, consider the case of loan size approved by the committee. This
loan size can be measured conditional on the committee approving an application, as
opposed to rejecting it, sending it to the manager, or postponing the decision until more
information is collected. Scores may have a direct effect on approved loan size, holding
constant the set of applications. This is the Average Treatment Effect (ATE) of scores on
loan amount. Scores also change the set of applications that the committee decides on.
These marginal applications are likely to be different along dimensions that are correlated
to loan size. Thus, treatment changes the composition of applications approved by the
committee in a way that may affect average loan size even if the ATE is zero.
   Disentangling the treatment and selection effects is typically difficult without an addi-
tional instrumental variable for the selection effect (see Lee 2008, for a recent discussion).
Our setting provides a unique advantage to deal with this identification problem: we can
evaluate outcomes of marginal committee decisions due to selection because we observe
the outcome of all decisions, regardless of whether they were made by the committee dur-
ing the pilot, by the committee after additional information is collected, or by the regional
manager. To follow our example above, suppose that by conditioning on the sample of
loans approved by the committee, we found that loan amounts are 10% larger when the
score is available. And suppose that without conditioning, we found loan amounts do
not change. In this example, the change in loan size conditional on committee approval



                                             26
is entirely driven by selection: scores induce committees to decide on larger applications
that would have otherwise been referred to the manager or decided after collecting more
information. If, on the contrary, issued loan amounts increase, we can infer that the ATE
of scores on approved loan amounts is positive.
   We present in Table 6 the estimates of β on outcomes conditioning on the subsample
of applications where the committee made the decision during the pilot (panel A), and
without conditioning (panel B). Conditional on making a decision, the probability that
a committee rejects an application increases by 0.9 percentage points in the presence
of scores, significant at the 10% level (column 1). This estimate implies a three-fold
increase in the proportion of applications rejected by the committee relative to the baseline
probability of 0.3% in the control group. Moreover, assuming that all the additional
rejections come from the marginal decisions, the estimate implies that committees reject
13% of the marginal cases they decide on when scores are used as an input ((0.9 −
0.3)/4.6). None of the other outcomes conditional on the committee approving the loan
are significantly affected by scores. So even though committees are deciding on a larger
proportion of marginal cases when the score is available, the average credit supply, loan
maturity, or probability of default of the loans approved by the committee do not change.
   Next we turn to evaluating the effect of treatment without conditioning on whether or
not the committee makes a decision. We can track the ex post outcomes of all applications
that led to an issued loan through the bank’s information system. This includes, for
example, issued loans where the application was approved by the regional manager. The
effect of scores on the probability that the loan is issued is close to zero and not statistically
significant (Table 6, panel 2, column 4). This implies that the addition of scores to the
loan production process does not affect the overall extensive margin of lending. Thus,
committees are rejecting more applications without affecting the total number of loans
issued. This implies that the full increase in loan rejections by committees is due to



                                               27
selection: committees are rejecting applications that would have been rejected by the
manager or by the committee in a second decision in the absence of the score.
   We find that treatment does not have a statistically significant effect on the average
level of other outputs (loan size and default probability, columns 5 and 6). Given the
potential downward bias of the estimates due to learning spillovers, we investigate again
in Section 5 whether the introduction of scores affects outcomes measured at the branch
level using a difference-in-differences analysis.



4.5    Interim Decisions before Observing Scores

In this subsection, we turn our attention towards evaluating the effect of treatment T 2 on
interim decisions. In treatment T 2, the committee performs an evaluation of the applica-
tion and reaches an interim conclusion before observing the score. That is, they choose
an interim action with the same information set as in the control applications, except
for the knowledge that the score would become observable by all committee members
immediately after the action is chosen.
   We estimate the OLS equation (1) with interim committee decisions as the left-hand
side variable, using for estimation only the control and T 2 applications. The right-hand
side variable of interest is a dummy equal to one if application i belongs to treatment
T 2. The coefficient on this dummy measures the effect of making the score available on
committee actions before the committee observes the score, and thus reflects the gross
effect before receiving a new signal about borrower creditworthiness.
   We present the results in Table 7 (odd columns). We present in the same table the
estimated effect on final outcomes for T 2, after the committee has observed the score
(even columns). The effect of the score on the probability of making an interim decision
is positive and significantly different from zero at the 5% confidence level (column 1). The
magnitude of the estimated coefficient is 0.039: the probability that the committee makes

                                              28
a decision increases by 3.9 percentage points before observing the score in T 2. The mag-
nitude is smaller than that of the effect on the probability of making final decision, 0.052
(column 2), but not statistically distinguishable. Committees thus make more decisions
in anticipation of receiving the score, and then make even more decisions after observing
it. The point estimates suggest that 75% (.039/0.052) of the increase in output occurs
before observing the score. In addition, the expectation of receiving a score significantly
reduces the probability that committees refer an application to the manager in the interim
decisions (see Appendix Table A.4).
   Conditional on making a decision, committees are also more likely to reject applications
during the interim action, and before observing the score. In this case, the increase in
the probability of rejection in the interim action, 1.3 percentage points (column 3), is
larger than the increase in the final outcomes, 1.1 percentage points (column 4), although
again, the estimates are not statistically distinguishable. Appendix Table A.3 presents
in matrix form the transitions between interim and final decisions for all the applications
in treatment T 2 and shows that committees never revise an interim decision to reject an
application. This implies that the decline in the point estimate on approval probability
between interim and final action occurs due to an increase in number of decisions made
and approved (the denominator of the fraction).
   Finally, the estimated effects on approved loan amounts, on the probability of adjusting
the application loan size, and on the absolute value of the adjustment, are all statistically
insignificant for both interim decisions and final ones.
   The main conclusion from this set of results is that the bulk of the effect of scores
on committee output occurs even while holding committees’ information set constant.
This is consistent with an incentive effect of scores on output: scores induce committees
to make more decisions. However, recall from the motivation in the introduction that
the incentive effect of scores need not increase the overall amount of information used



                                             29
in the decision process. Scores could lead committee members to forego useful private
information that is not contained in the score. When we estimate separately the effect
of scores on the default probability from treatments T 1 and T 2, we find the same result
presented in Table 6: the point estimate is negative but not statistically different from
zero (not shown). Interpreting this as evidence that scores do not deteriorate the quality
of lending, the results imply that most of the relevant information contained in the scores
is already known by the committee members, and scores provide incentives to use this
information more effectively in the decision process. We revisit the issue of the effect on
loan quality in the next section when we present the difference-in-differences results.25




5        Difference-in-Differences Results

In this section, we evaluate the effect of introducing scores by comparing the pilot branches
with a matched sample of control branches. There are two rationales for this analysis. The
first is that it allows us to test whether the introduction of scores affected the inputs that
are fed into the loan production function before the application arrives in the committee.
Namely, screening effort, applicant selection, and information collection performed by the
loan officer in the field. The experimental design was not designed to capture these effects,
since the randomization occurs at the committee level after the selection and information
collection have take place.
       The second rationale is that the spillovers documented in the previous section imply
that the comparison of treatment and control applications may hide important effects of
the introduction of scores on lending output. In fact, the patterns observed in Figure 3
suggest that all applications in pilot branches were de facto treated during the second

  25
    In unreported regressions we find that the effect of scores on output is heterogeneous on the score of
the applicant, although the results are significant only in the subsample of applications with a requested
amount above the median. This is consistent with an interpretation in which scores induce effort because
they make observable to the principal some of the private information in the committee.

                                                   30
half of the sample. A comparison between pilot and non-pilot branches is more likely to
provide an unbiased estimate of the effect of scores on lending output.
   This analysis compares outcomes of the pilot branches during the weeks of the trial
relative to other weeks, and relative to propensity score-matched, non-pilot branches of the
bank during the same weeks. This is equivalent to estimating a difference-in-differences
estimator, since the timing of the introduction of the pilot and the branches in which the
experiment was rolled out was determined by the researchers and not by an endogenous
choice of the bank. We estimate two types of difference-in-differences specifications. The
first one is at the application level:


               Yi = γ · P ilotW eekiBranch + αiBranch + δiW eek + ψiBranch t + εi ,         (3)

where Yi is either an application characteristic (e.g., borrower score, requested amount)
or a loan outcome (e.g., issued loan amount, in default after 12 months) for loan i.
The specification includes a full set of branch fixed-effects (αiBranch ), week fixed-effects
(δiW eek ), and branch specific trends (γiBranch t). The right-hand side variable of interest is
P ilotW eekitBranch , a dummy equal to one if the branch where loan i was issued was a pilot
branch of the randomized control trial during week t.
   The second specification includes a similar set of right-hand side variables but is esti-
mated after aggregating the data at the branch-week level:


                        Yjt = γ 0 · P ilotW eekjt + αj0 + δt0 + ψj0 t + ε0jt ,              (4)


where Yjt is a branch level output (e.g., the number of loans issued, the average and
standard deviation of realized loan returns) of branch j during week t.
   These specifications are estimated using all the loans approved between week 41 of
2010 (four weeks before the pilot starting date) and week 26 of 2011 (four weeks after


                                                 31
the pilot end date). Every pilot branch is matched with a control branch selected from
the population of bank branches using the nearest distance measured with a propensity
score. The propensity score is estimated using the branches’ number and total amount
of loans approved, average approved loan size, and the average borrower score in October
2010, the month prior to the beginning of the pilot.



5.1    Loan Screening

We present the results of estimating the loan level specification (3) in Table 8. The roll-
out of scores in a branch does not have a statistically significant effect on either the score
of the applicants that receive loans (column 1) or on the amount of the loan requested
in the application by loan recipients (column 2). The first measure captures the quality
of loan applicants as measured by the risk model; the second their quality as assessed
by the loan officer in the field (recall that loan officers seem to adjust downwards the
application amount for riskier borrowers). Thus, these results suggest that scores do not
change applicant selection by loan officers, or if it does, the change in applicant selection
is fully undone by the committee.
   Even if applicant selection does not change, it is possible that scores change the in-
formation collection effort by the officer. If this is the case, then the information in the
applications, which is the information used by the default model to predict the score,
could change. To evaluate whether this is the case, we test whether scores’ predictive
power of default changes during pilot weeks. In Table 8, column 3, we show the results
of estimating specification (3) using a default dummy as the dependent variable. The
right hand-side is augmented with the score, and the score interacted with the experi-
ment week dummy. The coefficient on the interaction term, which represents the change
in the predictive power of scores during the pilot, is not statistically significant at the
conventional levels. This suggests that loan officers did not alter in a significant manner

                                             32
their information collection effort in response to the introduction of scores.



5.2    Branch Output and Capital Allocation Efficiency

To evaluate the effect of score introduction on branch output we use the branch-week
specification (4) and present the results in Table 8. Rolling out the scores in a branch
neither affects the number of loans approved in a branch (column 4) nor the total amount
of lending (column 5). These results corroborate the conclusions from the previous sec-
tion: the entire increase in committee output caused by the scores substitutes for output
previously generated by managers with a higher opportunity cost of time, or by the same
committee after engaging in costly information collection. In other words, scores and
committee effort substitute for more expensive inputs to loan production.
   We also investigate whether the introduction of scores affects the default probability
of issued loans. Loans issued during the pilot week have a default probability that is 1.2
percentage points lower than loans in control branches, although the measured effect is
significant only at the 10% level (column 6). The point estimate implies a 12.6% decline
relative to the baseline default probability in the control group of 9.5%. Note that the
decline in the default probability occurs even though the average score of applicants does
not change, which means that the default probability drops above and beyond what would
be predicted by a default model based on ex ante borrower characteristics.
   This result is important because it highlights that the source of the improvement in
loan performance is not due to a better selection of applicants based on their observable
ex ante characteristics. Instead, the improvement in performance may be due to addi-
tional information produced by the committee during the deliberation, or because the
committee uses existing information to better tailor the loan contract characteristics to
the circumstances of the borrower. Either of these mechanisms would imply that scores
lead to a better allocation of capital across borrowers. A better capital allocation implies,

                                             33
in turn, an increase in the expected profitability of lending, and an equalization of the
expected marginal return across loans. We investigate this by evaluating the effect of
rolling out scores on the average and the cross-sectional standard deviation of the realized
gross return of loans issued in branch j during week t. The realized gross return of a loan
is calculated as the ratio of the collections divided by the amount lent. This ratio goes
up when borrowers repay a larger amount of principal and interest relative to the amount
borrowed. Consistent with the decline in default rates, the roll-out of scores also increased
the average realized return of lending by 1.5 percentage points (column 7). Consistent
with an improvement in capital allocation across borrowers, we find that the variation of
realized returns across loans issued by a branch drops during pilot weeks (column 8).



6     Conclusions

The last set of results is important because the overall effect of scores on the allocation
of capital is, in theory, ambiguous. Scores may drive committee members to cater to the
score and ignore soft information. We find that on the contrary, scores interact with other
organizational inputs to improve repayment above and beyond what the level of the score
can predict.
    Put together with the experimental results, the findings imply that scoring technologies
improve the overall efficiency of lending through two mechanisms: 1) they lower the cost
of loan production by increasing the productivity of committee members, decentralizing
the decision process and substituting for more expensive inputs, and 2) they increase the
efficiency of capital allocation.
    By design, the pilot trial holds constant interest rates, managers’ span of control,
committee members’ compensation, and other dimensions of the loan production process.
However, the new equilibrium level for these variables is likely to change after score
adoption (interest rates may drop to reflect the lower production costs, managers may

                                             34
oversee more branches, etc.). Thus, the estimated effects on output might not capture
fully the general equilibrium impact of scores. Changes along these dimensions are likely
to induce further improvements in productivity.
       Our results also highlight that there are two potential mechanisms that drive the
increase in committee productivity: pure information and incentives. We evaluate how
committee decisions change in a treatment that makes the score available to all committee
members soon after they have reached a decision to disentangle the two mechanisms. We
find that more than half of the increase in committee output occurs as a response to the
anticipation of the scores becoming available, holding the committee’s information set
constant. This suggests that the incentive channel plays a first-order role in the overall
effect of scores on lending productivity.
       These findings have interesting implications regarding the design of incentives inside
organizations. Information technology based solutions that increase the ease with which
the principal can monitor the actions of the agents may have first-order effects on pro-
ductivity and organizational design.26 In our context, the supervisors are able to observe
loan officers’ choices even in the absence of the score, for example, when they review the
loan officers’ performance and bonus payments on a quarterly basis. Thus, scores increase
the immediacy and ease with which the principal can monitor the agents but not whether
they get reviewed. Scores also affect how salient the information is to both the agent
and the principal, and is thus related to the work by Cadenas & Schoar (2011), who
change the frequency of incentives to help loan officers overcome procrastination issues.
It is suggestive that these relatively subtle changes in how agents are monitored induce
significant changes in behavior. As such, information technology solutions may represent
an effective and low cost alternative to steepening or increasing monetary incentives.

  26
    Note, in contrast, that our results have nothing to say about information technology based solutions
that completely substitute committee judgement. Berg, Puri & Rocholl (2013) show evidence that piece-
rate incentives and a lending rule solely based on a credit scoring model lead to loan officers distorting
the information they enter into the computer terminal.

                                                   35
References
Aghion, P. & Tirole, J. (1997), ‘Formal and Real Authority in Organizations’, Journal of
  Political Economy 105(1), 1–29.

Autor, D. & Dorn, D. (2013), ‘The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polarization
 of the U.S. Labor Market’, The American Economic Review 103(5), 1553–1597.

Autor, D., Levy, F. & Murnane, R. (2003), ‘The Skill Content of Recent Technological
 Change: An Empirical Exploration’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4), 1279–
 1334.

Baker, G. & Hubbard, T. (2004), ‘Contractibility and Asset Ownership: On-Board
  Computers and Governance in U.S. Trucking’, Quarterly Journal of Economics
  119(4), 1443–1479.

Berg, T., Puri, M. & Rocholl, J. (2013), ‘Loan Officer Incentives and the Limits of Hard
  Information’, NBER Working Paper . 19051.

Bloom, N., Garicano, L., Sadun, R. & Van Reenen, J. (2011), The Distinct Effects of Infor-
  mation Technology and Communication Technology on Firm Organization. Available
  at http://cep.lse.ac.uk/pubs/download/dp0927.pdf.

Brynjolfsson, E. & Hitt, L. (2000), ‘Beyond Computation: Information Technology, Orga-
  nizational Transformation and Business Performance’, The Journal of Economic Per-
  spectives 14(4), 23–48.

Brynjolfsson, E. & Yang, S. (1996), Information Technology and Productivity: A Review
  of the Literature, in M. Zelkowitz, ed., ‘Advances in Computers’, Vol. 43, Elsevier,
  pp. 179–214.

Cadenas, X. & Schoar, A. (2011), ‘Fighting Procrastination within the Firm’, NBER
  Working Paper . 16944.

Dessein, W. (2002), ‘Authority and Communication in Organizations’, The Review of
  Economic Studies 69(4), 811–838.

Einav, L., Jenkins, M. & Levin, J. (2013), ‘The Impact of Information Technology on
  Consumer Lending’, The RAND JOurnal of Economics 44(2), 249–274.

Garicano, L. (2000), ‘Hierarchies and the organization of knowledge in production’, Jour-
 nal of Political Economy 108(5), 874–904.
 URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/317671

Hertzberg, A., Liberti, J. M. & Paravisini, D. (2011), ‘Public Information and Coordina-
  tion: Evidence from a Credit Registry Expansion’, The Journal of Finance 66(2), 379–
  412.

                                           36
Hubbard, T. (2000), ‘The Demand for Monitoring Technologies: The Case of Trucking’,
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(2), 533–560.

Katz, L. & Murphy, K. (1992), ‘Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and
 Demand Factors’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(1), 35–78.

Lee, D. (2008), ‘Training, wages, and sample selection: Estimating sharp bounds on
  treatment effects’, Review of Financial Studies 76(3), 1071–1102.

Milgrom, P. & Roberts, J. (1990), ‘The Economics of Modern Manufacturing: Technology,
 Strategy, and Organization’, American Economic Review 80(3), 511–528.

Petersen, M. & Rajan, R. (1995), ‘The Effect of Credit Market Competition on Lending
  Relationships’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(2), 407–443.

Prat, A. (2005), ‘The Wrong Kind of Transparency’, The American Economic Review
  95(3), 862–877.

Prendergast, C. (1993), ‘A Theory of Yes Men’, The American Economic Review
  83(4), 757–770.

Rajan, R. (1992), ‘Insiders and Outsiders: The Choice between Informed and Arm’s-
 Length Debt’, The Journal of Finance 47(4), 1367–1400.

Rajan, U., Seru, A. & Vig, V. (2013), ‘The Failure of Models that Predict Failure: Dis-
 tance, Incentives and Defaults’, Journal of Financial Economics Forthcoming.

Stein, J. (2002), ‘Information production and capital allocation: Decentralized versus
  hierarchical firms’, The Journal of Finance 57(5), 1891–1921.
  URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/0022-1082.00483




                                          37
Figure 1:    Population Relationships between Default Probability and Credit
Scores/Requested Loan Amount


                                                                    (a) Default Probability, by Score


                                         .2
                       In Default after 6 and 12 Months
                           .05         .10       .15




                                                           0            .1                 .2                  .3               .4
                                                                                          Score

                                                                       95% CI                lpoly smooth: default6m30
                                                                       95% CI                lpoly smooth: default12m30




                                            (b) Default Probability, by Requested Loan Amount (log)
                                          .15
                        In Default after 6 and 12 Months
                               .05        0     .1




                                                               13                   14                  15                 16
                                                                                 log Requested Loan Amount

                                                                        95% CI                lpoly smooth: default6m30
                                                                        95% CI                lpoly smooth: default12m30




Non-parametric relationship between 6-month and 12-month default probabilities and (a) credit score, (b) requested loan
amount, estimated on the sample of all loans approved by BancaMia during October 2010, one month before the roll-out
of the randomized pilot program.




                                                                                        38
     Figure 2: Probability of Decision and Evaluation Time, by Application Amount


                                                                         (a) Probability that Committee Makes Decision

                                                                                  Control                                                             Treatment
                                       1




                                                                                                                              1
                                       .8




                                                                                                                              .8
                      Decide = 1
                                       .6




                                                                                                                              .6
                                       .4




                                                                                                                              .4
                                                            5             6         7        8                     9               5             6         7        8                     9
                                                                          ln(Requested Amount)                                                   ln(Requested Amount)

                                                                          95% CI                    lpoly smooth                                95% CI                     lpoly smooth
                                                            kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .4, pwidth = .4         kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .4, pwidth = .66




                                                                                        (b) Application Evaluation Time

                                                                                  Control                                                             Treatment
                                    10




                                                                                                                              10
                    Application Evaluation Time (Minutes)
                                                    8




                                                                                                                              8
                                      6




                                                                                                                              6
                       4




                                                                                                                              4
                                    2




                                                                                                                              2




                                                            5             6         7        8                     9               5             6         7        8                     9
                                                                          ln(Requested Amount)                                                   ln(Requested Amount)

                                                                         95% CI                    lpoly smooth                                 95% CI                    lpoly smooth
                                                            kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .4, pwidth = .65        kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .4, pwidth = .76




Non-parametric relationship of (a) probability that committee makes a decision on an application (approve or reject) and
(b) evaluation time, with application amount.




                                                                                                                       39
                                               Figure 3: Committee Output by Pilot Month


                                           Conditional Mean of Output by Pilot Month (and 95% C.I.)

                         1
        Probability of Making a Decision
               .8        .7   .9




                                           1                   2                      3               4
                                                                       Pilot Month

                                                                   Control           Treatment

Non-parametric relationship of (a) probability that committee makes a decision on an application
(approve or reject) and (b) evaluation time, with application amount.




                                                                        40
                                       Table 1: Descriptive Statistics by Randomized Subsample

                                                          (1)                     (2)                  (3)                          (4)
                                                        Control              Treatment T1         Treatment T2                    p-value
                                                       (n = 335)               (n = 563)            (n = 523)
                                                     Mean     SD             Mean     SD          Mean     SD         (1) = (2)   (1) = (3)   (2) = (3)

                                                       Panel   A. Ex Ante   Application Characteristics
     Application Amount (USD)                       1,551.5    1,321.4      1,571.7 1,405.6       1,532.3   1,256.8    0.832       0.852       0.649
     Application Maturity (Months)                    20.9       9.8          22.0      10.4        22.1      10.4     0.109       0.086       0.880
     Credit Risk Score                               0.151      0.068        0.155     0.074       0.158     0.080     0.459       0.201       0.512
     First Application (Dummy)                       0.146      0.354        0.147     0.355       0.159     0.366     0.962       0.631       0.616

                                                               Panel B. Committee Outcomes
     Evalutation Time (minutes)                      4.68      3.28        5.13    5.24            5.43     5.34       0.156       0.021       0.353
     Committee Approves/Rejects (Dummy)              0.890     0.314      0.931    0.254           0.950    0.218      0.032       0.001       0.221
41




                                           Panel C. Committee Outcomes, Conditional on Reaching decision
     Loan Approved (Dummy)                        0.997   0.058      0.987     0.11       0.984      0.13              0.161       0.100       0.717

                                                  Panel D. Committee Outcomes, Conditional on Approval
     Amount Approved 6= Application (Dummy)          0.698    0.460      0.737   0.441        0.692    0.462           0.230       0.849       0.108
     Approved Amount/Application Amount              0.979    0.435      0.975   0.318        0.950    0.293           0.905       0.271       0.187
     |Approved Approved - Application Amount|        266.4    478.8      249.8   484.3        245.6    486.0           0.635       0.557       0.892
     Maturity Approved 6= Application (Dummy)        0.262    0.440      0.278   0.449        0.307    0.462           0.609       0.174       0.314
     Approved Maturity/Application Maturity          0.985    0.290      1.000   0.264        0.983    0.371           0.471       0.922       0.404
     |Approved Maturity - Application Maturity|       2.3      4.7        2.4     5.0          3.2      6.0            0.616       0.023       0.032
     Loan Issued (Dummy)                             0.835    0.372      0.855   0.353        0.840    0.367           0.447       0.840       0.524

                                                   Panel E. Final Outcomes, Conditional on Loan Issued
     Disbursed Amount/Application Amount            0.959      0.382     0.965     0.297      0.974          0.549     0.828       0.702       0.755
     In Default after 6 Months (Dummy)              0.036     0.188      0.039     0.193      0.037         0.190      0.881       0.954       0.917
     In Default after 12 Months (Dummy)             0.095      0.293     0.088     0.283      0.089          0.284     0.757       0.781       0.976
     Defaulted Amount (6 months)                    27.26     166.22     26.43    147.97      35.04         193.26     0.947       0.604       0.476
     Defaulted Amount (12 months)                   62.67     238.07     71.84    257.73      74.11         265.39     0.650       0.584       0.902
    Table 2: Descriptive Statistics by Committee Action, Control Group Applications


                                                           Decide             Send Up              More Information
                                                         (n = 298)            (n = 16)                (n = 21)
                                                            (1)                  (2)                      (3)
                                                        mean     sd          mean    sd            mean       sd

 Panel A. Ex Ante Application Characteristics
 Application Amount (US$)                               1,443    1,170       2,480     2,126       2,476       1,994
 Application Maturity (Months)                           20.3     9.3         26.3      12.2        25.1        13.3
 Credit Risk Score                                      0.152    0.069       0.155     0.060       0.138       0.046
 First Loan (Dummy)                                     0.154                0.125                 0.048

 Panel B. Outcomes
 Time to decision (minutes)                             4.608    3.188       5.438     3.405        5.105      4.508
 Loan Issued (Dummy)                                    0.832                0.750                  0.714
 Amount Approved 6= Application (Dummy)                 0.924                1.000                  1.000
 Approved Amount/Application Amount                     0.945    0.272       0.950     0.227        1.486      1.807
 |Approved Approved - Application Amount|               287.4    499.1       262.9     309.8       1477.0     2153.0
 In Default after 6 Months (Dummy)                      0.028                0.000                  0.200
 In Default after 12 Months (Dummy)                     0.093                0.083                  0.133
 Defaulted Amount (after 6 Months)                       25.8    164.0         0.0      0.0         121.4      321.2
 Defaulted Amount (after 12 Months)                      66.4    246.6        28.6     99.2          0.0        0.0
Comparison of application characteristics where the officer reaches a decision—approves or rejects application—(column


1), those where the officer refers the application to the regional manager (column 2), and those where the committee
decides to collect additional information (column 3).




                                                         42
Table 3: Average Treatment Effect of Scores on Committee Output


           Estimation:                            OLS
           Dependent Variable:               Committee Decides

                                                (1)            (2)

           Treatment (T1 and T2)             0.046**        0.038**
                                             (0.018)        (0.019)
           Treatment (T2)                                     0.016
                                                            (0.013)
           ln(Application Amount)           -0.032***      -0.032***
                                             (0.012)        (0.012)
           ln(Application Maturity)           -0.026         -0.026
                                             (0.018)        (0.018)
           Credit Risk Score                  -0.105         -0.107
                                             (0.111)        (0.111)
           First Application                   0.009          0.009
                                             (0.018)        (0.018)
           Trend                                Yes            Yes

           Observations                        1,406         1,406
           R-squared                           0.041         0.042
          OLS estimates of the effect of treatment on committee
          output measured as the probability that committee reaches
          decision, with robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **,
          and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.




                                       43
                          Table 4: Costly Information and Referrals


 Committee Choice                        Approves          Rejects    More Information         Send to Manager
                                         (Omitted)
                                           (1)               (2)               (3)                     (4)

 Treatment (T1 and T2)                                    1.3236            -0.5439*               -0.9038***
                                                          (1.049)            (0.305)                 (0.344)
 ln(Application Amount)                                   0.0851           0.7971***                  0.1790
                                                          (0.466)            (0.243)                 (0.308)
 ln(Application Maturity)                                 -0.2176            -0.1358                1.7474***
                                                          (0.731)            (0.386)                 (0.570)
 Credit Risk Score                                       4.8843**            0.2146                  2.8701*
                                                          (2.121)            (2.001)                 (1.537)
 First Application                                        0.4442             -0.6193                  0.2574
                                                          (0.673)            (0.487)                 (0.419)
 Trend                                                      Yes                Yes                     Yes
 Observations                               1405
 Pseudo R-squared                          0.0875

 Fraction in Control Subsample             0.8866          0.0030            0.0627                  0.0478
 Marginal Effects:
 Treatment                                 0.0281         0.0124            -0.0174*               -0.0231**
                                          (0.0166)       (0.0100)           (0.0104)                (0.0094)
Multinomial Logistic Regression estimates of the effect of treatment on final committee actions: make a
decision on an application (approve or reject), postpone until the loan officer collects additional information,
or send the application to the manager (referrals). The first action, make a decision, is the omitted category.
The bottom rows present the proportion of each action in the control group and the estimated marginal effect
of treatment on the probability that the committee takes an action. Robust standard errors in parenthesis.
***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.




                                                      44
                                Table 5: Average Treatment Effect of Scores on Committee Effort


      Estimation:                             OLS                                              LAD (Quantile Regression)
      Dependent Variable:                Evaluation Time                                           Evaluation time
                                                                          25th %ile                   50th %ile                       75th %ile
                                          (1)           (2)             (3)        (4)              (5)        (6)                  (7)        (8)

      Treatment (T1 and T2)            0.760***      0.624**           0.183         0.123         0.426***      0.383**         0.663***     0.662***
                                        (0.229)      (0.273)          (0.192)      (0.194)          (0.157)      (0.193)          (0.231)      (0.254)
      Treatment (T2)                                  0.283                         0.057                         0.133                         0.113
                                                     (0.321)                       (0.170)                       (0.171)                       (0.249)
      ln(Application Amount)           0.751***     0.747***            0.084        0.053          0.239*         0.238         0.664***     0.617***
                                        (0.226)      (0.226)          (0.145)      (0.140)          (0.133)      (0.145)          (0.183)      (0.185)
      ln(Application Maturity)          0.653**      0.656**         0.676***     0.692***         0.680***     0.670***            0.227       0.265
                                        (0.332)      (0.330)          (0.222)      (0.222)          (0.208)      (0.225)          (0.308)      (0.303)
45




      Credit Risk Score                   -1.28       -1.301           -1.181       -1.175         -1.970**       -1.464           -1.761       -1.971
                                        (1.457)      (1.458)          (0.752)      (0.818)          (0.945)      (1.077)          (1.564)      (1.558)
      First Application                  0.695*       0.692*          0.408**      0.426**         0.541***     0.571***            0.764        0.757
                                        (0.387)      (0.388)          (0.187)      (0.194)          (0.186)      (0.204)          (0.509)      (0.535)
      Trend                                Yes         Yes               Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes              Yes          Yes

      Observations                       1,397        1,397            1,397        1,397            1,397        1,397            1,397        1,397
      R-squared                          0.048        0.049
     OLS estimates of the effect of treatment on application evaluation time in minutes, with robust standard errors in parenthesis (columns 1
     and 2). LAD estimates of the effect of treatment on evaluation time, with bootstrapped standard errors (500 repetitions) estimated via simultaneous
     quantile regressions in parenthesis (columns 3 through 8). ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
                                               Table 6: Scores and Conditional Committee Outcomes – OLS

                                                                             Approved         Approved                               Issued        In Default
      Dependent Variable:                            Committee                Amount          Maturity            Loan              Amount            after
                                                    Approves Dum.            (log USD)      (log Months)      Issued Dum.          (log USD)       12 months
                                                         (1)                     (2)             (3)               (4)                 (5)             (6)

                             Panel A. Subsample: applications where the committee made the decision during the pilot

      Treatment (T1 and T2)                             -0.0092*              -0.0001          0.0282             0.0051             0.0114          -0.0093
                                                         (0.005)              (0.020)          (0.029)            (0.025)            (0.024)         (0.020)
      Controls                                             Yes                  Yes              Yes                Yes                Yes             Yes
      Conditional of Committee Aproving                    No                   Yes              Yes                Yes                Yes             Yes
      Conditional on Loan Issued                           No                   No               No                 No                 Yes             Yes

      Observations                                        1,315                 1,314           1,314              1,302              1,001           1,001
46




      R-squared                                           0.007                 0.840           0.010              0.011              0.778           0.043

                                                                    Panel B. All applications

      Treatment (T1 and T2)                                                                                       0.0020             0.0107          -0.0158
                                                                                                                  (0.024)            (0.018)         (0.020)
      Controls                                                                                                      Yes                Yes             Yes
      Conditional on Loan Issued                                                                                    No                 Yes             Yes

      Observations                                                                                                 1,406              1,048           1,048
      R-squared                                                                                                    0.007              0.773           0.043
     OLS regressions of conditional outcomes on treatment status. Panel 1 shows estimates on the subsample of applications where the committee reached a
     decision (approves or rejects) during the pilot. Panel 1 shows estimates an all applications, including those where the decision was made by the regional
     manager and those where the committee made a decision later. Columns (2) through (4) are estimated on the subsample of applications where the
     committee approved an application. Columns 5 and 6 further conditions on issued loans. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate
     significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
     Table 7: Information versus Incentives: Effect on Interim and Final Actions in T 2 – OLS


      Outcome:                          Committee Decides            Committee Approves                  ln(Approved
                                              Dummy                         Dummy                          Amount)
      Choice:                           Interim    Final              Interim    Final               Interim      Final
                                          (1)       (2)                 (3)       (4)                  (5)         (6)

      Treatment T2                     0.0388**     0.0524***        -0.0136**     -0.0113*           -0.0023     -0.0064
                                        (0.019)      (0.018)          (0.007)       (0.006)           (0.023)     (0.022)
      ln(Application Amount)            -0.0257     -0.0378**          0.0013        0.0012          0.746***    0.776***
                                        (0.016)      (0.015)          (0.007)       (0.007)           (0.022)     (0.021)
      ln(Application Maturity)         -0.0572**     -0.0352          -0.0015       -0.0012         0.280***     0.237***
                                        (0.024)      (0.023)          (0.015)       (0.015)           (0.036)     (0.035)
      Credit Risk Score                 -0.0925      -0.1607          -0.1877       -0.1632         -0.821***    -0.762***
                                        (0.132)      (0.132)          (0.129)       (0.129)           (0.155)     (0.152)
47




      First Application                 0.0402*       0.0318          -0.0034       -0.0052           -0.0197     -0.0152
                                        (0.021)      (0.021)          (0.010)       (0.010)           (0.031)     (0.031)
      Trend                               Yes          Yes              Yes           Yes               Yes         Yes
      Observations                        851          851              787            793              783         793
      R-squared                          0.050        0.056            0.023         0.019             0.838       0.845
     OLS estimates the treatment effect on interim committee outcomes before observing the score (odd columns) and on
     final outcomes after observing the score (even columns). Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate
     significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
                                Table 8: Branch-Level Effects - Difference-in-Differences Estimates


      Unit of Observation:                        Loan                                                        Branch-Week
                                   Score     ln(Application       In Default        ln(Number       ln(Sum      Fraction of      Realized Return
                                                Amount)            after 12          of Loans)       Loan       Loans that      Average Std. Dev.
                                                                   Months                          Amount)       Defaults
                                    (1)             (2)               (3)                 (4)         (5)           (6)            (7)           (8)

      Experiment Week             -0.0014         -0.0194          -0.0071              -0.0273     0.0074        -0.0121*      0.0152*      -0.0392**
                                  (0.002)         (0.020)          (0.013)              (0.044)     (0.047)        (0.006)      (0.008)       (0.015)
      Risk Score                                                  0.6949***
                                                                   (0.039)
      Experiment Week                                              -0.0812
      x Risk Score                                                 (0.082)
      Branch Dummies                Yes             Yes              Yes                 Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
48




      Week Dummies                  Yes             Yes              Yes                 Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
      Branch Trends                 Yes             Yes              Yes                 Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes

      Observations                18,270          18,270            18,270               525          525            525           525          525
      R-squared                   0.044            0.028            0.016               0.754        0.699          0.283         0.284         0.17
     OLS regression of loan characteristics on a dummy equal to one if the application was evaluated during a week in which the randomized pilot study
     was taking place in the branch. Sample contains only approved loans from the eight pilot branches and eight propensity score-matched branches
     (branch matching based on number and total amount of loans approved, average approved loan size, and borrower score measured in October
     2010). The sample period is from week 41 of 2010 to week 26 of 2011 (four weeks before and after the pilot program began and ended). Columns
     1 through 3 are estimated at the loan level, and 3 through 9 at the branch-week level. Robust standard errors clustered at the branch level in
     parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
0
A       Appendix

              Figure A.1: Probability of Decision and Evaluation Time, by Score


                                                                         (a) Probability that Committee Makes Decision

                                                                                    Control                                                             Treatment
                                      1




                                                                                                                                1
                                      .9




                                                                                                                                .9
                      Decide = 1
                          .8




                                                                                                                                .8
                                      .7




                                                                                                                                .7
                                      .6




                                                                                                                                .6




                                                              0            .1          .2              .3           .4               0            .1          .2              .3           .4
                                                                                      Score                                                                  Score

                                                                           95% CI                    lpoly smooth                                 95% CI                    lpoly smooth
                                                              kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .1, pwidth = .08        kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .1, pwidth = .13




                                                                                        (b) Application Evaluation Time

                                                                                    Control                                                              Treatment
                                      6




                                                                                                                                6
                      Application Evaluation Time (Minutes)
                                                      5




                                                                                                                                5
                                        4




                                                                                                                                4
                         3




                                                                                                                                3
                                      2




                                                                                                                                2




                                                              0            .1          .2              .3           .4               0             .1          .2             .3           .4
                                                                                      Score                                                                   Score

                                                                           95% CI                     lpoly smooth                                 95% CI                    lpoly smooth
                                                              kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .1, pwidth = .09        kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .1, pwidth = .1




Non-parametric relationship of (a) probability that committee makes a decision on an application (approve or reject) and
(b) evaluation time, with application score.



                                                                                                                         1
Table A.1: Study Sample: Number of Applications per branch and per Treatment Status


                     Control      T1     T2        Total
     Branch #:
     1                  44        67      62        173
     2                  89       153     132        374
     3                  26        51      66        143
     4                  69        88      87        244
     5                  18        28      27         73
     6                  22        26      14         62
     7                  20        45      38        103
     8                  47       105      98        250

     Total             335       563     524       1,422

    Control: the committee makes a decision without observing the score. T 1: the borrower’s score is made available
    at the beginning of the application evaluation. T 2: the committee makes an interim decision before the score
    is made available, and allowed to revise the decision after observing the score.




                                                           2
                                 Table A.2: Effect of Scores on Committee Output, No Controls


     Sample Conditioning:                  None                      Committee Decides             Committee Approved                 Loan Issued
     Dependent Variable:          Evaluation Committee                  Committee                 ln(Approved   Loan              ln(Issued Defaults
                                    Time        Decides                  Approves                   Amount)    Issued             Amount)
                                     (1)          (2)                      (3)                        (4)        (5)                 (6)        (7)

     Score Dummy                   0.5962**       0.0506***                -0.0113**                 0.0281         0.0182         0.0541        0.0099
                                    (0.242)        (0.019)                  (0.005)                  (0.050)        (0.028)        (0.056)       (0.014)

     Observations                    1,412           1,421                   1,319                    1,315          1,303          1,001         1,001
     R-squared                       0.003           0.007                   0.002                    0.000          0.000          0.001         0.000

    OLS estimates of the effect of treatment on committee and loan outcomes. Columns (1) and (2) are estimated on all applications, columns (3) and
    (4) on the subsample of applications where the committee reached a decision, column (5) on the subsample of approved applications, and columns
3




    (6) and (7) are estimated on the subsample of issued loans. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%,
    5%, and 10% levels.
               Table A.3: Interim and Final Decisions in Treatment T 2


                                            Final Decision (after Observing Score):
                                    Accept         Reject      Obtain More Send Decision                        Total
                                   Application Application Information         to Manager

 Interim Decision:
 Accept                                 482               0                0                  1                 483
 Reject                                  0                8                0                  0                  8
 Obtain More Information                 0                0               20                  0                 20
 Send Decision to Manager                7                0                0                  5                 12

 Total                                  489               8               20                  6                 523
Each observation in the matrix represents the two sequential decisions made by a committee regarding the
same application in treatment T 2. Interim decisions (rows) are the decisions made before observing the score
and final decisions (columns) are the revised decisions after observing the score.




                                                     4
                    Table A.4: Information versus Incentives: Effect on Interim and Final Actions in T 2 – ML


     Estimation                                              Interim Outcomes                                                Final Outcomes
     Action:                                 Approve        Reject      More              Send to           Approve        Reject      More              Send to
                                            (Omitted)                Information          Manager          (Omitted)                Information          Manager
                                               (1)            (2)         (3)               (4)               (5)           (6)          (7)               (8)

     Treatment T2                                           1.5208         -0.4868       -0.8152**                         1.4762         -0.5112       -1.5197***
                                                            (1.071)        (0.347)        (0.392)                          (1.058)        (0.346)         (0.483)
     ln(Application Amount)                                 -0.1783       0.8793**        -0.1355                          -0.1558       0.9058**          0.5286
                                                            (0.698)        (0.359)        (0.453)                          (0.701)        (0.358)         (0.501)
     ln(Application Maturity)                                0.1960         0.0517       1.8806***                          0.1588         0.0159         1.0678*
                                                            (1.352)        (0.575)        (0.652)                          (1.342)        (0.568)         (0.618)
     Credit Risk Score                                     6.3225**         1.1175         1.7954                         6.4498**         1.3050         4.2580
                                                            (2.507)        (1.738)        (2.708)                          (2.566)        (1.774)         (2.806)
     First Application                                       0.2935        -0.9911        -0.5589                           0.3135        -0.9733         -0.4016
5




                                                            (0.642)        (0.644)        (0.656)                          (0.644)        (0.643)         (0.766)
     Trend                                                    Yes            Yes            Yes                              Yes            Yes             Yes
     Observations                                  850                                                         850
     R-squared
     Pseudo R-squared                             0.0975                                                      0.114

     Fraction in Control Subsample                0.8866    0.0030         0.0627          0.0478            0.8866        0.0030         0.0627          0.0478
     Marginal Effects:
     Treatment T2                              0.0279       0.0140         -0.0172        -0.0247*          0.0392*        0.0138         -0.0170       -0.0360***
                                              (0.0201)     (0.0104)       (0.0131)        (0.0128)          (0.0204)      (0.0102)       (0.0129)        (0.0136)
    Multinomial Logistic Regression estimates of the effect of treatment on interim committee decisions made before observing the score (columns 1 through 4) and
    on final decisions made after observing the score (columns 5 through 8). The bottom rows present the proportion of each action in the control group and the
    estimated marginal effect of treatment on the probability that the committee takes an action. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate
    significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
