                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               ASSESSING THE EFFECTS OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA LAWS
                        ON MARIJUANA AND ALCOHOL USE:
                          THE DEVIL IS IN THE DETAILS

                                       Rosalie Liccardo Pacula
                                           David Powell
                                            Paul Heaton
                                          Eric L. Sevigny

                                        Working Paper 19302
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19302


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2013




This research was supported by a grant from the National Institute on Drug Abuse (R01 DA032693-01).
We appreciate helpful comments on earlier versions of this work from Mark Anderson, Kitt Carpenter,
Priscillia Hunt, Mireille Jacobson, Beau Kilmer, Mark Kleiman, Daniel Rees and participants of the
2012 American Society for Health Economics annual meeting, 2012 American Society on Criminology
annual meeting, and the 2013 International Society for the Study of Drug Policy annual meeting. All
errors are the authors. The opinions expressed herein represent only those of the authors and not the
funding agency, our employers, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, David Powell, Paul Heaton, and Eric L. Sevigny. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Assessing the Effects of Medical Marijuana Laws on Marijuana and Alcohol Use: The Devil
is in the Details
Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, David Powell, Paul Heaton, and Eric L. Sevigny
NBER Working Paper No. 19302
August 2013
JEL No. I18,K32,K42

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper sheds light on previous inconsistencies identified in the literature regarding the relationship
between medical marijuana laws (MML) and recreational marijuana use by closely examining the
importance of policy dimensions (registration requirements, home cultivation, dispensaries) and the
timing of them. Using data from our own legal analysis of state MMLs, we evaluate which features
are associated with adult and youth recreational use by linking these policy variables to data from
the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY97), the Youth Risk Behavior Survey (YRBS) and
the Treatment Episodes Data System (TEDS). Our analyses control for state and year fixed effects,
using within state policy changes over time to estimate the effect on changes in our outcome variables
using a difference-in-differences approach. We find that while simple dichotomous indicators are generally
not associated with marijuana use, specific dimensions of MMLs, namely home cultivation and legal
dispensaries, are positively associated with marijuana use in each data set. Moreover, these same dimensions
are tied to binge drinking and fatal alcohol automobile accidents as well. The findings have important
implications for states considering legalization of marijuana, as regulating access to and promotion
of dispensaries may be key for reducing the harms associated with these policies.


Rosalie Liccardo Pacula                              Paul Heaton
RAND Corporation                                     RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street                                     1776 Main St.
P.O. Box 2138                                        P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138                          Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
and NBER                                             pheaton@rand.org
pacula@rand.org
                                                     Eric L. Sevigny
David Powell                                         1305 Greene St.
RAND Corporation                                     Department of Criminology and Criminal Justice
1776 Main St., 4121                                  University of South Carolina
Santa Monica, CA 90407                               Columbia, SC 29208
powelld@nber.org                                     sevigny@mailbox.sc.edu
I. INTRODUCTION
        In November 2012, Colorado and Washington state legalized possession of one ounce

or less of marijuana for recreational use by adults (those 21 years or older), and both states are

developing guidelines to enable production and sale. At least twelve other states are

considering similar policies and arguments for and against these policies are mounting based

largely on a thin and conflicting scientific literature of the effects of medical marijuana laws and

decriminalization policy on marijuana use and harms. Medical marijuana laws have received

particular attention during the legalization debate because of their hypothesized impacts on

access to marijuana and perceived harmfulness among key populations, particularly youth

(Friese and Grube, 2013; Thurston, Leiberman and Schmiege, 2011). Moreover, many state

medical marijuana policies now include provisions for the retail sale of marijuana for medicinal

purposes. In parts of some cities like Los Angeles CA and Denver CO, medical marijuana

dispensaries are popularly thought to outnumber Starbucks coffee shops (NPR, 2009; The

Atlantic Wire 2011). A clear understanding of the impact of medical marijuana laws--particularly

aspects relevant for broader legal regulated markets--is imperative for developing coherent

public policies pertaining to legalization.

        Average levels of marijuana consumption are higher in states with medical marijuana

laws (MMLs). In 2004/05, for example, household survey respondents in states with medical

marijuana laws were 92% more likely to report using marijuana in the last 12 months than those

in non-medical marijuana states (Cerdá et al., 2012). For youth aged 12-17 over the period

2002-2008, prevalence of marijuana use was 25% greater in states with MMLs compared to

those states without a MML (Wall et al., 2011). However, just because marijuana use is higher

in states that have these laws does not mean that the laws created higher use rates. States with

higher prevalence rates may be more likely to pass these initiatives in the first place. Indeed,

several studies have shown that there is no statistical relationship (and at times a slight negative

relationship) between these laws and recreational use of marijuana when other factors are
accounted for (Harper et al., 2012; Gorman and Huber, 2007). However, other studies

examining different years of data and other states show that there remains a positive

association between the laws and use for certain populations (Anderson et al., Forthcoming;

Cerdá et al 2012).

       The purpose of this paper is to carefully examine the impact of medical marijuana laws

on marijuana use in the general population and among youth. While a few similar efforts exist

(Anderson et al, Forthcoming; Cerdá et al 2012), we are the first to consider how specific

medical marijuana provisions regulating cultivation and distribution affect use. We demonstrate

the drawbacks of treating medical marijuana laws generically, showing that specific modes of

regulation differentially influence consumption, a finding which sheds new light on the

inconsistent findings of prior work. More specifically, using a differences-in-differences analysis

applied to data from the Youth Behavioral Risk Surveillance System (YRBS), National

Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), and Treatment Episode Data Set (TEDS), we show that

access to dispensaries or home cultivation may increase marijuana consumption, including

among youth, even while other forms of medical marijuana legalization appear to reduce

consumption. The effects are not consistent across all measures of use in our data sets,

suggesting that sampling limitations may also explain some of the disparate past findings

regarding the effects of medical marijuana. Our results suggest that the use of a simple

dichotomous indicator for legalized medical marijuana in policy research may mask important

heterogeneous effects of these laws. Moreover, the measured effects of medical marijuana may

be affected by the timing over which policies are being examined, the states being considered in

the analysis, and the representativeness of the data drawn from those states.

       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section II we provide background on

medical marijuana laws and these laws’ key dimensions. We also summarize the limited

research examining the impact of these laws, paying particular attention to past studies’ years of

analysis and hence their source of legal variation. Section III provides a theoretical framework
for thinking about how medical marijuana laws might influence consumption in the adult

population as well as among youth. In Section IV we discuss our data sources, and then present

the results from our analyses of the impact of these laws on marijuana use in Section V. Section

VI extends our analysis to consider related outcomes, specifically alcohol abuse and fatal

automobile accidents. We conclude in Section VII with a summary of our findings and its

implications for both medical marijuana policy and legalization proposals.




II. BACKGROUND


   As of January 1, 2012, 17 states and the District of Columbia had policies recognizing the

medicinal value of marijuana and providing a legal defense for patients who used marijuana

under the recommendation of a physician. Many early adopting states (those adopting between

1996 and 2000) did so through voter referendum, with such referenda providing little specific

guidance about acceptable sources of supply for marijuana. Since then, policies governing

medical marijuana, such as the allowance of dispensaries and requirements of patient

registration systems, have evolved in fits and starts in response to often competing legislative,

administrative, and judicial actions.

   Table 1 shows the evolution of certain key dimensions of MML laws across different states

through the end of 2011. Specific dimensions considered are whether states require patient

registry systems, whether states have allowances for general “pain” rather than just specific

medical conditions, whether states legally allow dispensaries, and whether states allow for

home cultivation.

   Beyond demonstrating which states employ various regulatory approaches, Table 1 also

shows that only two early-adopting states (Hawaii and Colorado) have not changed any of these

key dimensions relating to access, availability and norms since their policy was initially adopted.

Most states, even later adopters, have refined their state policies since initial passage, in
particular with reference to dispensaries. Dispensaries have emerged to a very modest extent in

states like Washington and Michigan that do not formally allow dispensaries, and such

emergence often precedes a subsequent change in policy. Moreover, in states where

dispensaries have been formally protected by state laws (e.g. Colorado and California), the

number of dispensaries has exploded, particularly since the 2009 announcement by the U.S.

Attorney General that the Justice Department would end raids on distributors who are in

compliance with state medical marijuana laws (Ogden, 2009).

       Marijuana dispensaries, as well as the competition and commercialization that can

emerge with them, can impact recreational use of marijuana through a number of avenues:

increased consumer access, normalizing the behavior and lowering perceptions of risk, and – if

competition emerges – possible price reductions. However, previous analyses of the effects of

MML laws do not consider their specific provisions, and therefore by default treat all laws as if

they have the same impact on recreational use. It is perhaps unsurprising that various studies

have found substantially different effects of medical marijuana laws on use given that laws have

been measured based only on whether a broad policy is adopted. The fact that the literature

ignores important changes over time in elements of state policies that impact access has

contributed to the lack of consistent results in analyses of the policies.

       Many early studies of medical marijuana laws find no significant impact of marijuana use

on consumption, but none of the early laws had formal allowances for dispensaries or

systematically regulated supply. For example, Khatapoush and Halfors (2004) use a pre-post

design for the period 1995-1999 to assess the impact of California’s medical marijuana law

adopted in 1996. Using data from over 15,000 telephone surveys of young adults in 41

communities, they assess whether California’s law affected perceived availability and

harmfulness, approval of marijuana, or past-month recreational use among Californians as

compared to residents of ten other non-MML states. The only significant difference in outcomes

is in perceived harm, which fell more in California over time than in other states. While California
had higher use rates of marijuana than other states, the average difference in trends did not

change. They conclude that California’s medical marijuana law had no significant impact on

recreational marijuana use among young adults.

         Gorman and Huber (2007) use data from a slightly longer time period (1995-2003), but

restrict their analysis to data in just four early adopting states (California, Colorado, Oregon, and

Washington) and look for structural breaks in state-specific quarterly counts of arrestees and

marijuana-involved emergency department (ED) episodes following medical marijuana adoption.

The authors find that initial passage of medical marijuana laws did not measurably change

either indicator of marijuana use. However, they note that they have a very short post-reform

time period for Colorado, which was the only state formally allowing dispensaries included in the

study.

         Harper, Strumpf and Kaufman (2012) examine a later period of policy change, looking

over the period 2003-2008 at MML adoption’s impact on adolescent self-reported marijuana use

and perceived harmfulness using aggregated National Survey on Drug Use and Health

(NSDUH) state data. First replicating and then improving upon an earlier descriptive study by

Wall et al., (2011), Harper et al. (2012) use a difference-in-differences approach with year and

state fixed effects to control for time-stable unobserved heterogeneity at the state level. They

find that state MMLs have no statistically significant effect on perceived harmfulness among 12-

17 year olds over the time period 2002-2008. When they expanded their sample with an extra

year of data and more carefully looked at impacts of these laws across various age groups (12-

17 year olds; 18-25 year olds, and 26+), they found no statistically significant impact of the state

MML policy on any age group.

         The importance of considering differences in responses to these policies by age was

also underscored in a study by Anderson and Rees (2011), which identified impacts of the MML

policies using NSDUH aggregated data during a period when just three states adopted new

policies: Rhode Island (RI), Vermont (VT) and Montana (MT). This work shows similar results of
no statistically significant effect on minors (aged 12-17), but positive effects of the policies on

older young adults. They find the law in Montana and Rhode Island increased use for those 18

years and older.

       Anderson, Hansen, and Rees (2012) use a similar difference-in-differences approach to

Harper et al. (2012), but employ a much longer panel of data from the 1993-2009 Youth Risk

Behavior Survey (YRBS). In general, models making use of both the state and national YRBS

data (which represents respondents in 9th-12th grade, so ages of 13- 17) show no statistically

significant effect of the MML policy on thirty day prevalence of use. In fact, in some

specifications, the authors find the policies are negative and statistically significant. However,

because YRBS participation varies across years, the authors only have eight MML states with

pre- and post-policy adoption data in each of the national and state samples. The Anderson et

al. (2012) paper is unique in its efforts to replicate findings in a variety of other data sets and in

considering different margins of use. Additional analyses are conducted making use of

individual longitudinal data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 (NLSY97) and

the 1992-2009 Treatment Admissions Data Set (TEDS) and findings using these data were

consistent with the YRBS analysis.

       Chu (2012) uses data from 1988-2008 and a differences-in-differences analysis to

consider the effect of MML on two other proxies for use—marijuana arrests and marijuana

rehabilitation treatments. In contrast to other studies, Chu finds evidence of a strong effect of

legalization on both outcomes, with increases in admissions observed among juveniles as well

as adults. While Chu’s use of administrative data arguably alleviates some concerns related to

self-reporting, a drawback of this analysis is that it confounds any direct impact of MML on use

with concomitant responses of law enforcement or health care providers to legal change.

       All these prior studies treat MMLs as a homogenous set of laws. This paper, in contrast,

recognizes that not all medical marijuana policies are homogenous and that important policy
dimensions are not static.1 We use variation in the timing of the core elements of MML policy

shown in Table 1 to assess whether particular forms of regulation are more relevant for use. We

also consider whether a more nuanced analysis of the attributes of these laws can explain the

apparent inconsistent findings to date regarding the effects of these laws on use. Moreover, like

Anderson et al. (forthcoming), we consider multiple measures of use, allowing us to consider

both overall prevalence and patterns of use for different subpopulations of interest. Considering

different margins of use is potentially valuable in light of national data showing relatively little

change in thirty-day prevalence rates of marijuana use during the 2000s, but large increases in

near-daily use, particularly among juveniles (SAMHSA, 2012).


III. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
         To the extent that medical marijuana laws influence either (a) the perceived harmfulness

of marijuana or (b) social availability of marijuana through home cultivation or dispensaries, they

can indirectly influence demand by shifting a taste parameter of the utility function or changing

the full price an individual faces for using marijuana. If we let M represent marijuana

consumption, O represent a vector of other substance use (e.g. alcohol), and C represent a

general composite consumption good, we can write the individual’s maximization problem as

follows2:


(1) Max {C, M, O} U(C) + bV(M, O)


subject to:


(2) Y = C + PM M + PO O

1
  Other studies have been published evaluating the impact of these laws on particular populations employing less
rigorous sample designs or methods (Thurstone, 2011; Cerdá et al 2012; Friese and Grube, 2013). In general, they
too have found conflicting results. Given the methods are less rigorous than those discussed here, we simply note
that these studies contribute to the general point of conflicting evidence in the literature.
2
  The current static analysis ignores the influence of habit formation on demand for marijuana and other illicit
substances. There is some empirical evidence that marijuana is habit forming (e.g. Pacula, 1998); however, research
suggests that about 1 in 10 users who ever use the drug will actually become dependent, a relatively small fraction of
the user group (Hall et al, 2001). Hence this additional level of complexity is omitted from the current model.
(3) b = f(Hi, Ai, i, Z, ) for i =M, O.


Following other models of substance use, utility is presumed to be separable in the consumption

of drugs and all other goods. Hence, U and V in equation (1) are subutility functions, where U’ >

0, U” < 0, Vi > 0 and Vii < 0 for i = M, O.3 The vector b represents individual-level factors that

influence the marginal utility of consuming marijuana and other substances, as is indicated by

equation (3). The marginal utility of consuming marijuana and other substances is a function of

the individual’s perceptions regarding the harm of using specific substances (Hi), the social

availability of the drug (Ai), the legal risks associated with consuming each drug (i), individual

observable characteristics, such as age or marital status (Z), and unobservable factors that

influence an individual’s “tastes” for drugs (), such as thrill-seeking behavior. It is assumed that

the individual error term, , is i.i.d. with a mean of zero.


         Equation (2) specifies the individual’s budget constraint, with Y representing the

individual’s income and PM and PO representing the monetary price of marijuana and other

substances consumed, respectively. Because marijuana is generally illegal to use and is

believed to impose negative health consequences to the individual (Hall, 2009; Hall and

Degenhardt, 2009), the monetary price of purchasing marijuana does not represent its full cost

to the user. Additional costs include the health risks (HM) and legal risks (M) of consuming the

substance. However, these additional costs are not typically paid for through market

transactions and therefore represent nonpecuniary aspects of the full price. 4 They cannot

therefore be represented through the budget constraint and are instead represented as

individual-specific shift parameters to the marginal utility of consuming marijuana. Higher

3
  An implicit restriction imposed by the use of separable utility functions is that marijuana or other substance use is
not allowed to increase the marginal utility of consuming other goods, such as leisure time. This is likely to be a
rigid assumption that should be explored in future research.
4
  The monetary price of marijuana or any illicit drug reflects only those costs and risks borne by the seller in the
black market. The actual monetary price charged will likely differ from consumer to consumer, based on the seller,
the ability of the buyer to judge quantity and quality, and the history between the buyer and seller. For more about
prices in drug markets see Caulkins (1994, 1995).
nonpecuniary costs are presumed to lower the marginal utility of consuming marijuana, or ∂b /

∂H < 0 and ∂b / ∂ < 0.


       The influence of medical marijuana laws (MedMJ) on perceived harm (HM) and social

availability (AM) can be incorporated into this model by noting that these parameters are

themselves a function of several additional factors. The individual’s perceptions of the risk of

using marijuana on an occasional or regular basis is likely to be a function of the individual’s

own information set of the health benefits and risks of marijuana, the prevailing social norms

regarding the use of marijuana , and other individual personality factors that influence the

individual’s receptivity to these different information sources. The presence of medical

marijuana laws is presumed to reduce perceptions of harm from regular marijuana use by

providing a medical justification for its use, thus causing marijuana to be seen more for its

positive attributes and less for the negative ones. This implies that ∂HM / ∂(MedMJ) < 0.


       The social availability of marijuana to the individual can similarly be written as a function

of several other factors, including the individual’s exposure to peers and/or family members who

use marijuana and the prevailing social norms regarding use of marijuana. To the extent that

medical marijuana laws expose youth to more adults and/or peers who use the substance or to

the extent that these laws enable home cultivation by friends, family and/or peers, these laws

are likely to increase its social availability. This implies that ∂AM / ∂(MedMJ) > 0.


       Ideally, we would like to estimate a system of models that enable us to simultaneously

evaluate demand equations associated with the maximization problems described in equations

(1)-(3) as well as the perceived harm and perceived availability. The problem is that sufficient

data do not exist for us to capture all the relevant domains and uniquely identify each of the

mechanisms. Moreover, measures of general access and perceived harm are often not

available for an individual’s immediate peer group and hence are proxied through aggregated
measures at a school or state level. Thus, we estimate here a reduced form of the model given

by:


       (4) M = M {PM, PO, Y, H(MedMJ), A(MedMJ), M, Z;  }


The model is first estimated with state aggregated measures of consumption so as to generate

models that are consistent with previous studies, and then where our data permits, we also

estimate individual level demand equations.


IV. DATA AND EMPIRICAL SPECIFICATION
       To study the association of medical marijuana laws and its different dimensions on

utilization, we employ a variety of data sets. In an ideal world, the results from each data set

should provide complementary evidence and provide validation of findings. However, for

reasons that will be described in greater detail below, each has its strengths and weaknesses

that lead to uncertainty regarding the reliability of findings from particular data sets.



4.1: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY97).

       The NLYSY97 provides individual-level data on a host of outcomes, including detailed

information on marijuana and alcohol use over the past 30 days. In our analysis, we were able

to use data from 1997-2009. The NLSY only follows a single cohort consisting of a population

between the ages of 12 and 17 in 1997. This cohort is resurveyed in each survey year.        A

limitation of this type of data, especially when compared to repeated cross-sections which are

resampled, is that the sample is constantly aging. Consequently, the NLSY97 sample is a

different age when studying the effects of policies in late-adopting states compared to the age of

those when early adopting state policies are evaluated. It is also not representative at the state-

level. However, our analysis will study changes in individual-behavior, reducing concerns that

this affects the validity or interpretation of our estimates. The primary advantage of the data is

the richness of the outcome variables, which includes the number of days in the previous 30
days in which the individual used marijuana, and the fact that individual unobservable factors

can be accounted for through fixed effects.



4.2. Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance (YRBS) System.

       The YRBS System surveys middle and high school students on a host of risky

behaviors, including alcohol and drug use. The data are repeated cross-sections, available

biennially for 1991-2011. State participation is not consistent so it is common for a state to

provide data in one wave but not the next. Many states require permission to access their

state’s YRBS data from the CDC and previous studies have noted difficulties and delays in

receiving data from all states (Anderson et al., 2012). These data provide individual-level

information. However, aggregated state-year statistics are available from the CDC without

state-level permission using their Youth Online application

(http://apps.nccd.cdc.gov/youthonline). We use these state aggregated data for our analysis.

The individual-level files do not provide much demographic information that can be used in our

regression analysis and the same individuals are not re-interviewed over time so little is lost

using these aggregated numbers. Using these data allows us to maximize the number of state-

years covered. Our final YRBS dataset include the fraction of high school students in state-year

that have used marijuana (alcohol) in the previous 30 days.



4.3. Treatment Episode Data Set (TEDS).

       The TEDS provides demographic and substance abuse characteristics of admissions to

alcohol and drug treatment facilities. The data include the substance or substances that the

individual is being treated for. The TEDS only includes treatment centers which receive public

funding. Assuming that the prevalence of public funding for treatment centers is not

systematically related to medical marijuana law adoption, this coverage issue should not bias

our results since we will be including state fixed effects in our analysis. Furthermore, the data
note whether an individual is referred by the criminal justice system. We will use this variable to

check whether changes in enforcement of marijuana laws, indicated by changes in referrals to

treatment from the criminal justice system, affect our results.

       The TEDS provides annual data on individual level admissions for the period 1992-2009.

State reporting is relatively consistent in the TEDS. The outcome variable for the TEDS

analysis is the number of treatment episodes in which marijuana (alcohol) is the primary

substance of abuse.

       We show in Table 2 the states in which we have pre and post policy implementation data

for each of the data sets used in our analysis (YRBS, NLSY and TEDS), in addition to the

NSDUH, which has been used by other researchers. Table 2 demonstrates that the effects of

medical marijuana laws are identified off of changes in outcomes in different states across the

various data sets, due to the coverage limitations of each data source. Capturing the true

effects of medical marijuana laws across a broad set of states may require triangulating across

multiple data sets rather than relying on a single data set.

       In the NLSY, there is fairly good inclusion of individuals across many states that adopt a

policy within the survey window. However, because the NLSY is a longitudinal survey, state

policies mostly change when respondents are older than 19 years of age, well past the average

age of marijuana initiation in the US (SAMHSA, 2012). The NLSY thus captures behavioral

effects among late initiates or established users. The sensitivity to policy changes for these two

groups could arguably be different than that of young adults (18-24) or youth in general. The

state YRBS, as noted by Anderson et al (2012), has good coverage for many states that adopt

policies and consistently evaluates impact on school-age children. However, important early

adopting states like California and Washington are missing from the sample. Because of

changes in the sampling frame of the NSDUH survey, state aggregate measures are only

available from 2002 forward. Thus, studies making use of these data completely miss policy

impacts in early adopting states. Moreover, to include early adopters in the control group, we
must assume that no refinements to the early policies occurred after 2002; otherwise, the simple

difference-in-differences approach might be biased. The TEDS data, however, do not suffer

from these sorts of problems as the data have been systematically collected since before any

state policies were adopted. However, the TEDS data capture use behavior on a much different

margin than simple prevalence estimates do, so it is entirely possible that patterns observed in

TEDS data would not necessarily replicate across more general measures of use.

       Keeping in mind these caveats, we show in Table 3 the mean values of each of our

measures of marijuana and alcohol use in our primary data sets. Consistent with what has

been reported elsewhere, we find higher rates of marijuana use among individuals living in

states that have adopted MMLs than in states that do not have these policies. This is broadly

true across all data sets. However, we find no consistent alcohol use patterns across our data

sets, perhaps because of age differences across our samples. For the NLSY and TEDS data—

which include people of older ages—average alcohol use is also higher in states with MML

policies. In the YRBS, which only includes 12-17 year olds, alcohol use rates are generally

lower in states that have MML policies. The fact that there are important differences in simple

descriptive statistics for each of these data sets suggests that considering multiple data sources

and controlling for unobservable state factors will be important for the analysis.



4.4 Empirical Specifications

       For all data sets, we use state-level changes in medical marijuana policy to identify the

relationship between that policy and a measure of marijuana (alcohol) utilization. We perform a

difference-in-differences analysis including state and year fixed effects in all regressions.

       For the NLSY, we have data at the individual level and thus we estimate logistic

regression models of self-reported marijuana use as a function of medical marijuana policies,

beer and cigarette taxes, state fixed effects, year fixed effects and a variety of individual factors

including gender, race/ethnicity, age, and educational attainment.
       In the YRBS, we use state aggregated prevalence rates and study the relationship

between the fraction of students using marijuana in the past 30 days and MML. We model this

relationship through the use of a Poisson regression, which provides consistent estimates when

the expected value of the outcome variable is modeled correctly (Silva and Tenreyro 2006), and

which permits us to easily adjusted standard errors to account for overdispersion. We estimate

       (5)



The TEDS analysis uses the same specification. The outcome variable is the number of

admissions in the state-year.

       Controls that are included in these models include dimensions of medical marijuana

laws, a vector of state time-varying factors (including age distribution within the state, proportion

that are male, proportion that are criminal justice referral for the state, the median income within

the state, beer taxes, cigarette taxes and the state unemployment rate), state fixed effects and

year dummy variables.

       The information on medical marijuana laws come from our own original examination of

the legal statutes and subsequent regulations pertaining to medical marijuana within the states.

State policies were reviewed by legal scholars, economists and policy analysts at RAND before

coding decisions for each dimension. In the case of registration requirements, our variable is

set equal to one in those states that require patients to register with a state or local authority.

States that simply recommend registration are coded as zeros as are states that do not make

any mention of a patient registry. States that provide legal protection for dispensaries are those

that either (a) explicitly allow dispensaries by either state statute or agency rule making, or (b)

recognize the existence of dispensaries or cooperatives in their rules and regulations and are

silent to their legality. States in which dispensaries are known to exist (e.g. Michigan or

Washington State) but for which there is no legal protection in legal statutes or agency

regulations are coded as if dispensaries are not allowed to exist. This is due in part to the fact
that we have no official date in which we can attribute the emergence of these dispensaries but

also because it is unlikely that the proliferation of dispensaries beyond a few targeted

jurisdictions is unlikely due to the uncertainty of legal protections. Finally, home cultivation is a

dichotomous indicator set equal to one if the state provides legal protection for patients and/or

their caregivers to grow their own plants for medicinal purposes.

        Information on state demographic variables and unemployment rates are available from

the Bureau of the Census and the Department of Labor, respectively. Information on beer taxes

and cigarette taxes were provided by the ImpacTeen Project and updated with information from

the NIAAA Alcohol Policy Information System (APIS) and CDC State Tobacco Activities

Tracking and Evaluation (STATE) systems. All standard errors in our analysis are adjusted for

clustering at the state-level.



V. RESULTS

        Coefficient estimates from our difference-in-difference models of the proportion of

students who use marijuana (YRBS) and logistic models of thirty day prevalence and near daily

use of marijuana in the NLSY are presented in Table 4. The top part of the table provides

results for youth in both data systems (those < 18 in the YRBS and those < 21 in the NLSY).

The bottom part of the table provides estimates from identical models run on the adults in the

NLSY. In all columns labeled “(1)”, we show results from models that simply include the MML

policy variable as a single dichotomous indicator, consistent with how it has been evaluated in

previous studies. In columns labeled with a “(2)” we then add to these specifications the three

primary dimensions of these marijuana policies that have changed over time and are believed to

impact access: patient registries, allowances for dispensaries, and home cultivation. We

exclude “pain” as a relevant domain due to its collinearity with these other policy dimensions

when state fixed effects are included. In columns labeled with a “(3)”, we remove the MML
dichotomous indicator and show simply the impact of each of the three policy dimensions of the

medical marijuana laws, allowing us to better understand the degree to which certain

dimensions are truly robust and independent of the medical marijuana allowance. This is

particularly important because in the YRBS we cannot estimate a model that includes the three

dimensions of the MML law simultaneously with the dichotomous indicator as several states are

perfectly identified when all of these variables are included given we estimate models with state

fixed effects (due to the timing of law changes within states and the timing of the data

collection). This serves as an important reminder that the inclusion/exclusion of particular states

over a given time period within a single data system has important implications on interpreting

results from that data system and why replication of findings in other data systems is important.

For the YRBS, we can only show a version of the model that includes the three policy

dimensions without the dichotomous policy variable (labeled with a “(3)”). .

       When we focus on results of just the MML dichotomous indicator (looking across

columns labeled with a “(1)”), we see that regardless of whether we use the NLSY or YRBS or if

we look at simple past month prevalence or heavy use of marijuana, we find no positive

statistically significant association between the dichotomous policy MML variable and any of

these measures of use for youth or the full NLSY sample. There is simply no evidence that the

passage of the medical marijuana policy positively influences the prevalence of marijuana use

among youth or adults. In one case, past month use in the full NLSY sample (including adults),

we find a negative and statistically significant association between the simple dichotomous

policy variable and use, suggesting that medical marijuana laws are associated with lower

prevalence rates of marijuana in the general population. The result is only marginally significant

at the 10% level, however, and is highly sensitive to model specification. So a general

conclusion that there is no significant effect of these policies on general prevalence rates or

heavy marijuana use rates among youth and adult populations seems reasonable based on

findings from these two data sources.
        However, it is entirely possible that such a finding is due to potentially offsetting effects

of particular dimensions of these specific laws. Indeed, when we incrementally include the three

medical marijuana dimensions to the model that includes MML laws (all columns labeled with a

“(2)”), we begin to see some interesting and important differences from prior estimates in the

literature. Interestingly, with respect to the simple MML dichotomous indicator, there is general

support for the same conclusion reached when it was entered alone with one exception. We

now find a positive, larger and statistically significant effect of the dichotomous MML indicator on

youth use in the past 30 days in the NLSY. None of the other three policy dimensions are

statistically significant in this specification, however, and the finding is sensitive to other

variables included in the model, so we do not take a lot of stock into this finding for the MML

variable itself.

        As can be seen in the third columns of the top half of Table 4, we get findings that are

generally consistent with those reported for the NLSY columns 2 when we include the three

policy dimensions in the model without the MML variable, with the exception of the home

cultivation variable. While neither youth past month prevalence or heavy marijuana use are

associated with patient registries or dispensaries, we get an odd and inconsistent finding with

respect to home cultivation. In the YRBS, we see a negative and marginally significant

association between home cultivation and youth marijuana use, which further investigation has

shown to be highly sensitive to particular states being included or dropped from the sample.

Indeed, in the NLSY data, which includes three additional states (New Jersey, Oregon,

Washington state), but drops Alaska, we find that the home cultivation has no statistically

significant effect on past month prevalence but a positive and significant effect on youth heavy

marijuana use. The inconsistency of the finding across data sets is most likely driven by the

differences in states included in each of these samples. Thus, the proper interpretation

generally, is difficult to say and something we explore a bit further in the TEDS data shortly.
           In the full NLSY sample, we get perhaps a stronger indication of the importance of the

different policy dimensions, at least perhaps for adults. In the model of past month prevalence,

the MML variable becomes statistically insignificant in column (2) when the three policy

dimensions are added into the model. But, we also find that past month prevalence of

marijuana use is lower in states that require a patient registry system but higher in states that

provide legal protection of dispensaries. These results do not simply reflect a collinearity with

the MML dichotomous variable, as they remain significant in column (3) when the MML law is

taken out, nor do they reflect a collinearity between themselves, as models entering these

variables individually generate similar results for each variable independently. 5 The findings for

adults suggest that any potentially protective effect medical marijuana policies m ight have for

adults is offset by the positive impact medical marijuana dispensaries have on recreational use.

It is interesting, however, that these same policy dimensions are not at all associated with self-

reported heavy use in the full NLSY sample. In models predicting heavy use in the past month

for the full NLSY sample, only home cultivation is marginally significant (as was the case for the

youth sample), and its significance is reduced when the MML dichotomous measure is taken

out.

           Overall, Table 4 suggests some interesting, albeit inconsistent, findings. In general,

when examining simple thirty day prevalence rates among youth, neither the policy nor specific

dimensions of the medical marijuana policies appear to provide a robust indication of an

influence on use in either the NLSY or YRBS. The “inconsistency” in the home cultivation

result is likely to be attributed to heterogeneity in the states being used for identification in each

of the analyses rather than differences in behaviors examined. We find some important

nuances for specific dimensions of the policy in the full NLSY sample, which includes adults.

However, the fact that the past month use measure is influenced by these policy domains rather

than heavy use raises some question as to whether the findings are indeed real, implying

5
    Results available upon request.
differential effects on these different margins, or again a reflection of specific states being

included in the NLSY sample.

       Although the findings are difficult to understand as a whole, there are a few important

takeaways. First, we can replicate previous results from the literature in terms of null finding of

the single dichotomous indicator for MML laws. Second, when we begin to consider specific

elements of the laws that might influence behavior, we see that several of those elements are in

fact associated with changes in patterns of use although not consistently so, as indicated by the

findings for the full NLSY.

       To more carefully assess how these policies affect heavy use, we show in Table 5

estimates for similarly specified difference-in-difference models using the TEDS data where the

main outcome variable is primary marijuana treatment admissions. A very high proportion of

marijuana treatment admissions are generated by law enforcement activities, much higher than

that for alcohol and other individual drugs. So to verify that particular policies are indeed

reflective of treatment need rather than just law enforcement activities, we present results for

both total treatment admissions (the three columns labeled “All”) and those that did not come

through the criminal justice system (referred to as “Non-CJ”). We place greater weight in results

identified from the non-criminal justice referrals, as they will more likely reflect true use behavior

rather than law enforcement activities. In the top portion of Table 5, we look at the effects of

the policies on all age groups and in the bottom portion of the table we again restrict the

samples to only include those younger than 21.

       Consistent with evidence presented by Anderson et al (2012), we find fewer primary

marijuana treatment admissions in MML states than in non-MML states for individuals under the

age of 21 as well as for the population as a whole, and our results are statistically significant.

The effect sizes are in general larger for the non-CJ referrals than all treatment episodes,

suggesting that simply having a MML policy does not lead to greater need for marijuana

treatment or higher treatment episodes and may in fact be associated with fewer admissions.
       When we add in additional information on particular dimensions of medical marijuana

policies that can change over time, we see once again that not all medical marijuana policies

are the same. In particular, Table 5 shows a persistently positive effect of medical marijuana

dispensary allowances on marijuana treatment admissions, which is only statistically

insignificant in the youth sample on all treatment admissions. The fact that the finding is

statistically significant at the 1% level for both youth and adult among the non-criminal justice

referrals to treatment suggests that the policy does in fact influence the need for treatment in

both the youth and adult population. Thus, while medical marijuana policies overall might be

associated with reduced treatment admissions, access to marijuana through dispensaries at

least partially offsets the benefit of these laws and is associated with higher treatment

admissions.

       Moreover, we find in the models excluding criminal justice referrals that states that

require patients to register have lower rates of marijuana treatment admissions for adults. The

findings for youth are also negative, but do not reach traditional levels of significance. This

differential pattern across adults and youth is similar to that observed in the NLSY data reported

in Table 4 and may reflect the fact that registration systems are a deterrent for adults (as they

legally are telling a state agency they use marijuana for medicinal purposes – a federal offense),

but inconsequential for youth who are less likely to formally register anyway given the need for

parental consent (whether registries are required or not).

       Finally, in all models that include the MML dichotomous policy indicator, we find that

home cultivation is also positively associated marijuana treatment admissions. The positive

association disappears when the MML law is removed, however. This again was consistent

with what was observed in the NLSY data, and in light of its replication here in the TEDS data

where all 50 states are represented, is less likely to be dismissed as an artifact of the selective

states in the NLSY. The inconsistency between columns when the MML law is included versus

excluded we believe has to do with the fact that the home cultivation variable is the one
dimension of the MML laws we examine that changes the least within states over the time

period we have data. Indeed, when you look at Table 1 and examine the home cultivation

variable across states, it is the only policy dimension of the three included in the model that

does not vary within state over time for the time period evaluated (up to 2009). The other two

variables (patient registry and dispensaries) do in fact vary within state during the time period

being evaluated in some states, meaning they will be less sensitive to the inclusion or exclusion

of the main policy effect. What does that mean for interpretation of the home cultivation

variable? When the MML policy is included, the home cultivation variable picks up cross-

sectional variation in the deviation of policies that do and do not allow for home cultivation (there

are five states that do adopt MML laws but do not allow for home cultivation). Without the main

MML policy effect, the lack of variation in the MML policy over time means the home cultivation

effect gets dominated by the main policy effect of having an MML, since two-thirds of the states

with any MML policy also allow for home cultivation.6

         These results provide an interesting perspective on the inconsistent findings in Table 4,

as all 50 states are consistently represented in the TEDS data unlike the YRBS and NLSY and

so the problem of “selective state” representation is not a problem in these TEDs analyses. In

particular, the full sample NLSY findings showing a positive effect of dispensary allowances on

thirty day prevalence rates (shown in Table 4) are verified here and presumed to be real even

though the effect of the policy was not statistically significant among self-reported heavy users

as we see a similar effect of dispensaries on treatment admissions for youth and adults in the

TEDS non-CJ referrals. Similarly, the finding of a positive effect of home cultivation on heavy

use in the full and youth samples of the NLSY, which was not supported in the YRBS data, is

6
 As not all states are represented in the NLSY and YRBS, the particular exclusion of some states might lead to
greater collinearity in one data system than another. As indicated in Table 2, there are five states that adopt MML
policies but do not allow for home cultivation: AZ, MD, NJ, WA and DC. Only MD is included in the YRBS
sample, so home cultivation is going to be highly collinear with the MML policy variable in these data (which is
why we could not run the model including dimensions plus the MML variable). In the NLSY, states having MML
policies with and without home cultivation are both missing, so the collinearity will be similar to that observed in
TEDS.
now verified in another sample of heavy users and is indeed robust, suggesting that home

cultivation provisions are generally associated with more heavy use of marijuana. Requiring

patients to register with the state, however, is clearly associated with reduced marijuana

treatment admissions among adults in the TEDS, consistent with what was found in the NLSY,

suggesting that this specific policy dimension could be effective at limiting access to those

interested in using for recreational purposes.




VI. DISCUSSION & EXTENSIONS

The evidence thus far shows that the specific dimensions of MML laws appear to matter in

terms of their impacts on recreational marijuana use and that some regulatory approaches

influence consumption differentially. Use of a single indicator for these laws captures the net

effect of a range of regulatory policies that vary across states, and can obscure some important

underlying policy dimensions that influence the effect of a particular state’s law because of the

dimensions captured in it. What this also means is that depending on the time period and state

laws being examined in a given sample, one can estimate very different policy effects. The

sensitivity of findings to choice of sample and time frame can explain at least some of the

inconsistency in existing published findings on the effects of MML laws on consumption.

       These findings raise an important follow-on question; Do alternative regulatory

approaches also differentially affect marijuana-involved public health outcomes? Although an

examination of the full set of public health outcomes that might reasonably be affected by MML

is beyond the scope of this paper, we are able to look at one particular public health outcome of

significant interest: alcohol use. Given the abundant evidence that alcohol use is associated

with a range of public health problems, an important channel through which these MML policies

might affect public health is through modifying alcohol use behaviors. Moreover, as with the

direct measures of marijuana use examined above, there are plausible scenarios under which
specific aspects of MML policy might have differential effects. In the analysis that follows, we

examine not only direct consumption measures, but also alcohol-involved vehicle fatalities. This

latter outcome furnishes an opportunity to assess whether the heterogeneity in impacts of

various approaches to MML regulation can be observed when examining a consumption-related

direct health outcome.

        There is tremendous concern regarding the potential impact of marijuana legalization

policies in Washington State and Colorado on alcohol consumption, particularly among high risk

users. The economics literature regarding the relationship between alcohol and marijuana

remains uncertain. Early studies examining the relationship between alcohol and marijuana

relying on information on state beer taxes and marijuana decriminalization policy suggest that

alcohol and marijuana are economic substitutes (Chaloupka and Laixuthai, 1997; Saffer and

Chaloupka, 1999; DiNardo & Lemieux, 2001). Subsequent studies that incorporate measures of

the monetary price of marijuana suggest that the two goods are economic complements

(Pacula, 1998; Farrelly et al.,1999; Williams et al., 2004; Pacula et al., 2010). However, two

recent studies making use of the regression discontinuity in drinking at age 21 generate

completely opposite findings (Yörük & Yörük, 2011; Crost and Guerrero, 2012; Crost and Rees,

2013). Thus, the question of the unintended impact of liberalizing marijuana policies on alcohol

related harm remains a critical unresolved question.

        Two studies to date have looked specifically at the question of the impact of medical

marijuana laws on drinking and in particular alcohol-related fatalities (Anderson & Rees, 2011;

Anderson et al., 2013). Both studies show that alcohol use and alcohol related automobile

fatalities are negatively associated with these policies, suggesting that the laws have the

positive effect of reducing alcohol related harm. However, both studies rely on a single

dichotomous indicator of medical marijuana laws. Thus, it is important to reassess these

findings in light of our results above.
        We begin by assessing the impact of these policies in the survey data we previously

examined for marijuana. Table 6 shows the results of identical models of self-reported alcohol

use in the past 30 days from both the YRBS and NLSY data. We also include in the final two

columns information from the TEDS treatment data, showing the impact of these policies on per

capita rates of treatment admissions where alcohol is the primary substance of abuse. Unlike

the case for marijuana, alcohol treatment admissions are not as heavily influenced by criminal

justice treatment referrals and there is little risk that marijuana policy enforcement would

dramatically impact the proportion of people referred to treatment from the criminal justice

setting with alcohol as the primary substance of abuse. Thus, we only present results for all

treatment admissions in which alcohol is the primary substance of abuse. Again, as was done

in Table 4, we report results for youth (those under the age of 21) of each survey/data set in the

top, and compare those results to analyses for the full survey/data population in the bottom

portion of the table. It is important to keep in mind that the YRBS sample (ages 12-17) is

considerably younger than the NLSY sample (which ages from a range of 12-17 and stays in

the youth sample until age 20), and hence rates of alcohol use are lower in the YRBS (as shown

in Table 3).

        When we simply include the single dichotomous indicator of a MML law in analyses

using each of these data sets, we generally find no statistically significant relationship between

the policy and alcohol use. This is consistent with our results for marijuana, as shown in Tables

4 and 5. When additional policy dimensions are included as explanatory variables, we again get

some disparate findings across age groups and data sets. It is important to keep in mind, again,

that identification of state policy effects is being assessed off of different state policies across

these data sets. Only the TEDS data comprehensively assesses the effects of changes in all

the states, but only heavy alcohol consumption requiring treatment is reflected in these data.

        There are few consistent findings when looking across the top panel of Table 6, which

shows the association between various MML policy dimensions and youth alcohol use. In
general, the inclusion of the additional policy domains does not lead to an increase in the

statistical significance of the MML policy variable for youth (similar to Table 4, but not Table 5).

However, the specific policy dimensions differ considerably in their effects on alcohol use across

the three data sets. Patient registries, which were not statistically important in any of the youth

marijuana models shown previously, are negative and statistically significantly associated with

past month alcohol use reported in the NLSY and only the NLSY. Given the lack of a significant

effect of this variable on any of the youth marijuana use models presented earlier, and in

particular the TEDS data, it is not clear how much meaning one should place on this finding.

       We see in the alcohol treatment admissions in TEDS that dispensaries have a positive

and statistically significant impact on primary alcohol treatment admissions, which is consistent

with findings in Table 5 for marijuana admissions. However, findings for the YRBS suggest that

dispensaries reduce self-reported alcohol use among those younger than age 18 in the past

month. The fact that this result does not hold for the NLSY, which includes more states with

changes in medical marijuana laws as well as a higher rate of alcohol use, and that a similar

significant finding was not identified for past month marijuana use in the YRBS data, suggests to

us that this negative finding in the YRBS is probably just spurious correlation caused with

another unobserved attribute of the states included in the data. The negative and significant

effect of the home cultivation variable on past thirty day use in the YRBS is also believed to be

spurious, as we do not find the same result in the NLSY when we limit these analyses to a

subset of the data on the same age group. In the NLSY data we see a consistent pattern of a

positive effect of the home cultivation variable on alcohol use for youth even when the MML law

is not included. Similarly we see a positive effect on alcohol primary treatment episodes, but the

results are not significant at conventional levels.

       When we look at the bottom half of Table 6 showing alcohol results for the adults, we

see a pattern of specific policy dimensions associated with use that is very similar to that shown

for marijuana, particularly in the NLSY sample. MML dichotomous measures are negatively
associated with self-reported alcohol use, patient registry requirements are negatively

associated with alcohol use and dispensaries are positively associated with alcohol use. These

findings are all consistent with what we observed for marijuana in the NLSY data and supported

in the TED marijuana admissions, suggestive of a complementary relationship between alcohol

and marijuana among adults. However, when we look at the results for patient registries in the

alcohol treatment admissions, we now see a switch in the association between patient registry

requirements and alcohol treatment admissions, becoming positive and statistically significant.

What is surprising is that none of the other policy dimensions change in the alcohol treatment

model, only patient registries. All the other policy dimensions suggest the impact on heavy

alcohol use as on heavy marijuana use (suggesting economic complementarity with respect to

these dimensions), but for a reason that is readily apparent to us, this one policy dimension

changes. The inconsistency between the NLSY finding and TEDS finding can be easily

explained by the fact that the NLSY data captures alcohol use at a very different margin (any

alcohol use) than that of the TEDS data (heavy use in need of treatment), suggesting there is a

heterogeneous effect of these policies along the distribution of drinkers.

       In general looking across the adolescent and adult alcohol measures, there are a few

broad conclusions that can be drawn. First, when policy elements of the MML laws are also

included, the simple dichotomous indicator of having a MML policy becomes negative and

statistically significant at a very high level in specifications for adults but not for youth. We did

not observe similarly large effects in the marijuana models (Table 4) although other researchers

have identified a negative relationship using other years of data (Anderson et al., 2013). Thus,

it is possible that broad medical marijuana policies do in fact generate lower marijuana use, and

possibly alcohol use. However, all policies are not the same. Marijuana dispensaries are

clearly an offsetting factor to any beneficial impact of these policies, as indicated both for

alcohol consumption (Table 6) and marijuana consumption (Tables 4 and 5). The effects are

stronger for adults than they are for youth, but they have effects on both marijuana consumption
and alcohol consumption. Moreover, we find that home cultivation generally has a positive

association with both marijuana use and alcohol use, although this finding is sensitive to which

state policies are assessed (as is indicated by the different results in the YRBS from the NLSY

and even TEDS data). Finally, patient registry requirements, which were shown to be

negatively related with marijuana use in Tables 4 and 5, are also negatively associated with

self-reported alcohol use, but positively associated with alcohol treatment admissions. The

differential effects of this policy, particularly in light of the clear negative effect it has on

marijuana use, provides the strongest evidence of an inconsistent relationship between alcohol

and marijuana for different segments of the using population.

        While the results presented thus far clearly suggest that not all medical marijuana

policies are the same, we have not yet considered what may perhaps be the most significant

public health outcome associated with the policy change: alcohol-involved traffic fatalities.

Anderson et al (2013) demonstrate convincingly that medical marijuana policies have a negative

and statistically significant association with alcohol related fatalities, providing perhaps the

strongest evidence that these policies may in fact have positive health benefits. To assess

whether those findings are sensitive to the policy dimensions considered, we replicate Anderson

et al (2013) model using the same estimation strategy in the 1990-2009 Fatal Accident

Reporting System (FARS). These data are collected by the National Highway Traffic Safety

Administration and represent an annual census of all fatal injuries suffered in motor vehicle

accidents in the United States, as known to police, emergency medical services, emergency

departments and death certificates. Similar to Anderson and his colleagues, we estimate the

rate of alcohol-involved fatal accidents for various groups (total fatalities, youth age 15-19 traffic

fatalities and percent of alcohol involved fatalities) as a function of medical marijuana laws, a

vector of state time-varying factors influencing driving practices (average vehicle miles traveled,

seat belt laws, graduated drivers licenses, administrative license revocations), state time varying
alcohol policies (blood alcohol content, or BAC, laws and the beer tax), state specific fixed

effects and year dummy variables. 7

        Results for similar models to Anderson et al (2013) are presented in Table 7. As there

are a few differences in the recognition of medical marijuana laws on the books between our

analysis and theirs (in particular the policies in Arizona and DC), we first construct a

dichotomous indicator of MML policy that is consistent with the definition they use and replicate

their results closely. Our results are broadly consistent although slightly smaller in magnitude to

their estimates. We obtain very similar results when we instead use our own dichotomous

measure of MML policies. In the third column, we then introduce the other policy elements as

additional explanatory variables. We find that MML policies remain negatively associated with

total fatal accident rates in the total population, but we again find that this negative relationship

is partially offset in states that also allow dispensaries. This is consistent with evidence we

showed in Table 6 that dispensaries leads to greater alcohol misuse, as indicated by the TEDS

data. Moreover, the result becomes even stronger when we restrict the data to those less than

21. These results provide a powerful example of how important it is to consider the nuances of

MML laws in assessing the general benefit or cost. Interestingly, we also find in the models

excluding the MML composite measure that home cultivation is negatively associated with fatal

alcohol-involved accidents. The fact that this variable is insignificant in the model including the

MML composite measures suggests to us that it is again simply picking up the strong negative

impact of the MML composite effect when this variable is excluded from the model.


VII. CONCLUSIONS
        While it may be tempting to attempt to learn something about the possible effects of

legalization on recreational marijuana use from the state experimentation with medical

marijuana laws, it is clear from the analyses presented in this paper that not all m edical


7
 Unlike Anderson et al, we use the same Poisson specification given by equation (5), as it is deemed to be a more
appropriate model fit.
marijuana laws are not homogenous. There are important nuances to these policies that have

differential effects on marijuana consumption and related public health harms. Contrary to

expectations, we do find that certain types of MML policies are associated with reduced

marijuana consumption. However, states that allow dispensaries and/or allow home cultivation

can undermine any salutary effect of MML laws on marijuana consumption. Similarly,

dispensary policies in particular offset the positive influence of MML laws on alcohol

consumption. Marijuana dependence appears to be higher in states with more lenient access to

medical marijuana. Measures that operate on supply channels--in particular home cultivation

and state acceptance of dispensaries--are associated with higher levels of dependence.

Importantly, they are also associated with higher admissions to treatment for alcohol abuse.

       The results in this paper provide some additional insight to the inconsistent findings in

the literature related to MML policies in general. Consistent with evidence shown by Anderson

et al (2012), our analyses show that measured policy effects are sensitive to the specific states

used to examine the impacts of policy change. We offer insight into that discussion by

demonstrating why this is the case. MML policies are not homogenous, and they do change

and get refined over time in important ways. Ignoring the heterogeneity across laws and key

regulations related to access that change over time can lead to an impolite picture of the effects

of these laws. The offsetting effects of particular policy dimensions on marijuana and alcohol

use, dependence, and alcohol involved fatalities suggests these policies might influence use

through a variety of different mechanisms, some that may be more relevant for particular

populations than others. Further work is needed to assess whether these findings hold for other

marijuana-related harms, as it is clear that measured effects are not consistent across different

levels of use and different age groups.

       Finally, the results should caution policy makers not to make simple inferences about the

relationship between alcohol and marijuana solely based upon analyses of MML policies,

particularly given the heterogeneity of these laws. Instead, a more careful consideration is
warranted that considers the particular states being evaluated and the dimensions of the

medical marijuana laws those states represent.
References

Anderson DM and D Rees (2011). Medical Marijuana Laws, Traffic Fatalities and Alcohol
Consumption. IZA Discussion Paper Series #6112 (November 2011).

Anderson DM, Hanson B and D Rees (2012). Medical Marijuana Laws and Teenage Marijuana
Use. IZA Discussion Paper Series # 7592. (May, 2012)

Anderson, DM, Hanson B, and D Rees. (2013). Medical Marijuana Laws, Traffic Fatalities and
Alcohol Consumption. Journal of Law and Economics.

The Atlantic Wire. 2011. “Marijuana Shops Outnumber Starbucks in Denver” Published (July 6,
2011) by Caitlin Dickson. http://www.theatlanticwire.com/business/2011/07/marijuana-shops-
outnumber-starbucks-denver/39649/

Caulkins, J. P. (1994). Developing Price Series for Cocaine. MR-317-DPRC, The RAND
Corporation, Santa Monica, CA.

Caulkins, J. P. (1995), “Domestic Geographic Variation in Illicit Drug Prices.” The Journal of
Urban Economics, 37, 38-56.

Cerdá M, Wall M, Keyes KM, Galea S and D Hasin (2012). Medical marijuana laws in 50 states:
Investigating the relationship between state legislation of medical marijuana and marijuana use,
abuse and dependence. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 120, 22-27.

Chaloupka, Frank and Adit Laixuthai. 1997. “Do Youths Substitute Alcohol and Marijuana?
Some Econometric Evidence.” Eastern Economic Journal 23: 253-275.

Chu YW (2012). Medical Marijuana Laws and Illegal Marijuana Use. Working Paper available at
SSRN 2164778.

Crost B and S Guerrero (2012). “The effect of alcohol availability on marijuana use: Evidence
from the minimum legal drinking age,” Journal of Health Economics 31(1): 112-121.

Crost B and D Rees (2013). The Minimum Legal Drinking Age and Marijuana Use: New
Estimates from the NLSY97. Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 32, No. 2, pp. 474-476.


DiNardo, John and Thomas Lemieux. 2001. “Alcohol, Marijuana, and American Youth: The
Unintended Consequences of Government Regulation.” Journal of Health Economics
20: 991-1010.

Farrelly MC, Bray JW, Zarkin GA, Wendling BW and RL Pacula (1999). The effects of prices
and policies on the demand for marijuana: Evidence from the National Household Surveys on
Drug Abuse. National Bureau of Economics Research Working Paper # .

Friese, Bettina and Joel W Grube (2013). Legalization of medical marijuana and marijuana use
among youths. Drugs: Education, Prevention and Policy, 20(1): 33-39.

Gorman, Dennis M. and J. Charles Huber Jr. 2007. “Do Medical Cannabis Laws Encourage
Cannabis Use?” International Journal of Drug Policy 18:160-167.

Hall W (2009). The adverse health effects of cannabis use: What are they, and what are their
implications for policy? International Journal of Drug Policy, 20, 458-466.

Hall W and L Degenhardt (2009). Adverse health effects of non-medical cannabis use. The
Lancet, 374, 1383-13392.

Hall W and RL Pacula (2003). Cannabis Use and Dependence: Public Health and Public
Policy. Melbourne, Australia: Cambridge University Press.

Harper S., Strumpf EC, and JS Kaufman (2012). Do medical marijuana laws increase marijuana
use? Replication study and extension. Annals of Epidemiology, 22, 207-212.

Khatapoush S and D Hallfors (2004). Sending the wrong message: Did medical marijuana
legalization in California change attitudes about the use of marijuana? Journal of Drug Issues,
35, 751-770.

National Public Radio (NPR). 2009. “In California, Marijuana Dispensaries Outnumber
Starbucks” Reported October 15, 2009.
http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=113822156
Ogden DW. 2009. Memorandum for selected United States Attorneys. At
http://www.justice.gov/opa/documents/medical-marijuana.pdf. Accessed April 2, 2013.

Pacula, Rosalie. 1998. “Does Increasing the Beer Tax Reduce Marijuana Consumption?”
Journal of Health Economics 17: 557-585.

Pacula RL, Kilmer B, Grossman M, and F.Chaloupka (2010). Risks and prices: The role of user
sanctions in marijuana markets. The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy: 10(1):
(Contributions), Article 11.

Saffer, Henry and Frank Chaloupka (1999). The Demand for Illicit Drugs. Economic Inquiry, Vol.
37, Number 3, pp. 401-411.

Silva, JMC Santos, and Silvana Tenreyro. "The log of gravity." The Review of Economics and
Statistics 88, no. 4 (2006): 641-658.

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA). 2013. Results from
the 2011 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Detailed Tables. Last accessed July 25,
2013 at: http://www.samhsa.gov/data/NSDUH/2011SummNatFindDetTables/NSDUH-
DetTabsPDFWHTML2011/2k11DetailedTabs/Web/HTML/NSDUH-DetTabsCover2011.htm#TopOfPage.

Thurstone C, Lieberman S, and S Schmiege. 2011. “Medical Marijuana Diversion and
Associated Problems in Adolescent Substance Treatment.” Drug and Alcohol Dependence 118:
489-492.

Williams J; Pacula R.L; Chaloupka, F.J; and H. Wechsler. (2004). “Alcohol and Marijuana Use
Among College Students: Economic Complements or Substitutes?” Health Economics, 13(9):
825-843.
Wall, Melani, Ernest Poh, Magdalena Cerdá, Katherine Keyes, Sandro Galea, and Deborah
Hasin. 2011. “Adolescent Marijuana Use from 2002 to 2008: Higher in States with Medical
Marijuana Laws, Cause Still Unclear.” Annals of Epidemiology 21: 714- 716.

Yörük, Bariş and Ceren Yörük. 2011. “The Impact of Minimum Legal Drinking Age Laws on
Alcohol Consumption and Marijuana Use: Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity
Design Using Exact Date of Birth.” Journal of Health Economics 30: 740-753.
Table 1: Summary of State Medical Marijuana Laws as of Jan 1 2012
State          Year of           Patient         Allowed       Home        Dispensaries
               Legislation/      Registry        for           Cultivation Allowed?
               Referendum/       Required?       “Pain” ?      ?
               Court Decision
Alaska         1998              No              Yes           Yes         No
               1999              Yes
               2007
Arizona        1996              No              Yes           No          No
               2010              Yes                           Yes         Yes
California     1996              No              Yes           Yes         No
               2003                                                        Yes
Colorado       2000              Yes             Yes           Yes         Yes
               2010
               2011
Delaware       2011              Yes             Yes           No          Yes
District of    1998              No              No            No          No
Columbia       2010              Yes                                       Yes
Hawaii         2000              Yes             Yes           Yes         No
Maine          1999              No              Yes           Yes         No
               2002              No                                        No
               2009              Yes                                       Yes
               2010
               2011
Maryland       2003              No              No            No          No
               2011                              Yes
Michigan       2008              No              Yes           Yes         No
Montana        2004              No              Yes           Yes         Ambiguous
               2011              Yes                                       No
Nevada         2001              Yes             Yes           Yes         No
               2003
               2005
New Jersey     2009              Yes             Yes           No          Yes
New Mexico     2007              Yes             No            Yes         Yes
Oregon         1998              No              Yes           Yes         No
               1999              No
               2005              No
               2007              Yes
Rhode Island   2007              Yes             Yes           Yes         No
               2009                                                        Yes
Vermont        2004              Yes             No            Yes         No
               2007                              Yes                       No
               2011                                                        Yes
Washington     1998              No              Yes           No          No
               2007                                            No
               2010                                            No
               2011                                            Yes
___________________________________________________________________________
Note: For each state, the first year listed represents year of initial legalization. Other years listed indicate years with
additional legal changes. In some cases, new laws did not alter any of the four policy dimensions listed in the table.
Table 2: Data Sets with Pre- and Post- Implementation Information on Medical Marijuana
Policies Assessable as of May 2012

State                   Year      NLSY      YRBS      NSDUH         TEDS
                                                       State
                                                     Aggregates
Alaska                  1996                  X                          X
Arizona                 2010

California               1996                                            X
Colorado                 2000         X         X                        X
Delaware                 2011
District of Columbia     2010
Hawaii                   2000        X*         X                        X
Maine                    1999         X         X                        X
Maryland                 2003        X*         X          X             X
Michigan                 2008        X*         X          X             X
Montana                  2004        X*         X          X             X
Nevada                   2001         X         X                        X
New Jersey               2009        X*                    X             X
New Mexico               2007        X*         X          X             X
Oregon                   1998         X                                  X
Rhode Island             2007        X*         X          X             X
Vermont                  2004        X*         X          X             X
Washington               1998         X                                  X
Notes: Asterisk for specific states in the NLSY indicates that cohort   is passed age of primary
initiation of marijuana by the time the state law passed.
Table 3: Sample Means of Measures of Marijuana and Alcohol Use for Each of Our Main Data
Sets
                                                         No MML               MML

YRBS (1993-2009)                                             Mean           SE    Mean          SE
             Percentage Using Marijuana in Last 30 Days      20.88         5.74   22.67        3.14
                 Percentage Using Alcohol in Last 30 Days    45.34         7.02   39.75        4.60
                                                       N             238                  29

NLSY (1997-2008)                                             Mean        SE       Mean        SE
              Percentage Using Marijuana in Last 30 Days     14.89      35.60     16.75      37.34
 Percentage Using Marijuana in At Least 16 of Last 30 Days    5.12      22.03      5.62      23.02
 Percentage Using Marijuana in At Least 21 of Last 30 Days    4.07      19.76      4.53      20.79
                 Percentage Using Alcohol in Last 30 Days    52.68      49.93     59.64      49.06
   Percentage Using Alcohol in At Least 16 of Last 30 Days    4.51      20.76      5.63      23.05
   Percentage Using Alcohol in At Least 21 of Last 30 Days    2.22      14.75      2.78      16.45
                                                        N          78641                18072

TEDS (1992-2008)                                             Mean           SE    Mean          SE
                         Marijuana Treatments per 1,000      0.89          0.53   1.24         0.53
                           Alcohol Treatments per 1,000      3.57          2.53   4.68         3.25
                                                      N              744                  84
Table 4: Impact of Medical Marijuana Laws on Recent and Heavy Marijuana Use in YRBS and
NLSY Data Sets
                                   YRBS                            NLSY < 21                             NLSY < 21
      Data Set             (1)            (3)           (1)         (2)          (3)         (1)         (2)          (3)
      Outcome             Used in the Past Month           Used in the Past Month             Heavy Use in the Past Month
        MML               -0.01                        0.004 0.026***                       0.003       0.003
                         (0.033)                      (0.010) (0.010)                     (0.007) (0.006)
     MML, Registry                      0.057                     -0.017       -0.017                  -0.025       -0.025
                                       (0.049)                    (0.013)     (0.013)                 (0.009)       (0.009)
  MML, Dispensaries                     0.037                      0.013       0.014                    0.008        0.008
                                       (0.047)                    (0.011)     (0.011)                 (0.017)       (0.017)
      MML, Home                        -0.072*                    -0.022       0.002                  0.029**      0.033***
                                       (0.038)                    (0.014)     (0.013)                 (0.015)       (0.013)
        State FEs          Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
        Year FEs           Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
    State covariates       Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
            N              267           267          46,321      46,321      46,321       46,321     46,321        46,321
                                                               NLSY Full Sample                    NLSY Full Sample
       Outcome                                               Used in Past Month               Heavy Use in the Past Month
          MML                                         -0.015*     -0.003                    0.001      -0.019
                                                      (0.008) (0.024)                     (0.009) (0.014)
     MML, Registry                                               -0.033**    -0.034**                  -0.018        -0.02
                                                                  (0.012)     (0.013)                 (0.012)       (0.012)
  MML, Dispensaries                                             0.033***     0.033***                   0.004        0.003
                                                                  (0.008)     (0.008)                 (0.006)       (0.006)
      MML, Home                                                   -0.002       -0.005                 0.051*         0.022
                                                                  (0.024)     (0.010)                 (0.037)       (0.022)
        State FEs                                       Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
        Year FEs                                        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
    State covariates                                    Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
            N                                         96,713      96,713      96,713       96,713     96,713        96,713
Significance Levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%. Standard errors in parentheses adjusted for clustering at the state level. Controls
included but not shown: ln(population), unemployment rate, age distribution, BAC limit, beer tax. NLSY analysis also
includes age fixed effects.
Table 5: Impact of Medical Marijuana Laws (MML) on Treatment Admissions, Marijuana as the
Primary Substance of Abuse/Dependence (TEDS, 1992-2009)
                                                All                         Non-CJ
                                     (1)        (2)       (3)       (1)       (2)       (3)
                 MML             -0.136*** -0.306***            -0.196*** -0.498***
                                   (0.051)   (0.071)              (0.059)   (0.075)
            MML, Registry                      -0.13    -0.128             -0.187** -0.186**
                                             (0.105) (0.103)                (0.106) (0.103)
          MML, Dispensaries                  0.120** 0.118**              0.229*** 0.224***
                                             (0.066) (0.064)                (0.065) (0.064)
             MML, Home                      0.233*** -0.059               0.397*** -0.075
                                             (0.080) (0.057)                (0.071) (0.052)
               State FEs             Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes
                Year FEs             Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes
           State covariates          Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes
                   N                 877        877       877       877       877      877
                                                 Under 21
                 MML              -0.150** -0.352***             -0.152** -0.434***
                                   (0.062)   (0.071)              (0.070)   (0.084)
            MML, Registry                     -0.204    -0.195              -0.207    -0.196
                                             (0.125) (0.121)                (0.130) (0.124)
          MML, Dispensaries                    0.109     0.108            0.396*** 0.395***
                                             (0.086) (0.083)                (0.086) (0.083)
             MML, Home                      0.310*** -0.027               0.379*** -0.034
                                             (0.060) (0.046)                (0.083) (0.065)
               State FEs             Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes
                Year FEs             Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes
           State covariates          Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes
                   N                 877        877       877       877       877      877
         Significance Levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%. Standard errors in parentheses adjusted
         for clustering at the state level. Controls included but not shown: ln(population),
                      unemployment rate, age distribution, BAC limit, beer tax.
Table 6: Impact of Medical Marijuana Laws (MML) on Alcohol Use in the YRBS, NLSY and Alcohol Treatment
Admissions in the TEDS
                                                                   Under 21 Sample
        Data Set                   YRBS                              NLSY                            TEDS
       Outcome            Use in the Past 30 Days          Use in the Past 30 Days         Number of Treatments
                             (1)          (3)           (1)         (2)         (3)      (1)         (2)          (3)
          MML              -0.036                      0.009      -0.005                0.107      -0.122
                          (0.024)                    (0.022) (0.017)                   (0.084) (0.081)
     MML, Registry                       0.067                  -0.118*** -0.118***                 0.069       0.069
                                        (0.041)                  (0.029)      (0.029)             (0.149)      (0.148)
  MML, Dispensaries                    -0.071**                    0.024       0.024             0.255*** 0.254***
                                        (0.034)                  (0.023)      (0.023)             (0.099)      (0.098)
      MML, Home                       -0.096***                 0.108***     0.103***               0.188       0.074
                                        (0.036)                  (0.027)      (0.021)             (0.150)      (0.131)
       State FEs            Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes
        Year FEs            Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes
    State covariates        Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes
           N                267           267        46,264       46,264      46,264     877         877         877
                                                                     Full Samples
        Data Set                                                     NLSY                            TEDS
       Outcome                                             Use in the Past 30 Days         Number of Treatments
                                                        (1)         (2)         (3)      (1)         (2)          (3)
          MML                                         -0.021 -0.046***                  0.047 -0.418***
                                                     (0.013) (0.016)                   (0.087) (0.055)
     MML, Registry                                              -0.068*** -0.074***              0.248*** 0.246***
                                                                 (0.021)      (0.023)             (0.065)      (0.070)
  MML, Dispensaries                                             0.043***     0.041***             0.110**     0.102**
                                                                 (0.011)      (0.010)             (0.061)      (0.062)
      MML, Home                                                  0.055**       0.013             0.375***       -0.017
                                                                 (0.023)      (0.022)             (0.065)      (0.045)
       State FEs                                        Yes         Yes         Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes
        Year FEs                                        Yes         Yes         Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes
    State covariates                                    Yes         Yes         Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes
           N                                         96,261       96,261      96,261     877         877         877
  Significance Levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%. Standard errors in parentheses adjusted for clustering at the state level.
  Controls included but not shown: ln(population), unemployment rate, age distribution, BAC limit, beer tax. NLSY
                                         analysis also includes age fixed effects.
Table 7: Impact of Medical Marijuana Laws on Alcohol Related Fatalities in 1990-2009 FARS

                                     ln(Fatal Accident Rate)
                                    All                                  21 and Under
   MML (AHR)      -0.076***                                -0.138***
                   (0.028)                                   (0.039)
   MML (new)                -0.066*** -0.077**                       -0.114*** -0.132***
                             (0.026) (0.034)                          (0.038) (0.025)
  MML, Registry                          -0.003     -0.006                        -0.014         -0.019
                                        (0.051) (0.052)                          (0.074)        (0.075)
MML, Dispensaries                       0.094** 0.093**                          0.111**        0.108**
                                        (0.043) (0.043)                          (0.056)        (0.054)
   MML, Home                              0.007    -0.068*                         0.018        -0.109*
                                        (0.049) (0.037)                          (0.056)        (0.057)
     Year FEs        Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes         Yes           Yes
     State FEs       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes         Yes           Yes
 State covariates    Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes         Yes           Yes
         N           1020      1020       1020       1020     1020      1020       1020           1020

Significance Levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%. Standard errors in parentheses adjusted for clustering at the
state level. Controls included but not shown: ln(population), unemployment rate, age distribution,
BAC limit, beer tax, and decriminalization status. Controls also included in the FARS analysis include:
graduated driver's license, adminstrative license revocation, seatbelt laws, and average vehicle miles
travelled.




PRELIMINARY DRAFT – PLEASE DO NOT DISTRIBUTE, CITE OR QUOTE
