                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                ASSET PRICING IN THE DARK:
                             THE CROSS SECTION OF OTC STOCKS

                                             Andrew Ang
                                           Assaf A. Shtauber
                                            Paul C. Tetlock

                                         Working Paper 19309
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19309


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2013




The authors thank Bill Aronin for providing MarketQA data. We appreciate helpful comments from
Andrew Karolyi (editor), David Hirshleifer (executive editor), two anonymous referees, Randy Cohen,
Kent Daniel, Larry Harris, Cam Harvey, Narasimhan Jegadeesh, Charles Jones, Tyler Shumway, Rossen
Valkanov, and Adrien Verdelhan. We are also grateful to seminar participants at the Western Finance
Association meetings and at the following universities: Arizona, Berkeley, Columbia, Michigan, North
Carolina, Stanford, and Virginia. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Andrew Ang, Assaf A. Shtauber, and Paul C. Tetlock. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Asset Pricing in the Dark: The Cross Section of OTC Stocks
Andrew Ang, Assaf A. Shtauber, and Paul C. Tetlock
NBER Working Paper No. 19309
August 2013
JEL No. G10,G12,G14,G20

                                              ABSTRACT

Over-the-counter (OTC) stocks are far less liquid, disclose less information, and exhibit lower institutional
holdings than listed stocks. We exploit these different market conditions to test theories of cross-sectional
return premiums. Compared to premiums in listed markets, the OTC illiquidity premium is several
times higher, the size, value, and volatility premiums are similar, and the momentum premium is three
times lower. The OTC illiquidity, size, value, and volatility premiums are largest among stocks held
predominantly by retail investors and those not disclosing financial information. Theories of differences
in investors’ opinions and limits on short sales help explain these return premiums.


Andrew Ang                                            Paul C. Tetlock
Columbia Business School                              Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall                              3022 Broadway, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027                                    New York, NY 10027
and NBER                                              pt2238@columbia.edu
aa610@columbia.edu

Assaf A. Shtauber
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
ashtauber13@gsb.columbia.edu
        While hundreds of studies have investigated expected return patterns in listed stocks that

trade on the NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ, many U.S. stocks—roughly one-fifth of the number

of stocks listed on the major exchanges—trade in OTC markets. The definition of an OTC stock

is one that trades on either the OTC Bulletin Board (OTCBB) or OTC Link (formerly Pink

Sheets, or PS) interdealer quotation system, where at least one licensed broker-dealer agrees to

make a market in the stock. We examine market data for 6,668 OTC firms from 1977 through

2008. To our knowledge, this is the largest dataset of U.S. stock prices to be introduced to

research since the Center for Research on Security Prices (CRSP) added data on NASDAQ

stocks in 1984.

        The OTC and listed stock markets consist of many similar firms and market participants.

More than 80% of OTC firms with market capitalizations above $1 million are traded in listed

markets either before, concurrently, or after their OTC trading activity. Most broker-dealers who

act as market makers in OTC stocks are also market makers in listed markets. Moreover, many

investors, including retail investors and hedge funds, actively trade both groups of stocks.

        There are, however, three important differences between OTC and listed stocks. First,

there is far lower liquidity in OTC markets than on the major exchanges. Second, whereas firms

in listed stock markets must file regular financial disclosures, disclosure requirements for firms

traded in OTC markets are minimal, if non-existent, for most of our sample period. 1 Third, non-

institutional (i.e., retail) investors are the primary owners of most OTC stocks, whereas

institutional investors hold significant stakes in nearly all stocks on listed exchanges, including

small stocks. Possibly as a consequence of low ownership by institutions, the main lenders of

shares, short selling of OTC stocks is difficult, expensive, and rare.


1
 After June 2000, firms listed on the OTCBB but not the PS must have at least 100 shareholders, file annual reports,
hold annual shareholder meetings, and meet other governance requirements (see Bushee and Leuz, 2005).


                                                         1
        We exploit these features of OTC and listed stock markets to distinguish among myriad

theories of return premiums. Differentiating theories whose predictions depend on stocks’

information environments and investor clientele using only the listed markets is challenging

because all listed stocks are subject to the same reporting requirements and nearly all are held by

institutions. 2 We estimate return premiums both within and across OTC markets and listed

markets, sorting stocks by the characteristics that distinguish the two markets. This combined

cross-market and within-market identification strategy allows for powerful tests of competing

theories because the data exhibit enormous heterogeneity along both dimensions.

        In light of the large cross-market differences in liquidity, we devote special attention to

measuring illiquidity premiums. We find that the return premium for illiquid stocks is much

higher in OTC markets than in listed markets. One of our key liquidity measures is the

proportion of non-trading days (PNT), where higher PNT indicates higher illiquidity, and we sort

OTC stocks into PNT quintiles. When constructing listed return factors, we focus on

“comparable” listed stocks with market capitalizations similar to the typical OTC stock to

control for differences in firm size. We first evaluate factors’ pre-cost returns. We find that an

OTC illiquidity factor has an annual Sharpe ratio of 0.91, whereas the comparable listed

illiquidity factor has a Sharpe ratio of just 0.14.

        Asset pricing theories based on transaction costs, such Amihud and Mendelson (1986)

and Constantinides (1986), do not explain the OTC illiquidity premium. These theories predict

that stocks exhibit positive pre-cost risk-adjusted returns that increase with bid-ask spreads to

compensate rational investors for their expected trading costs. Empirically, the most liquid OTC


2
 Researchers can also use international data, like Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2007) who estimate illiquidity
premiums, or different asset classes like Karolyi and Sanders (1998), to study determinants of return premiums.
International studies are hampered by different treatments of creditor rights and securities not having the same
claims to cash flows across countries.


                                                         2
stocks exhibit risk-adjusted monthly pre-cost returns of –4.0%, implying that their post-cost

returns are even more negative. In addition, the typical OTC investor incurs trading costs of less

than 50 basis points per month, suggesting that the magnitudes of trading costs are too small to

explain our findings. Data errors or microstructure biases in OTC stocks also do not explain the

OTC illiquidity premium. Such errors and biases should be smaller in the most liquid stocks and

would bias the returns of OTC stocks upward, implying their returns after adjusting for

illiquidity effects and data errors should be even more negative.

         The strongly negative returns of liquid OTC stocks are consistent with the idea that limits

to arbitrage allow the OTC illiquidity premium to remain so high during our 32-year sample.

Given the difficulty in short selling even liquid OTC stocks, an arbitrageur could be unable to

attain the high Sharpe ratio of the OTC illiquidity premium. We also provide evidence that

trading costs, while relatively insignificant for the typical OTC investor who trades very

infrequently, could severely limit the effectiveness of short-horizon arbitrage in OTC stocks.

         Next we test whether the well-known return premiums for stocks with low market

capitalizations (“size”), high ratios of book equity to market equity (“value” or B/M), low

idiosyncratic volatility (“volatility”), and high past returns (“momentum”) generalize to OTC

markets. 3 Interestingly, the return premiums for size, value, and volatility are similarly large in

OTC markets and comparable listed markets. In contrast, the return premium for momentum is

considerably smaller and less robust in OTC markets than in listed markets. 4 Most of the OTC

return premiums above are driven by the negative returns on the short legs of the long-short

portfolios, again consistent with theories in which limits to short selling affect prices.


3
  Studies of listed stocks by Banz (1981), Fama and French (1992), Ang et al. (2006), and Jegadeesh and Titman
(1993) provide early evidence of the size, value, volatility, and momentum premiums, respectively.
4
  Momentum is often thought to be pervasive in that it occurs in many different countries and asset classes (see, for
example, Asness, Moskowitz, and Pedersen (2013)).


                                                          3
       We find that traditional factor models—using factors constructed from listed returns—do

not account for the large illiquidity, size, value, and volatility return premiums in OTC markets.

We also show that the correlations between OTC return factors and their listed counterparts are

typically well below 0.5. The correlation between the OTC illiquidity factor and the listed Pastor

and Stambaugh’s (2003) illiquidity factor is close to zero. These facts show that the OTC factor

structure differs significantly from the factor structure of listed stocks, presenting a challenge for

explanations of return premiums based on economy-wide risk factors.

       Our final tests examine whether theories based on behavioral biases and limits to

arbitrage can explain OTC and listed return premiums. Models analyzing the impact of

differences in opinions and limits on short sales could apply to both OTC and listed markets. In

Appendix A, we present a model of OTC stock pricing inspired by the theories of Miller (1977),

Duffie, Garleanu, and Pedersen (2002), and Scheinkman and Xiong (2003). The key mechanism

is that, when investors’ opinions diverge, costs of short selling discourage the participation of

investors with the most pessimistic views of a stock. This causes overpricing followed by

negative risk-adjusted returns. In the model, investors’ overconfidence in their preferred

valuation signals causes disagreement. Disclosure of financial information reduces differences in

opinion by resolving uncertainty over which investors can disagree.

       The model predicts that differences in opinion and overpricing are associated with high

values of four firm characteristics: trading volume, return volatility, market capitalization, and

market-to-book equity ratio (M/B). These relations are stronger for stocks with higher investor

overconfidence and those with fewer disclosures. The model’s first four predictions are

consistent with the evidence that OTC stocks with high volume, volatility, size, and M/B exhibit

negative abnormal returns. Importantly, we also find evidence consistent with both sets of the




                                                  4
model’s predicted interaction effects. Motivated by Barber and Odean’s (2000) evidence that

retail investors are overconfident, we use a stock’s institutional ownership as an inverse measure

of investor overconfidence. We show that the return premiums for PNT, volume, volatility,

value, and size are 1.0% to 4.4% per month larger in OTC stocks that are not held by institutions.

We then measure OTC firms’ disclosure of book equity data, which is basic financial

information relevant for valuation. Empirically, OTC return premiums based on three proxies for

disagreement—PNT, volume, and volatility—are 1.4% to 1.6% per month larger among stocks

with undisclosed book equity.

       Our cross-market findings are also consistent with the idea that our model of overpricing

applies more to OTC markets than listed markets. Our evidence indicates that short selling is

more difficult in OTC markets; and the lower disclosure and higher proportion of retail clientele

in OTC markets suggest investor disagreement could be greater. The fact that the OTC illiquidity

premium exceeds the listed premium is consistent with this notion. Moreover, we find that the

return on the entire OTC market is actually significantly negative at –0.8% per month, implying

widespread overpricing of OTC stocks. This negative return is driven by the OTC stocks with the

most trading activity, which likely exhibit the highest investor disagreement.

       Although our model of overpricing provides a plausible account of many return

premiums, it does not make clear predictions for the momentum premium. We investigate

momentum further and find evidence that is most consistent with Hong and Stein’s (1999) model

based on the gradual diffusion of information across investors. The lack of momentum for most

OTC stocks is consistent with the idea that investors do not attend closely to most OTC firms’

fundamentals, perhaps because these firms lack credibility. We also find that momentum is

strongest among OTC stocks that disclose basic financial information and the largest OTC firms,




                                                5
which presumably have more credibility. Furthermore, momentum among large OTC firms does

not exhibit any reversal over five years, which is consistent with Hong and Stein’s (1999) model

but is hard to reconcile with some alternative models of momentum.



I. Related Studies of OTC Stocks

         Only a few studies investigate stock pricing in OTC markets. 5 Studies by Luft, Levine,

and Larson (2001) and Eraker and Ready (2011) find that the average OTC market return is

negative during their sample periods spanning 1995 to 2008. Although we use the OTC market

return as a factor in some of our tests, we focus on the cross section of OTC returns. 6 In many

cases, the differences among OTC stocks’ returns are much larger than the (negative) OTC

market premium and are not explained by exposures to the OTC market factor.

         Studies of OTC firms’ liquidity and disclosure are also relevant. Three studies examine

how liquidity changes for stocks moving from listed markets to the OTC markets. Sanger and

Peterson (1990) show that quoted bid-ask spreads triple for 57 firms that are delisted and then

trade in OTC markets from 1971 to 1985. Harris, Panchapagesan, and Werner (2008) show that

volume falls by two-thirds, quoted bid-ask spreads double, and effective spreads triple for 1,098

firms that are delisted from NASDAQ in 1999 to 2002 and subsequently trade on OTC markets.

Macey, O’Hara, and Pompilio (2008) also find higher spreads for most of the 58 NYSE stocks

moving to OTC markets in 2002. These studies suggest that the shift in trading to OTC venues

actually causes stocks to become less liquid.




5
  Bollen and Christie (2009) examine various aspects of OTC stock microstructure, but do not investigate cross-
sectional return premiums.
6
  Luft and Levine (2004) also explore the how OTC stocks’ returns are related to their size and liquidity, but they do
not perform formal statistical tests presumably because their sample spans only the five years from 1996 to 2000.


                                                          6
       Leuz, Triantis, and Wang (2008) investigate a firm’s decision to “go dark,” which means

a firm ceases to report to the SEC while continuing to trade publicly in OTC markets. They find

that the 480 firms going dark between 1998 and 2004 experience negative average abnormal

returns of –10% upon announcement. Our study analyzes the returns of all OTC firms, including

those that have chosen to go dark (a minority), those that have never reported to the SEC, and

those that currently report to the SEC. All OTC firms’ past disclosure policies and financial

reports are available to investors and thus should be reflected in stock prices insofar as they

affect investors’ valuations.



II. OTC Market Data

A. Institutional Details

       Our data consist of US common stocks traded in the OTCBB and PS markets from 1977

through 2008. We obtain these data through MarketQA, which is a Thomson Reuters data

analytics platform. The OTC markets are regulated by the Financial Industry Regulatory

Authority (FINRA), formerly the National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD), and the

SEC to enhance market transparency, fairness, and integrity. For most of our sample, the

defining requirement of an OTC stock is that at least one FINRA (formerly NASD) member

must be willing to act as a market maker for the stock.

       As of June 2010, over 211 FINRA firms were market makers in OTC stocks, facilitating

daily trading activity of $395 million ($100 billion annualized). The most active firms, such as

Archipelago Trading Services and Knight Equity Markets, are also market makers in stocks

listed on the NASDAQ and are SEC-registered broker-dealers. FINRA requires market makers

to trade at their publicly displayed quotations.



                                                   7
           Prior to 2000, the key formal disclosure requirement for firms traded on the OTCBB and

PS was Section 12(g) of the Exchange Act. This provision applies only to OTC firms with more

than 500 shareholders of record and $10 million in assets. Yet the vast majority of beneficial

owners of OTC firms are not shareholders of record as their shares are held in “street name”

through their brokers. So even large OTC firms can circumvent this disclosure requirement.

           FINRA and SEC regulation of OTC markets, however, has increased substantially since

2000. After June 2000, firms quoted on the OTCBB must have at least 100 shareholders, file

annual reports, hold annual shareholder meetings, and meet other governance requirements

(Bushee and Leuz, 2005). However, these disclosure requirements do not apply to PS firms, and

they did not apply to OTCBB firms for most of our sample.

           We later provide evidence suggesting that the majority of investors in the firms traded

exclusively on OTC markets are individuals rather than institutions. Individual investors can buy

and sell OTCBB and PS stocks through most full service and discount brokers, such as E-Trade,

Fidelity, and Schwab. However, short selling OTC stocks is difficult for investors, especially

individuals. We collect short selling data for a sample of 50 OTC stocks and 50 similarly-sized

listed stocks in June 2012. 7 A retail customer of Fidelity could buy all 100 of these stocks, but

the broker would allow short selling in only one of the OTC stocks and eight of the listed stocks.

Despite the constraints on individuals, for the 50 listed stocks, short interest as a percentage of

floating shares averages 4.1% and exceeds 0.1% for all 50. In contrast, for the 50 OTC stocks,

short interest averages just 0.5% and is lower than 0.1% for 28 of the stocks—though it is

positive for all but seven stocks. We infer that it is hard for individual investors to short most

small stocks; and nearly all investors have difficulty shorting OTC stocks. Thus, the OTC market

is a natural place to test theories of limits on short sales.
7
    These data are available upon request.


                                                    8
B. OTCBB and PS Data

        We examine the universe of firms incorporated in the US with common stocks that are

traded in OTC markets from 1977 through 2008. Our analysis uses only OTC firms without

stocks that have been listed on the NYSE, NASDAQ, or Amex exchanges within the last three

months. We purposely exclude listed firms to ensure that we are analyzing a set of firms that is

as orthogonal as possible to those listed on the traditional venues. MarketQA provides daily

trading volume, market capitalization, and closing, bid, and ask prices for these firms.

         To ensure adequate data quality, we further restrict the sample to firms meeting the

following requirements in the previous month:

    •   Non-missing data on stock price, market capitalization, and returns

    •   Stock price exceeds $1

    •   Market capitalization exceeds $1 million in 2008 dollars

    •   At least one non-zero daily return

    •   Positive trading volume—imposed only after 1995 when volume data are reliable. 8

The price restriction above follows Ince and Porter (2006), who find that errors in computed

returns are more likely for firms with prices of less than $1. 9 The market capitalization restriction

is designed to eliminate thinly traded and economically unimportant firms that would otherwise

dominate equal-weighted portfolios. The non-zero return and positive volume restrictions

exclude thinly traded firms that suffer from bid-ask bounce and nonsynchronous trading issues. 10

Our final OTC sample includes an average of 486 firms per month.


8
  Prior to 1995, some OTC firms’ volume data is recorded as missing when it is actually zero and vice versa. We set
all missing volume to zero prior to 1995 because we find that such firms have low volume when volume data
become available. Our results are virtually unchanged if we treat these firms’ volume data as missing instead.
9
  In untabulated results, we find that using a minimum price of $0.10 results in similar OTC return premiums.
10
   These filters also minimize the impact of market manipulation on our results. Aggarwal and Wu (2006), Böhme
and Holz (2006), and Frieder and Zittrain (2007) show that market manipulation can affect OTC stocks.


                                                         9
C. Comparison to Listed Stocks

           We compare our sample of OTC stocks to common stocks listed on the NYSE,

NASDAQ, or Amex exchanges using CRSP data. We define three groups of stocks: active,

eligible, and comparable. Active stocks have at least one non-zero daily return in the past year.

Eligible stocks meet our data requirements in Section II.B. Comparable stocks in the listed

sample consist of the 2N eligible listed firms with the lowest market capitalizations, where N is

the number of listed firms with a market capitalization below the median market capitalization in

OTC markets in each month. These listed firms are comparable to OTC firms in terms of size.

           Table 1 provides a snapshot of summary statistics for the OTC, comparable listed, and

eligible listed samples in July of 1997—a typical month of OTC market activity. In this month,

the median market capitalization of an OTC stock is $12.9 million, as compared to $36 million

for the eligible listed sample. The difference in total market capitalization is much larger ($21.3

billion versus $9.59 trillion) because the largest listed firms are enormous and because there are

12 times fewer OTC stocks (600 OTC stocks versus 7,127 listed stocks). The annualized median

OTC trading volume is only 2.2% of the median eligible listed trading volume ($2.3 million

versus $101 million, respectively). 11 The aggregate annualized transactions in OTC stocks

exceed $8.2 billion, whereas trades in eligible listed stocks exceed $11.4 trillion.

           [Insert Table 1 here.]

           By design, the OTC sample is more similar to the comparable listed sample described in

the second column of Table 1. In particular, the median size is identical in the two samples

($12.9 million). Although median sizes match perfectly, the mean size in the OTC markets is

larger ($35.5 million) than that of the comparable listed sample ($12.7 million) because some



11
     Listed trading volume statistics do not adjust for possible double-counting of NASDAQ interdealer trades.


                                                          10
OTC firms are quite large, as discussed below. 12 In July 1997, the mean of OTC trading volume

at $13.7 million is very similar to that of the comparable listed sample at $12.8 million. Although

mean volumes match well, the median OTC volume is smaller than that of the comparable listed

sample ($2.3 million vs. $6.1 million, respectively), which is not surprising given the thinner

OTC market. In summary, the comparable listed sample is a benchmark group that is close in

terms of size and trading characteristics to the OTC firms.

        Averaging across all months in our sample, the number of firms is 5,228 in the listed

sample and is 5,708 in the active listed universe. The averages are 486 in our OTC sample and

3,357 in the active OTC universe. The OTC sample contains fewer firms than the active OTC

universe partly because 30% of OTC firms have a stock concurrently listed on the NASDAQ,

making them ineligible for the sample. 13 When imposed individually, our sample filters for a

non-zero daily return, minimum price of $1, non-missing price, minimum market capitalization

of $1 million, and non-missing market capitalization eliminate 28%, 28%, 21%, 19%, and 16%

of active OTC firms, respectively. Notably, none of these sample requirements has much impact

on the listed sample, which contains 92% of the active firms in CRSP in an average month.

        We now compare the size, volume, and number of firms in the OTC and eligible listed

samples over time. For this comparison, we transform the size and volume data to minimize the

influence of outliers which sometimes reflect data errors. In each month, we compute the

difference in the cross-sectional average of the logarithms of size and ($1 plus) volume in the

two samples. After taking the difference, we invert the log transform to obtain a ratio that can be

interpreted as the OTC characteristic divided by the listed characteristic.

12
   The average fraction of shares floating is reasonably similar for the smaller samples of 50 OTC firms (53%
floating) and 50 similarly-sized listed firms (35% floating) in June of 2012.
13
   In untabulated tests, we find that cross-listed OTC and NASDAQ stocks exhibit return premiums much like other
listed stocks. The impact of NYSE versus NASDAQ listing choice has been studied in Baruch and Saar (2009) and
others. International cross-listing effects have been studied by Baruch, Karolyi, and Lemmon (2007) and others.


                                                       11
        Figure 1 summarizes the size, trading volume, and number of firms in the OTC sample as

a percentage of the corresponding amounts in the eligible listed sample. The number of firms in

the OTC sample averages 10% of the number in the listed sample, though this percentage

increased to 24% by the end of 2008. The average firm size and trading volume in the OTC

sample are an order of magnitude smaller than they are in the listed sample. The average OTC

stock is 11% of the size of the average listed stock. The average OTC stock’s volume is just 6%

of that of the average listed stock. The relative size of OTC stocks has almost always been higher

than their relative volume, consistent with lower liquidity in OTC markets. This gap between

relative size and volume widens after 2000, as more illiquid firms are now traded in OTC

markets relative to listed markets. 14 The increase in the number of OTC firms in the late 1990s

outpaces the concurrent rise in the number of listed firms. The relative increase in OTC firms

after 2003 coincides with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act when many listed firms to chose to “go dark.”

        [Insert Figure 1 here.]

        Although the typical OTC firm is smaller than most listed firms, there are several large

OTC firms that have market capitalizations similar to large listed firms. Table 2 lists the firm

size and month in which the 10 largest firms in our sample attain their peak size. These firms

have market capitalizations measured in billions. The largest firm, Publix Supermarkets, reaches

a market capitalization of $88 billion at the end of our sample in December 2008. It would rank

18th in size in the listed sample in that month, which exceeds the median of the top percentile.

Several large companies, such as Delphi Corp., trade on PS after delisting from NYSE,

NASDAQ, or Amex. We inspect the entire time series of data for all 77 OTC firms with peak

sizes exceeding $1 billion. We correct 19 errors arising from an incorrect number of shares


14
  As explained in footnote 9, a structural break in OTC volume reporting causes the gap to appear to widen in July
1995. Average OTC volume would be lower prior to July 1995 if volume data on all OTC firms were available.


                                                        12
outstanding. Such errors apply mainly to the largest of these 77 firms and do not affect their

returns. Still, these data errors suggest one should be careful when interpreting OTC size data

and value-weighted portfolio returns.

        [Insert Table 2 here.]

        In summary, the typical OTC stock is smaller, less liquid, and harder to short than the

typical listed stock. However, the largest 10% of OTC stocks are comparable in size to the

median-sized listed stock. The number of firms in our OTC sample is substantial, averaging

almost 10% of all listed stocks and increasing dramatically after 2000. Thus, although the OTC

market is much smaller than the market for listed stocks, the OTC universe is a powerful new

venue to test the determinants of return premiums.




III. Variable Definitions

        This section summarizes the key variables used in our analyses. Our return predictability

tests require estimates of stocks’ monthly returns and betas. We also measure several firm

characteristics known to predict returns in listed stocks, such as size, book-to-market equity, past

returns, idiosyncratic volatility, and illiquidity.

        We compute a stock’s return as the monthly percentage change in MarketQA’s “total

return index” variable, which is a cumulative stock price that accounts for dividends and splits. 15

We assign a monthly index value based on the last available daily index value. Our sample filters

ensure that this value is available within the last month. Our tests use two past return variables:




15
  Much like Ince and Porter (2006), we correct firms’ returns in cases in which extremely improbable return
reversals occur—e.g., a firm’s stock price changes from $57.00 to $5.70 and back to $57.00. None of the main
results depend on our correction procedure, which is available upon request.


                                                       13
past one-month returns (Ret[-1]) which capture short-term serial correlation and past 12-month

returns (Ret[-12,-2]), not including the past month, which capture stock price momentum.

       Idiosyncratic volatility is defined relative to the Fama-French (1993) three-factor model,

as in Ang et al. (2006). To estimate a stock’s volatility in month t, we use a time-series

regression from month t – 2 to t – 1 of the stock’s daily return on the daily market (MKT), size

(SMB) and value (HML) factors, as defined in Fama and French (1993). The stock’s

idiosyncratic volatility (Volatility) in month t is the log of the standard deviation of the residuals

from its time series regression. We use the same regression procedure as described in Appendix

B, except that we apply this to daily rather than monthly observations.

       Our analyses use three measures of individual stock liquidity. The main illiquidity

measure is the proportion of days with no trading volume (PNT) in each month. The PNT

variable measures an investor’s ability to trade a stock at all, which is highly relevant in illiquid

markets such as the OTC market. This measure more directly measures a lack of trading than

Lesmond, Ogden, and Trzcinka’s (1999) proportion of days with zero returns. The variable

Volume is the log of one plus a stock’s monthly dollar volume. The variable Spread is the

difference between a stock’s ask and bid quotes divided by the bid-ask midpoint from the last

day when both quotes are available. These other two illiquidity measures capture the amount of

trading and the cost of trading in a stock, respectively.

       Our return predictability tests use data on firm disclosure, institutional holdings, size, and

book-to-market ratios. Firm disclosure (Disclose) is a dummy variable that is one if a firm’s

book equity data is available from either Compustat, Reuters Fundamentals, or Audit Analytics.

We define book equity data as available if it appears in a firm’s annual report dated between 7

and 19 months ago. Institutional holdings (InstHold) is a dummy variable indicating whether a




                                                  14
firm’s stock appears as a holding of at least one institutional manager or mutual fund that filed

Form 13F, N-CSR, or N-Q with the SEC in the past three months, as recorded by Thomson

Reuters. Firm Size is the log of the most recently available market capitalization, as computed by

MarketQA. The book-to-market variable (B/M) is the log of the ratio of book-to-market equity.

We Winsorize all independent variables at the 5% level to minimize the influence of outliers.

         [Insert Table 3 here.]

         Table 3 reports summary statistics of returns and variables for OTC stocks and

comparable listed stocks in Panels A and B, respectively. The mean monthly return of OTC

stocks is slightly negative at –0.04% compared to 0.66% for comparable listed stocks, which is

consistent with Luft, Levine, and Larson (2001) and Eraker and Ready (2011). The cross section

of monthly OTC returns is also significantly more disperse than listed stocks, with cross-

sectional standard deviations of 28.08% and 19.46%, respectively. OTC stocks are substantially

more volatile than comparable listed stocks, with average monthly average volatilities of 6.56%

and 4.29% for the OTC and listed samples, respectively. The size and book-to-market

distributions of firms in the OTC and comparable listed samples are similar.

         However, the OTC and listed samples exhibit very different levels of disclosure,

institutional ownership, and liquidity. The mean of the Disclose dummy for book equity data is

0.60 in the OTC sample and 0.83 in the comparable listed sample, suggesting that 40% of OTC

firms choose not to disclose accounting data whereas only 17% of small listed firms omit this

information. 16 Table 3 shows that an average of 26% of OTC stocks are held by institutions

(InstHold), as compared to 71% of comparable listed stocks. This suggests that the investor

clientele in OTC markets is mainly retail, while institutions play a bigger role in listed markets.


16
   Some of the lack of book equity data reflects incomplete coverage in our data sources. In unreported analyses, we
find that our three data sources have significantly overlapping coverage, but no single source subsumes the others.


                                                         15
       The average of log volume (Volume) is much smaller for OTC stocks (8.25) than for

listed stocks (10.77). OTC stocks also trade much less frequently: the mean fraction of days with

no trading in a month, PNT, is 0.55 for OTC stocks compared to 0.20 for listed stocks. The 95th

percentile PNT value is 0.94, implying the least frequently traded OTC stocks trade just one day

per month. Average OTC Spreads are quite high at 0.15 versus 0.08 for comparable listed stocks.

We explicitly account for the impact of the bid-ask bounce bias in OTC stocks’ average returns

using the Asparouhova, Bessembinder, and Kalcheva (2010) method described below.

       Panel C in Table 3 shows average cross-sectional correlations among OTC firms’

characteristics and their betas on listed return factors. Nearly all of the pairwise correlations are

much less than 0.5. The exception is the large negative correlation of –0.84 between PNT and

Volume, which indicates that these two variables reflect a common source of OTC illiquidity.



IV. Comparing the Cross Sections of OTC and Listed Returns

       Following researchers studying listed stocks, we construct calendar-time portfolios of

OTC stocks ranked by characteristics to estimate the expected returns of OTC factors. We

compare OTC factor returns to those in the comparable listed and eligible listed samples.

Forming factors has the advantage that the means of the portfolios have economic interpretations

as return premiums. These portfolio tests also do not require linearity assumptions imposed by

regressions. The disadvantages of portfolios are that confounding effects can obfuscate return

premiums based on univariate sorts and they lead to less powerful tests. Accordingly, we also

present cross-sectional regressions below in which we jointly estimate return premiums. Our

analysis focuses on portfolios ranked by two illiquidity measures, PNT and Volume. We also

estimate the returns of factor portfolios ranked by size, value, volatility, and momentum.



                                                  16
         To construct portfolios, we sort firms into quintiles at the end of each month based on the

firm characteristic of interest, such as a firm’s PNT value in that month. A long-only quintile

portfolio return in month t is the weighted average of returns in month t of firms in the quintile,

as ranked by their characteristics in month t – 1 among sample firms. A long-short factor

portfolio return is the difference between the returns of the top and bottom quintile portfolios.

The portfolios use three sets of weights: equal-weighted (EW), value-weighted (VW), and

weighted by the prior month’s gross return (gross-return weighted or GRW). Asparouhova,

Bessembinder, and Kalcheva (2010) show that the expected return of a GRW portfolio is the

same as that of an EW portfolio, except that it corrects for the bid-ask bounce bias noted by

Blume and Stambaugh (1983). 17 A long-only portfolio’s excess return is its monthly return

minus the monthly risk-free rate prevailing at the end of the prior month. Each factor portfolio’s

alpha is the intercept from a time-series regression of its monthly returns on various monthly

factor returns. All standard errors are based on the robust estimator in Newey and West (1987). 18

         To measure factor loadings in portfolios that may be infrequently traded, we include six

monthly lags of each factor and report the sum of the contemporaneous and six lagged

coefficients as the factor loading. 19 We analyze five factors based on listed returns, including the

MKT, SMB, HML, momentum (UMD), and illiquidity (ILQ) factors. We define UMD using

Carhart’s 12-month momentum measure (1997) and ILQ using Pastor and Stambaugh’s (2003)

volume-induced reversal measure. We create a sixth factor equal to the value-weighted OTC


17
   In unreported tests, we simulate OTC stock returns in the presence of empirically realistic bid-ask bounce and
non-trading, as well as persistent 50% errors in recorded prices that occur with 5% probability. For portfolios sorted
by PNT values, we find that the bias in observed monthly GRW portfolio returns is always less than 0.85%, and
adjusting for the bias would only strengthen our main results.
18
   We follow Newey and West’s (1994) recommendation to set the number of lags equal to the highest integer less
than 4*(T/100)(2/9), where T is the number of periods in the sample. For our sample of 383 months, applying this
formula results in a lag length of 5 months.
19
   Our method is the monthly analog to the one proposed by Dimson (1979), who analyzes stocks that are
infrequently traded at the daily frequency.


                                                         17
market return minus the standard (30-day Treasury Bill) risk-free rate, which we refer to as

“OTC MktVW.” Our three return benchmarks are the OTC CAPM, Listed CAPM, and the Listed

Five-Factor models. The OTC CAPM and Listed CAPM models include only the OTC market

and listed market factors, respectively. The Listed Five-Factor model consists of the MKT, SMB,

HML, UMD, and ILQ factors.

           We summarize the return premiums for each OTC factor in Table 4. Panel A shows the

Sharpe ratios of each OTC and listed factor and their information ratios (alphas divided by

idiosyncratic volatilities) relative to the factor model benchmarks. Panel B displays the average

monthly returns and alphas of each OTC factor relative to the factor model benchmarks. Panel C

shows the listed factor loadings of OTC factors. Panels D and E report the analyses of Panels B

and C for comparable listed stocks. The returns in Table 4 do not include trading costs, and we

use them to test theories’ predictions of pre-cost returns.

           [Insert Table 4 here.]

           Table 4 shows three interesting comparisons between factor premiums in OTC markets

and those in comparable listed markets: (1) the illiquidity return premium is much larger in OTC

markets; (2) the size, value, and volatility premiums are similar in OTC and listed markets; 20 and

(3) the momentum premium is much smaller in OTC markets.



A. Liquidity Premiums

           The first four rows of Table 4, Panel A report the illiquidity premiums. The raw Sharpe

Ratios of the OTC illiquidity factors based on PNT and Volume are both large at 0.91 and –0.90,

respectively. Both PNT, which captures whether investors trade, and Volume, which quantifies

how much they trade, appear to be relevant aspects of liquidity for OTC stocks. The average
20
     All OTC and listed value portfolios exclude firms with negative book equity.


                                                           18
returns of the value-weighted PNT factor (PNTVW) are also highly positive and significant. They

are lower than the GRW returns partly because size-based weightings place the lowest weights

on the least liquid stocks, which have the highest returns. 21

         In contrast to the large OTC premiums based on the PNT and Volume measures of

illiquidity, the listed premiums based on these measures are tiny and insignificant. For

comparable and eligible listed stocks, the Sharpe ratios and information ratios based on either

liquidity measure are 0.30 or lower and are statistically insignificant. Our analysis of illiquidity

premiums complements the results from numerous studies of listed US and international stocks,

including Amihud and Mendelson (1986), Lee and Swaminathan (2000), Pastor and Stambaugh

(2003), Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2007), and Hasbrouck (2009). These studies show that

the least liquid listed stocks have higher returns than the most liquid listed stocks, though the

magnitude of the listed illiquidity premium depends on the liquidity measure and time horizon.

In particular, listed illiquidity premiums constructed by sorting on price impact rather than

volume measures could differ from those examined here.

         Neither the Listed CAPM nor the Listed Five-Factor model, which includes the illiquidity

(ILQ) factor of Pastor and Stambaugh (2003), can explain the OTC PNT and Volume illiquidity

premiums. In fact, the OTC PNT factor’s information ratio of 1.34 with respect to the Listed

Five-Factor model is larger than its Sharpe ratio of 0.91. The OTC illiquidity premiums become

larger after controlling for listed risk factors mainly because the OTC illiquidity factors are

negatively correlated with the listed market and SMB factors. Panel C of Table 4 shows that the

OTC PNT factor has negative market and SMB betas of –1.24 and –1.02, respectively, and an

insignificant ILQ beta. The very negative beta on the market and SMB factors and the

21
  In general, we do not focus on the value-weighted returns of OTC portfolios because these results are sensitive to
interactions between the large OTC size premium and the other factor premiums. Panel A of Table 5 in the
following section reports how each return premium varies with firm size.


                                                         19
insignificant ILQ beta pose a serious challenge for theories in which the OTC illiquidity

premium represents compensation for bearing systematic risk as measured by listed factors.

       Next we test whether asset pricing theories that emphasize transaction costs, such as

Amihud and Mendelson (1986) and Constantinides (1986), can account for the OTC illiquidity

premium. In such theories, prices adjust until investors’ post-cost risk-adjusted expected returns

are equal across assets and equal to the risk-free rate, assuming one can costlessly trade the risk-

free asset. This implies that all risky portfolios’ pre-cost alphas should be positive by an amount

reflecting the cost of trading risky assets, where cost is equal to bid-ask spread times the average

investor’s turnover. We test this hypothesis in Table 5 for OTC and listed portfolios sorted by

illiquidity measures. In each month, we either sort stocks into PNT deciles (Panel A), or into 10

bid-ask spread ranges (Panel B), using increments of 2.5% from 0% to 25%. Because these

finely partitioned sorts result in portfolios with fewer than 10 firms in the early years when

liquidity data are limited, Table 5 only includes data from August 1995 through December 2008.

       [Insert Table 5 here.]

       The results in Table 5 are inconsistent with several implications of trading cost theories.

First and foremost, the pre-cost CAPM alphas of the OTC stocks in all but one of the bottom

four (eight) deciles of PNT (Spread) are significantly negative, implying that their post-cost

alphas must be even more negative. The OTC stocks with the lowest PNT values have especially

negative pre-cost alphas of –3.98% per month, whereas the comparable listed stocks with the

lowest PNT values have roughly zero pre-cost alphas of –0.06%. Both groups of low PNT stocks

have similar turnover and the OTC stocks actually have higher bid-ask spreads (6.3% versus

4.6%). Thus, a transaction cost theory would predict that the OTC stocks should have higher




                                                 20
returns, rather than returns that are 3.92% lower; and it would not predict negative risk-adjusted

returns for any group of stocks.

       Moreover, the magnitudes of trading costs incurred by OTC investors are small relative

to the pre-cost return premiums in Table 4. In Constantinides’ (1986) model, an asset’s illiquidity

premium is equal to the representative investor’s one-way trading cost, which is the asset’s

turnover multiplied by half of its bid-ask spread. The last two columns in Table 5 report twice

this amount and show that the round-trip costs range from 0.14% for the highest PNT stocks to

1.30% for the lowest PNT stocks. These magnitudes are much smaller than the top minus bottom

decile PNT premium of 5.34% (3.98 – (–1.36)). Furthermore, because equilibrium trading costs

decrease with PNT, subtracting trading costs from returns would increase the magnitude of the

PNT premium. Unreported tests show the same point applies to the Volume premium and five of

the other six premiums reported in Table 4. OTC investors incur higher trading costs in low PNT

and high Volume OTC stocks because they trade these stocks more by definition, which more

than offsets the lower average spreads associated with these stocks. This is an important

difference between liquidity measures based on volume versus price impact, such as bid-ask

spread. Although OTC investors trade low Spread stocks more often, they incur lower costs in

such stocks (see Panel B) because of their low spreads.

       We also test the unique predictions of Amihud and Mendelson’s (1986) model, which

assumes heterogeneous investors with exogenously specified horizons. This theory predicts that

the risk-adjusted returns of portfolios sorted by bid-ask spreads will be increasing and weakly

concave. Intuitively, the marginal compensation for illiquidity diminishes with bid-ask spreads

because investors with longer horizons choose to hold illiquid stocks in equilibrium, and they

require less additional compensation per unit increase in spread than short-horizon investors. We




                                                21
formally test for monotonicity and concavity by constructing long-short portfolios based on the

10 spread-sorted portfolios in Panel B. The monotonicity portfolio puts increasing weights of (–

5, –4, –3, –2, –1, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5) / 15 on the 10 spread portfolios, while the concavity portfolio

applies initially increasing and then decreasing weights of (–2, –1, 0, 1, 2, 2, 1, 0, –1, –2) / 3. The

concavity portfolio represents the difference between two long-short illiquidity factors formed

within spread ranges of [0%, 12.5%] and [12.5%, 25%]. Its expected return is zero if the return-

spread relation is linear, positive if it is concave, and negative if it is convex.

        The results from the monotonicity and concavity tests are ostensibly inconsistent with the

implications of trading cost theories. The monthly alpha of the monotonicity portfolio based on

spread sorts is only slightly positive (0.54%) and is statistically insignificant. The monthly alpha

of a monotonicity portfolio formed from PNT sorts in Panel A is significantly higher at 3.75%.

Furthermore, the concavity portfolio based on spread sorts exhibits a significantly negative alpha

of 2.63% per month, meaning that the spread-return relation is actually convex, not concave.

        The results in Table 5 are also inconsistent with the hypothesis that data errors and

microstructure biases, such as bid-ask bounce, explain the OTC illiquidity premium. Both panels

demonstrate that the negative alphas of liquid OTC stocks are the primary driving force behind

the observed illiquidity premium. These negative alphas are unlikely to be spurious because

errors and microstructure biases are smaller among liquid stocks and typically produce an

upward bias, implying that the liquid OTC stocks’ true alphas may be even more negative.

        In unreported tests, we investigate whether the OTC illiquidity premium is driven by

survivorship bias. As we show in Table 7 below, the annual return of a PNT factor portfolio with

a 12-month holding period is 32.9% (12 * 2.74%). For the top and bottom PNT decile portfolios,

12-month returns are missing for 15.5% and 16.5% of firms during the post-formation period.




                                                   22
The similarity in these 12-month disappearance rates suggests survivorship bias does not explain

the OTC illiquidity premium. Furthermore, the annual return of the 12-month PNT factor

portfolio of 32.9% is twice as high as the 16% disappearance rates above. Thus, even an

enormous return differential of –50% between the disappearing high and low PNT firms would

explain only one quarter (–50% * 16% / 32.9% = 24.3%) of the OTC illiquidity premium.



B. Size and Value Premiums

       Table 4 shows that the size, value, and volatility premiums found in listed markets also

exist in OTC markets and have similar magnitudes. Panel A indicates that the annual Sharpe

ratios of the GRW size and value factors in the OTC market are –1.02 and 0.82, respectively, as

compared to –0.98 and 1.19 in the comparable listed sample. This evidence demonstrates that the

size and value premiums are robust to the differences across OTC and listed markets.

       While the magnitudes of these premiums are similar, neither the listed size nor the listed

value factor explains much of the variation in the OTC size and value factors. In Panel B, the

monthly alpha of the OTC size factor is –2.81% after controlling for its loading on the listed size

factor and the other four listed factors. These listed factors explain just 8.1% of the variance in

the OTC size factor, as reported in the R2 columns in Panel C. Even after controlling for the five

listed factors, the monthly alpha of the OTC value factor is still 2.29%. Although the loading on

the listed value (HML) factor is positive, all five listed factors explain just 25.3% of the variance

in the OTC value factor. Hence there are independent size and value factors in the OTC market

that are not captured by listed factors.




                                                 23
C. Volatility Premium

        Panel A in Table 4 shows that OTC stocks with high volatility have lower average returns

than those with low volatility. The Sharpe ratio of the OTC volatility factor at –0.55 is close to

the corresponding listed Sharpe ratios at –0.75 and –0.64. Panel B shows that the alpha of the

OTC volatility factor with respect to the listed CAPM is significantly negative at –2.63% per

month. At first glance, OTC stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility seem to exhibit low returns

just like listed stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility.

        Interestingly, the OTC volatility factor’s negative alpha is much smaller in the OTC

CAPM regression. The OTC market itself has an overall negative return: Panel A of Table 4

reports that the Sharpe ratio of the OTC market is –0.52. The fact that there is no idiosyncratic

volatility effect in OTC markets after controlling for the OTC market factor implies that a single

root cause could explain both the low return of the OTC market and the low returns of highly

volatile OTC stocks. Panel C shows that the OTC market beta of the long-short OTC volatility

factor is 1.07 and that exposure to the OTC market explains 15.5% of the variance in the

volatility factor. Panel C of Table 4 also indicates that the OTC volatility factor has a negative

loading of –1.38 on the listed illiquidity factor, implying that the volatility effect in OTC stocks

is related to the modest illiquidity premium in listed stocks.



D. Momentum

        The third key result is that the return premium for momentum in OTC markets is

surprisingly small. Whereas the Sharpe ratio of 1.56 for listed momentum is the largest among

all the comparable listed premiums in Table 4, Panel A, the Sharpe ratio of 0.41 for OTC

momentum is the smallest of the OTC premiums. Panel E in Table 4 shows that the OTC and




                                                   24
listed momentum factors are significantly positively correlated. 22 This explains why the

information ratio of the OTC momentum factor against the Listed Five-Factor model, which

includes listed momentum, is close to zero at 0.09.

        The OTC momentum premium shown in Table 4 is much smaller than the momentum

premium in listed stocks reported in Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) and the high Sharpe ratio of

1.30 for momentum in the eligible listed universe. The average OTC momentum premium has

the same sign as the listed premium, but the magnitude of the OTC premium is at least three

times smaller, depending on the exact specification. This evidence contrasts with the robust

evidence that illiquidity, size, value, and volatility premiums exist in the OTC markets. Only the

OTC illiquidity premium is significantly larger than its listed counterpart.



E. OTC Market Returns

        The last rows in Panels A to C of Table 4 report time-series regressions using the excess

return on the value-weighted OTC market as the dependent variable. The alpha of the OTC

market is negative, regardless of which listed factor model is used (also see Eraker and Ready

(2010)). In addition, the listed CAPM explains only 43.5% of the variation in the OTC market,

while the five-factor model explains 57.3% and leaves 42.7% unexplained. This is broadly

consistent with the inability of the other systematic listed factors to explain much of the variation

in the OTC size, value, momentum, illiquidity, and volatility factors.

        Motivated by the differences in volatility and liquidity between OTC and listed stocks in

Table 3, we explore the empirical relationship between the OTC market premium and the OTC

volatility and illiquidity premiums. In an untabulated regression, we find that the OTC market


22
  Like the listed momentum factor, the OTC momentum factor exhibits statistically and economically significantly
lower returns in January: its January Sharpe ratio is –0.89 versus a non-January Sharpe ratio of 0.54.


                                                       25
has highly significant loadings on the OTC volatility and PNT factors with t-statistics of 3.85 and

–5.98, respectively. Moreover, after controlling for these two factors, the OTC market’s alpha

changes from –0.74% to 0.01% (i.e., near zero). This regression establishes strong links between

the OTC volatility and illiquidity premiums and the negative OTC market premium.



F. Multivariate Cross-sectional Regressions

        We also estimate return premiums using monthly multivariate linear regressions that

simultaneously control for firms’ betas and characteristics. Table 6 reports Fama and MacBeth

(1973) return predictability coefficients, along with Newey and West (1987) standard errors in

parentheses. The point estimate is the weighted-average of monthly coefficients, where each

coefficient’s weight is the inverse of its squared monthly standard error as in Ferson and Harvey

(1999). As before, we use GRW returns to correct for bid-ask bounce bias. We group regressors

into firms’ betas on the MKT, SMB, HML, and UMD factors and firms’ characteristics based on

size, book-to-market equity, volatility, past returns, and illiquidity. 23 Regressions I, II, and III

include only betas, only characteristics, and both betas and characteristics, respectively. In

Appendix B, we explain how we estimate firms’ betas and adjust them to account for

nonsynchronous trading. The three sets of columns in Table 6 represent estimates of return

premiums in the OTC, comparable listed, and eligible listed samples.

        [Insert Table 6 here.]

        There are two main findings from Table 6. First, firms’ betas do not strongly predict

returns in any of the three samples, especially in Regression III which includes both firms’ betas

and characteristics. This echoes Daniel and Titman’s (1997) findings in listed stock markets.


23
  Regression specifications I and II also include an unreported dummy variable for firms with missing or negative
book equity variable to keep these firms in the sample without affecting the coefficient on book-to-market equity.


                                                        26
Although using estimated betas as regressors induces an attenuation bias in the coefficients on

betas, this bias cannot explain why half of the beta coefficients are negative and statistically

significant in Regression I. Furthermore, controlling for firms’ betas has virtually no impact on

the coefficients on firms’ characteristics, which are nearly identical in Regressions II and III. The

weak predictability from betas indicates that most of the predictive power in the cross section

comes from characteristics, and supports our use of characteristics in constructing portfolios.

       Second, with few exceptions, jointly estimating return premiums on firms’ betas and

characteristics results in premiums that are quite similar to those using portfolio methods. For

example, the PNT coefficient in the OTC sample in Regression III is 4.053, which implies a

3.36% per month (4.053 ∙ (0.08 – 0.91)) difference in returns between firms ranked at the

medians of the top and bottom quintiles of PNT (0.08 and 0.91, respectively). This magnitude

closely matches the top-to-bottom quintile difference in the GRW returns of PNT portfolios of

2.92% per month in Table 4.B. The same qualitative result applies to the other return premiums.

These findings in Table 6 show that none of the return premiums estimated using univariate

portfolio sorts in Table 4 is due to the correlations among firm characteristics. This makes sense

in light of the low cross-correlations among the variables reported in Table 3.C. Consequently,

we focus on portfolio tests in the rest of the paper.



V. Testing Theories of Limited Arbitrage and Behavioral Biases

       We exploit the differences between the OTC and listed markets as well as within-market

heterogeneity on several dimensions to test asset pricing theories based on limits to arbitrage and

behavioral biases. Our main strategy is to contrast return premiums in subsamples of OTC and

listed stocks, and we use additional tests to shed further light on the momentum premium.



                                                  27
A. Trading Costs as a Limit to Arbitrage

        We first test whether trading costs limit the extent to which arbitrageurs can exploit the

pre-cost returns of OTC factors in Table 4. We estimate the post-cost returns of an arbitrageur

who takes positions in each of the OTC factors, assuming that the investor pays each stock’s bid-

ask spread in every round-trip trade. Studies such as Frazzini, Israel, and Moskowitz (2012)

show that spread data overstate the trading costs incurred by arbitrageurs who use sophisticated

strategies to minimize costs. Our post-cost return calculation is more relevant for the average

investor in OTC markets.

        We compute post-cost returns at rebalancing frequencies between 1 and 24 months to

evaluate how arbitrageurs’ profitability depends on their portfolio turnover. We rebalance

portfolios at n-month frequencies using the Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) method in which 1/n of

the firms in each portfolio can change in each month based on rankings of firms’ characteristics

in the prior month. As before, we focus on portfolios with GRW weights, which remain gross-

return weighted in the absence of rebalancing. We also analyze VW and liquidity-weighted (LW)

portfolios to assess whether arbitrageurs lower their trading costs by concentrating on large and

liquid stocks. The LW weights are inversely proportional to stocks’ bid-ask spreads. 24

        Table 7 reports pre-cost and post-cost returns of GRW portfolios and breakeven

rebalancing frequencies and spreads for the post-cost factor portfolios. The breakeven frequency

(spread) is the rebalancing frequency (bid-ask spread) at which the post-cost return of the factor

portfolio is closest to 0%. Table 7 reports the pre-cost returns, post-cost returns, and breakeven

spreads of the GRW OTC factors with rebalancing frequencies of 1 and 12 months. We


24
  Because limited spread data are available, we compute post-cost returns only in the second half of the sample
(1993 to 2008) and estimate costs based on average portfolio turnover multiplied by average bid-ask spreads.


                                                        28
complement the table with Figures 2A and 2B, which show the GRW OTC factors’ pre-cost

returns and post-cost returns at rebalancing frequencies ranging from 1 to 24 months.

        [Insert Table 7 here.]

        [Insert Figures 2A and 2B here.]

        The main finding in Table 7 is that the post-cost returns for arbitrageurs trying to exploit

the OTC factors are much lower than the factors’ pre-cost returns. Even at the annual rebalancing

frequency, the post-cost GRW returns of all six OTC factors are less than 1% per month and are

not statistically significantly greater than 0%—in contrast to the pre-cost returns that are as high

as 2.74% per month and almost always statistically significant. Only the PNT, Volume, and

Value factors exhibit positive post-cost GRW returns at the annual frequency, which is why the

GRW breakeven horizons of these factors are less than one year. If an arbitrageur uses VW or

LW strategies, the breakeven horizons decline for these three strategies and the breakeven

horizon for the Size factor decreases to less than one year. However, one cannot profitably

exploit the OTC Momentum and Volatility factors with a one-year rebalancing frequency,

regardless of which weighting scheme one uses.

        Figures 2A and 2B show that pre-cost GRW factor returns monotonically decrease with

frequency presumably because the information used to form the portfolios gradually becomes

outdated at longer frequencies. Despite this effect, the post-cost factor returns steadily increase

with frequency because the longer frequency portfolios have much lower trading costs. At the

24-month frequency, the post-cost returns of the PNT and Value factors exceed 1% per month,

but only the Value factor return is statistically significant at the 5% level.

        The breakeven spread columns in Table 7 indicate that effective bid-ask spreads must be

quite high—the average across the six factors is 12.3%—in order to deter arbitrage at the one-




                                                  29
year rebalancing frequency. However, because the median OTC spread in Table 3.B is 10%, it

seems that OTC trading costs are indeed high enough to limit the effectiveness of arbitrage,

especially when one also considers the limits on short selling in OTC markets noted earlier. Such

limits help explain why these large OTC return premiums persist, but one needs a model of

investor behavior—such as the one in Appendix A—to understand why premiums arise in the

first place. We now turn to tests that allow us to distinguish among theories of limited arbitrage.



B. Evidence from Double Sorts

       We measure return premiums within each market in subsamples of stocks sorted by

characteristics that distinguish OTC and listed markets: institutional holdings, disclosure, and

size. We select these three characteristics to construct powerful tests of competing theories of

return premiums. We form double-sorted portfolios by first ranking stocks based on a

distinguishing characteristic in month t – 1 and sorting them into portfolios with sufficiently

many stocks. In these initial sorts, we use two portfolios when sorting on the two binary

variables (InstHold and Disclose), and three portfolios when sorting on size. Within each of these

portfolios, such as stocks not held by institutions, we sort stocks into terciles based on the

characteristics, such as liquidity, used in constructing factors. Holding each distinguishing

characteristic (e.g., institutional holdings) constant, we measure return premiums (e.g.,

illiquidity) as the difference between returns in month t of stocks in the top and bottom terciles

from the second sort. Our method also allows us to test whether the distinguishing characteristic

is priced within each tercile from the second sort.

       Table 8 shows the excess returns from these double-sorted portfolios. Panel A shows that

the return premiums for illiquidity (both PNT and Volume) and size are much larger within OTC




                                                 30
stocks that are not held by institutions. Panel B indicates that both illiquidity premiums and the

volatility premium are roughly twice as large among OTC stocks that do not disclose book

equity. Panel C shows the OTC illiquidity premium is larger among small stocks, while the OTC

momentum premium is four times larger among big stocks. Twelve of the 13 statistically

significant differences in return premiums in Table 8 exhibit the same signs in the OTC and

comparable listed samples, though the magnitudes are often smaller in the listed sample. We now

discuss the implications of these results and others for theories of return premiums.

       [Insert Table 8 here.]



C. Testing Theories of Investor Disagreement and Limits on Short Sales

       We test Miller’s (1977) hypothesis that investor disagreement combined with limits on

short sales leads to overpricing and negative abnormal returns. As we show in Appendix A, this

theory can help explain the illiquidity, size, volatility, and value premiums in OTC and listed

markets because these characteristics are natural proxies for investor disagreement. In particular,

both of our OTC illiquidity measures are based on trading volume, which is directly linked to

investor disagreement as formalized in Propositions 1 and 2 in Appendix A.

       There are several additional testable implications of this theory. If retail (institutional)

investors are more (less) likely to disagree, stocks not held by institutions should exhibit higher

return premiums based on proxies for disagreement. A complementary story is that a lack of

institutional ownership could be a proxy for limits on short sales, as suggested by Nagel (2005),

which are associated with larger overpricing in Miller’s (1977) theory. Consistent with both

interpretations, Panel A in Table 8 shows that the return premiums for illiquidity (both PNT and

Volume measures), volatility, value, and size are 0.96% to 4.39% per month larger in OTC stocks




                                                 31
that are not held by institutions. The differences in the illiquidity and size premiums are

especially large and highly statistically significant. Hinting at a role for limits on short sales, the

premiums among non-held stocks arise mainly from the extremely negative returns of stocks

with high liquidity, size, volatility, and valuation. There are also significant differences in the

illiquidity (PNT and Volume) premiums between stocks held and not held by institutions in the

comparable listed sample, suggesting similar mechanisms could operate in listed markets.

         In the model in Appendix A, the impact of differences in opinion is especially strong

among OTC stocks that do not disclose basic financial information. Investors are likely to hold

widely divergent views about the financial condition of firms without disclosures, implying

overpricing of such firms’ stocks will be more severe. Consistent with this idea, Panel B in Table

8 shows that the return premiums based on four proxies for disagreement—PNT, volume,

volatility, and size—are 1.38% to 1.64% per month larger among OTC stocks that do not

disclose book equity. The differences in all premiums except for size are significant at the 5%

level. The difference in size premiums is significant at the 10% level.

         We further test disagreement theories by analyzing whether disclosure itself can predict

returns. If the disclosure of financial information helps to resolve investor disagreement, as

predicted by the model in Appendix A, disclosing firms will earn higher returns than non-

disclosing firms. 25 We look for a disclosure premium within firms in the top terciles of liquidity

and volatility, where disagreement could significantly affect investors’ valuations. Panel B of

Table 8 shows that disclosing firms do exhibit higher returns than non-disclosing firms,

especially among liquid and volatile firms. The disclosure premium is 1.52% [= –1.04 – (–2.56)],


25
  Hirshleifer and Teoh (2003) develop a theory of attention that makes a similar prediction. Firms can choose
whether to disclose financial information to investors with limited attention. In equilibrium, firms do not disclose if
they have negative news, knowing that investors fail to take this self-selection into account. This theory predicts that
investors overprice firms that do not disclose, implying that these firms have lower returns than disclosing firms.


                                                          32
1.78%, and 1.37% per month, respectively, when evaluated within the PNT, volume, and

volatility terciles representing the most liquid and volatile firms. All three premiums are

statistically significant, economically large, and in line with the theory in Appendix A.

       Furthermore, the negative market returns on OTC stocks are consistent with the

overpricing argument. Investor disagreement can cause overpricing of the entire market when

there are market-wide limits on short sales (e.g., Jarrow (1980)). Because few OTC stocks can be

shorted and there is no tradable index of OTC stocks that can be shorted, limits on short sales

plausibly apply to the OTC market as a whole. Thus, disagreement combined with limits on short

sales could explain the negative returns of the OTC market. It could also help explain the strong

empirical links between the OTC market premium and the OTC premiums for illiquidity and

volatility, which could all stem from the same underlying investor disagreement.

       Lastly, Miller’s (1977) theory could help explain why the coefficients on market beta are

negative and statistically significant in predicting returns in Table 6. He argues that “the riskiest

stocks are also those about which there is the greatest divergence of opinion.” If so, in the

presence of limits on short sales, stocks with the highest systematic risk (i.e., beta) could become

so overpriced that they exhibit lower future returns than stocks with low risk.



D. Testing Theories of Momentum

       Firms traded in OTC markets disclose much less information than those in listed markets,

and retail investors dominate in OTC markets. This suggests that theories emphasizing how

investors react to information and the role of institutions could explain the relatively small OTC

momentum premium. This section presents evidence that is most consistent with Hong and

Stein’s (1999) model of momentum based on the gradual diffusion of information.




                                                  33
       Two elements in Hong and Stein’s (1999) model are necessary for momentum. First,

there must be a group of “newswatcher” investors who only attend to firms’ fundamentals and

disregard firms’ stock price movements. Such newswatchers may not follow many OTC firms.

Greenstone, Oyer, and Vissing-Jorgensen (2006) argue that investors view financial information

disclosed by most OTC firms as less credible than information from listed firms. In contrast,

OTC firms’ stock prices are reliable, verifiable, and widely available. If OTC stocks lack

newswatchers, they would not exhibit momentum. This argument is consistent with the evidence

in Tables 4 and 5 showing that OTC momentum is on average lower than listed momentum.

       The second key element in Hong and Stein’s (1999) model is the gradual transmission of

information across newswatchers. The model predicts that momentum is stronger and longer-

lasting when information transmission is slower. Because fewer investors hold and discuss OTC

stocks, information transmission is likely to be slower in OTC stocks than in listed stocks. Under

this reasoning, momentum should be strong and long-lasting among OTC stocks that

newswatchers might follow, such as large OTC firms and those that disclose key financial

information. Consistent with this prediction, Panels B and C of Table 8 shows that momentum is

two to four times higher among OTC stocks that newswatchers might follow. Specifically,

momentum is 1.78% and 1.55% per month, and highly statistically significant, among the largest

OTC firms and those that disclose book equity, respectively, while it is only 0.41% and 0.61%,

and insignificant, among the smallest OTC firms and those that do not disclose book equity.




                                                34
         Next we examine the time horizon of momentum in OTC markets. We construct long-

short momentum portfolios at various horizons using the Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) method,

similar to the rebalanced portfolios examined in Table 7. 26 Table 9 reports the momentum

portfolios’ GRW and VW returns at horizons up to five years. There is no momentum (–0.08%

per month) at the one-year horizon in OTC markets using the GRW method. There is, however,

significant one-year momentum (1.57% per month) in the VW OTC portfolios, but this places

extremely large weights on a few big OTC firms.

         [Insert Table 9 here.]

         Analyzing the long-term returns of momentum portfolios in OTC and listed markets

helps us differentiate theories of momentum. In the models of Hong and Stein (1999) and

Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998), momentum originates from investors’ underreaction to

tangible firm-specific information, such as news about firm earnings, and thus momentum need

not reverse. 27 In contrast, in Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam’s (1998) theory, momentum

arises from “continuing overreaction” to intangible information, implying that momentum

eventually reverses. Table 9 shows that VW momentum portfolios in OTC markets exhibit

positive but statistically insignificant returns of 0.45% per month in years two through five after

portfolio formation. In addition, momentum in listed markets exhibits limited reversal in the

eligible sample and no reversal in the comparable-size sample in years two through five. 28 The



26
   This procedure entails two steps. First, we form top and bottom quintile portfolios based on stocks’ Ret[-12,-2] as
of month t – k. Second, to measure returns n years after portfolio formation in each month t, we apply GRW weights
to the 12 monthly returns of the extreme quintile portfolios formed in months t – n*12 to t – n*12 – 11. The average
difference in the extreme quintile portfolios’ returns is the momentum premium at the n-year horizon.
27
   Because we lack earnings data for OTC firms, we cannot test several predictions of the Barberis, Shleifer, and
Vishny (1998) model, which is based on a representative investor’s underreaction and overreaction to sequences of
news. However, Loh and Warachka (2012) argue that listed stock price reactions to sequences of earnings surprises
are inconsistent with this model.
28
   Lee and Swaminathan (2000) and Jegadeesh and Titman (2001) show that momentum in listed stocks partially
reverses in their samples.


                                                         35
observed lack of reversal lends support to the two underreaction theories of momentum: Hong

and Stein (1999) and Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998).

       An alternative explanation for the weak GRW momentum premium in OTC markets is

the small role of institutional investors in OTC markets. In listed stock markets, institutions herd

(e.g., Nofsinger and Sias, 1999; Sias, 2004) and institutions follow momentum strategies (e.g.,

Badrinath and Wahal, 2002; Griffin, Harris, and Topaloglu, 2003). Gutierrez and Pirinsky (2007)

and Vayanos and Woolley (2012) argue that momentum in listed markets partly arises because of

agency issues in these delegated institutional money managers. Our cross-market evidence is

broadly consistent with this view. Table 4 shows that momentum is three times higher among

comparable listed stocks, which are far more likely to be held by institutions (see Table 3).

       However, the evidence within the OTC market is ostensibly inconsistent with the theory

that institutions per se cause momentum. Panel A in Table 8 shows that OTC stocks experience

nearly identical momentum (1.97% versus 2.18% per month) whether or not they are held by

institutions. Nevertheless, the types of institutions likely differ across OTC and listed markets.

Large asset managers that are subject to the delegated agency problems described by Vayanos

and Wooley (2012) play important roles in listed markets. Table 3 shows that few large

institutions invest in OTC stocks. However, small hedge funds without reporting obligations

could significantly affect OTC market prices. These smaller institutions may not be subject to the

same agency issues as the largest institutions. Future theories on institutional investors and

momentum should account for the different roles played by these various types of investors.




                                                 36
VI. Concluding Discussion

       While many cross-sectional return premiums in listed markets, such as size, value, and

volatility, generalize to OTC markets, other return premiums are strikingly different. The

premium for illiquidity in OTC markets is several times larger than in listed markets. The

pronounced momentum effect in listed markets is economically small in OTC markets. Listed

return factors cannot explain the majority of the variation in OTC return factors.

       Variation in the illiquidity, size, value, and volatility premiums within OTC markets is

consistent with theories in which disagreement and limits on short sales cause temporary

overpricing. Variation in the momentum premium within OTC markets is most consistent with

Hong and Stein’s (1999) theory based on the gradual diffusion of information. We test and find

only limited support for several alternative explanations of these premiums, including theories

based on exposures to systematic factor risk and those based on transaction costs.

       The return premiums in OTC markets offer insights into the future of listed markets. For

example, the finding that size, value, and volatility premiums exist in OTC markets provides new

evidence that these premiums are robust to differences in market structure and liquidity, and

therefore could persist in the future. The finding that the most actively traded OTC stocks appear

to be overpriced could also have an important counterpart in listed markets: Ofek and Richardson

(2003), Baker and Stein (2004), and others show that apparent speculative bubbles are often

associated with high trading volume. Our evidence suggests that such bubbles are magnified

when investors must price assets in the dark, and thus improved financial disclosures could

mitigate future bubbles.




                                                37
                       Appendix A: Model of OTC Stock Pricing

       Our stylized model of OTC stock prices features costly short selling and differences in

investors’ opinions. We analyze the price of a single equity-financed firm in three periods: 0, 1,

and 2. At date 0, the firm has assets in place normalized to $1. At date 2, the firm liquidates all

assets and pays all cash flows. The share price of the stock (p) endogenously adjusts to clear the

market. We normalize the supply of stock to one and the return on the risk-free asset to zero.

       We assume short selling costs are related to the cost of locating shares to borrow. Short

sellers borrow shares from share lenders, such as brokers or custodians, who incur deadweight

quadratic costs of finding shares (c/2)(shares lent)2, where c > 0. Share lenders pass these costs

on to short sellers who can borrow shares and pay total dollar fees of (c/2)(shares short)2. Based

on this total fee, the average borrowing fee per share is f = f(shares short) = (c/2)(shares short).

This lending fee (f) is akin to a negative rebate rate earned on collateral posted to borrow shares.

We assume share owners do not receive payment when share lenders lend their shares.

       There are two types of risk-neutral overconfident investors and N investors of each type.

Each investor owns 1/(2N) of the firm’s shares at date 0. At date 1, investors observe two public

signals, sA and sB, about the firm’s date 2 earnings (π2). Earnings satisfy π2 = sA + sB + u1 + u2,

where sA, sB, u1, and u2 are independently uniformly distributed from [–s, +s] and s ≥ 0 is a

measure of fundamental volatility. Stockholders receive 1 + π2 at date 2.

       The two types of investors differ in which signal they believe more, where the parameter

η ∈ [0, 1] represents agents’ overconfidence in their preferred signal. Specifically, the investors

mistakenly perceive the ut components of earnings to be correlated with their preferred signals.

Type X ∈ {A, B} believes that these components of earnings satisfy ut = η sX + (1 – η2)1/2 vt,




                                                  38
where t = 1 or 2, and the vt are uniformly distributed from [–s, +s] and independent of each

other, sA, and sB. Both types’ beliefs are correct if and only if η = 0.

        We consider two variants of the model: one in which the firm publicly discloses financial

information (e1 = sA + sB + u1) about date 2 earnings at date 1, and one without such disclosure.

We denote the date 1 earnings beliefs of investor type X ∈ {A, B} by EX. Based on only the two

signals, the rational expectation of the firm’s date 2 earnings is sA + sB. At date 1, investors’

earnings expectations in the cases with and without financial disclosure are given by

                  No disclosure: EA = (1 + 2η)sA + sB and EB = (1 + 2η)sB + sA                      (A1)

                Disclosure: EA = (1 + η)sA + sB + u1 and EB = (1 + η)sB + sA + u1.                  (A2)

Define the difference in opinion between investors to be DO = |EA – EB|. From the above

expressions, financial disclosure decreases difference in opinion as follows:

                                  No disclosure: DO = 2η|sA – sB|                                   (A3)

                                    Disclosure: DO = η|sA – sB|.                                    (A4)

        For simplicity, we analyze the model’s symmetric rational expectations equilibrium in

which each investor takes the market price as given and investors within each type use the same

strategies. Type X ∈ {A, B} chooses qX at date 1 to maximize expected profit, implying

                        qX ∈ argmax {qX(1 + EX – p1) – I(qX < 0)(c/2)qX 2},                         (A5)

where I( ) is an indicator function. The more optimistic type, for which EX = max(EA, EB),

chooses a long position, has a linear profit function, and buys stock until the price satisfies:

                                      1 + max(EA, EB) – p1 = 0.                                     (A6)

This condition implies the stock price reflects only the beliefs of the optimistic investors:

                          p1 = 1 + max(EA, EB) = 1 + (EA + EB)/2 + DO/2.                            (A7)




                                                  39
       Because prices reflect optimistic investors’ beliefs, the pessimistic investor type chooses

to short the stock and has a quadratic profit function. The pessimistic type’s demand satisfies

                   min(qA, qB) = (1 + min(EA, EB) – p1)/c = –DO/c < 0 if η > 0.                  (A8)

The second-order condition for pessimistic investors is satisfied because their expected profit is

quadratic in qX and –c < 0. Optimistic investors are also maximizing because their expected

profit is zero for all qX > 0. Market clearing [N(qA + qB) = 1] implies optimists’ demand is

                                 max(qA, qB) = 1/N + DO/c if η > 0.                              (A9)

The resulting average stock lending/borrowing fee per share is

                                  f = (c/2)|min(qA, qB)| = DO/2.                               (A10)

       In expectation, the equilibrium price at date 1 (p1) exceeds the efficient price (p1e) that

would prevail if there were no overconfidence. The efficient price is

                                 No disclosure: p1e = 1 + sA + sB                              (A11)

                                Disclosure: p1e = 1 + sA + sB + u1.                            (A12)

We define overpricing (Ovp) as the equilibrium price minus the efficient price (p1 – p1e):

                              No disclosure: Ovp1 = 2η max(sA, sB)                             (A13)

                                Disclosure: Ovp1 = η max(sA, sB).                              (A14)

       At date 0, before the signals are known, expected overpricing is

                                E[Ovp1] = E[DO]/2 > 0 if η > 0.                                (A15)

At date 0, all investors anticipate the date 1 equilibrium, so the price is

                                  p0 = 1 + E[DO]/2 > 1 if η > 0.                               (A16)

The date 0 price is higher than its efficient value of 1 because expected overpricing is positive

due to expected differences in opinion. As a consequence of overpricing, at date 0 the stock’s

expected return E[r] from date 1 to date 2 is negative and given by




                                                  40
                           E[r] = E[p2 – p1] = –E[DO]/2 < 0 if η > 0.                           (A17)

Expected return decreases with expected difference in opinion, which arises from

overconfidence. The overconfidence bias causes the stock’s expected return to be lower than the

risk-free rate of zero even though investors are risk-neutral.

       Equilibrium trading volume from date 0 to date 1 is:

                    Volume = |N max(qA, qB) – 1/2| = 1/2 + (N/c)DO if η > 0.                    (A18)

where 1/2 is the initial share endowment of type A investors. Expected trading volume is thus:

                            E[Volume] = 1/2 + (N/c)E[DO] if η > 0.                              (A19)

Return volatility at date 1 is the standard deviation of the change in price, which is

       Var(p1 − p0 ) = (1/2) Var[E A + E=
                                        B + DO ] (1/2) Var[E A + EB ] + (1/ 2)E[DO]2 ,          (A20)

where the second equality is based on the properties of the two uniformly distributed signals.

       In summary, ex ante overpricing increases with expected difference in opinion, which is

consistent with Miller (1977) and related theories. The equilibrium relies on the assumptions that

the cost of short selling is positive (c > 0) and convex and that investors are overconfident

(η > 0). Firm disclosure of financial information reduces differences in investors’ opinions.

       We now establish seven model predictions based on the above equilibrium.



       Proposition 1: If η > 0, expected return is negative and decreases with expected

difference in opinion. If η = 0, expected return is zero, and an equilibrium with no trading exists.

       Proof: If η > 0, expected return is –E[DO]/2, so it decreases with E[DO]. If η = 0, then

DO = 0 regardless of disclosure; and all traders believe firm value is 1 + EA = 1 + EB, so this

must be the equilibrium date 1 price. In this case, the price p1 = 1 + E(π2) is efficient and equal to




                                                 41
E(p2), implying that expected return is the risk-free rate of zero. At the price p1, all traders are

content to hold their initial endowments, implying an equilibrium with no trading exists.

        Proposition 2: If η > 0, expected trading volume increases with expected DO and is thus

negatively related to expected return.

        Proof: If η > 0, E[Volume] = 1/2 + (N/c)E[DO], which increases with DO. By

substituting E[r] = –E[DO]/2, we obtain E[Volume] = 1/2 – (2N/c)E[r], which shows the

negative relation.

        Proposition 3: If η > 0, an increase in s leads to an increase in expected DO, a decrease

in expected return, and an increase in return volatility.

        Proof: E[DO] is proportional to η E[|sA – sB|] = (2/3)ηs, where the equality is based on the

expectation of a random variable with a uniform difference distribution [(2/3)s]. Thus, E[DO]

increases proportionally with s. Because expected return is –E[DO]/2, it decreases proportionally

with s. Return volatility is proportional to s because both the E[DO]2 term and the Var[EA + EB]

in the return variance expression in Equation (A20) are proportional to s2, and volatility is the

square root of variance.

        Proposition 4: If η > 0, market equity (M) and the ratio of market-to-book equity (M/B)

increase with expected DO and thus size and M/B are negatively related to expected return.

        Proof: Because the firm’s book value is 1, its M = M/B = p0 = 1 + E[DO]/2. Thus, M/B

and M depend linearly on E[DO], which is negatively related to expected return.

        Proposition 5: The average stock lending fee per share (f) increases with expected DO

and is negatively related to expected return.

        Proof: From Equation (A10), the average lending fee is f = DO/2, which increases

proportionally with DO. Expected return decreases with E[DO] and thus with the lending fee.




                                                  42
       Proposition 6: An increase in overconfidence (η) increases expected DO and decreases

expected return. In addition, higher η amplifies each of the effects in Propositions 1 to 5.

       Proof: Regardless of disclosure, expected DO is proportional to ηE[|sA – sB|], which

increases with η. Expected return is –E[DO]/2, which must decrease with η. Because the effects

in Propositions 1 to 5 all rely on the expression for expected DO and this expression increases

with η, an increase in η amplifies each of these effects.

       Proposition 7: Expected difference in opinion is higher and expected return is lower with

no firm disclosure; and a lack of disclosure amplifies the effects in Propositions 1 to 5.

       Proof: From Equations (A3) and (A4), non-disclosure increases DO by = η|sA – sB| and

increases E[DO] by ηE[|sA – sB|]. Because Propositions 1 to 5 rely on the expression for expected

DO, which decreases with disclosure, a lack of disclosure amplifies these effects.



       The model delivers several intuitive results. Proposition 1 shows that difference in

opinion (DO) decreases expected return if agents are overconfident (η > 0). If agents are not

overconfident, the model predicts no trading and no overpricing because agents agree on the

firm’s value. Thus, Proposition 1 formally justifies our PNT (non-trading) proxy for no DO and

its positive relation with expected return. Proposition 2 extends this idea to trading volume. An

increase in expected DO increases expected shorting demand from the pessimistic investor type,

which generates high trading volume. Because agents trade more when they disagree more and

disagreement causes overpricing, stocks with high volume tend to be more overpriced.

       Propositions 3 and 4 show that expected differences in opinion are also positively related

to return volatility, firm size, and firms’ ratios of market-to-book equity. Intuitively, an increase

in the firm’s fundamental volatility (s) increases return volatility and expected DO because the




                                                  43
public signals that generate disagreement are more volatile. In addition, an increase in expected

DO increases overpricing and thus the firm’s market capitalization, justifying size as a proxy for

DO. Similarly, an increase in expected DO produces a higher stock price, holding book value

constant, thereby raising the firm’s M/B ratio, which justifies M/B as a proxy for DO. In this

stylized model, size and M/B are the same because book value is normalized to 1. Allowing

firms’ book values (B) to differ would generate cross-sectional variation in M/B ratios and

overpricing even among firms with identical size (M).

       Proposition 5 shows that markets with higher lending fees, such as OTC markets, will

exhibit larger overpricing. This proposition is consistent with studies such as D’Avolio (2002)

that interpret lending fees as arising from differences in investors’ opinions.

       Proposition 6 shows that an increase in investors’ overconfidence (η) increases DO

because disagreement results from placing excessive weight on different public signals. This

overconfidence channel justifies DO proxies based on retail trading if retail traders are especially

prone to overconfidence. In addition, Proposition 6 implies that stocks held primarily by retail

investors are more subject to the overpricing effects in Propositions 1 to 5. This motivates our

double-sorting methodology in which the initial sort is based on the presence of institutional

(non-retail) investors.

       Proposition 7 shows that a lack of firm disclosure increases differences in opinion

because investors agree on how to interpret basic financial disclosures made by the firm. As a

result, non-disclosure is associated with higher overpricing. Intuitively, lack of disclosure

increases the uncertainty over which investors can disagree, which increases expected

overpricing. Furthermore, non-disclosure amplifies the overpricing effects in Propositions 1 to 5,

which motivates our double sorts using disclosure.




                                                 44
 Appendix B: Estimating Betas and Accounting for Nonsynchronous Trading

        To estimate a stock’s betas in month t on return factors, we use a time series regression of

the stock’s monthly return on the monthly return factors from month t – 24 to month t – 1. In

cases in which a stock is not traded for one month or longer, we cumulate monthly factors during

the entire non-trading period to align the stock and factor returns. We compute stocks’ betas on

the MKT, SMB, and HML factors using the three-factor Fama and French (1993) regression. We

compute betas with respect to the UMD momentum factor constructed by Kenneth French,

which was originally used by Carhart (1997), and the illiquidity factor (ILQ) of Pastor and

Stambaugh (2003) using regressions of returns on MKT, SMB and HML in addition to the

respective factor. We require at least 10 observations in each regression.

        Because many OTC stocks do not trade every day, we correct stocks’ raw betas for

nonsynchronous trading by extending the method in Lo and MacKinlay (1990). Suppose that the

unobservable, “true” return process for stock i is

                                          Rit = α i + Ft β i + ε it                                  (B1)

where Ft is a 1 × m vector of factor returns. The econometrician only observes prices and

returns in periods when trading occurs. We denote the probability that stock i does not trade by

pi and assume this probability is constant across periods. If a security does not trade for several

periods, the observed return when it eventually does trade is the sum of all unobserved true

returns per period. Formally, we define a variable Xit(k) as follows:

                     1 if stock i traded in period t but did not trade in all k period prior to t
        X it (k ) =                                                                                 (B2)
                    0 otherwise.

This definition implies that X it (k ) = 1 with probability (1 − pi ) pik . Now we can write the

observed return process ( Rito ) as



                                                     45
                                                                 ∞
                                                       R = ∑X it (k ) R it − k .
                                                           o
                                                          it                                                                (B3)
                                                                k =0


We assume that factor returns (Ft) are independent and identically distributed over time with

E(Ft) = μF and

                                                          σ 12              .    .     . σ 1m 
                                                                                               
                                                          .                 .              . 
                                        Var ( Ft ) =Σ f = .                      .         . .                            (B4)
                                                                                               
                                                          .                            .   . 
                                                         σ                  .    .     . σ m2 
                                                          m1

We estimate regressions of observed monthly returns on observed monthly factors. The observed

beta vectors that we estimate are

                      βio =
                          [ E ( Ft o ' Ft o ) − E ( Ft o ' ) E ( Ft o )]−1[ E ( Ft o ' Rito ) − E ( Ft o ' ) E ( Rito )].   (B5)

Simplifying and rearranging Equation (B5) yields a relation between stock i’s true beta and its

observed beta and alpha:

                       2 pi o          2 pi              2 pi '                              2 pi '
         βi = βio −          α i [1 −        µ f (Σ f +        µ f µ f ) −1 µ 'f ]−1 (Σ f +        µ f µ f ) −1 µ 'f .      (B6)
                      1 − pi          1 − pi            1 − pi                              1 − pi

When Ft is a scalar, such as an intercept in a factor regression, this formula simplifies to

                                                                        2 pi o µ F
                                                    β=i βio −                 αi 2 .                                        (B7)
                                                                       1 − pi   σF

       We obtain the parameters required for computing βi as follows. First, we estimate the

observed betas and alphas ( β io and α io ) for each firm for each month with regressions using the

24 previous months. Next, we estimate the factor means and covariances (μF and Σf) for each

regression during the same 24 months. Lastly, we estimate the probability of a stock not trading

pi using the proportion of months in which the stock did not trade during the regression period.

We then substitute these parameter estimates into Equation (B7) to estimate stock i’s true beta.



                                                                       46
References

Aggarwal, R. K., and G. Wu, 2006, Stock market manipulations: theory and evidence, Journal of
      Business 79, 1915−1953.

Amihud, Y. and H. Mendelson, 1986, Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread, Journal of Financial
     Economics 17, 223−249.

Ang, A., R. J. Hodrick, Y. Xing, and X. Zhang, 2006, The cross-section of volatility and
      expected returns, Journal of Finance 61, 259−299.

Asness, C. S., T. J. Moskowitz, and L. H. Pedersen, 2013, Value and momentum everywhere,
       Journal of Finance 68, 929−985.

Asparouhova, E., H. Bessembinder, and I. Kalcheva, 2010, Liquidity biases in asset pricing
      Tests, Journal of Financial Economics 96, 215−237.

Badrinath, S. G. and S. Wahal, 2002, Momentum trading by institutions, Journal of Finance 57,
       2449−2478.

Baker, M. P., and J. C. Stein, 2004, Market liquidity as a sentiment indicator, Journal of
       Financial Markets 7, 271−299.

Banz, R. W., 1981, The relationship between return and market value of common stocks, Journal
       of Financial Economics 9, 3−18.

Barber, B. M., and T. Odean, 2000, Trading is hazardous to your wealth: the common stock
       investment performance of individual investors, Journal of Finance 55, 773−806.

Barberis, N., A. Sheifer, and R. Vishny, 1998, A model of investor sentiment, Journal of
       Financial Economics 49, 307−343.

Baruch, S., G. A. Karolyi, and M. L. Lemmon, 2007, Multimarket trading and liquidity: theory
      and evidence, Journal of Finance 62, 2169−2200.

Baruch, S., and G. Saar, 2009, Asset returns and the listing choice of firms, Review of Financial
      Studies 22, 2239−2274.

Bekaert, G., C. Harvey, and C. Lundbland, 2007, Liquidity and expected returns: lessons from
       emerging markets, Review of Financial Studies 20, 1783−1831.


                                                47
Blume, M. E., and R. F. Stambaugh, 1983, Biases in computed returns: an application to the size
      effect, Journal of Financial Economics 12, 387−404.

Böhme, R., and T. Holz, 2006, The effect of stock spam on financial markets, working paper,
     Technische Universität Dresden.

Bollen, N. P. B., and W. G. Christie, 2009, Market microstructure of the Pink Sheets, Journal of
       Banking and Finance 33, 1326−1339.

Bushee, B. J., and C. Leuz, 2005, Economic consequences of SEC disclosure regulation:
      evidence from the OTC Bulletin Board, Journal of Accounting and Economics 39,
      233−264.

Carhart, M. M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52,
       57−82.

Constantinides, George M., 1986, Capital market equilibrium with transaction costs, Journal of
      Political Economy 94, 842–862.

D’Avolio, G. M., The market for borrowing stock, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 271−306.

Daniel K., D. Hirshleifer, and A. Subrahmanyam, 1998, Investor psychology and security market
       under- and overreactions, Journal of Finance 53, 1839−1885.

Daniel, K., and S. Titman, 1997, Evidence on the characteristics of cross sectional variation in
       stock returns, Journal of Finance 52, 1−33.

Dimson, E., 1979, Risk measurement when shares are subject to infrequent trading, Journal of
      Financial Economics 7, 197−226.

Duffie, D., N. Gȃrleanu, and L. H. Pedersen, 2002, Securities lending, shorting, and pricing,
        Journal of Financial Economics 66, 307−339.

Eraker, B., and M. J. Ready, 2011, Over the counter stock markets, Working Paper, University of
       Wisconsin, Madison.

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns, Journal of
      Finance 47, 427−465.



                                                48
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds,
      Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3−56.

Fama, E. F. and J. D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: empirical tests, Journal of
      Political Economy 81, 607−636.

Ferson, W. E. and C. R. Harvey, 1999, Conditioning variables and the cross section of stock
       returns, Journal of Finance 54, 1325−1360.

Frazzini, A., R. Israel, and T. J. Moskowitz, 2012, Trading costs of asset pricing anomalies,
       Working Paper, University of Chicago.

Frieder, L. and J. Zittrain, 2007, Spam works: evidence from stock touts and corresponding
       market activity, Hastings Communications and Entertainment Law Journal 30, 479–
       520.

Greenstone, M., P. Oyer, and A. Vissing-Jorgensen, 2006, Mandated disclosure, stock returns,
       and the 1964 Securities Acts Amendments, Quarterly Journal of Economics 121,
       399−460.

Griffin, J. M., J. H. Harris, and S. Topaloglu, 2003, The dynamics of institutional and individual
        trading, Journal of Finance 58, 2285−2320.

Gutierrez, R. C. and C. Pirinsky, 2007, Momentum, reversal, and the trading behaviors of
       institutions, Journal of Financial Markets 10, 48−75.

Harris, J. H., V. Panchapagesan, and I. M. Werner, 2008, Off but not gone: a study of NASDAQ
        delistings, Working Paper, Ohio State University.

Hasbrouck, J., 2009, Trading costs and returns for U.S. equities: estimating effective costs from
      daily data, Journal of Finance 64, 1445−1477.

Hirshleifer, D., and S. H. Teoh, 2003, Limited attention, information disclosure, and financial
       reporting, Journal of Accounting and Economics 36, 337−386.

Hong, H. and J. C. Stein, 1999, A unified theory of underreaction, momentum trading, and
      overreaction in asset markets, Journal of Finance 54, 2143−2184.

Ince, O. S. and R. B. Porter, 2006, Individual equity return data from Thomson Datastream:
       handle with care, Journal of Financial Research 29, 463−479.


                                                49
Jarrow, R., 1980, Heterogeneous expectations, restrictions on short sales, and equilibrium asset
       prices, Journal of Finance 35, 1105−1113.

Jegadeesh N. and S. Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling losers: implications for
       stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65−91.

Jegadeesh N. and S. Titman, 2001, Profitability of momentum strategies: an evaluation of
       alternative explanations, Journal of Finance 56, 699−720.

Karolyi, G. A., and A. B. Sanders, 1998, The variation of economic risk premiums in real estate
       returns, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 17, 245−262.

Lee, C. M. C. and B. Swaminathan, 2000, Price Momentum and Trading Volume, Journal of
       Finance 55, 2017−2069.

Lesmond, D. A., J. P. Ogden, and C. A. Trzcinka, 1999, A new estimate of transaction costs,
      Review of Financial Studies 12, 1113−1141.

Leuz, C., A. Triantis, and T. Y. Wang, 2008, Why do firms go dark? Causes and economic
       consequences of voluntary SEC deregistrations, Journal of Accounting and Economics
       45, 181−208.

Lo, A. W. and A. C. MacKinlay, 1990, An econometric analysis of nonsynchronous trading,
       Journal of Econometrics 45, 181−211.

Loh, R. K. and M. Warachka, 2012, Streaks in earnings surprises and the cross-section of stock
       returns, Management Science, 58, 1305–1321.

Luft, C., L. M. Levine, and S. Larson, 2001, Over the Counter Bulletin Board Exchange: market
       structure, risk, and return, Journal of Alternative Investments Fall, 33−42.

Luft, C., and L. M. Levine, 2004, Over the Counter Bulletin Board Exchange: the impact of
       liquidity and size to return, volatility, and bid/ask spread, Journal of Alternative
       Investments Winter, 95−106.

Macey, J. R., M. O’Hara, and D. Pompilio, 2008, Down and out in the stock market: the law and
      economics of the delisting process, Journal of Law and Economics 51, 683−713.




                                               50
Miller, E. M., 1977, Risk, uncertainty, and divergence of opinion, Journal of Finance 32,
        1151−1168.

Nagel, S., 2005, Short sales, institutional investors and the cross section of stock returns, Journal
       of Financial Economics, 78, 277-309.

Newey, W. K. and K. D. West, 1987, A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and
      autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55, 703−708.

Newey, W. K. and K. D. West, 1994, Automatic lag selection in covariance matrix estimation,
      Review of Economic Studies 61, 631−653.

Nofsinger, J. R. and R. W. Sias, 1999, Herding and feedback trading by institutional and
       individual investors, Journal of Finance 54, 2263−2295.

Ofek, E. and M. Richardson, 2003, DotCom mania: the rise and fall of Internet stock prices,
       Journal of Finance 58, 1113−1138.

Pastor, L. and R. F. Stambaugh, 2003, Liquidity risk and expected stock returns, Journal of
        Political Economy 111, 642−658.

Sanger, G. C., J. D. Peterson, 1990, An empirical analysis of common stock delistings, Journal
       of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 25, 261−272.

Scheinkman, J. A. and W. Xiong, 2003, Overconfidence and speculative bubbles, Journal of
       Political Economy 111, 1183−1220.

Sias, R. W., 2004, Institutional herding, Review of Financial Studies 17, 165−206.

Vayanos, D., and P. Woolley, 2013, An institutional theory of momentum and reversal, Review
      of Financial Studies 26, 1087–1145.




                                                 51
Table 1: Summary Statistics for the OTC and Listed Samples in July 1997


                                                               Comparable         Eligible
                                                     OTC         Listed            Listed
Total Market Capitalization (Billions)                21.3               15.1          9,592
Median Market Capitalization (Millions)               12.9               12.9             36
Mean Market Capitalization (Millions)                 35.5               12.7          1,346
Trading Volume (Annualized Billions)                    8.2              15.2         11,472
Median Trading Volume (Annualized Millions)             2.3                6.1           101
Mean Trading Volume (Annualized Millions)             13.7               12.8          1,608
Number of Firms                                        600              1,190          7,127


We report statistics for size, volume, and the number of firms in the OTC, comparable listed, and
eligible listed samples in July of 1997, a typical month in terms of our OTC sample size. We
construct the comparable listed sample to have the same median size as the OTC sample. The
eligible listed sample consists of all listed stocks that satisfy the same data requirements as the
OTC stocks in our sample, as described in Section II.B.




                                                52
Table 2: The Peak Sizes of the Largest 10 OTC Firms

                                            Peak         Trading     Peak Size in     Size Rank in      Size Percentile in
Company Name                                Month        Venue         Billions      Listed Sample       Listed Sample
PUBLIX SUPER MARKETS INC                    Dec-08    OTCBB                  88.5               18th                99.5%
DELPHI CORP                                 Mar-08    Pink Sheets            13.0              225th                94.8%
MCI INC                                      Jan-04   Pink Sheets             7.7              292th                93.9%
MAXIM INTEGRATED PRODS INC                  May-08    Pink Sheets             7.1              381th                91.2%
LEVEL 3 COMMUNICATIONS INC                  Feb-98    OTCBB                   6.6              297th                95.8%
NAVISTAR INTL CORP NEW                      May-08    Pink Sheets             5.3              464th                89.3%
COMVERSE TECHNOLOGY INC                     May-07    Pink Sheets             4.7              567th                87.6%
MERCURY INTERACTIVE CORP                    Oct-06    Pink Sheets             4.6              515th                88.8%
ACTERNA CORP                                Oct-00    OTCBB                   3.0              623th                89.8%
HEALTHSOUTH CORP                            Dec-04    Pink Sheets             2.5              734th                84.4%


This table describes the ten largest OTC firms in our sample from 1977 to 2008. The first column shows the month in which each firm
attains its peak size. The third column shows its size in that month. The two rightmost columns show each OTC firm’s size rank and
percentile within the eligible listed sample. The eligible listed sample consists of all listed stocks that satisfy the same data
requirements as the OTC stocks in our sample, as described in Section II.C.




                                                                53
Table 3: Cross-Sectional Summary Statistics for Key Variables

Panel A: OTC Stocks

                                        Monthly Averages                              Total
Variable      Mean      SD        P5        P25     P50     P75     P95    Firms _   Months

Return (%)    -0.04   28.08    -34.73      -9.95   -1.30    4.86   39.23    486       383
Disclosure     0.60    0.46      0.00       0.29   0.65     1.00    1.00    486       383
Size           2.35    1.30      0.19       1.36   2.32     3.28    4.72    486       383
B/M            1.09    2.17      0.06       0.30   0.69     1.28    3.28    231       383
Volatility     6.56    5.52      0.79       2.33   4.95     8.97   20.57    476       383
Volume         8.25    3.57      4.43       5.67   7.01    10.96   14.62    486       383
PNT            0.55    0.34      0.01       0.28   0.63     0.82    0.94    486       383
Spread         0.15    0.14      0.02       0.05   0.10     0.20    0.51    391       192
InstHold       0.26    0.41      0.00       0.00   0.00     0.47    1.00    477       344




                                                              54
Panel B: Comparable Listed Sample

                                         Monthly Averages                              Total
Variable      Mean      SD          P5      P25     P50      P75     P95    Firms _   Months
Return (%)     0.66   19.46   -24.45       -8.99   -1.22     7.28   32.16   1018       383
Disclosure     0.83    0.33     0.28        0.65    1.00     1.00    1.00   1018       383
Size           2.21    0.53     1.08        1.85    2.32     2.66    2.89   1018       383
B/M            1.29    1.64     0.18        0.54    0.96     1.57    3.26    789       383
Volatility     4.29    2.13     1.22        2.65    3.97     5.61    8.99   1005       383
Volume        10.77    1.98     8.11        9.48   10.27    12.35   14.26   1018       383
PNT            0.20    0.21     0.00        0.03    0.13     0.33    0.67   1018       383
Spread         0.08    0.04     0.02        0.04    0.07     0.10    0.18    538       303
InstHold       0.71    0.39     0.08        0.51    0.82     0.99    1.00    890       344




                                                               55
Panel C: Cross-sectional Correlations among OTC Stocks

             βMKT βSMB βHML βUMD             Size    B/M Volatility Ret[-1] Ret[-12,-2] PNT Volume Disclosure InstHold
βMKT         1.00   -0.08    0.42    0.02    0.03   -0.09     0.05    -0.01       -0.02 -0.15  0.12      0.06      0.02
βSMB        -0.08    1.00    0.13   -0.01   -0.04   -0.05     0.10    -0.01        0.01 -0.14  0.11      0.03     -0.03
βHML         0.42    0.13    1.00    0.03    0.03   -0.04    -0.03     0.01       -0.04 -0.03  0.03      0.03      0.04
βUMD         0.02   -0.01    0.03    1.00    0.06   -0.02    -0.03    -0.01        0.02 0.00   0.02      0.01      0.02
Size         0.03   -0.04    0.03    0.06    1.00   -0.19    -0.36     0.05        0.15 -0.17  0.36      0.06      0.27
B/M         -0.09   -0.05   -0.04   -0.02   -0.19    1.00    -0.03    -0.03       -0.13 0.22  -0.19     -0.22     -0.02
Volatility   0.05    0.10   -0.03   -0.03   -0.36   -0.03     1.00     0.02       -0.01 -0.06 -0.11      0.01     -0.19
Ret[-1]     -0.01   -0.01    0.01   -0.01    0.05   -0.03     0.02     1.00       -0.01 0.04   0.01      0.02     -0.01
Ret[-12,-2] -0.02    0.01   -0.04    0.02    0.15   -0.13    -0.01    -0.01        1.00 0.00   0.05      0.04      0.00
PNT         -0.15   -0.14   -0.03    0.00   -0.17    0.22    -0.06     0.04        0.00 1.00  -0.84     -0.12     -0.06
Volume       0.12    0.11    0.03    0.02    0.36   -0.19    -0.11     0.01        0.05 -0.84  1.00      0.10      0.17
Disclosure 0.06      0.03    0.03    0.01    0.06   -0.22     0.01     0.02        0.04 -0.12  0.10      1.00      0.17
InstHold     0.02   -0.03    0.04    0.02    0.27   -0.02    -0.19    -0.01        0.00 -0.06  0.17      0.17      1.00

We summarize the distributions of monthly returns and the main firm characteristics for the OTC and comparable listed samples in
Panels A and B, respectively. We construct the comparable listed sample to have the same median size as the OTC sample. Panel C
contains average cross-sectional correlations between betas and characteristics among OTC sample firms. We compute all statistics
below separately for the cross section of stocks in each month and then average across months. We measure all firm characteristics
other than PNT using logarithms. We Winsorize all firm characteristics at the 5% level, but we do not Winsorize returns. The first
seven columns report monthly averages of means, standard deviations, and various percentiles. The second to last column presents the
average number of firms with non-missing values of each variable in each month. The last column presents the total number of months
in which there is any data for each variable.




                                                                56
Table 4: Time Series Analysis of OTC and Comparable Listed Factor Portfolios

Panel A: Evaluating OTC and Comparable Listed Factor Returns

                         Annualized Sharpe Ratios                 Annualized Information Ratios (GRW returns)
                             (GRW returns)                           Listed CAPM                   5-Factor Model
                              Comparable Eligible                     Comparable      Eligible
Factor                OTC         Listed       Listed         OTC         Listed       Listed             OTC
PNT                  0.91**        0.14         -0.01       1.24**         0.29         0.08             1.34**
                     (0.20)       (0.19)       (0.17)        (0.19)       (0.19)       (0.24)            (0.32)
PNTVWǂ               0.66**        0.04          0.13       1.00**         0.21         0.32             1.06**
                     (0.21)       (0.20)       (0.20)        (0.23)       (0.19)       (0.27)            (0.32)
Volume              -0.90**        0.07          0.15       -1.14**        0.16         0.30            -1.23**
                     (0.20)       (0.18)       (0.18)        (0.20)       (0.19)       (0.24)            (0.35)
Size                -1.02**      -0.98**         0.04       -0.98**      -0.81**        0.20            -0.92**
                     (0.21)       (0.20)       (0.19)        (0.19)       (0.19)       (0.21)            (0.28)
Value                0.82**      1.19**         0.53*       1.19**       1.22**        0.68**            1.00**
                     (0.24)       (0.20)       (0.21)        (0.22)       (0.22)       (0.25)            (0.33)
Momentum             0.41**      1.56**        1.30**       0.54**       1.71**        1.35**              0.09
                     (0.15)       (0.15)       (0.16)        (0.14)       (0.15)       (0.17)            (0.20)
Volatility          -0.55**      -0.75**      -0.64**       -0.79**      -1.08**      -1.01**             -0.50
                     (0.21)       (0.20)       (0.21)        (0.19)       (0.19)       (0.20)            (0.28)
OTC MktVWǂ           -0.52*                                 -1.21**                                     -1.52**
                     (0.23)                                  (0.19)                                      (0.26)




                                                           57
Table 4 Continued

Panel B: Evaluating OTC Factor Returns

                       Monthly Returns      Alphas by Model (GRW returns)
                       EW          GRW        OTC       Listed   Listed
Factor              Returns       Returns   CAPM       CAPM     5-Factor
PNT                  2.94**        2.92**    2.22**     3.70**   3.67**
                     (0.58)        (0.63)    (0.54)     (0.57)    (0.86)
PNTVWǂ               1.68**         N/A       1.01*     2.19**   2.19**
                     (0.53)                  (0.42)     (0.49)    (0.66)
Volume              -3.16**       -2.77**   -2.22**    -3.36**  -3.44**
                     (0.56)        (0.63)    (0.59)     (0.57)    (0.99)
Size                -3.45**       -3.07**   -3.14**    -2.95**  -2.81**
                     (0.56)        (0.63)    (0.76)     (0.57)    (0.85)
Value                1.99**        2.08**    1.77**     2.88**   2.29**
                     (0.54)        (0.60)    (0.55)     (0.52)    (0.76)
Momentum               0.49        1.39**     1.28*     1.84**      0.30
                     (0.43)        (0.53)    (0.60)     (0.49)    (0.69)
Volatility            -0.85       -1.87**     -1.00    -2.63**     -1.59
                     (0.62)        (0.72)    (0.71)     (0.62)    (0.90)
OTC MktVWǂ           -0.74*         N/A        N/A     -1.32**   -1.5**
                     (0.33)                             (0.21)    (0.26)




                                                        58
Table 4 Continued

Panel C: Systematic Variation in OTC Return Factors

                                       Factor Loadings                                    R2 by Model
                                                                                     OTC     Listed   Listed
               βOMKT    βMKT_CAPM   βMKT_5F    βSMB      βHML     βUMD      βLIQ
Factor                                                                              CAPM     CAPM 5-Factor
PNT           -1.05**     -1.41**   -1.24**   -1.02*      0.89     -0.16    0.13    24.3%    15.3%    34.1%
               (0.25)      (0.36)    (0.36)   (0.43)     (0.57)   (0.42)   (0.39)
PNTVW         -0.90**     -1.06**   -0.88**   -0.91*      0.70     -0.03    -0.14   36.1%    27.1%    40.1%
               (0.20)      (0.25)    (0.30)   (0.40)     (0.41)   (0.31)   (0.36)
Volume        0.86**      1.04**     0.97*      0.82      -0.75     0.16    -0.01   17.7%    11.5%    26.5%
               (0.25)      (0.36)    (0.41)   (0.47)     (0.66)   (0.45)   (0.41)
Size            0.02        -0.36     -0.01    -1.01      0.16     -0.39    0.33    2.4%     2.6%     8.1%
               (0.31)      (0.40)    (0.50)   (0.61)     (0.67)   (0.56)   (0.51)
Value         -0.71**     -1.19**   -0.85**     0.15      0.67     -0.54   1.00*    11.3%    9.6%     25.3%
               (0.22)      (0.28)    (0.30)   (0.39)     (0.41)   (0.43)   (0.47)
Momentum        -0.34       -0.62     -0.22    -0.72      0.74    1.09**    0.47    3.0%     2.2%     12.0%
               (0.26)      (0.40)    (0.39)   (0.51)     (0.47)   (0.41)   (0.44)
Volatility    1.07**      1.63**     0.87*     1.06*      -1.11     0.31   -1.38*   15.5%    8.6%     21.8%
               (0.27)      (0.40)    (0.37)   (0.42)     (0.65)   (0.50)   (0.56)
OTC MktVW        N/A      1.17**    1.15**    0.59**      0.00     -0.02    0.11     N/A     43.5%    57.3%
                           (0.11)    (0.13)   (0.17)     (0.17)   (0.14)   (0.18)




                                                           59
Table 4 Continued

Panel D: Evaluating Comparable Listed Factor Returns

                 Monthly Returns            Alphas by Model (GRW returns)
                  EW          GRW            OTC        Listed     Listed
Factor          Returns      Returns       CAPM        CAPM      5-Factor
PNT               0.11         0.22          -0.01       0.40       0.07
                 (0.30)       (0.30)        (0.29)      (0.26)     (0.28)
PNTVWǂ            0.06         N/A           -0.22       0.28       -0.14
                 (0.31)                     (0.29)      (0.25)     (0.28)
Volume            0.16         0.10          0.17        0.22       0.21
                 (0.27)       (0.27)        (0.27)      (0.26)     (0.30)
Size            -1.01**      -0.98**       -1.21**     -0.79**      -0.43
                 (0.19)       (0.20)        (0.24)      (0.19)     (0.25)
Value           1.39**        1.36**       1.36**      1.40**     1.40**
                 (0.23)       (0.23)        (0.24)      (0.25)     (0.24)
Momentum        1.77**        2.10**       1.95**      2.23**     2.06**
                 (0.21)       (0.21)        (0.20)      (0.19)     (0.28)
Volatility       -0.91*      -1.35**        -0.81*     -1.76**    -1.87**
                 (0.36)       (0.36)        (0.37)      (0.30)     (0.28)




                                                         60
Table 4 Continued

Panel E: Systematic Variation in Comparable Listed Return Factors

                                             Factor Loadings                                             R2 by Model
                                                                                                    OTC     Listed   Listed
                βOMKT      βMKT_CAPM    βMKT_5F      βSMB       βHML       βUMD       βLIQ
Factor                                                                                             CAPM     CAPM 5-Factor
PNT             -0.28*      -0.41**       -0.20    -0.66**     0.76**       0.17      -0.05        32.9%    26.5%    56.7%
                (0.14)       (0.14)      (0.16)     (0.20)     (0.19)      (0.18)    (0.14)
PNTVW          -0.32**      -0.51**       -0.31    -0.57**     0.72**       0.29      -0.09        37.4%      31.7%       60.2%
                (0.12)       (0.14)      (0.16)     (0.21)     (0.19)      (0.17)    (0.15)
Volume           0.01         -0.10       -0.18      0.39      -0.46*       0.10      0.01         32.6%      26.6%       58.0%
                (0.13)       (0.14)      (0.15)     (0.21)     (0.19)      (0.16)    (0.14)
Size           -0.32**      -0.36**      -0.31*      -0.35      0.04        -0.19     -0.28         7.9%       8.0%       21.0%
                (0.10)       (0.11)      (0.14)     (0.26)     (0.22)      (0.22)    (0.15)
Value            0.01         -0.05       0.14     -0.37**     0.49**     -0.38**     0.29          5.9%       3.4%       40.2%
                (0.09)       (0.14)      (0.12)     (0.13)     (0.15)      (0.13)    (0.15)
Momentum        -0.20*       -0.29*       -0.29      -0.23      -0.07      0.34*      -0.10         6.4%       9.1%       35.0%
                (0.09)       (0.12)      (0.16)     (0.17)     (0.17)      (0.16)    (0.14)
Volatility     0.69**        0.87**      0.63**    1.21**       -0.44       0.12      -0.03        34.6%      22.2%       54.9%
                (0.17)       (0.16)      (0.19)     (0.29)     (0.28)      (0.25)    (0.21)

This table summarizes the returns and risk of long-short factor portfolios constructed using data on OTC stocks and comparable listed
stocks from 1977 through 2008. We construct the comparable listed sample to have the same median size as the OTC sample. To
construct each factor, we sort firms in each sample into quintiles at the end of each month based on the firm characteristics in the
Factor column. Each factor’s return for month t is the difference between the weighted returns of firms in the top and bottom quintiles,
as ranked in month t – 1. We use either equal weights (EW), a firm’s prior month gross returns (GRW), or its prior month size (VW)
when computing quintile portfolio returns. The PNTVW and OTC MktVW portfolios are marked with ǂ to indicate that they are always
value-weighted while all other returns are weighted as indicated in the table.




                                                                  61
We estimate time series regressions of the monthly factor returns on various contemporaneous listed return factors and six lags of
these factors to account for non-synchronous trading. Each factor loading is the sum of the estimated coefficients on the
contemporaneous factor and its six lags. The regressors in these time series regressions are either the OTC market (OTC CAPM
model), the listed MKT (Listed CAPM model), or the listed MKT, SMB, HML, UMD, and ILQ (Listed 5-Factor model) return
factors. The last three columns in Panel B report the intercepts from these three regressions for each factor, while the first two columns
show the average factor returns. Panel C shows the factor loadings from each regression, along with the R2 statistics. Panels D and E
report the analogous statistics for the comparable listed sample. Panel A shows the ratio of the intercepts in Panels B and D to the
volatilities of the factors, where all ratios have been annualized by multiplying by the square root of 12. See the text for further details
and definitions. We denote statistical significance at the 5% and 1% levels using * and ** symbols, respectively. These statistical tests
employ Newey and West (1987) standard errors with the number of lags based on the formula from Newey and West (1994).




                                                                    62
Table 5: Testing Transaction Cost Theories of the Illiquidity Premium

Panel A: Sorts by PNT

                    CAPM Alphas (GRW)             Mean PNT               Mean Spread    Mean Turnover      Trading Costs
                        Comp.                          Comp.                   Comp.           Comp.              Comp.
 PNT Decile      OTC    Listed Difference      OTC     Listed           OTC    Listed    OTC   Listed    OTC       Listed
1 Liquid       -3.98** -0.06      -3.92**      0.000   0.000            6.3%    4.6%    20.7% 18.7%     1.30%     0.85%
                (0.95)  (0.55)     (0.67)
2              -3.40** -0.02      -3.39**      0.051     0.048          9.8%   5.6%     9.5%    8.2%    0.93%     0.46%
                (0.86)  (0.48)     (0.89)
3                -2.12    0.11      -2.23      0.113     0.092      11.2%      5.8%     7.5%    5.8%    0.84%     0.34%
                (1.09)  (0.57)     (1.23)
4              -1.93** -0.19      -1.74**      0.198     0.137      12.7%      6.3%     5.6%    4.5%    0.71%     0.29%
                (0.56)  (0.44)     (0.59)
5                -1.24    0.27      -1.52      0.301     0.183      14.2%      6.5%     3.5%    3.6%    0.50%     0.24%
                (0.79)  (0.43)     (0.84)
6                -0.55    0.13      -0.68      0.410     0.231      15.4%      6.6%     2.8%    3.1%    0.43%     0.21%
                (0.58)  (0.44)     (0.66)
7                 0.22    0.74      -0.52      0.519     0.285      15.9%      7.0%     1.8%    2.7%    0.29%     0.19%
                (0.69)  (0.56)     (0.90)
8                 0.88    0.31       0.57      0.629     0.352      18.5%      7.3%     1.4%    2.5%    0.26%     0.18%
                (1.28)  (0.42)     (1.30)
9                 0.47    0.18       0.29      0.757     0.464      22.2%      7.9%     0.9%    1.9%    0.19%     0.15%
                (0.62)  (0.32)     (0.67)
10 Illiquid       1.36   -0.17     1.52**      0.898     0.661      30.9%      8.8%     0.5%    1.0%    0.14%     0.09%
                (0.70)  (0.34)     (0.58)
Monotonicity    3.75**    0.20     3.55**
               (0.76)   (0.38)     (0.76)



                                                             63
Panel B: Sorts into Bid-Ask Spread Ranges

   Bid-Ask           CAPM Alphas (GRW)          Mean PNT      Mean Spread      Mean Turnover      Trading Costs
    Spread               Comp.                       Comp.           Comp.            Comp.              Comp.
    Range         OTC    Listed Difference   OTC     Listed   OTC    Listed    OTC    Listed    OTC       Listed
(0.000,0.025]     -1.25   0.48      -1.73*   0.215   0.137    1.5%   1.5%     14.7% 18.2%      0.21%     0.28%
                 (0.68)  (0.39)     (0.68)
(0.025,0.050]   -1.52**   0.59     -2.12**   0.297   0.178    3.7%    3.6%    10.5%   8.5%     0.39%     0.31%
                 (0.52)  (0.46)     (0.50)
(0.050,0.075]    -1.62*   0.14     -1.76**   0.336   0.214    6.2%    6.1%    7.8%    5.8%     0.48%     0.36%
                 (0.75)  (0.43)     (0.66)
(0.075,0.100]   -2.30** -0.88      -1.43**   0.353   0.242    8.7%    8.6%    6.7%    5.1%     0.58%     0.44%
                 (0.51)  (0.54)     (0.52)
(0.100,0.125]   -2.27** -0.15      -2.11**   0.369   0.278    11.2%   11.1%   6.3%    3.9%     0.71%     0.44%
                 (0.64)  (0.61)     (0.73)
(0.125,0.150]   -2.21** -0.64        -1.58   0.388   0.297    13.7%   13.6%   5.3%    3.6%     0.72%     0.50%
                 (0.77)  (0.76)     (0.96)
(0.150,0.175]    -1.57*   0.25       -1.82   0.417   0.311    16.2%   16.1%   4.5%    4.0%     0.73%     0.65%
                 (0.77)  (0.93)     (1.19)
(0.175,0.200]   -2.47** -0.68       -1.79*   0.434   0.333    18.6%   18.6%   4.7%    3.4%     0.88%     0.63%
                 (0.75)  (0.73)     (0.90)
(0.200,0.225]     -0.36   -1.93      1.57    0.456   0.387    21.4%   21.2%   3.4%    3.1%     0.73%     0.65%
                 (1.23)  (1.15)     (2.29)
(0.225,0.250]     -0.28   -1.51      1.22    0.483   0.398    24.0%   23.8%   2.6%    2.9%     0.62%     0.69%
                 (1.10)  (1.31)     (2.23)
Monotonicity      0.54   -1.73*    2.27**
                 (0.54)  (0.66)     (1.00)
Concavity       -2.63** -0.38**    -2.25**
                (0.98)   (0.93)   (1.61)


                                                         64
This table reports the risk-adjusted returns and summary statistics for portfolios sorted by two illiquidity measures, PNT in Panel A
and Spread in Panel B. In Panel A, we rank firms based on their PNT values in each month and divide them into decile portfolios. In
Panel B, we divide firms into portfolios containing firms with the Spread ranges noted in the first column of Panel B. We require at
least 5 firms in all portfolios in each month. We include data from August 1995 through December 2008 when volume and bid-ask
data are widely available. A decile portfolio return for month t is based on month t – 1 sorting. We compute returns corrected for bid-
ask bounce by weighing each firm’s return by its prior month’s gross return.

The first two columns in both panels report CAPM alphas for portfolios composed of OTC stocks and of stocks included in the
comparable-size listed sample, as described in Section II.C. These alphas are the intercepts from time series regressions of monthly
portfolio returns on the listed MKT factor, including six lags to account for non-synchronous trading. Columns 8 and 9 in both panels
report mean Turnover values for each portfolio, while columns 10 and 11 report mean monthly trading costs. Turnover is defined as
monthly volume divided by end-of-month market capitalization. Trading costs are defined as Spread*Turnover.

We denote statistical significance at the 5% and 1% levels using * and ** symbols, respectively. These statistical tests employ Newey
and West (1987) standard errors with the number of lags based on the formula from Newey and West (1994).




                                                                   65
Table 6: Cross-Sectional Regressions of Monthly Returns on Firm Characteristics

                         OTC Sample               Comparable Listed Sample               Eligible Listed Sample
                  I          II        III         I         II        III           I              II        III
bMKT          -0.228**              -0.140*     -0.233**                -0.057    -0.282**                   -0.069
               (0.063)              (0.054)      (0.072)               (0.059)     (0.086)                  (0.059)
bSMB          -0.160**              -0.063*     -0.128**                -0.014    -0.199**                   -0.047
               (0.034)              (0.031)      (0.038)               (0.032)     (0.052)                  (0.031)
bHML           0.141**               0.091*       0.061                 0.012     0.198**                    0.054
               (0.044)              (0.042)      (0.039)               (0.028)     (0.062)                  (0.034)
bUMD            -0.065               -0.060       0.007                 -0.005      0.047                    0.028
               (0.044)              (0.041)      (0.027)               (0.026)     (0.029)                  (0.023)
Size                      -0.692** -0.688**                -0.607**   -0.625**                 -0.134**    -0.142**
                           (0.141)  (0.124)                 (0.097)    (0.095)                  (0.038)     (0.038)
B/M                        0.380** 0.316**                 0.659**    0.631**                  0.522**     0.475**
                           (0.119)  (0.117)                 (0.104)    (0.102)                  (0.083)     (0.074)
Volatility                -0.247** -0.245**                -0.356**   -0.347**                 -0.436**    -0.414**
                           (0.034)  (0.033)                 (0.043)    (0.038)                  (0.060)     (0.046)
Ret[-1]                   -0.038** -0.038**                -0.064**   -0.065**                 -0.043**    -0.046**
                           (0.007)  (0.007)                 (0.006)    (0.006)                  (0.005)     (0.005)
Ret[-12,-2]                0.008** 0.008**                 0.018**    0.019**                  0.013**     0.014**
                           (0.001)  (0.001)                 (0.001)    (0.001)                  (0.001)     (0.001)
PNT                        4.302** 4.053**                   -0.364     -0.475                   0.050       -0.086
                           (0.642)  (0.639)                 (0.334)    (0.301)                  (0.373)     (0.306)

Average R2      6.8%       10.6%      15.0%      1.6%       3.7%       4.7%        2.6%          4.8%        5.8%
Avg. Stocks      454        441        439        919        905        905        4,809         4,762       4,762




                                                           66
This table displays corrected estimates of cross-sectional regressions of monthly stock returns on several firm characteristics and
factor loadings. We estimate monthly cross-sectional weighted least squares regressions as in Asparouhova, Bessembinder, and
Kalcheva (2010), using each stock’s gross return in the previous month as the weighting. The table reports average coefficients that
weight each monthly coefficient by the inverse of its squared standard errors as in Ferson and Harvey (1999). We compute Newey and
West (1987) standard errors with five lags based on the formula from Newey and West (1994). The R2 in the bottom row is the
average from the monthly regressions. We denote statistical significance at the 5% and 1% levels using * and ** symbols, respectively




                                                                 67
Table 7: Impact of Trading Costs and Rebalancing Frequency on Arbitrageur Returns

                     Pre-cost Returns                Post-cost Returns             Breakeven Spread              Breakeven Frequency
OTC factor       1 Months      12 Months          1 Months 12 Months             1 Months   12 Months           GRW     VW       LW
PNT              4.53%**        2.74%**           -8.94%**       0.87%            5.41%       17.04%               6      4        4
Volume           4.53%**        2.48%**          -14.02%**       0.05%            4.73%       14.12%              12      9        6
Size             4.59%**         1.44%*          -10.59%**      -0.96%            6.42%        9.25%             24+      9       10
Value             4.1%**        2.51%**           -5.81%**       0.64%            6.33%       16.19%               6      3        3
Momentum         1.96%**          0.87%          -15.17%** -2.11%**               2.19%        4.41%             24+     24+     24+
Volatility        2.44%*        2.22%**          -15.11%**      -0.43%            2.69%       12.87%              17     24+     24+


This table evaluates the returns for an arbitrageur trying to implement the OTC factor returns who pays stocks’ bid-ask spreads on
each round-trip trade. We compute summary statistics for long-short factor portfolios that are rebalanced at frequencies of 1 and 12
months using the method in Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) in which up to 1/n of the firms in each portfolio change in each month,
based on rankings of OTC firms’ values of the characteristics listed in the first column in the prior month.

The first two columns report factor portfolios’ average pre-cost returns for 1- and 12-month rebalancing frequencies. Columns 3 and 4
report factor portfolios’ average post-cost returns at these frequencies. Estimated monthly costs are equal to average portfolio turnover
multiplied by average bid-ask spreads. Columns 5 and 6 show the bid-ask spreads such that average post-cost returns would be zero
for the two rebalancing frequencies. In Columns 1 to 6, all stocks’ returns are weighted by their prior month’s gross return (GRW).
Columns 7, 8 and 9 report rebalancing frequencies at which, using actual bid-ask spreads, average post-cost returns would be closest
to zero for three portfolio weighing methods: GRW (as used in columns 1-6), value-weighted (VW) returns, and liquidity-weighted
(LW) returns, which are weighted by the inverse of stocks’ bid-ask spreads. These statistics are based on 192 months of data from
January 1993 through December 2008. We denote statistical significance at the 5% and 1% levels using * and ** symbols,
respectively. These statistical tests employ Newey and West (1987) standard errors with five lags based on the formula from Newey
and West (1994).




                                                                   68
Table 8: Double Sorted Portfolios

Panel A: Double Sorted Portfolios: Initial Sort Based on Institutional Holdings

                       Held stocks monthly returns             Non-held stocks monthly returns       Premium
                                                                                                     Difference
                 Top tercile   Bottom tercile   Premium     Top tercile   Bottom tercile   Premium
                                                                                                        (%)
OTC Stocks

PNT                  0.21           -1.44         1.65         1.11           -4.12         5.23**    -3.58**
Size                -0.31            0.40        -0.71         -2.13           1.74        -3.87**     3.16**
Volume              -0.80            0.51        -1.30         -3.97           1.72        -5.70**     4.39**
Value                1.18           -1.36       2.54**         1.10           -2.56         3.66**      -1.12
Momentum             0.77           -1.20       1.97**         -0.28          -2.46         2.18**      -0.21
Volatility          -0.76            0.52        -1.28         -2.01           0.23        -2.24**       0.96

Comparable Listed Stocks

PNT                  0.46            0.35         0.11         0.54           -0.28          0.82*    -0.71*
Size                 0.17            0.90       -0.73**        -0.05           0.70         -0.75*      0.02
Volume               0.57            0.28         0.29         -0.18           0.53          -0.71    1.00**
Value                0.89           -0.03        0.92**        1.08           -0.76         1.84**    -0.92*
Momentum             1.23           -0.34        1.56**        1.08           -0.93         2.01**     -0.44
Volatility          -0.22            0.88       -1.10**        -0.67           0.98        -1.65**      0.55




                                                              69
Panel B: Double Sorted Portfolios: Initial Sort Based on Disclosure

                    Disclosing stocks monthly returns        Non-disclosing stocks monthly returns    Premium
                                                                                                      Difference
                  Top tercile   Bottom tercile Premium       Top tercile   Bottom tercile   Premium
                                                                                                         (%)
OTC Stocks
PNT                  0.89           -1.04        1.94**        0.75            -2.56         3.31**    -1.38*
Size                 -0.22           1.16       -1.38**        -1.47            1.42        -2.89**     1.51
Volume               -0.62           1.02       -1.64**        -2.40            0.89        -3.28**    1.64*
Momentum             0.89           -0.66        1.55**        -0.04           -0.65          0.61      0.94
Volatility           -0.24           0.70         -0.94        -1.61            0.93        -2.54**    1.60*

Comparable Listed Stocks
PNT                 0.69             0.36          0.33        0.41            -0.35           0.76     -0.43
Size                0.25             1.08       -0.83**        -0.03            0.41          -0.45     -0.38
Volume              0.40             0.55         -0.15        -0.15            0.35          -0.50      0.35
Momentum            1.45            -0.14        1.59**        1.27            -0.73         2.00**     -0.41
Volatility          -0.12            1.04       -1.16**        -0.90            0.89        -1.79**     0.63*




                                                              70
Panel C: Double Sorted Portfolios: Initial Sort Based on Size

                        Big stocks monthly returns                  Small stocks monthly returns           Premium
                     Top          Bottom                                                                   Difference
                                              Premium          Top tercile   Bottom tercile   Premium
                    tercile        tercile                                                                    (%)
OTC Stocks
PNT                   0.12         -2.00          2.12*           2.31           -1.32          3.62**        -1.50
Volume               -1.47         -0.33          -1.14           -1.59           3.21         -4.80**       3.65**
Value                 0.33         -2.72         3.05**           2.03            0.19            1.84        1.20
Momentum             -0.09         -1.86         1.78**           1.26            0.84            0.41        1.37
Volatility           -2.12         0.44         -2.55**           0.95            1.53           -0.58        -1.97

Comparable Listed Stocks
PNT                0.31            0.10           0.21            0.77            0.83          -0.06          0.27
Volume             0.41            0.11           0.29            1.02            0.61           0.42         -0.12
Value              0.50            -0.19         0.70**           1.46            0.54         0.92**         -0.23
Momentum           1.08            -0.73         1.81**           1.54            0.24         1.29**         0.51*
Volatility        -0.72            0.78         -1.50**           0.47            1.19         -0.72*        -0.78**


This table contains average monthly returns for double sorted portfolios within OTC stocks and within stocks included in the
comparable listed sample, which consists of stocks that are comparable to stocks in the OTC sample in terms of size, as described in
Section II.C. We first rank stocks according to one characteristic of interest and sort them into portfolios. We then rank stocks within
these portfolios according to other characteristics and again sort into portfolios. We sort stocks into terciles rather than quintiles to
ensure that we have a sufficient number of stocks in each portfolio, and require at least 10 stocks in each tercile. Within each double-
sorted tercile, we compute returns corrected for bid-ask bounce by weighing each stock’s return by its prior month’s gross returns. We
display returns for the top and bottom terciles (i.e., the extreme terciles) according to the second sort within the first-sort extreme
terciles. For binary variables (InstHold and Disclose), we sort stocks into two portfolios based on their values. Panel A reports the
returns of double-sorted portfolios where stocks are first sorted according to InstHold. Panel B reports returns where stocks are first
sorted according to Disclose. Panel C reports returns where stocks are first sorted according to Size. We denote statistical significance
at the 5% and 1% levels using * and ** symbols, respectively. These statistical tests employ Newey and West (1987) standard errors
with five lags based on the formula from Newey and West (1994).


                                                                   71
  Table 9: Long–term Returns of Momentum Portfolios

                                             Comparable Listed
                   OTC Stocks                      Stocks                  Eligible Listed Stocks
Horizon in     GRW         VW                GRW            VW              GRW             VW
Months        Returns    Returns            Returns      Returns           Returns        Returns
[1,1]         1.39**      3.15**            2.10**        1.97**            1.68**        1.29**
[1,12]         -0.08      1.57**            0.58**        0.75**             0.44*          0.47
[13,24]        -0.75       0.71              -0.12         -0.03             -0.21         -0.23
[25,36]        -0.07       0.37               0.13          0.24             -0.17         -0.11
[37,48]        -0.66       0.37               0.05          0.05              0.10          0.08
[49,60]        -0.99       0.42              -0.08          0.18           -0.29**         -0.20

[13,60]         -0.56        0.45             0.02          0.12            -0.13         -0.10


  This table contains average returns for long-short momentum portfolios constructed at various
  time horizons using the method described in Jegadeesh and Titman (1993). We first form top and
  bottom quintile portfolios for each month t-1 based on stocks’ momentum, defined as the return
  from month t-12 to month t-2. Returns within each extreme quintile portfolio are either weighted
  by the prior month’s gross returns (“GRW returns”) or value weighted (“VW returns”). Then, to
  measure momentum returns n years after portfolio formation in each month t, we equally weight
  the 12 monthly returns of the extreme quintile portfolios formed in months t - n*12 to t - n*12 –
  11. The top minus bottom quintile portfolio return is the momentum premium at the n-year
  horizon. We compute returns for portfolios within our 3 samples: OTC stocks, stocks included in
  the comparable listed sample, which consists of stocks that are comparable to stocks in the OTC
  sample in terms of size, as described in Section II.C, and stocks included in the eligible listed
  sample, which consists of all listed stocks that satisfy the same data requirements as the OTC
  stocks in our sample, as described in Section II.B. We denote statistical significance at the 5%
  and 1% levels using * and ** symbols, respectively. These statistical tests employ Newey and
  West (1987) standard errors with five lags based on the formula from Newey and West (1994).




                                                 72
Figure 1: OTC Sample Characteristics as a Percentage of Listed Sample Characteristics


                                                0.40
                                                                 Number of Stocks
   OTC Characteristic / Listed Characteristic




                                                0.35             Average Size
                                                                 Average Volume
                                                0.30

                                                0.25

                                                0.20

                                                0.15

                                                0.10

                                                0.05

                                                0.00
                                                       1/77 1/79 1/81 1/83 1/85 1/87 1/89 1/91 1/93 1/95 1/97 1/99 1/01 1/03 1/05 1/07



For each month, we plot the average size, average trading volume, and number of stocks in the
OTC sample as a percentage of the corresponding statistics in the eligible listed sample. To
minimize the influence of outliers and possible data errors, we transform the size and volume
data for this comparison. In each month, we compute the difference in the cross-sectional
average of the logarithms of size and ($1 plus) volume in the two samples. Then we invert the
log transform to obtain a ratio that can be interpreted as the OTC characteristic divided by the
listed characteristic. We exclude volume data from firms with zero monthly volume prior to July
1995, which is the date when volume data become reliable. The eligible listed sample consists of
the CRSP stocks satisfying the same data requirements as the OTC sample described in Section
II.B.




                                                                                           73
Figure 2: Impact of Trading Costs and Rebalancing Frequency on Arbitrageur Returns

Panel A: Pre-Cost Monthly Returns of OTC Factor Portfolios

  5.0%
                                                                 Value
                                                                 PNT
                                                                 Volume
  4.0%
                                                                 Volatility
                                                                 Size
                                                                 Momentum
  3.0%



  2.0%



  1.0%



  0.0%
              1          2            3          6          12           24
                             Rebalancing Frequency (months)




                                           74
Panel B: Post-Cost Monthly Returns of OTC Factor Portfolios

   2.0%

   0.0%

  -2.0%

  -4.0%

  -6.0%
                                                                   Value
  -8.0%
                                                                   PNT

 -10.0%                                                            Volume
                                                                   Volatility
 -12.0%
                                                                   Size
 -14.0%                                                            Momentum

 -16.0%
                1           2            3         6          12                24
                                Rebalancing Frequency (months)


We plot the average monthly returns of long-short OTC factor portfolios that are rebalanced at
various frequencies using the method in Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) in which up to 1/n of the
firms in each portfolio change in each month, based on rankings of OTC firms’ values of the
characteristics listed in the first column in the prior month. In both figures, rebalancing
frequencies are indicated on the x-axis and stocks’ returns are weighted by their prior month’s
gross return (GRW). In Panel A, we plot average pre-trading cost returns. In Panel B, we plot
average post-trading cost returns for an arbitrageur who pays stocks’ bid-ask spreads on each
round-trip trade. Estimated monthly costs are equal to average portfolio turnover multiplied by
average bid-ask spreads. Figures are based on 192 months of data from January 1993 through
December 2008.




                                               75
