NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIRM PERFORMANCE IN A GLOBAL MARKET
Jan De Loecker
Pinelopi Koujianou Goldberg
Working Paper 19308
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19308
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

We would like to thank Tim Bresnahan for early conversations on the topic, and Channing Verbeck
Jr. for excellent research assistance. This paper is not intended to be a comprehensive literature review.
Instead, we discuss a selected set of papers from the perspective of our empirical framework that nests
the productivity and pass-through literatures spanning Industrial Organization, International Trade
and International Macro. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Jan De Loecker and Pinelopi Koujianou Goldberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Firm Performance in a Global Market
Jan De Loecker and Pinelopi Koujianou Goldberg
NBER Working Paper No. 19308
August 2013
JEL No. D22,D40,F10,L1
ABSTRACT
In this article we introduce an empirical framework to analyze how firm performance is affected by
increased globalization. Using this framework we discuss recent work on measuring the impact of
various shocks firms face in the global marketplace, such as reductions in trade costs (through lowering
tariffs and abolishing quotas). Our analytical framework nests most empirical approaches to estimating
the impact of trade and industrial policies on firms active in international markets. We identify outstanding
issues surrounding the identification of the underlying mechanisms and conclude with suggestions
for future research.
Jan De Loecker
Department of Economics
307 Fisher Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
jdeloeck@princeton.edu
Pinelopi Koujianou Goldberg
Yale University
Department of Economics
37 Hillhouse Ave.
P.O. Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
penny.goldberg@yale.edu

1

Introduction

Few topics have been researched as extensively as the relationship between trade openness and ﬁrm, or industry, performance. A Google Scholar search on the keywords “trade
and productivity”returns 1,920,000 papers! The purpose of this article is twofold: First,
we develop a general framework for discussing the large empirical literature on the topic.
Second, we summarize the main insights from work to date. While much of the empirical
research we draw upon rests on theoretical models, we do not review theoretical work
directly, except to the extent that this theoretical work informs empirical speciﬁcations
and helps identify underlying mechanisms.
Our point of departure is the voluminous empirical literature on the eﬀects of trade
on ﬁrm productivity. Economists have always postulated that one of the main beneﬁts
of opening up markets to foreign competition is to make ﬁrms more “eﬃcient” and
have proceeded to estimate the eﬀects of trade liberalizations, or globalization more
generally, on eﬃciency. Early empirical attempts predate theoretical work in this area
and for the most part lack a sound theoretical justiﬁcation for why one would expect
eﬃciency to increase with exposure to foreign markets. With the development of models
of ﬁrm heterogeneity, however, this literature has experienced a renaissance. There are
two main strands. The ﬁrst one investigates the performance of exporters and relies
primarily on cross-sectional comparisons in order to assess whether exporters are more
eﬃcient than ﬁrms that sell to domestic markets only. The second strand focuses on
trade liberalization episodes and investigates whether industry productivity increases in
the post-reform period, where the productivity gains can arise either because of withinﬁrm improvements or because of reallocation of economic activity towards more eﬃcient
ﬁrms.
While this literature has established some interesting patterns, we show that with
few exceptions, it has been loose in its use of the term “productivity”. What it actually
delivers is a measure of “ﬁrm performance” or “proﬁtability”. The distinction between
“productivity” and “proﬁtability” is important; the latter will depend not only on physical eﬃciency, but also on prices, which will reﬂect product diﬀerentiation and markups
in addition to costs. The framework we develop allows one to explicitly trace these components. This decomposition oﬀers the advantage that one can link improvements in
ﬁrm performance to speciﬁc mechanisms though which globalization aﬀects ﬁrms. Understanding these mechanisms is important for assessing the welfare and distributional
eﬀects of trade openness; for example, a trade liberalization that improves ﬁrm performance by inducing improvements in physical eﬃciency has diﬀerent implications from a
2

liberalization that makes ﬁrms better oﬀ by increasing their proﬁts.
The realization that measured ﬁrm performance captures markups as well as physical eﬃciency naturally leads to two other literatures that were developed in diﬀerent
contexts; the large Industrial Organization literature on imperfect competition and the
International literature on incomplete (exchange rate) pass-through. The ﬁrst explicitly
investigates the measurement and determinants of markups (e.g., the role of market
structure, product diﬀerentiation and demand elasticities); the second focuses on how a
certain type of cost shock (i.e., exchange rate changes) is passed through to prices. Firms
competing in global markets are faced with a diﬀerent market (and likely also demand)
structure, and may as a result change their prices and markups or their product characteristics. A tariﬀ reduction for example intensiﬁes the import competition domestic
ﬁrms face and we would expect them to reduce their prices and markups in response.
This is the usual pro-competitive eﬀect one associates with trade liberalizations. At the
same time, a reduction in tariﬀs allows ﬁrms to purchase imported intermediates that
they use as inputs in their production at lower prices; these reductions in input prices
are tantamount to a cost shock facing the ﬁrm, similar to the exchange rate changes
considered in the International literature. Whether or not this cost shock will be passed
through to prices will depend on many factors that reﬂect demand and market structure
conditions.
Our review concludes that there is one robust ﬁnding that emerges from this literature: globalization improves industry performance. However, there is less of a consensus
on how these improvements arise. Many studies ﬁnd that improvements are generated
through reallocation of market shares towards better performing ﬁrms, while others document signiﬁcant within-ﬁrm improvements. A number of papers ﬁnd that the eﬀects
of input tariﬀ liberalization dominate those of output tariﬀ liberalization in some developing countries. Perhaps more importantly, the majority of studies do not distinguish
between physical eﬃciency and price/markup eﬀects. Hence, it is not clear that the
aforementioned improvements represent true productivity gains as opposed to increases
in market power. A couple of recent papers that have emphasized this distinction show
that the eﬀects on markups and prices are signiﬁcant. However, it is too early to know
whether the results from these studies generalize to other contexts. This is an exciting area for future research and we hope that the current article will help guide future
endeavors in this direction.
The remainder of the article is organized as follows. In section 2 we introduce a
general framework that can be used to discuss existing work and clarify what economic

3

theory suggests should be measured, and what is measured in practice. We use this
framework to decompose “ﬁrm performance” into its components. In section 3, we
discuss the particular mechanisms through which trade openness is expected to aﬀect
each of these components. Section 4 brieﬂy summarizes the insights obtained from work
to date and section 5 concludes.

2

A Framework for Measuring Performance

Performance at the ﬁrm level is measured in many diﬀerent ways. Such ways include
accounting measures of proﬁtability, the Lerner index, sales per input and total factor
productivity. While correlated, the various measures capture diﬀerent aspects of ﬁrm
performance, and exposure to a global market is not expected to aﬀect these aspects in
the same way. In this section, we ﬁrst use a simple regression framework to summarize
the large empirical literature on the topic. Next, we introduce an empirical framework,
based on a production function, that allows us to reinterpret the commonly used measures of performance and decompose them into their underlying determinants: demand
and cost primitives, as well as the market structure of the industry under study.

2.1

Measuring Performance

We characterize a large literature – spanning Industrial Organization, International Economics and International Macroeconomics – by considering ﬁrm performance (πit ) as the
residual in a regression of sales (sit ) on input expenditures (eit ).1 Applied researchers
typically consider a log-linear relationship between sales and expenditures:
sit = eit β + πit ,

(1)

where β is the vector of coeﬃcients. The data we have in mind track ﬁrms indexed by i
for which we observe sales and input use, both expressed in monetary terms (i.e., sales
and expenditures), over time t. The residual πit as a measure of performance is closely
related to proﬁts since we subtract expenditures from sales.
The fundamental research question economists have been trying to answer over the
last few decades is: How do changes in international competition aﬀect the performance
of ﬁrms (πit ), industries, and ultimately the overall welfare of countries or regions? Trade
liberalization episodes, preferably exogenous to ﬁrms in an industry, are the natural place
1

The vector eit typically includes expenditures on labor, intermediate inputs (materials), and capital.
Unless noted otherwise, small letters denote the log of the corresponding variable throughout this article.

4

to turn to in order to analyze this question empirically by relating performance measures
to changes in trade protection, such as tariﬀ declines, lifting of quota restrictions, or
removal of antidumping duties.
Equation (1) is a natural point of departure for the literature that typically utilizes
ﬁrm- or plant-level data across many diﬀerent sectors of one or more economies. Such
data tend to be readily available for a large set of countries and time periods. In contrast,
the case study approach commonly employed in modern Industrial Organization makes
use of much more detailed information on product-level prices and product- or ﬁrmspeciﬁc cost variables to compute performance measures - at the cost that the approach
is only feasible for the speciﬁc industries and countries for which this information is
available. Another approach towards measuring performance would be to use accounting
data to measure performance as operating proﬁts. However, this article is concerned
with recovering measures of ﬁrm performance that accurately reﬂect economic costs and
beneﬁts and it is well known that accounting proﬁts provide poor measures of economic
proﬁts.2
With few exceptions, the existing literature has viewed equation (1) as the empirical
analogue of a production function and interpreted the residual πit as a measure of total
factor productivity (TFP). As we argue below, under a set of restrictive assumptions,
equation (1) is indeed a production function with β the estimated production function
coeﬃcients. One possible set of such assumptions features ﬁrms that produce a homogeneous product and are active in an industry characterized by perfectly competitive
output and input markets. In this case, the relationship between sales and expenditures
is equivalent to the relationship between physical output and inputs, and consequently
πit is an estimate of (physical) productivity. However, in the general case, the performance residual πit will capture much more than productivity.
When we try to understand how increased international competition impacts ﬁrm
performance, recovering the residual of (1) is only the ﬁrst step; in order to identify the
underlying mechanism(s) we need to understand the underlying components of πit . To
this end, we need to be more precise about what πit actually measures. We turn to
this issue in the next section, and use a production function approach to interpret the
performance residual (πit ).
2
See Schmalensee (1989) for a detailed discussion of the problems of using accounting proﬁts as a
measure of ﬁrm performance.

5

2.2

Firm Performance: A View from the Production Side

Using a basic production function3 that relates quantities produced (qit ) to a vector of
physical input usage (xit ) allows us to express sales in a (perhaps) more familiar fashion
as:
sit = xit α + ωit + pit

(2)

= eit α + ωit + pit − zit α,
where we relied on the deﬁnition of sales: sit = qit + pit ; a standard Hicks-neutral
production function: qit = xit α + ωit , with α and ωit the vector of production function
coeﬃcients and productivity, respectively4 ; and the deﬁnition of input expenditures:
eit = xit + zit , with zit the vector of input prices.
This simple framework allows us to immediately connect our structural equation (2)
to the proﬁtability residual in (1) by grouping the last three terms in the equation above
to πit = ωit + pit − zit α. Hence, we can rewrite (2) as an equation relating sales to
expenditures:
(3)
sit = eit α + πit .
Equations (1) and (3) are almost identical up to the coeﬃcients β and α. We
distinguish between the structural coeﬃcients of the production function, α, and the
coeﬃcients obtained after estimating an equation such as (1). It is only under a set of
very restrictive assumptions that these two vectors will be identical.
Consider equation (1) and assume that the researcher is willing to make the economic
assumption that there is neither output nor input price variation across ﬁrms.5 Even
in this case, OLS estimation of equation (1) on a panel dataset of ﬁrms is not expected
to yield the vector of coeﬃcients (α) due to the well known simultaneity and selection
biases. Both biases arise from the likely correlation between inputs and unobserved
productivity (ωit ). This is a well known problem when estimating production functions
that has been addressed in the literature and we refer the reader to a recent overview
by Ackerberg, Benkard, Berry, and Pakes (2007) for a detailed discussion. For the
remainder of this article, we assume that these biases can be appropriately dealt with
3

To simplify notation, we base our discussion on a Cobb-Douglas production function, but our
framework generalizes to any other functional form.
4
For the well-known Cobb-Douglas production function in three inputs (labor (l), materials (m) and
capital (k), we get: qit = αl lit + αm mit + βk kit + ωit .
5
Time variation in both output and input prices can be accommodated by either deﬂating the
variables appropriately using industry-wide deﬂators, or by including a full set of year ﬁxed eﬀects. In
any case, the price variables would not be indexed by i.

6

when estimating the underlying structural parameters. Our point is that if output and
input prices do not vary across ﬁrms, it is possible in principle to recover both the
production function coeﬃcients α and ﬁrm productivity ωit by applying the techniques
suggested in the recent literature.
Consider equation (1) once more, but let us now allow for both output and input price
variation. In this case, the structural error πit contains two more components in addition
to productivity: the output price (pit ) and the vector of input prices (zit ). Relying on
sales and expenditure data will clearly not deliver an estimate of productivity, nor will
it deliver the vector of production function coeﬃcients. In this case, β is a vector of
coeﬃcients describing the mapping from expenditures to sales.
To see why estimation of equation (1) will lead to biased coeﬃcients in the presence
of output and/or input price variation, let us explicitly introduce deﬂators and rewrite
(2) to reﬂect the usual practice in empirical work in this area. Let pIt be the price deﬂator
for industry I, z̄tI a vector of industry-speciﬁc input price deﬂators, and p∗it = pit − pIt ;
zit∗ = zit − z̄tI ; s∗it = sit −pIt ; and e∗it = eit − z̄tI denote deﬂated output price, input prices,
sales and expenditures respectively. Researchers typically take the following version of
(2) to the data:
∗
∗
s∗it = e∗
it α + ωit + pit − zit α

(4)

= (xit + zit∗ ) α + ωit + p∗it − zit∗ α,
Consider ﬁrst the case where there is output price, but no input price variation across
ﬁrms. In this case, zit∗ = 0, and the terms related to input price variation drop out from
(4). This is the typical case considered in Industrial Organization studies which assume
that input prices are equalized across ﬁrms (once regional diﬀerences are controlled for).
Output price variation captured by p∗it will generally be correlated with e∗it (which is equal
to xit in this scenario): ceteris paribus, we expect ﬁrms that charge higher prices to sell
lower quantities, which in turn implies lower input quantities. Hence, the correlation
between p∗it and xit is likely to be negative, leading to a downward bias in the estimates
of the coeﬃcients α as well as the returns to scale. This bias was the focus of the work
of Klette and Griliches (1996), as well as De Loecker (2011). We refer to it as the output
price bias. A closely related point was made by Katayama, Lu, and Tybout (2009) who
allow for input prices to vary across ﬁrms, but presume that this input price variation
can be completely controlled for when one observes ﬁrm-speciﬁc wages (so that zit∗ can
be treated as an observable). As we argue below, this assumption is strong – even when
wages are observed, the prices of other inputs (e.g., materials) are typically not observed,
while a ﬁrm-speciﬁc price for capital is never available.
7

Second, consider the case where there is no output price variation, but input prices
vary across ﬁrms. This case may seem irrelevant in practice, but as we show below,
it corresponds to the case where we observe ﬁrm-speciﬁc output prices and hence can
control for output price variation, while input price variation remains uncontrolled for.
In this case, it is evident from (4) that input price variation will lead to a strong negative
bias in the estimated coeﬃcients; a ﬁrm that faces higher input prices will have higher
input expenditures that will not lead to higher physical output. We refer to this bias as
the input price bias. In contrast to the output price bias, the input price bias has received
no attention in the literature so far; the only study we are aware of that has attempted to
address it is De Loecker, Goldberg, Khandelwal, and Pavcnik (2012) (DLGKP hereafter).
Realistically, the data will be characterized by both output and input price variation,
so that estimates of equation (1) will suﬀer from both output and input price bias.
Unless these two biases interact in a way so as to oﬀset each other, they will lead to
biased estimates of the production function coeﬃcients. Further, even conditional on
the parameter vector that the estimation delivers in this case, one will be able to recover
only a (biased) estimate of the composite residual πit .
The message so far is that with sales and expenditure data alone, one cannot, in
general, recover the underlying components of ﬁrm performance or identify productivity.
As always in empirical work, there are two ways out of such a situation: either one
collects more data or one makes additional assumptions that will allow identiﬁcation.
2.2.1

Additional Data

One might be tempted to conclude at this point that the solution to all issues discussed in
this section would be to collect more data on ﬁrms’ output and input prices. Obviously,
more data are always preferable (at a minimum, one can ignore them). However, the
introduction of additional data creates its own challenges; while more data may help
alleviate some of the problems discussed above, they are not a panacea.
Output prices tend to be more readily available than input prices in ﬁrm or plantlevel surveys. However, these data are often unit values (derived by dividing revenues
by quantities over a period of time), and suﬀer from the well documented problems
associated with unit values. Further, their use in the context of production function
estimation poses additional challenges associated with diﬀerences in the units in which
quantities are recorded across ﬁrms and products. Finally, the attempt to exploit output
prices forces the researcher to explicitly confront issues that are speciﬁc to multiproduct
ﬁrms; output prices are recorded at the product level, which calls for estimation of

8

production functions at the product level. However, input expenditures are only recorded
at the ﬁrm level. Hence, even when output prices are available, estimation of production
functions for multiproduct ﬁrms is not possible unless one adopts one of three approaches:
(a) eliminate multiproduct ﬁrms from the sample and focus on single-product ﬁrms only;
(b) aggregate product prices to the ﬁrm level and conduct the analysis at the ﬁrm level;
(c) devise a mechanism for allocating ﬁrm input expenditures to individual products
and conduct the analysis at the product level.
Each of these approaches has its drawbacks: Given that multiproduct ﬁrms account
for a signiﬁcant fraction of output in the manufacturing sector, eliminating them from
the analysis is hard to defend; approach (b) requires one to specify a demand system
that allows aggregation in a consistent manner and creates the need for additional assumptions; similarly, approach (c) requires spelling out the assumptions needed in order
to allocate input expenditures across products.
The fact that the use of output price data requires assumptions is not necessarily a
weakness, especially since the assumptions one needs in this context are either already
made (albeit implicitly) in the existing literature or are weaker than the ones required
under alternative approaches. Nevertheless, our point is that more data do not eliminate
the need for assumptions and structure.
Assuming the challenges outlined above can be dealt with, the use of output prices
should allow one to eliminate the output price bias we discussed above. Syverson (2004)
and Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008) are examples of studies that have accomplished this successfully. They rely on a selected set of plausibly homogeneous good
industries (ready-mixed concrete for example) and exploit output price data in order to
separate out price variation from productivity. An implicit assumption in their framework is that input prices do not vary across ﬁrms. This assumption is indeed plausible
in the context of the homogeneous product industries they consider; for example, it is
plausible to assume that (conditional on region), the input prices ready-mixed concrete
producers face are the same. In this setting, the only bias present in (4) is the output
price bias, and this bias can be successfully dealt with when one observes output prices.
However, the focus on homogeneous product industries leaves us with the bulk of
economic activity unaccounted for. The set of industries characterized by substantial
product diﬀerentiation comprises a large share of economic activity. In such industries,
controlling for output prices alone is insuﬃcient; diﬀerentiated products require diﬀerentiated inputs, so that we would expect input prices to vary across ﬁrms, even when
these ﬁrms are located in the same region and even when input markets are perfectly

9

competitive. Input prices are typically unobserved. Controlling for output prices in this
case will eliminate the output price bias, but will leave the input price bias intact and
will in fact make its consequences for estimation more salient. In this case, (4) becomes:
qit = (xit + zit∗ ) α + ωit − zit∗ α.

(5)

The problem with trying to estimate this version of (4) is immediately apparent:
without controlling for the (unobserved) variation in input prices, the coeﬃcients α will
be seriously biased. The seriousness of this problem is demonstrated in DLGKP: the
authors estimate a physical production function for Indian manufacturing that relates
physical output to (deﬂated) input expenditures. When input price variation is not
controlled for, the coeﬃcients α often seem nonsensical and have the wrong sign. Yet,
these apparently nonsensical results make a lot of sense in the presence of input price
bias: consider for example two ﬁrms that produce shirts and use the same technology;
however, one ﬁrm uses silk as in input to produce silk shirts, while the other ﬁrm uses
less expensive cotton to produce (less expensive) cotton shirts. Suppose that both ﬁrms
produce the same number of shirts in a period. If we relate the number of shirts produced
to (deﬂated) expenditures on materials, we would ﬁnd that the ﬁrm that uses higher
expenditures (silk) produces as much as the ﬁrm that uses lower expenditures (cotton).
Hence, the coeﬃcient on materials will be negative. Note that if one had not corrected
for the output price bias in this case and had used deﬂated revenues instead of quantities
as the left hand side variable, the problem would have been less transparent as silk shirts
would be associated with higher revenues so that higher expenditures would have led
to higher revenues. Of course, the fact that the problem is in this case less transparent
does not mean that the problem does not exist.
Ultimately, the source of the problem is that products and inputs are diﬀerentiated.
DLGKP address this issue by introducing a control function for the (unobserved) input
prices. This is based on the premise that conditional on regional variation, input price
diﬀerences reﬂect quality diﬀerences in the inputs across ﬁrms. DLGKP go on to argue
that the assumptions underlying this control function are weaker than the ones required
under alternative approaches that develop full-ﬂedged models of product diﬀerentiation
(with assumptions on particular demand functions and market structure). Nevertheless,
their approach once again demonstrates the need for assumptions; data alone do not
eliminate the need for economic structure.
Finally, one might argue that if we were able to observe in addition to output, input
prices for every single input, then we would be able to estimate the structural equation
(2) with only a limited set of assumptions. While in theory this is an appealing prospect,
10

in practice, it is unlikely that we will ever be able to control for input price variation using
data. To our knowledge, the only survey that contains information on prices of materials
purchased is the one for Colombian manufacturing ﬁrms; but even there, the ﬁrm-speciﬁc
price of capital is not observed, while utilizing the detailed input price information for
materials is a challenge itself due to a variety of measurement issues. We conclude that
while the use of additional data on prices can improve on certain aspects of estimation
and identiﬁcation, the need to introduce assumptions remains. The question is not
whether or not one needs assumptions, but which set of assumptions is less restrictive.
2.2.2

Additional Assumptions

Let us return to equation (3) and consider the typical case where we have a standard
dataset containing (deﬂated) sales and expenditures (s∗it , e∗it ) for a panel of ﬁrms in a
given industry. We now ask: under which assumptions can we recover the structural
parameters and the components of ﬁrm performance when estimating equation (3)?
One case that allows us to recover productivity (ωit ) has already been discussed:
the case where there is neither output, nor input price variation across ﬁrms. The
assumptions required to produce this lack of price variation are strong. Therefore,
we ask whether it is possible to achieve the same result with a set of less restrictive
assumptions; speciﬁcally we consider a setting where there is both output and input
price variation and ask under which conditions these two types of variation will interact
in such a way that the output price bias exactly oﬀsets the input price bias, that is
p∗it − zit∗ α = 0. We show that the following assumptions are required for the price bias
to be completely eliminated:
1. The industry is characterized by monopolistic competition (MC)
2. Firms produce a horizontally diﬀerentiated product and face the same constant
elasticity of substitution (CES) demand system
3. Production is characterized by constant returns to scale (CRS)
4. Input price variation (across ﬁrms and time) is input neutral, such that zit∗h = λit
∀h = {1, 2, ..., H}, with H the total number of inputs.
The ﬁrst two assumptions imply that ﬁrms will pass through costs completely to
prices, and therefore any input price variation, both in the cross section and in the
time series, will be completely reﬂected in output price variation, so that p∗it = zit∗ .
11

Assumption 4 is required to make sure that in any cross section of ﬁrms the input price
variation is restricted to a scalar. The CRS assumption is important to guarantee that

h αh = 1, and consequently the input price variation exactly oﬀsets the output price

variation.6 . To see the impact of this assumption, let h αh < 1. This would lead to

a price error of p∗it − h αh λit , which, even under complete pass-through, would leave

1 − h αh λit in the error term biasing the estimates of interest.
While the above assumptions are somewhat weaker than the assumption of no output
or input price heterogeneity, they are still restrictive and inconsistent with a substantial
body of work in International and Macroeconomics that has documented incomplete
pass-through of cost shocks to prices.7 Hence, the question arises whether there are
alternative assumptions that would allow for a more satisfying treatment of unobserved
prices. We brieﬂy discuss the set of assumptions underlying two recent papers that
explicitly address these biases, De Loecker (2011) and DLGKP.
Output price heterogeneity. De Loecker (2011) works with standard data in
which output and input prices are unobserved. He assumes away input price variation
across ﬁrms8 and focuses on addressing the output price bias. To this end, he explicitly
introduces a demand system in his empirical model; in the particular application he considers, he works with CES, but his approach works also for alternative demand systems
as long as one can relate log quantity to log prices and additional demand shifters; such
demand systems include the nested logit and the random coeﬃcient demand model as in
Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995), where log prices enter the indirect utility function.
The basic idea behind De Loecker’s approach is to use the demand structure to
express the (unobserved) price variation p∗it as a function of observables, in his case, an
industry quantity index qIt and a set of product dummies Di . De Loecker (2011) shows
that this gives rise to the following version of (4):
 it ,
s∗it = xit β + βI qIt + Di δ + ω

(6)

α
where βI = |η1I | with ηI denoting the elasticity of demand of industry I, β = ηIη+1
I
ηI +1
 it = η ωit . Estimation of
with α denoting the production function coeﬃcients, and ω
I
6

Consider a two-input production function with labor and capital (l, k). Under Assumption 4, the
∗
∗
− αk rit
= p∗it − αl λit − αk λit = p∗it − (αl + αk )λit ,
structural error term can be written as p∗it − αl wit
where w and r denote the (log) prices of labor and capital respectively, asterisks are used to denote
deviations from industry averages and λit is a scalar that captures the input-price neutral variation of
∗
∗
= rit
). CRS guarantees that (αl + αk ) = 1
input prices relative to the input price indexes (λit = wit
∗
and with complete pass-through, pit = λit
7
See Goldberg and Knetter (1997) for an overview of this literature.
8
This was plausible in the context of Belgian textile producers who are geographically concentrated.

12

the above equation delivers the demand elasticity ηI , along with the true production
coeﬃcients α, and allows one to separate the physical productivity ωit from the output
price variation (βI qIt + Di δ).
The results are consistent with one’s priors; the production function coeﬃcients
obtained after correcting for output price bias are larger in magnitude (consistent with
the presence of a downward bias when output price bias is not controlled for) and suggest
increasing returns to scale. The approach rests crucially on assuming a demand system,
but assumptions on the demand system and cost pass-through are implicit whenever one
estimates (4) without controlling for the output price bias.
Output and input price heterogeneity. DLGKP work with a diﬀerent dataset
from India that contains information on product-speciﬁc prices (i.e., unit values). As
noted earlier, the availability of output price data is not a silver bullet, at least not
when one considers a large set of diﬀerentiated product industries. While the output
price data allow DLGKP to eliminate the output price bias without resorting to any
assumptions, they still need to address the input price bias. To do so, they assume that
the only source of input price variation across ﬁrms (apart from regional diﬀerences) is
quality diﬀerentiation; this assumption rules out imperfect competition in input markets.
Further, they assume an output quality production function that displays complementarities in the qualities of inputs and output: higher quality output demands higher
quality inputs, and high quality inputs are complements to each other. Under these
assumptions, they show that conditional on regional variation, input prices will be a
function of output quality, which can be proxied through a ﬂexible polynomial in output
prices, market shares, product dummies, and interactions thereof. This polynomial represents a control function for input prices and is consistent with a large set of alternative
demand and market structures and the main models used in Industrial Organization and
International Trade. Given that output prices are observed, the output price variation
is eliminated from both the left and right hand sides of equation (4), which becomes:
qit = e∗
it α + ωit + zt (pit , msit , Di , Gi ),

(7)

where pit is the output price of the ﬁrm, msit is a vector market share variables (including
unconditional and conditional market shares), Di captures product dummies and Gi
denotes ﬁrm location. The function zt (.) serves here as a control for the unobserved
input price variation zit∗ α.
Conditional on productivity and input price variation captured by zt (.), we obtain
the correct structural production function parameters by considering how variation in
13

physical input use maps into variation in physical output.
In sum, while the bulk of empirical work has focused on estimating the sales generating function (1), recent papers have focused on estimating the structural equation
(2) by correcting for the output and/or input price biases. In all cases, the correction
involves not only additional data, but also explicit statement of the assumptions under
which the correction is valid.
2.2.3

A Classiﬁcation of Existing Work

In Table 1, we classify existing papers on the broad subject of globalization and ﬁrm
performance based on how they deal with unobserved output and input prices. The
columns and rows indicate which kind of price variation is controlled for.
Table 1: Output and input prices: a classiﬁcation
Output price (pit )
p̄It
p∗it
Input price (zit )

z̄tI

Case A

Case B

zit∗

Case C

Case D

Note: We remind the reader of our notation: pIt is the price deﬂator for industry I, z̄tI a
∗ = z − z̄ I denote
vector of industry-speciﬁc input price deﬂators, and p∗it = pit − pIt and zit
it
t
deﬂated output price and input prices respectively.

Case A: Standard Framework: Most existing work use output and input price
deﬂators common across ﬁrms that capture industry-wide movements in output and
input prices. The only price variation occurs in the time series, and any variation
away from these industry-wide deﬂators will introduce the output and input price biases
discussed above.
Case B: De Loecker (2011): In the setting considered in De Loecker (2011), price
variation across ﬁrms is controlled for by explicitly introducing a demand system. On
the input side, it is assumed that ﬁrms face common input prices.
Case C: Observing Output Prices. In this case, input prices vary across ﬁrms,
but output prices do not. As we noted above, this case corresponds to a speciﬁcation

14

estimated in DLGKP for expositional purposes, where physical quantities are regressed
against deﬂated input expenditures, as in equation (5).
Case D: Pass-through literature and DLGKP: Perhaps the only literature
that has allowed for both output and input price variation to characterize ﬁrms active
in international markets is the pass-through literature9 . This literature recognizes both
that prices vary across ﬁrms and that ﬁrms respond incompletely and diﬀerentially to
cost shocks; this incomplete response generates not only price dispersion across ﬁrms,
but also for a particular ﬁrm, price dispersion across destinations. The cost shocks
considered in the pass-through literature are exchange rate changes, but the insights of
this literature are equally applicable to other cost shocks, including input price shocks
or changes in tariﬀ and other trade policies.
In contrast to the literature described above that takes a production function approach, the pass-through literature is based on a demand-based approach where assumptions on the demand side, market structure and ﬁrm behavior are combined in order to
derive measures of ﬁrm performance. While this literature oﬀers the advantage of a
much richer treatment of heterogeneity and product diﬀerentiation, it comes at the cost
of an extensive set of assumptions. These assumptions seem defendable in the context
of case studies of particular industries, where knowledge of the institutional details can
guide the choice of the appropriate structure, but are more controversial when applied
to a large cross-section of industries. We therefore do not devote any space to discussing
this literature here, but focus on the production function-based approach instead. From
a production function perspective, to our knowledge, only DLGKP develop a framework
that accounts for both output and input price variation and estimate equation (7). Interestingly, the insights obtained using their approach turn out to be consistent with
the main insights of the pass-through literature; not only do the ﬁndings indicate substantial heterogeneity across ﬁrms, the authors ﬁnd evidence consistent with incomplete
pass-through of cost shocks to prices.
2.2.4

An Example

We conclude this subsection with an example. We have a sample of 318 single-product
Indian textile producers over the period 1989-2003 for which we observe (deﬂated) sales
and expenditures on labor, intermediate inputs and capital; in addition we observe
9

Representative papers include Goldberg and Verboven (2001); Nakamura and Zerom (2010); Goldberg and Hellerstein (2013); Berman, Martin, and Mayer (2012); Amiti, Itshkhoki, and Konings (2013).

15

product-level prices.10
We consider a standard Cobb-Douglas production function and highlight the output
and input price biases using four distinct speciﬁcations: (1) an OLS regression of sales
against expenditures; (2) an OLS regression of quantity against expenditures; (3) an
OLS regression of quantity against expenditures and a control function for input prices
that includes only the output price (this control function is a special case of the control
function used in DLGKP; it rests on a vertical diﬀerentiation model of consumer demand
where output price is a suﬃcient statistic for quality and hence input price variation);
and (4) a special case of DLGKP that assumes an AR(1) process for productivity and,
as in speciﬁcation (3), a control function for input prices that depends only on output
price. Table 2 lists the estimated coeﬃcients.
Table 2: Estimated coeﬃcients: evaluating the price biases

Coeﬃcients
labor
materials
capital

Revenue
Physical Output
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.162
-0.029 0.171 0.227
0.812
0.576 0.834 0.634
0.035
-0.514 0.010 0.140

Note: The data were constructed by DLGKP. We observe 318 producers of textiles (industry
code PNIC 17). We omit the standard errors, but all coeﬃcients are signiﬁcant at the 1% level,
as is common in the estimation of production functions. Speciﬁcations (1), (2) and (3) are
OLS regressions of the relevant dependent variables (revenue in (1) and physical output in (2)
and (3)) on deﬂated expenditures, plus a polynomial in output price in (3). Speciﬁcation (4)
estimates the coeﬃcients using GMM, where we rely on lagged inputs as instruments exploiting
the variation in adjustment costs in labor and capital, while allowing current productivity
shocks to aﬀect current material choices. See DLGKP for further discussion.

Speciﬁcation (1) generates perhaps the most familiar numbers for the various coeﬃcients. This OLS regression is a useful way to describe the underlying data and check
that the estimates are within the range of existing studies; there is a long list of papers
that estimate production functions using diﬀerent datasets, and therefore the literature
in this area has settled on what are reasonable looking estimates.
In the second speciﬁcation, we consider the case discussed in equation (5): physical
quantity is projected onto deﬂated expenditures, leaving input price variation uncontrolled for. We get results that are hard to interpret at ﬁrst, such as negative labor and
10

We only consider single-product producers to demonstrate the price bias in isolation. Using multiproduct ﬁrms requires a treatment of the unobserved input allocations, which is not the focus of this
article. See the discussion under section 2.1.1, option (a).

16

capital coeﬃcients. But our framework actually predicts, or at least is consistent with,
negative coeﬃcients. Just as in our shirt production example, we ﬁnd that ﬁrms that
spend more on labor, produce less output, but generate more sales.
In speciﬁcation (3) we stick to a simple OLS regression, but add a third order polynomial in the ﬁrm’s output price. We recover coeﬃcients similar to speciﬁcation (1).11
This OLS regression is a very useful diagnostic check for the problem at hand: by merely
including output prices, while ignoring all other well known identiﬁcation problems, we
generate “‘plausible” production function coeﬃcients12 . Of course, the proper benchmark should by no means be speciﬁcation (1). However, the fact that we get positive
output elasticities for all three inputs, and that the returns to scale now look sensible

( h α̂h = 1.015), is reassuring.13
Finally, in speciﬁcation (4) we allow for both unobserved productivity shocks to aﬀect
input choices and for heterogeneous input prices. This speciﬁcation can be thought of
as a special case of DLGKP: we control for serially correlated productivity using an
AR(1) process for productivity, and for unobserved input price variation by including a
control function in output prices as in speciﬁcation (3). The coeﬃcients are similar to
those in speciﬁcation (3), but there are a few diﬀerences as expected. By controlling for
unobserved productivity diﬀerences, we undo the negative correlation between capital
and productivity and recover a substantially higher capital coeﬃcient; further, we ﬁnd
a lower coeﬃcient on materials due to the positive correlation between input use and
productivity. Table 2 does not list the remaining structural parameters describing the
relationship between input prices and output price – i.e., zt (pit ). But it is interesting to
note that we ﬁnd that ∂z∂pt it(.) > 0 for all ﬁrms and time periods, conﬁrming that output
prices are positively correlated with input prices14 .
11

We obtain almost identical coeﬃcients if we include output price in linear fashion.
We have found output price to have a ﬁrst order eﬀect when we correct for input price variation.
The use of output price as the sole control can be justiﬁed on the basis of a vertical diﬀerentiation model,
where price is a proxy for output quality, and hence also input quality and input prices. Additional
variables, such as market shares and product dummies, make the control function more general and
consistent with a larger set of demand models, but lead to very similar results. See DLGKP for more
discussion on the estimation and identiﬁcation of this control function zt (.).
13
The OLS regressions do not control for the standard simultaneity bias, so even if we observed qit
and xit we would not recover the production function coeﬃcients α.
14
This positive correlation is also documented in Kugler and Verhoogen (2012) who have the advantage
of directly observing some input prices (e.g., wages and the prices of materials) as well as output prices
in their Colombian data.
12

17

2.3

Interpreting the Performance Residual (πit )

Equation (2) will be useful for the remainder of this paper for two reasons. First, it
allows us to highlight the potential channels through which globalization can aﬀect ﬁrm
performance: ﬁrms competing in international markets are likely to adjust their scale of
production (xit and hence eit ), productive eﬃciency (ωit ), prices and associated markups
(pit ), as well as product and input quality (reﬂected in both pit and zit ). Second, we can
classify almost all studies on the subject based on which component(s) of proﬁtability
they have focused on in each instance.
Existing work has, in one form or another, studied how episodes of trade reform
aﬀect productivity, prices and quality across a wide range of countries, industries and
time periods. Below we argue that a large part of the literature has only recovered the
impact on proﬁts πit , without decomposing it into the separate eﬀects on the underlying
factors. But in most instances, we care about the exact mechanisms through which
trade aﬀects ﬁrm performance, as these have diﬀerent distributional and potentially also
aggregate welfare implications.
Our production function framework suggests ways for identifying the components
of the structural error πit . After estimating the structural production function and
demand parameters, De Loecker (2011) recovers separate estimates of productivity and
markups, and consequently estimates of (average ﬁrm-level) prices. This is accomplished
by committing to a particular demand system and market structure – i.e., CES demand
paired with monopolistic competition. However, even when we are not willing to make
assumptions on the underlying demand system and market structure, we may still be
able to recover, if not the levels, at least the changes in markups using the production
function framework. If researchers observe prices, they can further obtain estimates of
marginal costs.
De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) show how to recover markups from production
data. The essential insight is that for any variable input free of adjustment costs the
markup drives a wedge between the input’s output elasticity and the input’s revenue
share. The latter is directly observed in the data; the former is not, but can be estimated.
In the context of our Cobb-Douglas production function, the markup μit for ﬁrm i at
time t is given by:
Sit
(8)
μit = αv v ,
Eit
The subscript v stands for variable. Depending on the application, variable inputs can
include labor, electricity, or any other intermediate input.
To illustrate this approach, let us consider the same data on Indian textile producers.
18

Let materials be a variable input in production. Using (8) we compute markup as:
0.634 × ESitm , and obtain an average markup of 1.30 with a standard deviation of 0.65.
it
The markup distribution suggests considerable variation, with the 25th percentile ﬁrm
breaking even with a markup of about 1, while the 75th percentile ﬁrm makes substantial
proﬁts (excluding ﬁxed costs) with a markup of about 1.42.
The markup calculation relies on estimates of the production function, which in
turn deliver estimates of productivity. The speciﬁcs will depend on the data at hand,
and we refer the reader to De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) and DLGKP for detailed
discussions of the issues that arise in the context of diﬀerent data sets.
In sum, the production function framework has the potential to generate separate
measures of productivity and markups without commitment to speciﬁc demand and
market structure assumptions as is common in the demand-oriented IO literature on
imperfect competition. Once the components of proﬁtability are identiﬁed, one can
examine how globalization aﬀects each of these components. This is the subject of the
next section.

3

Mechanisms

We use the framework introduced above to discuss the main mechanisms through which
participation in international markets, and in particular trade reforms, aﬀect performance. We denote trade reforms by Tit and allow them to aﬀect ﬁrms diﬀerently over
time. This speciﬁcation allows for ﬁrms in an industry to produce diﬀerent products for
instance, so that they end up facing diﬀerent rates of protection. Whether or not there
is variation across ﬁrms is crucial for any identiﬁcation strategy that tries to recover the
causal eﬀect of Tit on ﬁrm performance and its components. The mechanisms we discuss
below can be broadly classiﬁed into two categories: mechanisms that induce changes
within ﬁrms and hence aﬀect ﬁrm-level components of proﬁtability; and mechanisms
that induce reallocation of economic activity across ﬁrms in an industry. In the latter
case, ﬁrm-level proﬁtability may be unaﬀected by trade, but trade-induced reallocation
of resources from less to more proﬁtable ﬁrms can still lead to better performance at the
industry level.

3.1

Within-Firm Changes

Firms participate in international markets both as producers/sellers of goods and as
buyers of intermediate inputs used in the production of these goods. Trade policies

19

may aﬀect both aspects of ﬁrm activity. Speciﬁcally, changes in the protection of ﬁnal
products (e.g., reductions in output tariﬀs) will aﬀect the competition domestic producers face, and changes in the protection of intermediate inputs (e.g., input tariﬀs) on the
other hand will aﬀect the costs of production. The channels through which trade reforms
aﬀects ﬁrms will accordingly depend on the speciﬁc nature of the trade policy changes,
and in particular on whether these aﬀect output versus input markets. Therefore, in the
course of our discussion we will often ﬁnd it necessary to make a distinction between
“output” and “input”oriented trade policies (for expositional purposes, we will base our
discussion on tariﬀs given that these are easily measured, but in principle the arguments
apply to any other trade policy).
We use equation (2) as the basis of our discussion to diﬀerentiate between mechanisms that aﬀect: (a) the ﬁrm-level productivity ωit ; (b) the expenditures eit and their
components (input quantities xit and prices zit ); (c) output prices pit and markups; and
4) none of the above, but induce within-ﬁrm reallocation in multi-product ﬁrms.
3.1.1

Reduction of X-ineﬃciencies and Management Practices

The perhaps most advocated argument for opening up a country to foreign markets
is that exposure to international competition increases the eﬃciency of the previously
protected domestic producers. In terms of our framework, this channel would lead to an
increase in the physical eﬃciency ωit . But why would the eﬃciency of these producers
increase? A popular argument is that intensiﬁed competition will reduce X-ineﬃciencies
at the ﬁrm level. Although intuitive, this argument has little theoretical appeal in its
simplest form; why were ﬁrms willing to leave money on the table prior to the trade
reforms? A potential answer is that in practice, reduction of X-ineﬃciencies is costly, and
therefore it takes an increase in competition for ﬁrms to ﬁnd it proﬁtable to undertake
the actions necessary to become more eﬃcient. For example, in the face of intensiﬁed
competition, ﬁrms might ﬁnd it necessary to replace old, ineﬃcient managers by more
competent ones, or adopt better management practices. While these considerations
feature prominently in casual discussions of trade and productivity, we are aware of no
theoretical work that formalizes these arguments.
From an empirical point of view, this mechanism suggests a reduced form way of
introducing trade policy by making physical eﬃciency a function of trade policy:
ωit = ω(Tit ).

(9)

Note that the above mechanism suggests that the relevant policy is one that aﬀects
the output side of the ﬁrm, since the motivation for reducing X-ineﬃciencies arises from
20

the exposure to intensiﬁed competition; in the case of tariﬀs for example, the relevant
measure of trade policy would be output tariﬀs.15
3.1.2

Feedback Eﬀects

The reason we expect ﬁrms to increase their productivity in response to a trade shock
is that we expect them to undertake actions in order to become more eﬃcient. Some of
these actions may be unobservable to the researcher in which case they will be subsumed
in the residual ωit (this is for example the case if ﬁrms replace current managers by
better ones or adopt better management practices and these actions are not reﬂected in
changes in expenditures). But in many instances, improvements in productivity will be
associated with actions that are observable, for example, investment in new technologies,
R&D, entry in export markets, etc. In these cases, the law of motion of productivity
should be modiﬁed so as to explicitly allow for these actions to aﬀect productivity:
ωit = g(ωit−1 , Ait−1 ) + ξit .

(10)

The term Ait−1 , denoting any action undertaken by the ﬁrm in order to increase
its productivity, is lagged given that it likely takes time for actions to take eﬀect. Of
course, the fact that these actions (investment; R&D; exporting, etc.) are allowed to
aﬀect productivity does not mean that they will in fact do so. The above law of motion
is entirely consistent with a ﬁnding that the action undertaken by the ﬁrm did not have
an eﬀect on productivity ultimately; hence, it does not assume the result. Nevertheless,
if one believes that a certain action is likely to aﬀect productivity, it is imperative to
include it in the law of motion.
Productivity enhancing actions will typically be correlated with the inputs in the
production function, so that their omission from the law of motion will generate a omitted
variable bias. This is the main point of De Loecker (2013) and it can be made clear using
the example of a productivity enhancing investment. The investment will aﬀect not only
productivity, but also the capital stock. Suppose that we do not allow investment (the
action) to aﬀect productivity though the law of motion. Then the estimation of the
production function will suﬀer from an omitted variable bias that will generate a biased
capital coeﬃcient; speciﬁcally, given that higher investment will likely be associated
with higher capital, we would expect an upward bias in the capital coeﬃcient estimate.
Moreover, a second stage regression relating productivity to investment would tend to
15

Below we discuss the importance of including both contemporaneous and lagged trade policy variables to accommodate the role of expectations and dynamics.

21

understate the role of investment for the same reason; given that investment was not
included in the ﬁrst stage that estimated the production function, the improvement in
ﬁrm performance will be attributed to the higher capital and not to the productivity
improvement.
In conclusion, recognizing that productivity evolves endogenously in response to
ﬁrms’ actions calls for a modiﬁed law of motion for productivity at a minimum. Ideally,
one would like to supplement this law of motion with an explicit model of how the
actions A are determined. This is done for example in recent papers by Bustos (2011)
and Aw, Roberts, and Xu (2011). The relevant actions are “exporting” and “adoption
of new technology” in the ﬁrst paper, and “exporting” and “R&D”in the second, and in
both cases the authors use structural models to show how these actions are determined
and how they respond to trade liberalization.
3.1.3

Input Side

Input Expenditures In equation (2) we explicitly distinguished between the two
components of expenditures (eit ): physical input use (xit ) and input prices (zit ). Both
components will typically vary across ﬁrms and will be aﬀected by globalization; for
example, a reduction of input tariﬀs will have a direct eﬀect on the prices of imported
inputs, and hence zit . There are three distinct reasons for ﬁrm-speciﬁc input prices (zit ),
even for ﬁrms active in narrowly deﬁned industries: (a) pure geographical variation in
input prices (for example, local labor markets and constrained labor mobility imply
regional diﬀerences in wages); (b) variation in input quality leading to diﬀerences in
input prices; and (c) ﬁrm speciﬁc input prices due to monopsony power in input markets.
The literature on production function estimation has typically ignored or assumed away
heterogeneity in input prices due to quality diﬀerences across producers or to imperfect
competition in input markets.
To highlight the forces generating variation in expenditures across ﬁrms let us write:
ehit = xhit +zith (νith , Git ) for a given input h. The term νith refers to the “quality” of input h.16
We collect all other ﬁrm-speciﬁc factors determining input prices, including the ﬁrm’s
geographic location, in Git , which will capture among other things the (re)location of
economic activity (plant closings, oﬀshoring, etc.) induced by a ﬁrm’s exposure to global
16

We use the term “quality”to capture diﬀerences in observed and unobserved attributes of a given
input – for example, skill diﬀerences across workers. Whether one can measure input quality will depend
on the data at hand. Standard ﬁrm-level data usually provide us with the total use of intermediate inputs
in dollars, and sometimes even with physical units, but will typically not record input characteristics
or direct measures of quality.

22

markets or other shocks.
Four distinct and largely disconnected literatures have focused on how globalization
aﬀects the various components of input expenditures. First, the trade and productivity
literature has set out to measure how the transformation of physical inputs (x) to output (q) changes with increased foreign competition; indirectly, this literature also deals
with the scale eﬀects that operate through inputs (x). Second, the trade and quality
literature has focused on whether producers upgrade (or downgrade) the quality of their
products and inputs in response to increased exposure to international trade17 . Third,
the trade and labor literature has focused on how globalization aﬀects workers of diﬀerent skills. Finally, the literature on multinationals and oﬀshoring has investigated how
globalization aﬀects ﬁrms’ locational choices (part of Git ). In all these cases, exposure
to global markets aﬀects eit directly.
Imports of New Intermediate Inputs A diﬀerent mechanism through which globalization can aﬀect ﬁrm performance is highlighted in Halpern, Koren, and Szeidl (2011).
So far, we have abstracted from the fact that the materials used in the production, m,
are a composite of many diﬀerent domestic and imported intermediate inputs. Acknowledging the aggregation underlying m suggests an additional channel for performance
improvements: if the reduction in trade costs leads to the import of new intermediate
inputs, then we would expect an increase in production beyond the one predicted by
the increase in expenditures. This increase will be more pronounced if the new inputs
are of higher quality compared to the ones previously used, but the argument does not
rest on quality improvements: as long as the production technology exhibits a “taste for
variety”, a larger number of imported inputs will imply higher output.
The simplest way to make this point is to consider (as in Halpern, Koren, and
Szeidl (2011) or Goldberg, Khandelwal, Pavcnik, and Topalova (2010b)) a standard
Cobb-Douglas production function in capital, labor, a set of intermediate inputs M ,
and productivity Ω. To keep notation manageable, we abstract from quality diﬀerences
between imported and domestic products, and suppress the ﬁrm and time subscripts.
Each intermediate input Mj is assembled from a combination of a domestic and imported
17

Schott (2004) and Khandelwal (2010) are classic references on the relationship between trade and
product quality, while Verhoogen (2008) is a classic reference on the eﬀects of globalization on both product and input quality. The main message of these papers is that producers often need to change/upgrade
the quality of their products in order to enter foreign markets. These changes in product quality induce
changes in input quality. Through the link between output and input quality, shocks in output markets
aﬀect factor markets.

23

variety:
α

Q = ΩLαL K αK ΠJj=1 Mj j
θ−1

θ−1

θ

Mj = [MjFθ + MjDθ ] θ−1 ,

(11)
(12)

where MjF and MjD denote the quantities of the foreign and domestic inputs respectively,
and θ is the elasticity of substitution. Let us abstract from the output and input price
biases. One can show that in this setting, equation (2) takes the form:
s∗it = qit = xit α + Fi (nit ) + ωit = e∗
it α + Fi (nit ) + ωit .

(13)

The term Fi (nit ) is a function increasing in the number of imported inputs nit . Hence,
if a trade liberalization increases the number of imported intermediates, we will expect
to see a rise in measured productivity, Fi (nit ) + ωit . Why would a reduction in trade
costs lead to the import of new intermediates? When deciding whether or not to import
intermediates, ﬁrms balance the marginal cost savings associated with the new inputs
against the ﬁxed costs of importing. A reduction in the tariﬀs on inputs increases the
cost savings associated with importing, hence leading to a larger number of imported
intermediates. Note this mechanism does not suggest any improvements in the physical productivity ωit . The issue here is analogous to the well known gains from the
introduction of new products; because the standard deﬂators used to obtain deﬂated
expenditures e∗it do not account for new imported inputs, these new inputs will ultimately show as an increase in measured productivity. This mechanism likely underlies
the large within-ﬁrm productivity gains found in studies that examine the eﬀects of input tariﬀ liberalization, such as Amiti and Konings (2007) for Indonesia and Khandelwal
and Topalova (2011) for India. In fact, Goldberg, Khandelwal, Pavcnik, and Topalova
(2009) and Goldberg, Khandelwal, Pavcnik, and Topalova (2010b) explicitly show that
the input tariﬀ liberalization in India led to a large increase in the number of imported
inputs.
3.1.4

Price and Markup Changes

It is natural to expect that ﬁrms will adjust prices and markups when faced with a
trade shock. Many trade models assume CES preferences with monopolistic competition. Under these assumptions, markups are constant; hence, trade shocks do not aﬀect
markups. Recent theoretical work has moved away from these restrictive assumptions
and considered alternative demand systems 18 (while maintaining for the most part the
18

See for example, Melitz and Ottaviano (2008), Mayer, Melitz, and Ottaviano (2011), Feenstra and
Weinstein (2010), Arkolakis, Costinot, Donaldson, and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2012).

24

assumption of monopolistic competition) in order to investigate how markups and prices
respond to trade liberalization.
If we observe prices and have a plausibly exogenous source of variation for the trade
policy Tit , it is conceptually straightforward to evaluate the price eﬀects of trade reforms.
We would start with the reduced form:
pit = p(Tit ) +

it ,

(14)

where it is a standard i.i.d. error term. A tougher task is to identify the speciﬁc channels
leading to price changes, i.e., the cost and markup responses to changes in international
competition. To highlight these channels, let us write price as the sum of marginal cost
mc and markup μ:
(15)
pit = mcit (qit , zit , ωit ) + μit (D, M).
The marginal cost mc is a function of quantity produced q, the input prices the
ﬁrm faces z, and ﬁrm productivity ω. The markup μ will be a function of the demand
structure D and the market structure and ﬁrm behavior which we summarize in M.
Trade shocks are expected to aﬀect each of these components, with the speciﬁc eﬀects
depending on the particular nature of the trade shock. As noted earlier, CES preferences
and monopolistic competition imply constant markups (in log terms); unless trade liberalization aﬀects the costs mc, it will have no eﬀect on prices. In more general setups,
markups will be variable and respond to the trade reform.
To illustrate the mechanisms at work, let us consider a simple example that features
linear demand and monopolistic competition. When assessing the eﬀects of trade reforms, it is important to distinguish conceptually between reforms that aﬀect the input
markets (e.g., input tariﬀ liberalization) and reforms that aﬀect the output markets (e.g.,
output tariﬀ liberalization). Both types of reforms are likely to aﬀect both marginal costs
and markups, albeit through diﬀerent channels.
Consider a unilateral output tariﬀ liberalization ﬁrst. The decrease in tariﬀs exposes
domestic producers to increased import competition. In the context of equation (15),
this translates to a change in market structure and consequently, the residual demand
curve facing the ﬁrm. In Panel A of Figure 1, we plot the initial equilibrium in this
market, which occurs at the point at which the original marginal revenue curve intersects marginal cost. For ease of exposition, we assume that marginal cost is constant
and that is not aﬀected by trade liberalization. Trade liberalization implies intensiﬁed
competition, so the residual demand curve will shift inward and become ﬂatter. The new
equilibrium occurs at a point at which the price and markup are both lower. This case
25

corresponds to the standard intuition that trade liberalization, by intensifying competition, leads to lower prices and lower markups. Figure 1 allows one to trace the particular
forces that shift price from its pre-reform level p0 to its post-reform level p1 .
Figure 1: Price, quantity and markup response to trade liberalization
       

 

  






  

  



























 

 
 

 



Note: Solid lines represent the initial demand and cost conditions, while dashed lines indicate
the new demand and cost conditions – i.e., post trade liberalization.

Next, consider a unilateral input tariﬀ liberalization. Input tariﬀ declines will have
direct eﬀects on the marginal cost; they will reduce the input prices zit and may further
lead to improvements in productivity ωit through the import of new intermediates discussed above. In the context of Panel B of Figure 1, this implies a downward shift in the
marginal cost curve. The decline in input tariﬀs does not aﬀect competition, hence we
would not expect any eﬀects on markups arising from changes in the residual demand
facing the ﬁrm. However, as long as the underlying structure does not imply constant
markups (as is the case with the CES), markups will change as a result of the incomplete
pass-through of the marginal cost change to price. This is shown explicitly in Panel B
of Figure 1. The marginal revenue curve is not aﬀected by the trade reform, while the
marginal cost curve shifts downward. The post-reform equilibrium is associated with
a higher markup, though the price is lower than before. The reason is not that the
environment has become less competitive. The higher markup arises as a result of the
incomplete response of the price to the marginal cost change.
26

This (to Trade and Industrial Organization economists) apparently counterintuitive
eﬀect is completely intuitive to International Macro economists who have studied the
incomplete response of prices to exchange rates. Just like input tariﬀ shocks, exchange
rate changes represent cost shocks to ﬁrms. It is well documented that prices respond
incompletely to exchange rate shocks, a phenomenon known as incomplete exchange
rate pass-through. Tariﬀ and exchange rates have a symmetric eﬀect on ﬁrms’ proﬁts;
applying the insights of the exchange rate pass-through literature to input tariﬀs immediately yields the result that with variable markups, input tariﬀ reductions will lead
to markup increases. To our knowledge, this is an insight that the bulk of the trade
literature has missed; only DLGKP address this issue explicitly and show that incomplete pass-through of input prices led to markup increases in the case of the Indian trade
liberalization. Prices did decline as a result of the trade reform, but the price reductions were only a small proportion of the cost declines; the bulk of the cost reductions
beneﬁted ﬁrms in the form of higher markups.
In reality, most trade reforms, especially those that have been implemented in developing countries, combine input with output tariﬀ liberalization (put diﬀerently, the
real world trade liberalizations are characterized by a combination of Panels A and B of
Figure 1). In such instances, it is particularly important to assess not only the reform’s
impact on prices, but also its eﬀects on the price determinants. The reason is that the
eﬀects on input prices as well as markups can have important distributional implications.
3.1.5

Within-Firm Reallocation

A diﬀerent mechanism that can lead to within ﬁrm performance improvements is highlighted in Bernard, Redding, and Schott (2010) and is speciﬁc to multi-product ﬁrms:
ﬁrms can improve revenue productivity that is, ωit + p∗ijt in the context of equation
(2))by reallocating within-ﬁrm resources from the production of less proﬁtable to the
production of more proﬁtable products, where j denotes products. This mechanism is
similar in spirit to the one we will discuss in section 3.2 on the role of reallocation in
increasing aggregate industry performance. The diﬀerence is that here this mechanism
generates performance improvements at the ﬁrm-level. It is important to note that this
mechanism does not hinge on any improvements on the physical ﬁrm productivity, ωit ,
which remains unaﬀected. The distinction between physical and revenue productivity is
therefore important here: it is only revenue productivity that increases and this increase
is brought about entirely through reshuﬄing of resources across products with diﬀerent
proﬁtability.

27

3.2

Reallocation: Aggregate Eﬀects

So far we have focused on the potential eﬀects of trade liberalization on individual producers. However, at the end of the day what we care about is how an industry, country
or group of countries, is aﬀected by trade. Reallocation of economic resources from less
towards more proﬁtable producers is one way in which industry- (or country) performance can increase even in the absence of any eﬀects on individual ﬁrms. There is by
now a large theoretical and empirical literature highlighting the aggregate productivity
gains arising from such reallocation19 .
Collard-Wexler and De Loecker (2013) discuss some of the recent ﬁndings and point
out that although we know by now that this reallocation process plays a substantial role
in the data, it has been hard to identify speciﬁc forces that induce reallocation. Empirical
work in international trade is perhaps the one big exception. The main advantage of
studying large and arguably exogenous (at least from the perspective of an individual
producer or industry) trade reforms is that they present us with exogenous shocks to the
residual demand curves (in the case of output tariﬀs) and/or costs (in the case of input
tariﬀs) facing domestic producers. We can then trace out how the allocation of economic
activity, usually measured by the market share in a particular market/industry, changes
with the change in trade policy. The reshuﬄing of market shares towards the more
productive/proﬁtable ﬁrms has the potential to raise aggregate performance beyond the
potential individual ﬁrms’ improvements discussed in the previous section. The extent
to which the reallocation process is important depends, of course, on how dispersed
proﬁtability was initially, prior to the reforms.
Recently, Hsieh and Klenow (2009) put forward a simple theoretical framework to
highlight this mechanism by focusing on wedges in marginal revenue products and pointing out distortions that can give rise to such wedges. Changes in both output and input
tariﬀs fall nicely into this framework: output tariﬀs present standard distortions in output markets as they constrain competition, while input tariﬀs generate distortions in
capital and intermediate input markets. The reduction of these distortions through
trade reforms should lead to a more eﬃcient allocation of resources across ﬁrms.
This reallocation mechanism is in principle simple to measure in the data: calculate
the covariance of productivity and market share for each time period and see how it
reacts to the trade liberalization episode. However, the above discussion should have
made clear that the interpretation of the results will depend greatly on whether we rely on
19

For example, this reallocation mechanism is central to the Melitz (2003) model and many other
follow-up papers that feature ﬁrm heterogeneity.

28

actual productivity (ωit ), or a performance measure (such as πit ) that contains both cost,
demand and market structure components. For example, if we relied on πit and found
that the market share of more proﬁtable ﬁrms increased post trade liberalization, this
increase might not be desirable from an aggregate welfare point of view if it represented
a shift towards ﬁrms with more market power rather than higher eﬃciency.

3.3

Static Versus Dynamic Eﬀects

So far we have not made a distinction between trade shocks that aﬀect producers instantaneously and shocks that aﬀect producers with a lag. Many theoretical models are
static in nature or focus on steady state predictions which blur the distinction. However,
for empirical models that wish to separately identify the impact of trade liberalization
on the various components of performance the diﬀerence between static and dynamic
eﬀects can be important.
Let us focus on the productivity channel (ω(Tit )). It is reasonable to ask whether
producers can immediately adjust their productive eﬃciency when faced with a change
in protection. This question boils down to whether the trade reforms were expected or
not, and hence whether producers had time to adjust prior to the actual change.
The standard working assumption is to assume that ﬁrm-level productivity moves
over time according to a ﬁrst-order Markov process: ωit = g(ωit−1 ) + ξit . This speciﬁcation is based on the observation that ﬁrm-level productivity (independently of how
exactly it is measured) is highly persistent over time. However, the question remains
whether we can think of trade liberalization as a shock that immediately aﬀects productive eﬃciency. Take the example of a trade-induced reorganization of production. It
arguably takes time for a ﬁrm to change the organization of production. Therefore, we
would expect productivity to not react immediately or even possibly drop temporarily
during the reorganization.
Therefore, it is important to let the function ω(.) be suﬃciently ﬂexible in how trade
policy shocks enter, by including both contemporaneous trade policy changes as well
as lags. For example, in the context of analyzing the impact of trade reforms on ﬁrm
performance in Indian manufacturing, DLGKP consider a law of motion that, in addition
to lagged productivity, also includes lagged output and input tariﬀs and the ﬁrm’s lagged
export status.

29

4
4.1

Evidence
Proﬁtability and Feedback Eﬀects

If there is one robust ﬁnding that the literature has delivered to date, this is that
industry proﬁtability increases with exposure to foreign competition. This relationship
is documented both in the time series, in studies that exploit trade liberalization episodes
to identify the eﬀects of trade openness on ﬁrm performance, and in the cross-section,
in comparisons of the performances of exporters and non-exporters. Most papers that
exploit trade liberalizations focus on changes in output tariﬀs (Pavcnik (2002) is a classic
reference), but recently, starting with the work of Amiti and Konings (2007), the focus
has shifted towards input tariﬀ liberalizations. Indeed, several studies on developing
countries ﬁnd the eﬀects of input tariﬀs (representing direct cost shocks to ﬁrms) to be
larger than those of output tariﬀs (which operate through changes in the competition
facing ﬁrms). Further, the literature ﬁnds evidence of both within-ﬁrm performance
improvements and re-allocation, with the relative importance of each channel depending
on the particular setting. These ﬁndings are well documented in the literature, and we
refer the reader to recent surveys by Melitz and Treﬂer (2012) and Melitz and Redding
(Forthcoming) for a more extensive discussion.
At the cost of repeating ourselves, we emphasize once again that these ﬁndings of
improved performance, though robust across countries and time, refer to proﬁtability
only, and are therefore not particularly illuminating regarding the mechanisms at work.
With this caveat in mind, it is worth pointing out that studies that have allowed for
endogenous productivity evolution along the lines suggested in section 3.1.2 ﬁnd significant evidence of feedback eﬀects. These feedback eﬀects have two implications. First,
in studies of trade liberalizations, they suggest that performance improvements are heterogeneous across ﬁrms, as ﬁrms with diﬀerent characteristics (e.g., initial proﬁtability
levels; R&D expenditures; capital intensity, etc.) optimally choose diﬀerent actions in
response to trade shocks, which in turn aﬀect their proﬁtability. Bustos (2011), Aw,
Roberts, and Xu (2011) and Lileeva and Treﬂer (2010) all ﬁnd evidence of such heterogeneity. Second, in studies that compare exporters to non-exporters, feedback eﬀects
can lead to diﬀerent conclusions regarding the relative importance of “selection”versus
“learning by exporting”eﬀects. De Loecker (2013) for example, demonstrates that in
the case of Slovenia, learning by exporting seems to play an important role once one
explicitly controls for the fact that entering export markets is associated with higher
investment. These ﬁndings once again point to the importance of employing empirical

30

speciﬁcations that are consistent with the underlying mechanisms one has in mind when
analyzing the data.

4.2

Mechanisms Underlying Proﬁtability

It is only recently that research has focused on unpacking the mechanisms that generate the aforementioned performance improvements. While it is still too early to draw
general conclusions based on the ﬁndings of the few studies that explicitly distinguish
between physical productivity and price eﬀects, the evidence to date suggests that demand side and price eﬀects are important and may be the primary factors generating
the documented proﬁtability increases.
To demonstrate the signiﬁcance of these eﬀects, consider the De Loecker (2011) study
of the Belgian textile market. As explained earlier, De Loecker does not have price data,
but introduces a demand system in order to separate productivity from price eﬀects.
Hence, one can distinguish in his framework between aggregate proﬁtability (Πt ) and
aggregate productivity (Ωt ). Table 3 performs the standard decomposition of aggregate
(i.e., industry-level) productivity changes. Columns 2-4 refer to revenue productivity,
while columns 5-7 refer to physical productivity. Columns 2 and 5 show the aggregate
changes at the industry level; columns 3 and 6 show the within-ﬁrm component, while
columns 4 and 7 capture the reallocation20 .
There are two interesting features of this table. First, the aggregate physical productivity change between 1994-2002 (a period that spans removal of major trade restrictions,
i.e., quotas, in textiles) displayed in column 5 appears signiﬁcantly lower than the change
in revenue productivity in column 2. Hence, it seems that the usual “productivity” improvement shown in column 2 reﬂects primarily changes in prices. Second, column
4 suggests signiﬁcant reallocation eﬀects, from less proﬁtable towards more proﬁtable
ﬁrms. The literature has often interpreted these eﬀects as reallocation from less eﬃcient
towards more eﬃcient ﬁrms. However, column 7 suggests that this interpretation is misguided: the reallocation eﬀects computed using physical productivity are substantially
smaller – almost non-existent. Hence, it appears that the reallocation documented using
revenue productivity as a measure of ﬁrm performance was reallocation towards higher
price and higher markup ﬁrms, not towards ﬁrms with higher eﬃciency.
20

Levinsohn and Petrin (2012) have criticized this market-share-based measure of reallocation as
being uninformative in welfare calculations. While we are sympathetic to their criticism, we simply
want to compare our physical productivity based results to those one would obtain using the standard
approach in the literature, and to this end, we adopt the standard practices of this literature throughout
the calculations.

31

Table 3: Reallocation and Trade Liberalization
Year
(1)
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002

Proﬁtability
Πt
πt
cov
(2) (3) (4)
1.00 0.90 0.10
0.98 0.87 0.11
1.02 0.93 0.10
1.09 0.97 0.13
1.06 0.97 0.10
1.06 0.99 0.07
1.02 0.99 0.03
1.03 0.96 0.06
1.05 0.96 0.09

Productivity
Ωt
ωt
cov
(5) (6)
(7)
1.00 0.95 0.05
0.94 0.89 0.05
0.99 0.95 0.03
1.02 0.97 0.05
0.97 0.94 0.03
0.99 0.99 0.00
0.95 0.96 -0.01
0.95 0.95 0.00
0.97 0.95 0.02

Note: This table is based on the estimates obtained from the analysis in De Loecker (2011).
Both Π and Ω are normalized to one in 1994. We follow the decomposition in Olley and Pakes


(1996) whereby aggregate productivity Ωt = i msit ωit = ω̄t + i (ωit − ω̄t )(msit − m̄st ) =
ω̄t + covt (msit , ωit ), with msit the market share. We apply the same decompostion to the
proﬁtability index Πt .

Because De Loecker (2011) works with a CES demand system - albeit one that
allows for diﬀerent demand elasticities across products within the textile industry markups and prices at the product/ﬁrm level are not aﬀected by the trade liberalization;
the price and markup eﬀects in his framework are the result of reallocation (across
ﬁrms, or across products within a ﬁrm) towards ﬁrms/products with higher markups.
However, we would expect trade liberalizations to also aﬀect prices and markups at
the ﬁrm/product level through both the residual demand (i.e., intensiﬁed competition)
and the cost (i.e., lower prices of imported intermediates) channels. To this end, one
needs to consider more general demand systems that allow for variable markups and
incomplete pass-through of cost changes to prices. Such a framework is considered in
DLGKP. As noted earlier, DLGKP do not commit to a particular demand or market
structure, but adopt an empirical speciﬁcation that nests the main models used in Trade
and Industrial Organization, including those that generate variable markups. They use
the Indian trade liberalization to separately identify the eﬀects of the residual demand
(reductions in output tariﬀs) versus cost (reductions in input tariﬀs) channels. The
authors ﬁnd that output tariﬀ declines have the expected pro-competitive eﬀects; they
lead to lower prices and lower markups. But the striking result is that in the end, the
net eﬀect of the Indian liberalization was to increase markups. This increase, which at
32

ﬁrst seems at odds with the standard intuition that trade has pro-competitive eﬀects
and hence reduces markups, does not come about because of ﬁrm collusion, or any other
attenuation of competition. It is the result of the incomplete pass-through of input tariﬀ
declines to prices.
These results that may seem surprising in the context of trade, are consistent with
the ﬁndings of the exchange rate literature as well as the substantial Macro literature
on price rigidities. Overall, studies that have attempted to explicitly address the price
and markup eﬀects associated with trade openness suggest that the demand side of
the market is as important as the cost side; trade liberalizations do not lead only to
(physical) productivity improvements, but also to changes in prices and markups that
need to be modelled explicitly.21

5

Conclusions and Future Work

We conclude with some ﬁnal thoughts on the state of the literature and future work.
There are several strands within Trade that deal broadly with ﬁrm performance and
globalization, each employing diﬀerent assumptions and approaches. Unfortunately,
there has been minimal cross-fertilization of ideas across these literatures up to now.
The empirical productivity literature has focused on estimating the eﬀects of trade on
ﬁrm performance, without distinguishing between physical eﬃciency and price/markup
eﬀects. Mainstream theoretical models in Trade often employ assumptions that imply
constant markups (for example, CES preferences with monopolistic competition), and
hence abstract from the potential of trade to aﬀect markups. Models that do allow for
markup eﬀects have typically focused on the pro-competitive eﬀects of trade, paying
little attention to the markup eﬀects that arise as a result of incomplete pass-through of
trade-induced cost reductions to prices. But this type of incomplete pass-through has
been precisely the focus of the large literature on exchange rate pass-through, which tries
to understand how prices and markups respond to exchange rate shocks. Its insights have
never been applied to trade liberalizations, despite the fact that (input) tariﬀ reductions
and exchange rates have similar eﬀects on ﬁrm proﬁts. Finally, there have been case
studies of the eﬀects of trade liberalization on ﬁrm performance in particular industries
(e.g., automobiles22 ) that rest on estimation of structural industry models in the IO
tradition, but the results of these studies do not readily generalize to the economy at
21

A similar point emphasizing the role of the demand side has been made in several papers by Foster,
Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008, 2012), but in the context of the domestic market.
22
See Goldberg (1995) and Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1999).

33

large.
We believe that the time is ripe for the methods and insights of these separate literatures to be combined in theoretical and empirical work in this area, and hope that this
article represents a small step in this direction. Indeed, there are encouraging signs. Recent empirical work on the eﬀects of trade liberalizations has tried to distinguish between
eﬃciency and markup eﬀects yielding novel insights. Current work on the eﬀects of trade
on markups makes an explicit distinction between the competition and the pass-through
channels. But much more research, on diﬀerent countries and diﬀerent time periods, is
needed before we will be able to draw general conclusions. Further, the last few years
have seen the emergence of an exciting new literature on assessing the aggregate gains
from trade under alternative modeling assumptions. This literature that is primarily,
though not exclusively, theoretical has emphasized the role that functional form assumptions, especially ones with implications for markup adjustment, play in evaluating the
gains from trade. Careful empirical work that is motivated by and consistent with theoretical models, but does not depend heavily on restrictive functional form assumptions,
can play an important role in informing the assumptions of the models used to assess
the welfare gains from trade.

References
Ackerberg, D., L. C. Benkard, S. Berry, and A. Pakes (2007): “Econometric
Tools for Analyzing Market Outcomes,” in Handbook of Econometrics, ed. by J. Heckman, and E. Leamer, vol. 6, chap. 63. Elsevier, 1 edn.
Amiti, M., O. Itshkhoki, and J. Konings (2013): “Importers, Exporters and Exchange Rate Disconnect,” mimeo.
Amiti, M., and J. Konings (2007): “Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs, and
Productivity: Evidence from Indonesia,” American Economic Review, 97, 1611–1638.
Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, D. Donaldson, and A. Rodrı́guez-Clare (2012):
“The Elusive Pro-Competitive Eﬀects of Trade,” mimeo.
Aw, B. Y., M. J. Roberts, and D. Y. Xu (2011): “R&D Investment, Exporting,
and Productivity Dynamics,” American Economic Review, 101, 1312–44.
Berman, N., P. Martin, and T. Mayer (2012): “How do Diﬀerent Exporters React
to Exchange Rate Changes?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 437–492.
Bernard, A. B., S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2010): “Multiple-Product
Firms and Product Switching,” American Economic Review, 100, 70–97.
Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995): “Automobile Prices in Market
Equilibrium,” Econometrica, 63, 841–90.

34

(1999): “Voluntary Export Restraints on Automobiles: Evaluating a Strategic
Trade Policy,” American Economic Review, 89, 400–430.
Bustos, P. (2011): “Trade Liberalization, Exports, and Technology Upgrading: Evidence on the Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinian Firms,” American Economic
Review, 101, 304–40.
Collard-Wexler, A., and J. De Loecker (2013): “Reallocation and Technology:
Evidence from the U.S. Steel Industry,” NBER Working Papers, (18739).
De Loecker, J. (2011): “Product Diﬀerentiation, Multiproduct Firms, and Estimating
the Impact of Trade Liberalization on Productivity,” Econometrica, 79, 1407–1451.
(2013): “Detecting Learning by Exporting,” American Economic Journal:
Microeconomics, 5, 1–21.
De Loecker, J., P. K. Goldberg, A. K. Khandelwal, and N. Pavcnik (2012):
“Prices, Markups and Trade Reform,” NBER Working Papers, (17925).
De Loecker, J., and F. Warzynski (2012): “Markups and Firm-Level Export Status,” American Economic Review, 102, 2437–71.
Feenstra, R. C., and D. E. Weinstein (2010): “Globalization, Markups, and the
U.S. Price Level,” NBER Working Papers, (15749).
Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson (2008): “Reallocation, Firm
Turnover, and Eﬃciency: Selection on Productivity or Proﬁtability?,” American Economic Review, 98, 394–425.
Foster, L., J. C. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson (2012): “The Slow Growth of
New Plants: Learning about Demand?,” NBER Working Papers, (17853).
Goldberg, P. K. (1995): “Product Diﬀerentiation and Oligopoly in International
Markets: The Case of the U.S. Automobile Industry,” Econometrica, 63, 891–951.
Goldberg, P. K., and R. Hellerstein (2013): “A Structural Approach to Identifying the Sources of Local Currency Price Stability,” Review of Economic Studies, 80,
175–210.
Goldberg, P. K., A. Khandelwal, N. Pavcnik, and P. Topalova (2009):
“Trade Liberalization and New Imported Inputs,” American Economic Review, 99,
494–500.
Goldberg, P. K., A. K. Khandelwal, N. Pavcnik, and P. Topalova (2010b):
“Imported Intermediate Inputs and Domestic Product Growth: Evidence from India,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125, 1727–1767.
Goldberg, P. K., and M. M. Knetter (1997): “Goods Prices and Exchange Rates:
What Have We Learned?,” Journal of Economic Literature, 35, 1243–1272.
Goldberg, P. K., and F. Verboven (2001): “The Evolution of Price Dispersion in
the European Car Market,” Review of Economic Studies, 68, 811–48.
Halpern, L., M. Koren, and A. Szeidl (2011): “Imported Inputs and Productivity,” CeFiG Working Papers, (8).
35

Hsieh, C.-T., and P. J. Klenow (2009): “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in
China and India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 1403–1448.
Katayama, H., S. Lu, and J. R. Tybout (2009): “Firm-level productivity studies:
Illusions and a solution,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 27, 403–
413.
Khandelwal, A. (2010): “The Long and Short (of) Quality Ladders,” Review of
Economic Studies, 77, 1450–1476.
Khandelwal, A., and P. Topalova (2011): “Trade Liberalization and Firm Productivity: The Case of India,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 93, 995–1009.
Klette, T. J., and Z. Griliches (1996): “The Inconsistency of Common Scale Estimators When Output Prices Are Unobserved and Endogenous,” Journal of Applied
Econometrics, 11, 343–61.
Kugler, M., and E. Verhoogen (2012): “Prices, Plant Size, and Product Quality,”
Review of Economic Studies, 79, 307–339.
Levinsohn, J., and A. Petrin (2012): “Measuring Aggregate Productivity Growth
Using Plant-Level Data,” RAND Journal of Economics, 43, 705–725.
Lileeva, A., and D. Trefler (2010): “Improved Access to Foreign Markets Raises
Plant-Level Productivity... for Some Plants,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125,
1051–1099.
Mayer, T., M. J. Melitz, and G. I. Ottaviano (2011): “Market Size, Competition,
and the Product Mix of Exporters,” NBER Working Papers, (16959).
Melitz, M. J. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and
Aggregate Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 71, 1695–1725.
Melitz, M. J., and G. I. Ottaviano (2008): “Market Size, Trade, and Productivity,”
The Review of Economic Studies, 75, 295–316.
Melitz, M. J., and S. J. Redding (Forthcoming): “Heterogenous Firms and Trade,”
in Handbook of International Economics. Elsevier, 4th edn.
Melitz, M. J., and D. Trefler (2012): “Gains from Trade When Firms Matter,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26, 91–118.
Nakamura, E., and D. Zerom (2010): “Accounting for Incomplete Pass-Through,”
Review of Economic Studies, 77, 1192–1230.
Olley, S., and A. Pakes (1996): “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Industry,” Econometrica, 64, 1263–98.
Pavcnik, N. (2002): “Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvement: Evidence from Chilean Plants,” Review of Economic Studies, 69, 245–76.
Schmalensee, R. (1989): “Inter-industry studies of structure and performance,” in
Handbook of Industrial Organization, ed. by R. Schmalensee, and R. Willig, vol. 2,
chap. 16. Elsevier, 1 edn.

36

Schott, P. K. (2004): “Across-product Versus Within-product Specialization in International Trade,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 646–677.
Syverson, C. (2004): “Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example,”
Journal of Political Economy, 112, 1181–1222.
Verhoogen, E. A. (2008): “Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Wage Inequality in the
Mexican Manufacturing Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 489–530.

37

