NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE INTER-GENERATIONAL AND SOCIAL TRANSMISSION OF CULTURAL TRAITS:
THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM SMOKING BEHAVIOR
Rebekka Christopoulou
Ahmed Jaber
Dean R. Lillard
Working Paper 19304
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19304

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

This research is funded by the National Institute on Aging (grant 1 R01 AG030379-01A2). The paper
has benefited from discussions with participants of the Health Behaviors and Disparities Research
Seminar at Cornell University; the Conference on the Economics of Interactions and Culture at the
Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance; the Applied Microeconomics Seminar at the Ohio State
University; and the 2013 Conference of the European Society of Population Economics at Aarhus
University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Rebekka Christopoulou, Ahmed Jaber, and Dean R. Lillard. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Inter-generational and Social Transmission of Cultural Traits: Theory and Evidence from
Smoking Behavior
Rebekka Christopoulou, Ahmed Jaber, and Dean R. Lillard
NBER Working Paper No. 19304
August 2013
JEL No. D1,I1,Z1
ABSTRACT
The extant literature on cultural transmission takes competing cultures in society as given and parental
cultural preferences as fixed. We relax these assumptions by endogenizing both societal and parental
preferences. We use smoking as a case-study of a cultural trait which did not always exist, and which
over time has switched from being perceived as socially acceptable to being perceived as undesirable.
In our model, parents' preferred cultural traits depend on the perceived health costs of smoking, and
societal preferences depend on the behavior of a tobacco industry that aims to maximize smoking prevalence.
We derive conditions for the emergence and persistence of the smoking habit, and find new implications
for the relationship between parental and societal influences. We then test explicitly for the validity
of our theoretical framework using novel US data. We find that our framework is able to capture features
of smoking behavior which existing models are unable to explain.

Rebekka Christopoulou
The Ohio State University
1787 Neil Avenue
235C Campbell Hall
Columbus, OH 43210
Christopoulou.1@osu.edu
Ahmed Jaber
Cornell University
457 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
jabera@nber.org

Dean R. Lillard
Department of Human Sciences
The Ohio State University
1787 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
lillard.13@osu.edu

1

Introduction

Cultural traits and norms, like risk-preferences, corruption, and altruism, are important in shaping individual
economic behavior. The process by which such traits get transmitted from one generation to the next determines
whether they survive and and how they are geographically distributed. In this study, we explain how cultures rst
emerge in society and how they may persist across generations even when parental preferences change over time.
Our study adds to a growing economics literature that looks at the joint role of parental and social channels of
cultural transmission.
Researchers from a wide range of scientic disciplines have long debated the nature/nurture question to evaluate
the relative contribution of cultural (or environmental) and genetic eects on cognitive and psychological traits
(Sacerdote 2011). Economists have also contributed to this debate, and have provided elaborate theory predicting
that the genetic transmission of traits determines behavior (Robson and Samuelson 2011). However, this literature
generally concurs with the standard Darwinian prediction of the survival of the ttest, and is at odds with evidence
for the resilience of minoritarian ethnic and religious traits, e.g.

among the US immigrant population.

The

`melting pot' hypothesis, which suggests that characteristics and traits of the immigrant population in the US will
converge over time until they resemble those of the general population, is not consistent with observed patterns.
The observed behavior and characteristics of migrants conforms more closely to the `salad bowl' hypothesis,
which suggests that dierent ethnic and minoritarian communities can simultaneously co-exist and maintain their
respective cultural identities. In fact, norms in the country of immigrant origin are found to signicantly predict
the behavior of second- and third-generation US immigrants (e.g Borjas 1992, Fernandez and Fogli 2009, Algan
and Cahuc 2010). Starting with Bisin and Verdier (2001), the cultural transmission literature emerged to provide
a rationale for this previously unexplained persistence of cultural traits (see Bisin and Verdier 2011 for a review).
Bisin and Verdier (2001) developed a model in which children acquire traits either via societal role models or via
parental socialization eorts. They assume that children are more likely to acquire a given trait the more prevalent
that trait is in society, and that all parents want to transmit their own cultural trait to their children.

Given

these assumptions, their model identies a key feature of the social environment that ensures the co-existence
of cultural traits in equilibrium. This property, which Bisin and Verdier term cultural 'substitutability', states
that parents socialize their children less when their cultural trait is more prevalent in the population. Although
ground-breaking, Bisin and Verdier's model fails to explain the persistence of traits that all parents want to avoid
passing on to their children, even if they themselves possess them (e.g. insincerity, preferences for unprotected
sex, substance use, low educational attainment). Saez-Marti and Sjogren (2008) address this failure by imposing
that societal role models who belong to the minority group have a disproportionate inuence on children. This
condition ensures the resilience of traits that parents do not actively transmit.

2

Still, existing theory fails to account for two important aspects of cultural transmission. First, it says little
about how traits emerge. If societal role models of a new cultural trait do not exist then it is unclear how that
culture would arise in a society where all parents socialize their children to the same preferred culture. Second,
the theory does not inform us about how and why parents with the same cultural trait may prefer dierent traits
for their children.

Most eorts have focused on developing a framework for contexts where parents' cultural

attitudes are xed. Yet, history is alive with examples of newly born cultural traits (e.g. the culture of social
networking) and traits that switched from being perceived as virtuous or socially acceptable to being perceived
as bad or undesirable, and vice versa (e.g.

preferences about smoking, polluting the environment, pre-marital

sex, polygyny, divorce, womens' rights etc.).

Using the smoking habit as a case-study, we adapt the cultural

transmission framework to account for this general class of traits.
Smoking of tobacco was rst adopted before the 15th century by native Americans, who used it for recreation,
medicinal purposes, or as a hallucinogenic in rituals. When Christopher Columbus and his crew discovered the
American continent, they also discovered smoking of tobacco and introduced the practice to Europe.

In 1854,

Philip Morris made the rst hand-rolled cigarettes in London's Bond Street. The second industrial revolution then
saw the invention of the cigarette rolling machine, which made it possible to mass produce cigarettes cheaply. From
that time and till the 1960s, the habit of smoking diused rapidly, producing high prots for the tobacco industry.
By the time of the world wars, smoking had become so socially acceptable that governments in most countries
distributed cigarettes to troops as part of their regular daily rations. Some even continued to subsidize cigarette
consumption during peacetime. The social perception of smoking started to change only after the publication of
the Royal College of Physicians 1962 report on Smoking and Health (RCPL, 1962) and the US Surgeon General's
Report on Smoking (USDHEW 1964).

Those reports compiled and distilled for public consumption scientic

evidence about the health consequences of tobacco use that had been accumulating for more than three decades.
In the ensuing years, public campaigns against tobacco consumption followed. Over time, those campaigns and
the ever accumulating evidence impacted the popularity of the smoking habit.
What this brief history of smoking teaches us is that the dynamics of the smoking culture have been shaped
by the strategic behavior of a prot-maximizing industry, and the discovery and diusion of scientic evidence.
We take this lesson to theory and build the rst model of cultural transmission that is able to predict both the
emergence and the long-term persistence of culture in a world where outside forces may aect parents' preferred
trait for their children. In our model, the exibility in parental preferences is due to the availability and spread
of information aecting perceptions about the health cost of smoking. This makes our setup more general than
existing models, each of which assumes a particular distribution of parental preferences, e.g.

that all parents

promote their own trait (Bisin and Verdier 2001) or that all parents promote the same trait (Saez-Marti and
Sjogren 2008). We also relax a standard assumption in the literature that children are more likely to acquire a
given trait the more popular that trait is in society. Instead, we assume the existence of a tobacco industry which

3

can manipulate youth smoking behavior (e.g. via advertising). We respectively dene as cultural conformity and
cultural distinction the positive and the negative relationship between the probability of adopting a trait and the
prevalence of that trait in society. Our theory formalizes the relationship of parental and social inuences that
existing models predict by showing that cultural substitution in the parental channel of transmission is always
tied to cultural conformity in the social channel of transmission. It also makes the novel prediction that cultural
distinction is always tied to cultural complementarity. To establish support for our predictions, we carry out an
empirical investigation of smoking behavior using U.S. data.
Our empirical exercise adds to a small but growing group of `structural socialization studies' that explicitly test
the properties of the transmission mechanism (e.g. Jellal and Wol 2002, Namoro and Roushdy 2008, Patacchini
and Zenou 2011, Dohmen et al. 2012). Consistent with our theoretical set-up, we model smoking participation by
children as a function of parental socialization eorts and societal inuences. We then estimate this function using
a novel dataset. Specically, we use data on the smoking behavior of parents and children, and on parental eorts
to socialize children against substance use, from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. We combine these data
with newly constructed smoking prevalence rates from the Current Population Survey, and newly collected data
on individual exposure to anti-smoking information based on the content of magazine articles. Our identication
of the causal eect of parental socialization relies on state- and time-variation in parental exposure to anti-smoking
information. Our identication of the causal eect of the societal inuences relies on the state-level measurement of
the smoking prevalence, which rules out bias due to peer-choice and residential selection, and on the use of xed
eects, which account for unobserved factors that drive both individual and group behavior. We nd evidence
that supports our variant of the cultural transmission theory. Using our results, we project smoking participation
rates of children to future generations and show that they converge to a steady-state in which smoking persists.
The paper is structured as follows. In section 2, we summarize the health economics literature on smoking
behavior and explain how this falls short of describing smoking dynamics across generations.

In Section 3 we

formally present our model. In Sections 4-6, we describe our empirical strategy, the data we use, and our empirical
results. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper.

2

Health economics literature on the transmission of smoking

Empirically, children whose parents smoke are themselves more likely to smoke. But researchers have not established that this simple correlation reects a causal relationship. Available evidence is often suspect because studies
use poor data, small samples, or fail to account for the endogeneity of parental smoking decisions. Even the better
studies have produced mixed evidence. Loureiro et al. (2010) nd correlations consistent with sex-specic transmission using a UK sample. Göhlmann et al. (2010) nd no sex dierences using German data. Using the same
data but a dierent identication strategy, Lillard (2011) nds that parental smoking behavior does not inuence

4

whether children start smoking (for a review of earlier studies see Avenevoli and Ries Merikangas 2003).

One

explanation for these mixed ndings is that parental behavior may have countervailing inuences on their children
smoking habits and these inuences may cancel out each other's eect. For example, a child of a smoker may be
discouraged from smoking by parental advice and anti-smoking rules in the home (Powell and Chaloupka, 2005).
Conversely, a child of a non-smoker may be attracted to smoking as an act of revolution against parental control
(Huver et al., 2007). Such diverse inuences of parenting styles have been overlooked by most of the empirical
studies.
Further, social transmission mechanisms of smoking may also be at play.

Children may copy the smoking

behavior of their peers or societal role-models irrespective of their parents' behavior.

This channel of smoking

transmission has been the subject of a large and growing literature in economics, which consents that `peer-eects'
are important drivers of smoking participation.

This general conclusion is qualitatively robust across dierent

denitions of peer groups, e.g. school-mates, classmates or friends (Gaviria and Raphael 2001, Powel, Tauras and
Ross 2005, Lundborg 2006, Clark and Loheac 2007, Fletcher 2010); siblings (Harris and Lopez-Valcarcel 2008);
partners (Clark and Etile 2006); and the population residing in the same state or prefecture (DeCicca et al 2008,
Yamamura 2011). Christopoulou and Lillard (2013) argue that, in fact, societal inuences on smoking participation
stretch beyond current generations and across national borders. They show that the smoking prevalence of the
children of British immigrants in Australia, South Africa, and the US, varies systematically with the smoking
behavior of their parents' birth cohort in the UK when that cohort was at the same point in their life-cycle. The
implication is that immigrant parents who grew up in a culture that tolerated (or even condoned) smoking will
carry and transmit those values (consciously or subconsciously) to their children, thereby increasing the probability
that they smoke.
The available theory on the economics of smoking does not reect the intuitive processes that the empirical
evidence describes. To analyze smoking behavior, researchers typically use either a myopic addiction model or a
rational addiction model. These models aim to explain the life-course dynamics of the consumption of addictive
goods assuming that individuals introspectively change their own preferences.

The former model assumes that

current consumption depends on one's own past consumption (Pollak 1970, 1976a); the latter model assumes
that current consumption depends both on its past levels and on expectations of future consumption (Stigler and
Becker 1977; Becker and Murphy 1988). Both models ignore the possibility that one's consumption may depend
on the (past, present, or future) consumption of another person. As importantly, both models stipulate that the
initial consumption of the addictive good (i.e. when previous consumption has been consistently zero) depends
only on current factors and characteristics (e.g. prices). Thus, neither model is able to account for the fact that
two individuals with similar characteristics who face exactly the same environment may take dierent smoking
initiation decisions depending on their familial experiences during childhood. In eect, the models fail to achieve
their purpose of describing consumption dynamics over the life-course, and they completely ignore consumption

5

dynamics across generations. The same holds for subsequent models that were built to reconcile the myopic and
rational addiction theories (e.g. Orphanides and Zervos 1995, 1998).
The economic theory on social interactions, which was developing concurrently with the theory of addiction,
oers a less restrictive framework of analysis.

The benchmark study by Pollak (1976b) developed a model of

habit formation and learning, allowing individual preferences to depend on others' behavior, which either provides
information about the costs and benets of behavior, or establishes a point of reference. However, rarely have the
theoretical implications of this approach been drawn with respect to smoking behavior, and in the few occasions
that they have, they have focused on peer eects and have ignored the parental channel of transmission (e.g.
Nakajima 2007, Poutvaara and Siemers 2008).

In this paper, we draw on the literature of intergenerational

transmission of cultural traits to extend the theoretical analysis in this direction.

3

The model

3.1

Environment

Assume that there are an innite number of periods (t
periods. A person born in period

t

is a child in period

child in adulthood. Hence, in period
period

t)

= 1, 2, 3, ...), and each individual is alive for two consecutive

t+1

and children (born in period

t

and an adult in period

t + 1.

Each individual bears one

the population consists of two overlapping generations: adults (born in

t + 1).

We use he to refer to a generic child and she to refer to a generic

adult.
Individuals are either smokers or non-smokers; we call
We then denote

Qt+1

qt

the proportion of the youth who smoke in period

the proportion of adult smokers in period

t + 1.

t.

An individual's smoking behavior need

not be constant throughout the course of a lifetime, since a smoker may decide to quit smoking. To simplify the
exposition, we however impose

Qt+1 = qt .

This is consistent with the literature on cultural transmission, which

1 Our results are qualitatively robust to

assumes a cultural trait is acquired once and for all during childhood.

extending the model to one where parents may quit smoking in adulthood.

3.2

Socialization process

Children are born without predened traits and acquire their smoking behavior through a transmission process.
A child is rst exposed to his parent's inuence, a process we refer to as

preferred

trait need not coincide with her

exhibited

vertical transmission.

The parent's

trait, and so our specication does not force parents to

socialize their children to their own traits. In particular, a smoker parent may choose to socialize her child away

1 By

implicitly assuming that socialization is a function of a parent's youth (rather than adult) smoking behavior, we are imposing

that attitudes towards smoking are acquired early on in life. This modeling assumption allows us to abstract away from the strategic
considerations that would arise from a situation where it would be Pareto optimal for all parents to quit smoking for their childrens'
sake, but who cannot credibly commit to doing so because they each have an incentive to freeride on others' eorts.

6

from smoking, while remaining a smoker herself. The driving force for this divergence between own behavior and
desired behavior could be, for instance, that quitting has addiction costs that are only incurred by someone who
already smokes. To our knowledge, Saez-Marti and Sjogren (2008) and Patacchini and Zenou (2011) are the only
studies to have theoretically investigated in a cultural transmission framework the possibility that parents agree
on the trait to be passed on to future generations (e.g.

educational attainment).

In contrast, the bulk of the

literature on cultural transmission has been motivated by the study of traits like religion, where parents want to
promote their own trait.
Bisin and Verdier call `direct' transmission the process of having parents socialize children to their own traits.
`Vertical transmission' can thus be thought of as a generalization of `direct transmission'.
parent socializing her child to her own trait as
other than her own as

active socialization.

2 We will then refer to a

direct socialization, and to a parent socializing her child to a trait

From here on, we focus on the case where all parents want to discourage

their children from becoming smokers. A smoker parent does not directly socialize her child to smoke, nor does
a non-smoker parent actively socialize her child to smoke. This feature arises endogenously once we let parents
choose the extent of vertical transmission, as it would be counterproductive to ever encourage children to acquire
the unwanted cultural trait. In the terminology of the model, non-smoker parents directly socialize their children
to their own trait with probability
with probability

a (qt ).

d (qt ),

while smoker-parents actively socialize their children to the other trait

1 − d (qt )

With remaining probability

for non-smoker parents, and

1 − a (qt )

for smoker

parents, the child acquires his trait through non parental inuences, a channel which the literature typically labels
as

horizontal transmission.

We think of

S (qt )

With probability

S (qt )

/

1 − S (qt ),

the child then becomes a smoker/non-smoker.

as reecting not only the inuence of societal role models but also the advertising eorts of a

prot-maximizing tobacco industry, as well as the child's own choices.
Throughout the analysis, we impose one of two possible assumptions on the vertical transmission process:

cultural substitution

or

cultural complementarity.

The concept of cultural substitution has been a cornerstone of

the literature starting with Bisin and Verdier (2001), while cultural complementarity has received less attention
(e.g. Bisin, Topa and Verdier 2004; Patacchini and Zenou 2011).

Assumption V1

(Cultural Substitution):

Assumption V2

(Cultural Complementarity):

d (qt )

and a (qt ) are increasing in qt , and d (0) = a (0) = 0.

d (qt )

and a (qt ) are decreasing in qt , and d (1) = a (1) = 0.

Assumption V1 says that a parent's vertical transmission eort is an increasing function of the unwanted trait
in society, and that parents exert no eort when the unwanted trait is absent from society.

When smoking is

the unwanted trait, parents want to make sure their children do not fall prey to the inuence of smoker role
models, and so

2 Note

d (qt )

and

a (qt )

are increasing functions of smoking prevalence

qt .

Assumption V2 says that a

however that our terminology deviates from the literature, which interchangeably uses vertical and direct transmission

to refer to children mimicking their parents.

7

parent's vertical transmission eort is a decreasing function of smoking prevalence in society. This phenomenon
can emanate in two possible ways. Parents may either give up on socializing their children when the outside threat
becomes greater, or the threat of the unwanted trait might be decreasing with its prevalence in society.
We also impose one of two assumption on the horizontal transmission process:

distinction.

cultural conformity

or

cultural

While cultural conformity has been an implicit feature of existing models on cultural transmission,

cultural distinction has been largely overlooked by theoretical studies. In a recent paper, Bisin et al. (2013) call
cultural conformity (distinction) the drop (increase) in psychological costs of interacting with a member of an
outside cultural group when that outside group becomes more dominant. They use those notions to understand
the implications of ethnic identify on marriage outcomes in a cultural transmission framework.

We, however,

dene those concepts dierently:

Assumption H1 (Cultural

conformity):

S (qt )

is increasing in

qt .

Assumption H2 (Cultural

distinction):

S (qt )

is decreasing in

qt .

A large literature on identity formation in psychology, sociology, and political science argues that cultural or
ethnic minority groups may either pursue cultural assimilation into the majority population or they may strive to
keep their distinct identities.

3 We follow this reasoning to assume that the child culturally distinguishes himself

when he horizontally adopts the minority culture, and he culturally conforms when he horizontally adopts the
majority culture.

Thus, cultural distinction predicts that the greater smoking prevalence is in society, the less

likely the child is to adopt this trait. Cultural conformity makes the opposite prediction, that the greater smoking
prevalence is in society, the more likely the child is to adopt this trait.
As we noted above, our denition of cultural conformity has been implicitly assumed in the literature as part
of the horizontal socialization. Existing work has thought of

S (qt )

as representing a

matching process,

i.e. the

likelihood a child is matched to a smoker role model from the population of adults (random-matching (e.g. Bisin
and Verdier 2001; Bisin et al.2013); non-random matching (e.g. Bisin et al. 2004; Saez-Marti and Sjogren 2008)).

4

This matching process must satisfy two basic properties: (i) A child can only be matched to a non-smoker/smoker
when there are only non-smokers/smokers (S

(0) = 0

and

S (1) = 1),

and (ii) the likelihood of being matched

to a smoker increases with the proportion of smokers in society (i.e. our denition of cultural conformity). As
we will show in the empirical section of this paper, there is strong support for the possibility of having cultural
distinction, which cannot be accommodated by existing models.
Section 3.5 reveals that under cultural substitution, assuming

More importantly, the study of dynamics in

S (0) = 0

leads to the disappearing of the smoking

culture in steady state, which is at odds with real-world behavior. The mechanism for horizontal transmission
that we propose addresses this gap in the theoretical literature.

3 See Bisin and Verdier (2011) for a survey of this literature and a list of references.
4 Saez-Marti and Sjogren (2008) refer to as conformism a non-random matching process

that favors the dominant trait.

denition of conformism thus diers from both our and Bisin et al. (2013)'s denition of cultural conformity.

8

Their

3.3

Endogenous vertical transmission

We now explicitly dene the likelihood that a child follows his parent's desire to not smoke as a function of parental
socialization. We nd the optimal level of parental investment, and derive comparative statics for the eect of
smoking prevalence and health costs of smoking.
As before, the subscript

i ∈ {0, 1}

denotes the adult's smoking behavior. When the child is born, his parent

decides how much to invest in his anti-smoking socialization,
the child to become a non-smoker with probability
a smoker with probability

S (q),

v (λi ).

λi ≥ 0.

The cost of socialization is

With remaining probability

and a non-smoker with probability

H

represents the

perceived

and causes

1 − v (λi ), the child becomes

1 − S (q).

We normalize a parent's utility from not seeing her child smoke to
of having a child who smokes, where

c (λi ),

0.

We then denote by

(but not necessarily actual,

eects of smoking. All parents alike value their children's health status, and so

ui (H) < 0

the utility

H ) detrimental health

ui (H) decreases with the perceived

health costs of smoking. Formally, an adult's utility function can be written as follows:

U (λi ; q, H) ≡ (1 − v (λi )) S (q) ui (H) − c (λi ) ,

where a parent's investment is associated with a probability

(1 − v (λi )) S (q) of seeing her child smoke.

Proposition

1 gives the optimal interior investment in the anti-smoking acculturation of a child.

Proposition 1:

Let v (.) be a dierentiable, increasing and concave function, and c (.) be a dierentiable,

increasing and convex function. When interior, a parent's optimal investment choice λ∗i solves
v 0 (λ∗i )
1
.
=
c0 (λ∗i )
−ui (H) S (q)
The assumptions on

v (.)

and

c (.)

(1)

are standard to ensure the existence of a unique solution to the maximization

problem. They state that (i) more eort leads to a greater likelihood (cost) of dissuading the child from acquiring
the unwanted behavior, and (ii) the eectiveness (cost) of this investment decreases (increases) in the amount of
eort that is invested. The optimal investment choice simply equates the marginal cost of investing to its expected
marginal benet. The assumption that

ui (H) < 0

for

i = 0, 1

makes it not optimal for any parent to invest in

pro-smoking culturalization, as this would promote the parent's undesired trait. Had we assumed instead that
smoker parents perceive a non-negative net utility from smoking,

u1 (H) ≥ 0

, we would be in the world of Bisin

and Verdier (2001) where each type of parent promotes her own trait. Ceteris paribus, this possibility is more likely
to arise when the health costs of smoking are small, since both parents perceive children's utility to be decreasing
the more harmful the smoking habit is. From the result in Proposition 1, we can then derive comparative statics
on the investment choice:

9

Proposition 2:

Performing comparing statics on the optimal investment derived in Proposition 1, we obtain

the following predictions:
•

Prediction 1: Parents who perceive

larger

health costs from smoking invest

more

in anti-smoking cultural-

ization.
•

Prediction 2: We have cultural substitution i cultural conformity holds, and cultural complementarity i
cultural distinction holds.

Prediction 1 is straightforward; it states that parents invest more in the anti-smoking culturalization of their
children the more serious the health costs of this habit. Prediction 2 says that vertical socialization follows cultural
substitution when horizontal socialization follows cultural conformity, which is a well-known theoretical result in
the literature, starting with Bisin and Verdier (2001). It implies that when a higher smoking prevalence increases
the likelihood that a child smokes, it is more worthwhile for the parent to exert socialization eort.

However,

Prediction 2 also says that vertical socialization follows cultural complementarity when horizontal socialization
follows cultural distinction, which is a result that is not emphasized in the literature.

It implies that when

smoking prevalence decreases the likelihood that a child smokes, it also lowers the value of socialization to the
parent. Patacchini and Zenou (2011) produce the opposite nding in a cultural transmission model augmented
with peer eects at the vertical transmission stage. Their result requires assuming that both the cost and marginal
cost of socialization are increasing in the proportion of smokers. Like the rest of the literature, we instead favor
a framework where society only plays a role through horizontal transmission; i.e. in the event that the parent is
unsuccessful at socializing her child to the desired trait.

3.4

Endogenous horizontal transmission

To complete the model, we explicitly dene the likelihood that the child adopts smoking through non-parental
channels. Before parents decide how much to socialize their children, a prot-maximizing monopolist chooses a
level of investment

θ

into increasing the appeal of smoking to the youth. Such a feature could arise, for example,

through celebrity endorsements of this habit. Advertising
have diminishing marginal returns, so that

0

cost of advertising (κ

>0

and

κ00 > 0).

∂S(q,θ)
∂θ

> 0 and

θ
2

can be thought of as stimulating "demand", but to

∂ S(q,θ)
∂θ 2

< 0.5

The function

κ (θ) represents the convex

Keeping the rm's investment constant, we assume that

be thought of as a matching process, so that
an interior level of investment for the rm,

∂S(q,θ)
∂q

∂S(0,θ)
∂θ

S (.)

can still

> 0.

We nally impose a regulatory condition to ensure

> κ0 (0).

Proposition 3 describes the equilibrium of the game

implied between the monopolist and parents.

5 We

put this word in quotation marks given that children do not make any active choice in the cultural transmission framework.

10

Proposition 3:

In a subgame perfect equilibrium, we have S (0, θ∗ (0)) > 0, which ensures a heterogeneous

distribution of traits in steady state. Moreover, both cultural substitution and cultural conformity may obtain.
S (0, θ∗ (0)) > 0

follows directly from assuming an interior solution to the problem. It ensures that the tobacco

company would always want to invest a positive amount in making the smoking habit emerge. The second part of
the result comes from a study of the sign of

dS
dq

θ∗

=

∂S
∂q

+

∂S
∂θ ∗
∂θ θ ∗ ∂q . We have cultural complementarity whenever

this quantity is positive, and cultural substitution otherwise. While determining the sign of this quantity involves
the interaction of numerous terms, it is possible to talk loosely about when each possibility obtains using the
ndings in Proposition 2. For example, cultural distinction obtains when: 1) an increase in smoking prevalence
decreases the value of the investment sharply (
of their children becoming smokers (a

> d).

∂ 2 S(q,θ)
negative enough), or 2) smoker parents are less tolerant
∂θ∂q

The main take away message is that both cultural conformity and

cultural distinction are realistic possibilities. We leave it to the data to tell us when each obtains.

3.5

Dynamics



We summarize the period

t+1

transmission process into a transition matrix

(1 − d (qt )) S (qt ) , (Pt1 ≡ (1 − a (qt )) S (qt ))

where

Pt0 ≡

gives the proportion of children of non-smokers (smokers) who adopt

smoking. This matrix is subscripted by the time period
behavior, which is acquired in their youth.


P
 t0 
Pt ≡ 
,
Pt1

t

since transmission is a function of the parents' smoking

We can represent the evolution of smoking in society through the

equation




1
−
q
t 

q̇ = PtT 
 − qt ,
qt
where the superscript

T

(2)

indicates the transpose of a matrix. The following result describes the steady state be-

havior of the system.

Proposition 4:

In a steady state, there always exists a fraction of non-smokers. Moreover, under cultural

complementarity the smoking habit always persists, while under cultural substitution it persists as long as S (0) > 0.
Under cultural complementarity, we must have cultural distinction (Proposition 2), and therefore children always have the proclivity to reject the status-quo so that neither traits disappear in steady state. Under cultural
substitution, smoking never becomes the unique trait since parents have an incentive to prevent this from happening. In contrast, smoking may disappear if no outside factor forces it to persist. Given Proposition 3, we know
that the existence of a tobacco industry can guarantee the coexistence of both traits under this scenario.

11

4

Empirical strategy

We use the following baseline specication:

P r(ever smoke = 1)c

= α0
+ α1 ∗ P r(socialization = 1)p
+ α2 ∗ sm. prevalence of role model populationcs
P
+
α3j ∗ Xjcs

(3)

j

+ νc

P r(socialization = 1)p

= β0
+ β1 ∗ exposure to health inf ormationp
+ β2 ∗ sm. prevalence of role model populationcs
P
+
β3j ∗ Xjcs

(4)

j

+ υc
Equation (3) is the empirical counterpart of
equation that treats
of (1).

PT ,

as described in the previous section. It is a structural form

P r(socialization = 1) as the endogenous regressor.

Equation (4) is the empirical counterpart

In this rst-stage equation we identify parental socialization using dierent indicators of the parent's

exposure to health information
parameter; and

β

X

denotes exogenous control variables;

denotes a reduced-form parameter. Indexes

stands for state; and
variable. Finally,

as instruments.

ν

j

and

c

and

p

α

denotes a structural

stand for child and parent, respectively;

s

identies each characteristic (individual, parental, or state) that we include as a control

υ

are the jointly distributed error terms.

We estimate (3) and (4) as a system by IV probit, even though this method is meant to be used when the
endogenous regressor is continuous rather than binary. Because Heckman's (1978) maximum likelihood bivariate
probit was built to accommodate binary endogenous regressors, it would have been more appropriate to use in our
case. However, we choose not to use it because it is computationally cumbersome,

6 and it does not signicantly

outperform IV probit or even IV linear probability models in terms of accuracy (see Nichols 2011 and references
therein). To conrm the latter point, we test the robustness of our baseline specication to a range of alternative
estimation methods, including the bivariate probit.
To statistically identify exogenous variation in parental socialization we assume that, controlling for the child's
own exposure to anti-smoking articles, we can exclude parental exposure to health information as a direct determinant of the child's decision to smoke. To test this exclusion restriction, we calculate the Amemiya-Lee-Newey

6 Researchers

nd that to run a bivariate probit often takes 10 or 20 times as long as other similar models, and that standard

statistical software like Stata and R frequently fail to nd the maximum of the likelihood (e.g. Freedman and Sekhon 2010)

12

(ALN) minimum

χ2

statistic under the null that the instruments are valid (i.e. uncorrelated with the error term)

7

and correctly excluded from the outcome equation.
power, we calculate the

χ2

To test whether our instruments have weak explanatory

statistic under the null that the instruments are jointly statistically insignicant in

the reduced form. We also calculate the Hausman

χ2

statistic to test whether there is a statistically signicant

dierence between IV probit and probit (naive) estimates. The null of this test is that the probit model provides
both consistent and ecient estimates while IV probit estimates are only consistent, and that the dierence between the two is normally distributed with mean zero. Further, we calculate the Wald
that the correlation coecient between

ν

and

υ

is zero and, therefore,

χ2

statistic to test the null

P r(socialization = 1)

can be treated as

exogenous. Finally, we check the robustness of our baseline estimates to the inclusion of a wide range of controls
and instruments.
To statistically identify the social transmission of the smoking trait we rely on the fact that the smoking
prevalence of the role-model population is measured at the state-level.

Because we can plausibly assume that

state-specic smoking prevalence is exogenous to the parental choice of the state of residence and it cannot be
aected by endogenous peer-choice, we rule out selection and simultaneity bias from the estimated eects. Bias
due to exogenous correlated eects, however, remains a possibility (Manski 1993, 2000). The smoking prevalence
of the role-model population is the aggregation of individual behavior which (depending on how the role-model
population is dened) may include the parent or the child. Thus, our estimate of

α2

may reect the fact that

individuals in a given state have similar smoking behavior because they have unobserved similar characteristics or
because they are exposed to the same institutional or contextual factors (`Manski's reection problem'). To account
for such unobserved common factors, we follow the health economics literature and use a xed eects specication
(see, for example, Nakajima 2007 and references therein). Because, as we describe below, the smoking prevalence
of the role model population varies by state and child age, we include a full set of state and age xed-eects. We
thus identify causality of the social eects by using variations in the proportion of smokers between age-groups
within a state.
We use the results to assess whether socialization by parents and role models aect a child's smoking decision,
to identify the relative contribution of the two types of socialization to the transmission of the smoking culture,
and to test important properties of the transmission process; namely, cultural substitution versus complementarity,
and cultural conformity versus cultural distinction. Finally, we use the structural parameter estimates to forward
project how the rate of ever-smoking of 10-18 year olds will evolve under dierent policy scenaria.

7 The

Amemiya-Lee-Newey test is only possible after running the two-step Newey (1985) IV probit estimator. All other results we

present in this paper are derived using the maximum likelihood IVprobit estimator.

13

5

Data

Our empirical analysis exploits new as well as existing data in novel ways.

Below we discuss the source and

construction of each type of data. Table 1 provides summary statistics of selected variables.

5.1

Individual level data on children and care-givers

We draw individual level data on children aged 10-18 from the 2002 and 2007 waves of the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics (PSID) - Child Development Supplement/Transition to Adulthood (CDS-TA) surveys, and
supplementary data on parents of each child from the main family les of the PSID. The CDS-TA sample was
originally drawn from PSID families with children 0-12 years in 1997 and reinterviewed in 2002 and 2007. We use
sample weights provided by the PSID to account for unequal probabilities of being selected into the CDS sample
and for dierential attrition rates of PSID and CDS participants. The 2002 and 2007 wave of CDS-TA directly
surveys children age 10 and older about tobacco use and other types of behaviors. These data were collected by
an audio computer assisted self-interview.

In such interviews, youth listen to the questions through a headset

and record their responses directly into a laptop computer. Neither the child's parents nor the interviewer knew
how s/he answered the questions. Aquilino (1994) documents that this method generates more accurate data on
socially sensitive topics such as psychological well-being, sexual behaviors, and experiences with tobacco, alcohol,
and drug use.

We use the data on whether a child ever smoked (dened on the survey as smoking at least 1

cigarette every day for 30 days) to represent

P r(ever smoke = 1)c .

Eighteen percent of our sample smoked at

some time between age 10 and 18.
The CDS-TA surveys asks questions not only of the child but also of the person in the PSID household who
identied herself/himself as the `primary' care-giver (PCG) of that child.

Table 1 documents that biological

mothers comprise 93 percent of self-identied care-givers, six percent of care-givers are biological fathers, and
the rest are adoptive mothers or step-mothers.

Because of the disproportionate share of biological mothers in

our sample, we cannot separately model how cultural transmission varies with the nature of the parent-child
relationship.
While the CDS-TA surveys do not ask questions that are specically about smoking socialization eorts of the
PCG, the surveys do collect information that is likely to proxy for it. Ideally the surveys would ask each PCG to
report how much eort she spends socializing her child about the health risks of smoking. Instead the CDS/TA
surveys asked each care-giver to report how frequently during the past month she talked to each child about the
dangers of substance use (e.g.

drinking alcohol or taking drugs).

that ranged from not in the past month to every day.

The survey specied ve response categories

While these data are not ideal, we expect answers to

them to be correlated with the conceptual variable of interest. In addition, we identify variation in the pattern
of responses in these data using variation in information that is specically about health risks of smoking. As a

14

result, though imperfect, the CDS data are likely to proxy well for the conceptual variable of interest. Table 1
shows that 21 percent of care-givers reported they had not spoken with their child about the dangers of substance
use in the past month. Most (42 percent) care-givers discussed this subject once or twice per month. However, 37
percent of care-givers discussed substance use at least once a week during the previous month.
In addition to the socialization data, we draw CDS-TA data on age, sex, race, and religion of the child;
household income; family size; and measures of parenting styles, reading habits, and employment status of the
PCG.
We also draw data on the smoking behavior and educational attainment of the PCGs from the main PSID
les. We use data on smoking behavior from the 1986, 1999, 2001, 2003, 2005, 2007, and 2009 family les and data
from a special 1990 questionnaire administered to all PSID household members over the age of 55 to construct our
measure of whether a parent ever smoked. Finally, we draw data on years of completed schooling from all waves
of the PSID. In our sample, 45 percent of PCGs smoked at some point in their lives and the average PCG has
completed 13 years of schooling.

5.2

Smoking prevalence rates of the role model population

To construct measures of role-model smoking behavior, we use data from the Tobacco Use Supplements to the
Current Population Survey (TUS-CPS). Sponsored by the National Cancer Institute and administered as part
of the U.S. Census Bureau's continuing labor force survey, the TUS-CPS data have been collected intermittently
since 1955. We use responses from 21 surveys conducted in August 1967, August 1968, September 1989, September
1992, January and May 1993, September 1995, January and May 1996, September 1998, January, and May 1999,
June and November 2001, February 2002, February, June, and November 2003, May and August 2006, and January
2007. Each survey asks respondents: Have you ever smoked regularly?; If yes, what is the age when you started?;
Do you currently smoke?; and If not, what is the age when you last smoked regularly?.
After dropping multiple observations for each individual across monthly waves of the same calendar year, we
pool all data from these waves and use the smoking questions to construct the smoking history of every TUS-CPS
respondent. To do this we identify all respondents who ever smoked and who report a start age, a current smoking
status, and a quit age (former smokers only). We then assume that a person smoked in every year between the
age she started and either the age at the survey date (current smokers) or the age she quit (former smokers).
Because in each calendar year our sample includes all respondents who were alive in that year and retrospectively
answered the smoking questions in any later year, we start with an enormous sample of current, ever, and never
smokers (approximately 81 million observations). We combine our computed smoking life-histories with data on
the state of residence (at the time of the survey) to construct smoking prevalence rates by sex, cohort, state, and
calendar year (weighted by the CPS sampling weights).

15

To match our empirical specication as closely as possible with our theory, we assume that a child's role model
is drawn from his parent's generation. This assumption means that we create smoking prevalence rates of the role

8 Table 1 shows that among

model population using males and females who are 20-29 years older than the child.

the potential social role models of children in our sample, the average smoking prevalence rate is 26 percent. Later
in the analysis we experiment with dierent denitions of the role-model population (by age and sex).
To illustrate the variation in the data we develop, Figure 1 plots the smoking rates by sex, state, and calendar
year for the social role models of children who are age 14 at the time of the survey (i.e. at mean age). While these
data have rich variation across all dimensions, the variation we can exploit is limited because we only observe a
child's smoking behavior and his parent's socialization eort in 2002 and 2007. Despite that limitation, plenty of
variation remains available to us: across states, gender, and by child age. Figure 2 showcases the data that we
actually use in the analysis.

9 Clearly, the smoking rates vary signicantly by gender and state, but note that,

because the state-specic curves cross, the rates also vary by age of the child/parent generation.

5.3

Information about the health risks of smoking

To instrument parental socialization we use temporal and geographic variation in exposure to information about
the health risks of smoking. The basic data consist of counts of articles published between 1924 and 2009 that
warn readers about the health risks of smoking.

We use counts of articles published in each of more than 21

popular consumer magazines. To generate additional geographical, but also temporal variation, we also exploit
data on the number of issues of each magazine that were sold in each state in each year.
The data on articles were generated by rst searching two electronic databases (ProQuest and the Historical
Reader's Guide to Periodical Literature) using a keyword search on  smok* and cancer,  smok* and health,
 cig* and cancer,  cig* and health and similar text strings. Successive searches produced roughly 5,000 titles of
articles published between 1890 and 2009. Two undergraduate research assistants then independently reviewed all
5,000 titles to identify articles that potentially warned about the health risks of smoking. This review eliminated
roughly 2,500 articles that focused on the eect of the health risk information on nancial returns of tobacco
companies, tobacco growing agriculture, and international trade in tobacco. The remaining set included articles
whose titles suggested that the articles discussed content about risks individuals faced.

A team of research

assistants collected copies of all articles and read them. Two of them independently rated the articles as a)  prosmoking, b)  neutral, and c)  anti-smoking when they judged that an article conveyed to readers the impression
that smoking a) improved, b) did not aect, or c) degraded the health of smokers. Any disagreement was discussed

8 i.e.

we assume an average generation gap of 25 years, which is slightly smaller than the average generation gap that we observe

in our data (28 years).

9 Note

that instead of 2007 data we use data that correspond to 2006 because the 2007 survey was conducted in January. Aside

from the fact that the sample is smaller, smoking behavior in January does not represent average smoking behavior throughout the
year because more people quit smoking in January to implement a New Year's resolution. Many of these people fail in their resolution.
Consequently, smoking prevalence rates in January are lower and more widely distributed than smoking prevalence rates over the
whole year.

16

and resolved. The resulting list of articles generated a list of magazines in which the articles appeared.
We then compiled data on sales of each of those magazines in every state in each year. We got the sales data from
the Audit Bureau of Circulation. The Audit Bureau of Circulation is an organization that publishers voluntarily
join. Its sole purpose is to audit and verify circulation gures the publishers provide to them. Their independent
auditing provides a valuable service to publishers because they charge advertisers more for space in more widely
circulated magazines. Advertisers therefore demand (and publishers willingly provide) an independently veried
count of circulation. The magazine circulation data vary by month, year, and state.
We assume that, when a magazine is sold, it is seen by all members of the household in which the purchaser

10 To capture this exposure, we divide estimates of each state's population from the Current Population

resides.

Reports of the Census Bureau by 2.3 (the average household size) and divide the number of issues sold in each
state in each year by that number. The resulting gure is an estimate of the fraction of each state's population
that read each magazine (in each year). We then multiply the fraction of each state's population that read each
magazine by the number of articles that appeared in that magazine. This step yields the exposure of a randomly
drawn person from a given state to an article that appeared in a given magazine in a given year.

Finally, we

sum across all magazines in which an anti-smoking article appeared. The nal data proxy for the total potential
exposure to anti-smoking magazine articles in a given state in a given year. Currently we compute this sum using
articles that appear in 21 magazines that accounted for 70 percent of all anti-smoking magazine articles produced
by the above searches. Formally our measure is given by:

Anti-smoking articles readst

=

21
X

Articlesmt

m=1
where

s

denotes state,

t

denotes calendar year, and

m

Issuesmst
Populationst /2.3

(5)

denotes each of 21 magazines.

Figure 3 plots the resulting measure for all states between 1929 and 2009. We use these data to compute several
alternative measures of exposure to anti-smoking information of both PCGs and children. The two measures we
select to use in the baseline specication are: (i) the accumulated sum of articles (potentially) seen by the PCG or
the child since age 10, which should capture the degree of exposure; and (ii) the standard deviation in the articles
read since age 10, which should capture the

in frequency

of the information ow.

Similar measures have been

shown to predict changes in consumption of fats and oils as information developed and spread about the health
risks of consumption of saturated, monounsaturated, and poly unsaturated fats (Chern et al. 1995). We start
counting exposure from age 10, assuming that it is the earliest age a child can comfortably read. Year 1929 is the
earliest year in which a PCG in our sample was age 10, and year 1994 is the earliest year in which a child was age
10. Thus, our measures of exposure for PCGs (i.e. our instruments) encompasses all temporal and state variation
illustrated in Figure 3. In contrast, our equivalent measure for children (which we use as a control) encompasses

10 In

fact we only assume a household member

potentially

sees the article. From now on we use the terms exposure and potential

exposure interchangeably.

17

the variation illustrated in the shaded area only. The `typical' PCG in our sample has been exposed to about 12
anti-smoking articles since age 10, while the corresponding number for the `typical' child is 4.

5.4

Indicators of the economic environment

In our regressions, we control for time-varying state-specic economic factors that may aect the child's probability
to smoke or the PCG's socialization eorts. Specically, we control for state and federal cigarette taxes and state
per-capita income. We use the measure of `full' taxes on cigarettes described in Lillard and Sfekas (2013). This
measure is the sum of the state and federal cigarette tax and the per pack escrow payments that are required
on the 1998  Master Settlement Agreement between the four major cigarette manufactures and the US states.
Viscusi and Hersh (2011) and Lillard and Sfekas (2013) document that this payment is functionally equivalent to
a per pack cigarette tax. We draw data on real per capita state income from the Regional Economic Information
System of the Bureau of Economic Analysis in the U.S. Department of Commerce (SA05 series) and adjust them
in units of real 2008 dollars. To illustrate the variation in these two variables, we plot them by state and year in
Figures 4 and 5.

6

Results

6.1

Vertical versus horizontal transmission of the smoking trait

The naive way to think about the cultural transmission of the smoking trait would be to assume no reverse
causality between parental socialization eorts and the childrens' decision to smoke. Table 2 presents estimates
of equation (3) under this assumption; that is, by treating
use the socialization data in their `raw' form; i.e.

P r(socialization = 1)

as exogenous. In column 1 we

in ve categorical dummy variables: not in the past month

(the reference category), once/twice a month, once a week, several times a week, and daily. In columns 2-5 we
dichotomize the data into a single dummy to denote that children are socialized with `at least' a given level of
frequency (at least once/twice per month, at least once a week etc.).
combinations.

The resulting estimates vary across the

In column 1, PCG socialization eorts are associated with a higher probability that the child

ever smokes, even though that association decreases as the frequency of socialization increases. The estimates in
column 2 also suggest a positive association, while columns 3-5 suggest a weak negative association (which in 3
and 5 is statistically insignicant). The probable cause of these counterintuitive results is the endogeneity of the
socialization variable. Children may be less likely to smoke when their parents socialize them against it, but it
is also likely that a PCG will discuss substance use more often if a child smokes or the parent suspects a child is
likely to smoke. To isolate the former eect we abandon the naive approach.
Table 3 presents our baseline estimates of jointly determined equations (3) and (4), as described in Section

18

11 To simplify the analysis, we dichotomize the socialization variable,

4.

P r(socialization = 1),

to indicate the

12 As we

probability that the PCG socializes the child about the dangers of substance use at least once a week.

mentioned earlier, we instrument the PCG's socialization eorts with the parental exposure to smoking-related
health information since age 10 and the infrequency of that exposure. In contrast to the results in column 3 of Table
2, the coecient on the instrumented socialization variable is negative and statistically signicant, suggesting that
a parent's eort to socialize her child is eective. The performance of the instruments in the rst-stage equation
is satisfactory: they are statistically signicant and the sign of their coecients are in the direction described in
Prediction 1. Those PCGs who are exposed to more anti-smoking articles on average also exert more eort to
socialize their children. Holding the average level of exposure constant, PCGs socialize their children less if their
exposure varies more over time. That is, PCGs socialize their children more when they are exposed to a constant
stream of information about the health risks of smoking compared to PCGs who see the same number of articles on
average but who see no articles in some years and many articles in others. The diagnostic test results corroborate
the good performance of our instruments and of the baseline specication in general.
We should note that a factor contributing to instrument validity is that the baseline specication controls for
the child's exposure to anti-smoking articles since age 10. Again, the estimated coecient on this variable makes
economic sense: a higher information exposure of the child is associated with a lower probability that the child
ever smokes and with a lower socialization eort by the PCG (as s/he now relies on the external information to
do the job). Although the statistical signicance of these eects is somewhat weak, it is important to mention
that removing the measure of child exposure from the estimation signicantly impacts the ALN test of overidentication. In this case, the

χ2

statistic increases to 3.255 and the probability values drops to 0.071, so that

we reject the hypothesis that the instruments are valid at the 10% level of signicance.
In all regressions reported in Tables 2 and 3, the probability that the child ever smokes increases with the
state-specic smoking prevalence rates of the role-model population, providing evidence for cultural conformity.
In the rst-stage of Table 3, the socialization eort of PCGs also increases with the smoking prevalence in the
role model population and it is statistically unrelated to parental smoking status, providing evidence for cultural
substitution.

The co-existence of cultural substitution and conformity supports Prediction 2 of the model.

It

suggests that all parents wish to discourage smoking and, because they know that their children will conform to
societal trends, they will increase their anti-smoking socialization eorts when smoking becomes more popular in
society (we expand this discussion in Section 6.3).

11 From

this point onwards all regressions are estimated by IV probit. See Table 4 in the Appendix for a set of robustness test of

the baseline estimates to alternative methods of estimation.

12 We

dichotomize the socialization variable because the coecients on the dierent versions of the socialization variable presented in

columns 2-5 of Table 2 suggest that socialization categories once a week, several times per week and every day produce results that
are similar among them but much dierent to the results produced by category once/twice a month. This implies that the response
distribution we observe could be a mixture of two distributions, each capturing a dierent kind of decision process.

Nonetheless,

our baseline results show low sensitivity to the denition of the dichotomized socialization variable. See Table 5 for the robustness
analysis. In a similar exercise, Patacchini and Zenou (2011) use the frequency that a parent reads to a child to capture parental eort
to cultivate interest in education to the child. They dichotomize their socialization variable the same way.

19

To compare the importance of the parental (vertical) and social (horizontal) channels of transmission of the
smoking habit, we calculate marginal eects of `equivalent' changes in parental socialization eorts and the smoking
prevalence of the role model population on the probability that the child smokes.

Clearly, dening changes of

equivalent magnitude in two completely dierent variables is a challenge. We take a `let the data speak' approach
and allow both variables to increase by half their standard deviation. This corresponds to a 9.8 percentage point

13 , and to a

increase in the share of parents who socialize their children at least once a week (from 41.6% to 51.4%)

2.6 percentage point increase in the smoking prevalence rate of the role model population (from 26.3% to 28.9%).
We nd that these changes cause the likelihood that the child smokes to decrease by 3.9 percentage points and to
increase by 2.8 percentage points, respectively. The implication is that parental inuences are stronger than social
inuences in the determination of youth smoking participation. Note that we reach this conclusion without taking
into account the direct eects of parental smoking behavior on the probability of youth smoking participation (e.g.
due to genetics, mimicking, nicotine addiction from passive smoking, or easier access to cigarettes). Our results
suggest that this channel of transmission is also important; the child is more likely to have ever smoked when the
PCG has ever smoked. The reported marginal eects, therefore, understate the true eect of the parental channel
of transmission.
All regressions in Tables 2 and 3 control for the PCG's education, family income, state cigarette tax, state

14 The signs of the estimated coecients on all these variables are

income, and a wealth of demographic variables.

in the expected direction and consistent with empirical ndings in the health economics literature. The child is
more likely to have ever smoked when the PCG is less educated, when family and state income is low, and when
cigarette taxes are low. The PCG is more likely to socialize the child at least once a week when s/he is highly
educated, when family and state income is higher, and when cigarette taxes are higher (e.g. because, when taxes
are high, smoking by the child entails a higher nancial cost for the entire family). From this point on, we do not
show estimated coecients on the control variables, but rather focus on the variables of interest.

6.2

Robustness analysis

Although the baseline specication is already very conservative, there are reasons that induce us to test its
robustness to new instruments and controls. First, the performance of our instruments may be impaired by their
limited variation; e.g., our measure of PCG exposure to health information does not vary across PCGs who live
in the same state and were born in the same year. We could benet from an exposure measure that is parentspecic and adds individual-level variation to our instrument. Second, our denition of the exposure measure (i.e.

13 Because

the parental socialization variable is binary, we calculate its standard deviation (0.19) using its estimated value from the

reduced-form regression. To induce an increase in this variable that corresponds to half of its standard deviation, we had to randomly
shift PCGs from category 0 to category 1 so that the mean of the variable increases by 9.8 percentage points. This is mathematically
equivalent to increasing the probability of socialization for those parents who do not socialize their kids at least once a week from 0
to 0.17 (=(0.19/2)/(1-0.416)).

14 To

save space, we do not present coecients on the age xed eects of the PCG and the age, sex, state, race, and religion

xed-eects of the child. However, full results for all models are available on request.

20

as the accumulated sum of anti-smoking articles) imposes the restrictive assumptions that information does not
decay and that it has constant returns to scale. More exible specications of the exposure measure may be more
appropriate. Third, in our baseline specication we do not account for dierences in the personality of children or
in parenting styles. Both of these have been shown in the psychology literature to vary with children's smoking
behavior and the eectiveness of parental socialization eorts (e.g. Huver et al. 2007). Fourth, in our baseline
specication we do not control for dierences across PCGs in the cost of the parental socialization eorts. We next
try to address these issues using a new set of variables which Table 6 presents along with some basic descriptive
statistics.
Our rst exercise aims at introducing individual-level variation in our set of instruments.

To do this, we

draw from the PSID-CDS-TA a variable that measures how often the PCG reads the newspaper during the
week. Assuming that this variable is highly correlated with magazine readership, we interact it with the PCG's
information exposure measure to generate a new variable that varies across PCGs. Column 1 of Table 7 tests the
robustness of the baseline specication to this inclusion. The results are highly robust, and the new instrument
appears with a positive and signicant coecient, suggesting that anti-smoking information is more eective at
increasing parental socialization eorts when parents have the habit of reading the newspaper often. In comparison
to the baseline results, the diagnostic test results are slightly improved (e.g. the probability value of the the ALN
test statistic increases to 0.578).
As a further robustness test, we dene information exposure to be the average number (instead of the accumulated sum) of anti-smoking articles that the PCG or the child potentially read since age 10. This specication
essentially decreases the contributing value of each anti-smoking article by a factor proportional to the age of
the PCG, so that (older) PCGs who see a given number of articles over a longer life-span end up with a lower
information exposure score than (younger) PCGs who see the same number of articles over a shorter life-span.
In other words, the new exposure measure allows the value of information to decay over time. Columns 2 and
3 of Table 7 show how the baseline estimates change when we replace the original exposure measure with this
new measure, and when we interact it with the frequency the PCG reads the newspaper. Although the results
are qualitatively robust to this change and the instrument coecients are positive and statistically signicant, the
tests of instrument identication reject the hypothesis that the instruments are valid.
Finally, in Table 8 we check the robustness of the baseline estimates to controls that capture personality traits
of the child and parenting styles of the PCG (column 1), to controls that capture the cost of PCG socialization
eorts (column 2), and to both set of controls together (column 3).
The rst set of controls includes: (i) an indicator of whether the child has a tendency to break rules, which
we create by combining a selection of variables documenting problematic past behavior (see note of Table 6 for
the exact denition); (ii) an indicator of high and strict parental control, which we create by combining responses
of the PCG to questions about the number of rules s/he impose on the child, whether these rules are strictly

21

enforced, and whether s/he discusses these rules with the child; (iii) an indicator of violent parenting, which ags
whether the child is spanked more than 3 times per week; and (iv) an indicator of complete lack of communication
among the PCG and the child.

Controlling for these variables is potentially important because it may further

address the problem of reverse causality between socialization eorts of the PCG and the smoking behavior of the
child. Rebellious children or children subject to authoritative parenting may react against parental anti-smoking
pressure and may be more likely to smoke when the socialization eorts of the PCG are more frequent.

We

nd that the these controls signicantly predict the dependent variables in both the structural and reduced-form
equation, while leaving the remaining coecients almost unaected. As expected, children who are rule-breakers
and children who are spanked regularly are more likely to ever smoke and more likely to be socialized by PCGs.
In contrast, children who are under strict parental control are less likely to ever smoke and are less often socialized
by parents. Finally, children who never discuss any subject with their parents are more likely to ever smoke.
Our measures of the parental socialization cost include: (i) the number of individuals younger than 18 in the
family unit; (ii) an indicator of whether the PCG is employed; (iii) the weekly hours that the PCG spends at work;
(iv) an indicator of whether the PCG works a regular daytime schedule; and (v) an indicator of whether it takes
the PCG over an hour to get to work each way. Once more, we nd that, when included in the baseline regression,
these variables signicantly predict the dependent variables and only result in small quantitative changes in the
estimated coecients of the other variables. Children who live in households with many other children are less
likely to smoke and more likely to be socialized by PCGs. Children of working parents are less likely to smoke
but also less likely to be socialized, whereas children whose parents work more and regular hours are more likely
to smoke and more likely to be socialized.
When we insert in the baseline specication all the new controls together we obtain similar results. All three
specications of Table 8 pass the diagnostic tests. In fact, the probability values of the ALM test for specications
(1) and (3) are higher in comparison to that of the baseline specication (0.860 and 0.648, respectively), suggesting
that the addition of the controls aids identication.

6.3

The mechanisms underlying the transmission process

In the previous sections we found a positive coecient on the smoking prevalence of the role-model population in
both the reduced-form and the structural-form equations. We interpreted these ndings as evidence for cultural
substitution and conformity. In this section, we scrutinize these results by carrying out two exercises. First, we
interact parental smoking status with the prevalence rate of the role-model population to inform our discussion
of cultural substitution.

Second, we use alternative denitions of the role-model population to inform our dis-

cussion on cultural conformity. Both exercises allow us to conrm the links between substitution and conformity
and between complementarity and distinction. We conclude this section by further exploring dierences in the
socialization process between smoker and non-smoker parents.

22

6.3.1

Substitution versus complementarity

Assuming that both smoker and non-smoker parents wish to discourage smoking, cultural substitution entails
that all parents should increase anti-smoking socialization eorts in response to the smoking rate in society. The
rst-stage estimates in columns 1 and 2 of Table 9 show that this prediction is supported by the data. We nd
positive and signicant coecients on all interactions of smoking prevalence and parental smoking status.

We

read this result to suggest that our extension of the Bisin and Verdier model is more appropriate to use when
studying the transmission of traits like smoking than the Bisin and Verdier model in its original version. If smoker
parents wished to transmit the smoking culture to their children, like the Bisin and Verdier model would assume,
then we would expect to nd evidence of cultural complementarity for smoker parents and cultural substitution
for non-smoker parents (i.e. positive coecients on the interaction terms in Table 9 for non-smoker parents, and
negative coecients for smoker parents). However, our results suggest otherwise.
As our model predicts, we nd similar behavior across smokers and non-smoker parents because there is an
exogenous force (anti-smoking information) that has changed people's perceptions of smoking from a `good' trait
to a `bad' trait. As a result, parents wish to socialize children to be non-smokers, even if they themselves smoke.
We follow this logic to develop another implication: we should nd evidence of culture complementarity among
smoker PCGs exposed to little (or very low) anti-smoking information because, absent other information, these
would still consider smoking to be a good trait. In column 3 of Table 9 we attempt to test this hypothesis by
interacting the parental smoking status with smoking prevalence in the role model population at dierent quantiles
of parental information exposure (quantiles 0-10, 10-50, 50-90, and 90-100).
We note that, in our data there is no PCG who is subject to no anti-smoking information.

All PCGs are

exposed to some non-negligible level of information. In fact, the PCG at the 10th percentile of the distribution
of our exposure variable saw 8 articles, relative to a mean of 12. Therefore, it comes as no surprise that we do
not nd evidence of cultural complementarity in our results (none of the estimated coecients carries a negative
sign). Nonetheless, there is enough variation in the data to reveal two important patterns that corroborate our
theoretical set-up. First, when the smoking prevalence of the role model population increases, all parents respond
by increasing their socialization eorts, and their response is larger the more exposed they are to information
about the health risks of smoking. Second, this response is not statistically dierent from zero for smoker parents
who are exposed to very low levels of information. These ndings encourage us to speculate that, had we observed
in our data parents with no or negligible information exposure, we would be able to document a switch in the
direction of the relationship between parental socialization and the proportion of smokers in society from positive
to negative.

23

6.3.2

Conformity versus distinction

To this point, all the results we have reported are based on the assumption that children derive their role-models
from the population that is 20-29 years older. Next, we test whether the probability that the child ever smokes is
associated with the smoking prevalence rate of the population of individuals 0-9 and 10-19 years older than the
child, and whether that association diers by gender.

15 We present our results in Table 10. Estimates in columns

1-4 are based on the total sample, while estimates in columns 5 and 6 are based on data on male and female
children, respectively.
The structural form estimates suggest that the probability that the child ever smokes increases with the smoking
prevalence rates of all population sub-groups, except for males who are 0-9 years older. The implication is that,
in relation to the bulk of the population, children form their smoking decisions based on their needs to achieve
assimilation, inclusiveness, and cultural conformity.

In relation to the sub-group of young boys, however, the

childrens' motive is the exact opposite. In this case, it is their need to generate a sense of distinctiveness from
individuals that are part of that group that motivates their smoking decisions.

To put it bluntly, our results

suggest that young boys operate as anti-role-models. Although this result might seem surprising, one should note
that health economic studies on peer eects have not reached a consensus on gender dierences in social inuence.
For example, Nakajima (2007) study peer eects of smoking among school-mates in the US and nds that these
are positive and signicant within the same gender but statistically negligible across genders. In contrast, Clark
and Loheac (2007) study peer eects on dierent types of risky behavior among friends and school-mates in the
US and nd signicant cross-gender interactions for alcohol use, with young males being more inuential than
young girls. While we are the rst to provide evidence on cultural distinction using smoking data, our evidence
complements those presented in the study of ethnic identity formation by Bisin et al.(2013). These authors nd
that, in neighborhoods in which the share of a given ethnic group is high, the association between the share of the
ethnic group and individual ethnic identities is negative.

6.3.3

The link between substitution (complementarity) and conformity (distinction)

In both Tables 9 and 10, the smoking prevalence rates signicantly predict the PCGs socialization eorts in the
reduced form and the probability that the child smokes in the structural form. Importantly, these eects always run
in the same direction, a result which reconrms the inter-connection between cultural substitution and conformity
and between cultural complementarity and distinction, and corroborates Prediction 2 of the model. This result
suggests that, because all parents wish to discourage smoking, they will increase their anti-smoking socialization
eorts when smoking becomes more popular among all societal groups to which their children will conform, and
they decrease their anti-smoking socialization eorts when smoking becomes more popular among young boys

15 Naturally,

the alternative measures of smoking prevalence rates are correlated with each other, but there is still independent

variation in the smoking prevalence rates across the dierent groups. See Table 11 for correlation coecients and Table 6 for means
and standard deviations.

24

from which their children will want to distinguish themselves.
It is worth noting that both our theory and ndings contradict those produced by Patacchini and Zenou (2011),
although they apply a comparable exercise to identify the cultural transmission mechanisms of preferences for education.

Like our assumption that both smoker and non-smoker parents wish to transmit preferences against

smoking to their children, Patacchini and Zenou assume that both educated and uneducated parents wish to
transmit preferences in favor of education to their children. However, unlike our prediction that cultural complementarity is tied with cultural distinction, these authors predict that complementarity is tied with conformity. As
we briey discuss in section 3, this prediction relies on their assumption that a high prevalence of education in
society creates positive externatilities in the eectiveness of parental socialization eorts by decreasing socialization costs (e.g. because more educated neighbors can help a less educated parent to better socialize the children).
Their results support their theory. They nd that all parents socialize their kids in favor of education, that their
socialization eort increases with the prevalence of educational attainment in the population residing in the same
neighborhood and, at the same time, the neighborhood education level increases the probability that children
acquire education.

6.3.4

Other mechanisms

Also relevant is that the theoretical predictions of Patacchini and Zenou rely on the assumption that educated
parents are more eective in socializing their children than uneducated parents because they face lower cost of
socialization.

Our model necessitates no particular assumption about the mechanisms underlying the vertical

transmission process of smoker versus non-smoker parents. On the contrary, it allows many mechanisms to be at
work at the same time. For example, smoker and non-smoker parents may or may not dier in the eectiveness of
their socialization eorts, in their tolerance of having children who smoke, in their perception of the health-risks
of smoking, and other dimensions. Whether or not each of these scenaria is true is an empirical question.
The evidence we present in Table 9 already shed some light on this issue. We nd that never-smoker parents
respond to the popularity of smoking in society by increasing their socialization eorts both more than eversmokers (column 1) and more than current and ex-smokers (column 2).

Further, we nd that this dierence

persists at all levels of information exposure (column 3). We present more evidence in Table 12. There we show
that never-smoker parents also have a higher responsiveness to health information both relative to ever smokers
(column 1) and relative to current and ex-smokers (column 2). Both these ndings suggest that smoker and nonsmoker parents evaluate dierently the health risks that their children face when they smoke, and are consistent
with existing empirical evidence that non-smokers tend to overestimate the impact of smoking on health (e.g.
Viscusi and Hakes 2008).

In Table 12 we also show that never-smoker parents lower their socialization eorts

when they work and increase their socialization eorts when their child is a rule-breaker less than ever-smokers
(column 3 and 5, respectively). This may be because, unlike parents who smoke, never-smoker parents are more

25

eective at socializing their kids to be non-smokers by setting the right example and can, therefore, aord to lower
their socialization eorts when socialization cost increases or when they have reactive children. Somewhat at odds
with this interpretation is our nding that the responsiveness to the socialization cost does not statistically dier
between never-smokers and current smokers (column 4), whereas the responsiveness to having a reactive child does
not statistically dier between never-smokers and ex-smokers (column 6).

6.4

Forward projections of the share of children who ever smoke

As a nal exercise, we simulate the dynamics of youth ever-smoking rates over time as described by equation (2)
in section 3.5. To do this we use the estimated structural parameters from column 3 of Table 8 (i.e. our most
restrictive specication), and the mean probability that a child ever smokes that we observe in our sample as the
initial condition. This exercise serves two purposes. First and foremost, it shows that the smoking trait persists in
the steady state of the population dynamics, it provides an estimate of the smoking rates at the steady state, and
it provides an estimate of the time that smoking rates would need in order to adjust to that steady-state. Second,
this exercise provides a framework that we can use to test how dierent policy regimes can aect the speed of
adjustment of the youth smoking rates to equilibrium. We draw the projections in Figure 6.
The solid line shows how the youth ever-smoking rates would fare in future generations all else equal.

It

16 This

indicates that the share of youth ever-smokers converges to a steady-state value just above 11 percent.

evidence conrms the long term persistence of the smoking trait, and is consistent with Predictions 3 and 4. Full
convergence to that steady-state occurs within ve generations (which are on average 25 years apart); i.e.
individuals that are born between 2108-2121.

for

However, 90 percent of the adjustment occurs within only three

generations; i.e. for individuals who are born between 2058-2071.
This trajectory can be altered by a social planner via several policy instruments. Here we give the examples
of `reasonable' increases in cigarette taxes and in parental socialization eorts during the lifetime of the children
observed in our data. The dotted line shows how the smoking rates would fare under half a standard deviation
increase in cigarette taxes (i.e. under a 0.27 dollar increase); and the dashed line shows how they would fare under
half a standard deviation increase in the share of parents who socialize their children at least once a week (i.e. an
increase of 9.8 percentage points). The former is an example of a policy that targets children directly, while the
latter is an example of a policy that targets children indirectly, via parental behavior.
We nd that the proposed increase in taxes accelerates the rate of adjustment of youth ever-smoking rates
so that 90 percent of the adjustment is achieved within two generations. In comparison, the proposed increase
in socialization accelerates the rate of adjustment so that 90 percent of the adjustment is achieved within only
one generation.

16 Because

Similarly, the increase in taxes reduces the rate of young smokers at the steady-state by 0.8

we use our most restrictive specication to carry out the projections, our results are based on a sample size of 2074. The

probability that the child ever smokes in this sample equals 19.6% (as opposed to the 18% reported in Table 1). Our results suggest
that, in order to reach their equilibrium value, youth smoking rates need to drop by 8.6 percentage points (from 19.6% to 11%).

26

percentage points, whereas the increase in socialization reduces it by 1 percentage point. By no means, do we
present these results to suggest that subsidizing parental socialization is a preferred tobacco control policy relative
to a tax increase. Such a claim would require evidence on the cost of each policy regime. Rather, this evidence
demonstrates that a policy maker has the tools to signicantly change both the steady-state smoking rates of
young people and the speed of adjustment to that steady state. For example,

Healthy People 2020

reports that

19.5 percent of adolescents in grades 9 through 12 smoked cigarettes in 2009 and sets the objective to reduce
that percentage to 16 percent by 2020. The results we present in Figure 6 suggest that, by using the right policy
regime, the government can achieve and even surpass that goal.

7

Conclusion

Building on the literature on cultural transmission, we develop a model of smoking dynamics that focuses on
the role of parents and social norms; we use novel data to test its theoretical predictions; and we nd empirical
support. Our paper advances the literature in several ways.
On the theory front, we extend the seminal work by Bisin and Verdier (2001) to provide a rationale for why
traits rst emerge, why parents may change the traits they prefer to transmit to their children, and how long-term
cultural heterogeneity can be achieved when that occurs.

We argue that a cultural trait may emerge when a

prot-maximizing industry promotes it, and the way people perceive that trait can be inuenced by the ow of
related information.

Thus, relative to the existing theory, we contribute a framework of analysis to study the

transmission mechanisms of a wider variety of cultural traits.

Specically, our model can be used to study (i)

cultural traits that already exist and the way people perceive them does not change over time (e.g. preferences
on education; trust; religion); (ii) cultural traits that already exist but the way people perceive them changes over
time (e.g. preferences on smoking, polluting the environment, or women's rights); and (iii) cultural traits that are
brand new (e.g. the culture of social networking). To date, the cultural transmission theory has focused on the
traits in the rst category.
In developing our model, we introduce new mechanisms to characterize the cultural transmission process.
Specically, we relax a standard assumption in the cultural transmission theory that, when children adopt their
traits from society, this happens via a (random or non-random) matching process. This matching process entails
that the probability of acquiring a trait always increases with the prevalence of that trait in society. In our model,
we allow the industry to aect the direction of this relationship. Borrowing terminology from the literature on
identity formation, we formally dene the positive relationship between the probability of adopting a trait and
the prevalence of that trait in society as cultural conformity. We show that conformity in the social channel of
transmission is always tied to substitution in the parental channel of transmission, which posits that parents increase their socialization eorts the more prevalent their preferred cultural trait is in society, and is a cornerstone

27

assumption in the literature.

Conformity and substitution will co-exist because parents will lower their social-

ization eorts when their preferred trait becomes more popular among societal groups to which they know that
their children will conform. Correspondingly, we formalize the assumption of cultural distinction to predict the
opposite of cultural conformity; i.e. a negative relationship between the probability of adopting a trait and the
prevalence of that trait in society. We show that distinction in the social channel of transmission is always tied
to complementarity in the parental channel of transmission, which posits that parents decrease their socialization
eorts the more prevalent their preferred cultural trait is in society. Distinction and complementarity will co-exist
because parents will increase their socialization eorts when their preferred trait becomes more popular among
societal groups from which they know that their children will distinguish themselves. We take all our theoretical
predictions to U.S. data and we nd supporting evidence.
To test our model, we carefully account for the endogeneity of the parental socialization eorts using a novel
measure of parental exposure to anti-smoking information as an instrument. We also avoid selection, simultaneity,
and exogenous correlation bias in the estimated social eects by measuring smoking prevalence of the role-model
population at the state-level, and including a full set of xed eects in our regression models. Thus, our empirical
analysis contributes to the health economics literature causal estimates of parental and social inuences on youth
smoking participation. Whether smoking behavior is transmitted through parents, role-models, or peers is relevant
for designing tobacco control policy and anti-smoking campaigns. If children primarily pick up smoking from their
parents, policies that target parental behavior may be more eective at preventing smoking onset than policies that
target young people directly. If children primarily pick up smoking from the society, then this implies externalities
that can lead to large dierences in smoking behavior through social-multiplier eects. On the one hand, social
pressure can cause consumption to be sticky in the face of policy instruments; on the other hand, social inuences
can complement government interventions to prevent smoking initiation among young people. Our results suggest
that parental inuences are more important than social inuences in the transmission of the smoking trait, and
they showcase the spread of anti-smoking information as a key instrument to lower smoking rates among young
people.
Finally, we demonstrate how the cultural transmission theory can provide an analytical framework which policy
makers can use to evaluate the long-term eects of tobacco control policies.

Specically, we use our empirical

results to project what will be the steady state rate of youth smoking in future generations. We show that the rate
converges to a steady state in which smoking persists. But we also show that a policy maker can aect both the
level of smoking at that steady state and the speed of adjustment to that steady state. Our projections suggest
that, under the right policy regime, it is possible to achieve the youth smoking rate objectives set by

People 2020.

28

Healthy

References
[1] Algan, Yann, and Pierre Cahuc. 2010.  Inherited Trust and Growth. American Economic Review, 100(5):
2060-92.

[2] Aquilino, W. S. 1994. Interview mode eects in surveys of drug and alcohol use: a eld experiment. Public
Opinion Quarterly, 58: 210-240.

[3] Avenevoli S. and Ries Merikangas K. 2003. Familial inuences on adolescent smoking. Addiction 98(Suppl.
1): 1-20.

[4] Becker G. S. and Murphy K. M. 1988. A Theory of Rational Addiction, Journal of Political Economy, 96 (4):
675-700.

[5] Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier, 2000. Beyond the Melting Pot: Cultural Transmission, Marriage and the
Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits.

Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115: 955-988.

[6] Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier, 2001. The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the Dynamics of
Preferences.

Journal of Economic Theory , 97:

298-319.

[7] Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier, 2011. The Economics of Cultural Transmission and Socialization. in

Handbook of Social Economics, Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin, and Matt Jackson (eds), Elsevier Science.
[8] Bisin, A., Topa,G., Verdier,T., 2004.Religious intermarriage and socialization in the United States.Journal of
Political Economy.112,615664.

[9] Bisin
Like

Alberto,
Beckham:

Patacchini
Ethnic

Eleonora,
Identity

Verdier

and

Thierry

Integration,"

and

Zenou

Unpublished

Yves.

2013.

manuscript

"Bend

(available

It
at:

http://people.su.se/~yvze0888/Beckham%2001-23-2013.pdf )

[10] Borjas, George J. 1992. "Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility." The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
107(1):123-50.

[11] Chern, Wen S, Loehman, Edna T, and Yen, Steven T, 1995. "Information, Health Risk Beliefs, and the
Demand for Fats and Oils," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 77(3): 555-564.

[12] Christopoulou, R., Lillard, D. R. 2013. Is Smoking Behavior Culturally Determined? Evidence from British
Immigrants. NBER Working Paper No. 19036.

[13] Clark, A.E., and Etile, F., 2006. Don't give up on me baby: spousal correlation in smoking behavior. Journal
of Health Economics 25 (5), 958978.

29

[14] Clark, Andrew E. and Youenn L. 2007. It wasn't me, it was them!

Social Inuence in risky behavior by

adolescents. Journal of Health Economics. 26: 763-784.

[15] Dohmen Thomas, Armin Falk, David Human, Uwe Sunde, 2012. "The Intergenerational Transmission of
Risk and Trust Attitudes," Review of Economic Studies, 79(2): 645-677.

[16] Fernandez, Raquel, and Alessandra Fogli. 2009.  Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work, and
Fertility. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1): 14677.

[17] Fletcher Jason, M. 2010. Social Interactions and Smoking: Evidence using multiple student cohorts, instrumental variables, and school xed eects, Health Economics, 19: 466-484.

[18] Freedman David A. and Jasjeet S. Sekhon. 2010. Endogeneity in Probit Response Models. Political Analysis,
18(2): 138-150.

[19] Gaviria, Alejandro and Raphael, Steven. 2001. "School-Based Peer Eects And Juvenile Behavior," The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(2): 257-268.

[20] Göhlmann, Silja, Christoph M. Schmidt, and Harald Tauchmann. 2010.  Smoking Initiation in Germany: The
Role of Intergenerational Transmission. Health Economics, 19(2): 227- 242.

[21] Harris, Jerey E. and Gonzalez Lopez-Valcarcel B. 2008. Assymetric peer eects in the analysis of cigarette
smoking among young people in the United States, 1992-1999 Journal of Health Economics. 27:249-264.

[22] Heckman James J. 1978. Dummy Endogenous Variables in a Simultaneous Equations System. Econometrica,
46(6): 931-959.

[23] Huver Rose M. E., Engels Rutger C. M. E, Van Breukelen Gerard, De Vreis Hein. 2007. Parenting style and
adolescent smoking cognitions and behavior. Psychology and Health, 22(5): 575-593.

[24] Jellal Mohamed and Wol Francois-Charles. 2002. Cultural evolutionary altruism: theory and evidence,
European Journal of Political Economy, 18: 241-262.

[25] Lillard, Dean. 2011. "Keeping it in the Family? If Parents Smoke Do Children Follow?" Journal of Applied
Social Science Studies. 131: 277-286

[26] Lillard Dean R. and Sfekas Andrew. 2013.  Just passing through: the eect of the Master Settlement Agreement on estimated cigarette tax price pass-through. Applied Economics Letters, 20(4): 353-357

[27] Loureiro, Maria L., Anna Sanz-de-Galdeano, and Daniela Vuri. 2010.  Smoking Habits: Like Father, Like
Son, Like Mother, Like Daughter? Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 72(6): 717-743.

30

[28] Lundborg, P., 2006. Having the wrong friends? Peer eects in adolescent substance use. Journal of Health
Economics 25 (2), 214233.

[29] Manski, C.F., 1993. Identication of endogenous social eects: the reection problem. Review of Economic
Studies 60 (3), 531542.

[30] Manski, C.F., 2000. Economic analysis of social interactions. Journal of Economic Perspectives 14 (3), 115
136.

[31] Nakajima, Ryo. 2007. "Measuring Peer Eects on Youth Smoking Behaviour," Review of Economic Studies,
74(3): 897-935.

[32] Namoro Soiliou and Rania Roushdy. 2008. "Intergenerational Transmission of Fertility Preferences: A Test
of the Cultural Substitution Assumption," Working Paper 352, University of Pittsburgh, Department of
Economics.

[33] Newey W. K. 1987. Ecient estimation of limited dependent variable models with endogenous explanatory
variables. Journal of Econometrics, 36: 231-250.

[34] Nichols Austin. 2011. Causal Inference for Binary Regression with Observational Data. CHI11 Stata Conference 6, Stata Users Group.

[35] Orphanides, A., Zervos, D., 1998. Myopia and addictive behavior. The Economic Journal 108 (446), 7591.

[36] Orphanides, A., Zervos, D., 1995. Rational addiction with learning and regret. The Journal of Political
Economy 103 (4), 739758.

[37] Patacchini Eleonora and Zenou Yves. 2011. Neighborhood Eects and Parental Involvement in the Intergenerational Transmission of Education. The Journal of Regional Science, 51(5): 987-1013.

[38] Pollak, R. A. 1970. Habit formation and dynamic demand functions. Journal of Political Economy. 78: 745763.

[39] Pollak, R. A. 1976a. Habit formation and long-run utility functions. Journal of Economic Theory, 13: 272-297.

[40] Pollak, R.A., 1976b. Interdependent preferences. American Economic Review 66 (3), 309320.

[41] Poutvaara P. and Siemers L-H.R. 2008. Smoking and Social Interaction. Journal of Health Economics.
27:1503-1515.

[42] Powell L. M. and Chaloupka F.J. 2005. Parents, public policy, and youth smoking, Journal of Policy Analysis
and Management, Volume 24, Issue 1, p. 93112.

31

[43] Powell Lisa M., John A. Tauras, Hana Ross, 2005. The importance of peer eects, cigarette prices and tobacco
control policies for youth smoking behavior, Journal of Health Economics, Volume 24, Issue 5, September
2005, Pages 950-968

[44] Robson, Arthur and Larry Samuelson. 2011. The Evolutionary Foundations of Preferences. in

Handbook of

Social Economics, Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin, and Matt Jackson (eds), Elsevier Science.
[45] Royal College of Physicians of London (RCPL), 1962. Smoking and Health: Summary and Report of the
Royal College of Physicians of London on Smoking in Relation to Cancer of the Lung and other Diseases,
London: Pitman Medical Publishing Co. Ltd

[46] Sáez-Martí María & Sjögren Anna, 2008. "Peers and Culture," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 110(1):
73-92.

[47] Stigler G. J. and Becker G. S. 1977. De Gustibus Non Est Disputandum, American Economic Review, 67
(2):76-90.

[48] U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare (USDHEW). 1964.  Smoking and Health: Report of the
Advisory Committee to the Surgeon General of the Public Health Service , Public Health Service Publication
No. 1103.

[49] Viscusi, W. Kip & Hakes, Jahn K. 2008. "Risk Beliefs And Smoking Behavior," Economic Inquiry, 46(1):
45-59.

[50] Viscusi, W. Kip and Hersch Joni. 2011.  Tobacco Regulation Through Litigation: The Master Settlement
Agreement. in Regulation versus Litigation: Perspectives from Economics and Law. Daniel P Kessler (editor),
University of Chicago Press, 71-101.

32

Appendix I: Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1:

The parent invests an amount

anti-smoking culturalization. The assumptions on
so the solution solves the First Order Condition

Proof of Proposition 2:
(Prediction 1).

v (.)

and

λ∗i ≡ arg maxλ0 (1 − v (λi )) S (q) ui (H) − c (λi )
c (.)

ensure the maximization problem is concave, and

−v 0 (λi ) S (q) ui (H)−c0 (λi ) = 0, which can be rewritten as (??). 

By total dierentiation of (??), we get

We then always have

dλ∗
−i
dq

into

dλ∗
i
dH

2

0

[c0 (λ∗i )]
−ui (H) 1
0 λ∗ −v 00 λ∗ c0 λ∗
(ui (H))2 S(q) c00 (λ∗
v
( i) ( i)
i) ( i)

=

>0

2

=

[c0 (λ∗i )]
S 0 (q)
1
0 λ∗ −v 00 λ∗ c0 λ∗
[S(q)]2 −ui (H) c00 (λ∗
v
)
(
( i) ( i)
i
i)

> 0

i

S 0 (q) > 0,

and the

eect of an increase in smoking prevalence on the likelihood a child becomes a smoker can be expressed as

(1 − v (λ∗i )) S 0 (q)

(Prediction 2).

Proof of Proposition 3:



In a subgame perfect equilibrium, the rm's objective function can be written as:

max Q (q, θ) − κ (θ) ,
θ

Q (q, θ) ≡ [q (1 − a (q, θ)) + (1 − q) (1 − d (q, θ))] S (q, θ)

where

q

smokers given a proportion

of adult smokers. whose solution

denotes the proportion of children who become

θ∗ (q)

[q (1 − a (q, θ)) + (1 − q) (1 − d (q, θ))]

In order to understand when cultural distinction vs.

∂S
∂q

+

∂θ ∗
∂S
∂θ ∗
∂θ θ ∗ ∂q , where ∂q

nator of the expression for

=

solves the FOC:

∂S (q, θ)
= κ0 (θ)
∂θ

conformity arise, we need to study the sign of:

+[q(1−a(q))+(1−q)(1−d(q))]
[d(q)−a(q)−qa0 (q)−(1−q)d0 (q)] ∂S(q,θ)
∂θ
c00 (θ)−[q(1−a(q))+(1−q)(1−d(q))]

∗

and
so

d (0) < 1.

q̇ < 0

we have

17 Our

q̇ > 0

When

i

When

q = 0,

S (0) > 0.

q = 1,

we have

we have

θ∗

=

. While the denomi-



q̇ = (1 − d (0)) S (0).

Under cultural substitution we have

Under cultural complementarity we have

q̇ = (1 − a (1)) S (1) − 1.

always. Under cultural complementarity we have

S0 < 0

∂θ∂q

dS
dq

∂θ
∂q is always positive, the numerator can admit both signs. Hence cultural substitution

Proof of Proposition 4:
and so

∂ 2 S(q,θ)

∂ 2 S(q,θ)
∂θ 2

obtains if and only if the numerator takes a large enough negative value.

d (0) = 0

17

under cultural complementarity, and so

d (0) > 0

q̇ > 0

Under cultural substitution we have

a (1) = 0

S (0) > 0

and so

and

q̇ < 0

i

S (1) < 1.

S (1) < 1. 

assumptions ensure that the second order condition satises



 ∂ 2 S (q, θ)
SOC : q 1 − a1 (q) + (1 − q) 1 − d0 (q)
− κ00 (θ) < 0
∂θ2
and so we have a concave problem whose solution can be recovered through the FOC.

33

and so

i

S (0) > 0

a (1) > 0

and

By Proposition 2,

Appendix II: Tables

Variable

Table 1: Weighted means and frequencies of selected variables

Child

Female
Age
Race
White, non Hispanic
Black, non Hispanic
Other
Ever smoked regularly
Acc. sum of anti-smoking articles potentially read since age 10

Primary Care Giver (PCG)

Age
Education
Relationship to child
Biological mother
Biological father
Adoptive mother
Stepmother
Socializes child against substance use
Never
Once or twice a month
Once a week
Several times a week
Every day
Ever smoked regularly
Acc. sum of anti-smoking articles potentially read since age 10
St.deviation of anti-smoking articles potentially read since age 10

Family unit

Real family income/10000

State

Real cigarette tax
Real state income/10000
Sm. prevalence of total population 20-29 years older than child

Observations: 2246.

34

x̄/%

[s.d]

0.50
13.83

[2.25]

0.66
0.16
0.18
0.18
4.07

[0.39]
[0.05]

41.99
13.02

[6.10]
[2.75]

0.93
0.06
0.01
0.00
0.21
0.42
0.14
0.13
0.10
0.45
12.2
0.42

[0.50]
[2.78]
[0.07]

4.31

[5.22]

1.59
3.66
0.26

[0.54]
[0.50]
[0.05]

Table 2: Probit regression of the probability that the child has ever smoked

Child socialized against substance use
Once or twice per month
Once a week
Several times a week
Every day
Sm. prevalence of role-model population
PCG has ever smoked
Education of PCG
Family income
State cigarette tax
State income per capita
Pseudo R-squared

All
categories
(1)

0.351***
(0.026)
0.256***
(0.033)
0.187***
(0.033)
0.192***
(0.037)
3.399***
(1.048)
0.329***
(0.018)
-0.044***
(0.004)
-5.453***
(0.388)
-0.930***
(0.074)
-2.404***
(0.171)
0.257

(2)
0.288***
(0.024)

3.117***
(1.047)
0.333***
(0.018)
-0.038***
(0.004)
-5.433***
(0.387)
-0.919***
(0.074)
-2.450***
(0.172)
0.256

Dichotomized: 1=`At least'
(3)
(4)
(5)

-0.025
(0.020)

3.598***
(1.043)
0.337***
(0.018)
-0.041***
(0.004)
-5.121***
(0.385)
-0.900***
(0.074)
-2.372***
(0.171)
0.252

-0.050**
(0.022)
3.579***
(1.041)
0.336***
(0.018)
-0.042***
(0.004)
-5.100***
(0.385)
-0.902***
(0.074)
-2.374***
(0.170)
0.252

-0.031
(0.031)
3.522***
(1.041)
0.338***
(0.018)
-0.041***
(0.004)
-5.127***
(0.385)
-0.901***
(0.074)
-2.384***
(0.170)
0.252

Controls: Dummies for age of PCG, and age, sex, state, race, and religion of child. Observations: 2246. Standard
errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

35

Table 3: IVprobit estimates of baseline specication

Child socialized at least once/week
Sm. prevalence of role-model population

Prob(child
ever smokes)
-1.461***
(0.159)
4.929***
(0.856)
0.251***
(0.026)
-0.085***
(0.005)
-3.504***
(0.468)
-0.656***
(0.083)
-1.684***
(0.205)
-0.025*
(0.014)

Prob(child
socialized at
least 1/week)

1.309***
(0.197)
PCG has ever smoked
-0.003
(0.005)
Education of PCG
-0.037***
(0.001)
Family income
0.471***
(0.048)
State cigarette tax
0.045***
(0.0110)
State income per capita
0.148***
(0.022)
Child info exposure since age 10
-0.012**
(0.005)
PCG info exposure since age 10
0.018***
(0.006)
Infrequency of PCG info exposure since age 10
-1.160***
(0.101)
Amemiya-Lee-Newey minimum X 2 statistic
0.82 [0.365]
Hausman X 2 statistic
252.0 [0.000]***
Wald X 2 statistic
40.4 [0.000]***
X 2 for joint signicance of instruments
165.4 [0.000]***
Change in prob(child ever smokes) after half s.d increase in:
Socialization
-0.039
Sm. prevalence of role-model population
0.028
Controls: Dummies for age of PCG, and age, sex, state, race, and religion of child. Obs:
2246. Standard errors in parenthesis; p-values in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1.

36

Table 4: Robustness of baseline estimates to alternative methods of estimation

Second-stage: Prob(child ever smokes)

Child socialization

Sm. prevalence of role-model population
PCG has ever smoked
Education of PCG
Family income
State cigarette tax
State income per capita
Child info exposure since age 10
First-stage: Prob(child socialization)

Sm. prevalence of role-model population
PCG has ever smoked
Education of PCG
Family income
State cigarette tax
State income per capita
Child info exposure since age 10
PCG info exposure since age 10

Infrequency of PCG info exposure since age 10

Linear probability model
2SLS
IVLIML
IVGMM

Bivariate
probit

Probit +
Ordered probit

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.187***
(0.063)
1.215***
(0.187)
0.072***
(0.004)
-0.017***
(0.003)
-0.346***
(0.048)
-0.028***
(0.009)
-0.072***
(0.019)
0.034***
(0.003)

-0.207***
(0.066)
1.246***
(0.191)
0.072***
(0.004)
-0.018***
(0.003)
-0.337***
(0.049)
-0.027***
(0.009)
-0.070***
(0.020)
0.034***
(0.003)

-0.173**
(0.071)
1.153***
(0.176)
0.073***
(0.004)
-0.016***
(0.003)
-0.354***
(0.048)
-0.028***
(0.008)
-0.072***
(0.015)
0.035***
(0.003)

-1.501***
(0.019)
4.171***
(0.721)
0.223***
(0.016)
-0.086***
(0.004)
-3.054***
(0.297)
-0.534***
(0.059)
-1.487***
(0.134)
-0.022
(0.013)

-0.415***
(0.147)
4.982***
(1.164)
0.338***
(0.018)
-0.077***
(0.014)
-4.779***
(0.406)
-0.821***
(0.079)
-2.344***
(0.171)
-0.014
(0.016)

1.305***
(0.200)
-0.002
(0.005)
-0.036***
(0.001)
0.473***
(0.048)
0.046***
(0.011)
0.148***
(0.023)
-0.011**
(0.005)
0.016***
(0.006)
-1.161***
(0.105)

1.305***
(0.200)
-0.002
(0.005)
-0.036***
(0.001)
0.473***
(0.048)
0.046***
(0.011)
0.148***
(0.023)
-0.011**
(0.005)
0.016***
(0.006)
-1.161***
(0.105)

1.305***
(0.204)
-0.002
(0.005)
-0.036***
(0.001)
0.473***
(0.047)
0.046***
(0.011)
0.148***
(0.023)
-0.011**
(0.005)
0.016***
(0.006)
-1.161***
(0.114)

4.438***
(0.657)
-0.014
(0.015)
-0.115***
(0.003)
1.400***
(0.137)
0.180***
(0.033)
0.440***
(0.071)
-0.067***
(0.014)
0.081***
(0.016)
-3.717***
(0.275)

2.984***
(0.487)
0.011
(0.012)
-0.090***
(0.003)
1.145***
(0.113)
0.231***
(0.027)
0.257***
(0.056)
-0.011
(0.010)
0.057***
(0.011)
-2.505***
(0.210)

Controls: Dummies for age of PCG, and age, sex, state, race, and religion of child. Observations: 2246. Standard errors in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The child socialization variable in (1)-(4) is the Prob(child socialized at least
once/week) and in (5) it is the original ordinal variable that takes values 1-5 to measure how often PCGs socialize children.
In (5) we estimated the 1st stage by ordered probit, and the 2nd stage by probit using the hat values from the 1st stage as
the socialization variable. We did not adjust the errors.

37

Table 5: Robustness of baseline estimates to alternative denitions of the socialization variable

Dichotomized: 1=`At least'
Once or twice/month Several times a week

Every day

-1.465***
(0.324)
3.397***
(0.862)
0.266***
(0.0345)
-0.049***
(0.004)
-3.625***
(0.695)
-0.618***
(0.121)
-1.835***
(0.282)
0.005
(0.014)

-2.215***
(0.150)
3.809***
(0.718)
0.136***
(0.0343)
-0.097***
(0.004)
-2.369***
(0.528)
-0.334***
(0.100)
-1.420***
(0.219)
0.002
(0.012)

-3.249***
(0.183)
5.218***
(0.652)
0.195***
(0.031)
-0.085***
(0.003)
-2.415***
(0.514)
-0.302***
(0.097)
-1.088***
(0.234)
-0.057***
(0.011)

0.345**
(0.175)
PCG has ever smoked
0.012**
(0.004)
Education of PCG
-0.012***
(0.001)
Family income
0.353***
(0.042)
State cigarette tax
0.061***
(0.010)
State income per capita
0.033*
(0.020)
Child info exposure since age 10
0.030***
(0.005)
PCG info exposure since age 10
-0.025***
(0.006)
Infrequency of PCG info exposure since age 10 -0.214**
(0.089)
All controls and remaining information, as in Table 3.

0.752***
(0.168)
-0.024***
(0.004)
-0.034***
(0.001)
0.329***
(0.041)
0.090***
(0.009)
-0.007
(0.019)
-0.0004
(0.004)
0.015***
(0.004)
-0.620***
(0.087)

1.057***
(0.120)
0.010***
(0.003)
-0.020***
(0.001)
0.083***
(0.029)
0.048***
(0.007)
0.040***
(0.014)
-0.019***
(0.003)
0.011***
(0.003)
-0.379***
(0.064)

Second-stage: Prob(child ever smokes)

Child socialization

Sm. prevalence of role-model population
PCG has ever smoked
Education of PCG
Family income
State cigarette tax
State income per capita
Child info exposure since age 10
First-stage: Prob(child socialization)

Sm. prevalence of role-model population

38

Table 6: Weighted means and frequencies of new controls and instruments

Indicators of child personality and parenting styles
Child is a "rule-breaker"
Child subject to many rules, strictly enforced, rarely discussed
Child spanked more than 3 times per week
PCG never discusses any subject with child
Measures of socialization cost
Number of children in the family unit
PCG has a job
Hours per week PCG typically works
PCG usually works a regular daytime schedule
Typically takes PCG over an hour to get to work each way
Alternative measures of information exposure
Mean anti-smoking articles PCG potentially read per year since age 10
Days per week the PCG reads the newspaper
Alternative denitions of role-mode sm. prevalence
State-specic smoking prevalence of:
Total population 0-9 years older than child
Total population 10-19 years older than child
Females 0-9 years older than child
Females 10-19 years older than child
Females 20-29 years older than child
Males 0-9 years older than child
Males 10-19 years older than child
Males 20-29 years older than child

x̄/%

[s.d]

N

0.31
0.10
0.01
0.01

[0.46]
[0.31]
[0.09]
[0.08]

2232
2232
2232
2232

2.10
0.71
27.5
0.57
0.05

[1.15]
[0.45]
[20.5]
[0.49]
[0.21]

2088
2088
2088
2088
2088

0.88
1.96

[0.13]
[1.94]

2236
2236

0.19
0.26
0.17
0.23
0.24
0.21
0.30
0.29

[0.07]
[0.06]
[0.07]
[0.06]
[0.06]
[0.07]
[0.05]
[0.05]

2246
2246
2246
2246
2246
2246
2246
2246

Rule breaker: the child did something dangerous, damaged public property, got in a ght, drove drunk or
high over 10 times the last 6 months or that the child has been arrested or put in jail more than once to
date or that the child has a lot of secrets or hides a lot of things from parents.

39

Table 7: Robustness of the baseline specication to new instruments

Second-stage: Prob(child ever smokes)

Child socialized at least once/week

Sm. prevalence of role-model population
First-stage: Prob(child socialization)

Sm. prevalence of role-model population

PCG info exposure since age 10 (acc. sum)
* frequency PCG reads the newspaper
PCG info exposure since age 10 (mean)

(1)

(2)

(3)

-1.465***
(0.138)
4.376***
(0.861)

-1.436***
(0.174)
4.527***
(0.889)

-1.576***
(0.132)
3.952***
(0.850)

1.231***
(0.197)
0.017***
(0.006)
0.0005***
(0.0000)

1.245***
(0.210)

1.186***
(0.211)

0.290***
(0.082)

-1.167***
(0.099)
2,236
1.095
252.0***
53.3***
216.5***

-1.206***
(0.104)
2,246
17.0***
253.9***
33.8***
163.6***

0.273***
(0.079)
0.006***
(0.001)
-1.181***
(0.103)
2,236
17.1***
295.0***
57.6***
194.0***

* frequency PCG reads the newspaper
Infrequency of PCG info exposure since age 10
Observations
Amemiya-Lee-Newey minimum X 2 statistic
Hausman X 2 statistic
Wald X 2 statistic
X 2 for joint signicance of instruments

Controls: for (1) as in baseline specication; (2) and (3) control for child info exposure since
age 10 (mean) instead of (acc. sum).

40

Table 8: Robustness of the baseline specication to new controls

Second-stage: Prob(child ever smokes)

Child socialized at least once a week

Sm. prevalence of role-model population
Child is a `rule-breaker'
Child subject to many rules, strictly enforced, rarely discussed
Child spanked more than 3 times per week
PCG never discusses any subject with child
No. of kids below 18 in the family unit

(1)

(2)

(3)

-1.424***
(0.179)
4.248***
(0.894)
0.417***
(0.024)
-0.593***
(0.031)
0.546***
(0.115)
0.611***
(0.102)

-1.843***
(0.095)
3.535***
(0.760)

-1.836***
(0.108)
2.773***
(0.791)
0.389***
(0.025)
-0.562***
(0.035)
0.707***
(0.093)
0.395***
(0.093)
-0.027***
(0.010)
-0.374***
(0.039)
0.003***
(0.001)
0.086***
(0.022)
-0.004
(0.037)

PCG has a job
Hours per week PCG typically works
PCG works a regular daytime schedule
Takes PCG over an hour to get to work each way
First-stage: Prob(child socialized at least once/week)

Sm. prevalence of role-model population
PCG info exposure since age 10

Infrequency of PCG info exposure since age 10
Child is a `rule-breaker'
Child subject to many rules, strictly enforced, rarely discussed
Child spanked more than 3 times per week
PCG never discusses any subject with child
No. of kids below 18 in the family unit

1.312***
(0.197)
0.017***
(0.006)
-1.121***
(0.101)
0.054***
(0.005)
-0.109***
(0.007)
0.367***
(0.026)
-0.038
(0.028)

PCG has a job
Hours per week PCG typically works
PCG works a regular daytime schedule
Takes PCG over an hour to get to work each way
Observations
Amemiya-Lee-Newey minimum X 2 statistic
Hausman X 2 statistic
Wald X 2 statistic
X 2 for joint signicance of instruments

2,232
0.045
242.7***
31.0***
157.8***

Controls: as in baseline specication.

41

-0.032***
(0.010)
-0.303***
(0.039)
0.002**
(0.001)
0.089***
(0.021)
-0.062*
(0.036)
1.006***
(0.208)
0.033***
(0.006)
-1.205***
(0.105)

0.015***
(0.003)
-0.177***
(0.011)
0.003***
(0.000)
0.045***
(0.007)
0.015
(0.011)
2,088
1.299
358.1***
90.1***
139.6***

0.979***
(0.208)
0.032***
(0.006)
-1.171***
(0.105)
0.060***
(0.005)
-0.100***
(0.008)
0.368***
(0.026)
-0.047*
(0.027)
0.014***
(0.003)
-0.184***
(0.011)
0.002***
(0.000)
0.046***
(0.007)
0.025**
(0.011)
2.074
0.209
350.1***
71.9***
133.4***

Table 9: Probit estimation of the probability that the child is socialized at least once/week

Second-stage: Prob(child ever smokes)

Child socialized at least once/week

Prev. of role model pop. * PCG never smoked
Prev. of role model pop. * PCG ever smoked
Prev. of role model pop. * PCG currently smokes

(1)

(2)

(3)

-1.462***
(0.159)
4.455***
(0.875)
5.158***
(0.867)

-1.457***
(0.161)
4.154***
(0.881)

-0.998***
(0.208)

Prev. of role model pop. * PCG used to smoke
Prev. of role model pop. * PCG never smoked * PCG info exposure q0-10

4.938***
(0.870)
3.966***
(0.878)

Prev. of role model pop. * PCG never smoked * PCG info exposure q10-50
Prev. of role model pop. * PCG never smoked * PCG info exposure q50-90
Prev. of role model pop. * PCG never smoked * PCG info exposure q90-100
Prev. of role model pop. * PCG ever smoked * PCG info exposure q0-10
Prev. of role model pop. * PCG ever smoked * PCG info exposure q10-50
Prev. of role model pop. * PCG ever smoked * PCG info exposure q50-90
Prev. of role model pop. * PCG ever smoked * PCG info exposure q90-100
First-stage: Prob(child socialized at least once/week)

Prev. of role model pop. * PCG never smoked
Prev. of role model pop. * PCG ever smoked

Prev. of role model pop. * PCG currently smokes

1.367***
(0.200)
1.195***
(0.206)

Prev. of role model pop. * PCG used to smoke
Prev. of role model pop. * PCG never smoked * PCG info exposure q0-10

1.361***
(0.200)
1.197***
(0.206)
1.119***
(0.208)

Prev. of role model pop. * PCG never smoked * PCG info exposure q10-50
Prev. of role model pop. * PCG never smoked * PCG info exposure q50-90
Prev. of role model pop. * PCG never smoked * PCG info exposure q90-100
Prev. of role model pop. * PCG ever smoked * PCG info exposure q0-10
Prev. of role model pop. * PCG ever smoked * PCG info exposure q10-50
Prev. of role model pop. * PCG ever smoked * PCG info exposure q50-90
Prev. of role model pop. * PCG ever smoked * PCG info exposure q90-100
X 2 test of the equality of the coecients in rst-stage

3.538*

11.64***

Observations: 2246. Controls: as in baseline specication, excluding sm. prevalence of role model population.

42

0.461***
(0.080)
0.295***
(0.062)
0.252***
(0.056)
0.318***
(0.0541)
0.573***
(0.083)
0.540***
(0.066)
0.485***
(0.057)
0.478***
(0.057)

0.053***
(0.019)
0.078***
(0.017)
0.094***
(0.016)
0.124***
(0.016)
0.030
(0.020)
0.061***
(0.017)
0.096***
(0.016)
0.086***
(0.016)
237.5***

Table 10: Baseline specication under alternative denitions of the role-model population

(1)
Second-stage: Prob(child ever smokes)

Child socialized at least once/week
Sm. prevalence of:
total population 0-9 years older

total population 10-19 years older
total population 20-29 years older
males 0-9 years older

-1.439***
(0.163)
-0.083
(0.594)
5.434***
(0.892)
5.366***
(0.851)

males 10-19 years older
males 20-29 years older
females 0-9 years older

Total population
(2)
(3)

(4)

Males
(5)

Females
(6)

-1.442***
(0.163)

-1.424***
(0.165)

-2.153***
(0.183)

-1.842***
(0.094)

-5.766***
(0.666)

-3.917***
(1.010)

-4.909***
(0.912)

5.114***
(0.661)

7.787***
(2.179)

2.268***
(0.866)

-0.552***
(0.160)

-0.824***
(0.239)

-0.003
(0.237)

0.711***
(0.164)

1.286***
(0.266)

0.594**
(0.249)

2,246

1,058

1,045

-1.088**
(0.513)
5.543***
(0.707)
3.690***
(0.746)

females 10-19 years older
females 20-29 years older

-1.424***
(0.161)

1.328**
(0.549)
1.375**
(0.689)
4.145***
(0.683)

First-stage: Prob(child socialized at least once/week)

Sm. prevalence of:
total population 0-9 years older

total population 10-19 years older
total population 20-29 years older
males 0-9 years older

-0.023
(0.159)
1.272***
(0.208)
0.153
(0.178)

males 10-19 years older
males 20-29 years older
females 0-9 years older

-0.186
(0.137)
0.087
(0.138)
1.247***
(0.173)

females 10-19 years older
females 20-29 years older
Observations

2,246

2,246

Controls: as in baseline specication.

43

0.329**
(0.142)
0.428***
(0.164)
0.466***
(0.166)
2,246

Table 11: Correlation coecients of alternative measures of the sm. prevalence of the role-model population

Measure 1:
Smoking prevalence in total population:
0-9 years older than child
0-9 years older than child
10-19 years older than child

Measure 2:

Correlation

10-19 years older than child
20-29 years older than child
20-29 years older than child

0.4839
0.6679
0.8355

Smoking prevalence in male population:
0-9 years older than child
10-19 years older than child
0-9 years older than child
20-29 years older than child
10-19 years older than child
20-29 years older than child

0.3405
0.5592
0.7127

Smoking prevalence in female population:
0-9 years older than child
10-19 years older than child
0-9 years older than child
20-29 years older than child
10-19 years older than child
20-29 years older than child

0.5732
0.7106
0.8505

Smoking prevalence in population 0-9 years older than child:
Males
Females

0.9170

Table 12: Probit estimation of the probability that the child is socialized at least once/week (rst-stage)

Interacted with:
PCG never smoked
PCG ever smoked
PCG currently smokes

PCG info exposure
(1)
(2)

PCG has a job
(3)
(4)

Child is a rule-breaker
(5)
(6)

0.020***
(0.006)
0.012**
(0.006)

-0.066***
(0.007)
-0.044***
(0.008)

0.046***
(0.007)
0.068***
(0.007)

PCG used to smoke
Observations
X 2 test of the equality of the coes

2,246
17.7***

0.020***
(0.006)
0.013**
(0.006)
0.012*
(0.006)
2,246
22.0***

Controls: as in baseline specication, excluding interacted variable.

44

2,101
3.9**

-0.065***
(0.007)
-0.056***
(0.009)
-0.032***
(0.010)
2,101
11.0***

2,238
4.7**

0.046***
(0.007)
0.087***
(0.009)
0.035***
(0.011)
2,238
22.5***

Appendix III: Figures

Figure 1: Smoking prevalence of role-model population of 14 year old children by sex, state, and year

.2

.3

.4

.5

.6

.7

Males, Age: 14+20 − 14+29

1950

1970

1990

2010

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

Females, Age: 14+20 − 14+29

1950

1970

1990

45

2010

Females, 2002

.2

.1
.1

46

38−47

.2

38−47

.3

37−46

.3

37−46

.4
36−45

Females, 2006

36−45

.4
35−44

.1

35−44

.1
34−43

Males, 2002

34−43

.2

33−42

.2

33−42

.3

32−41

.3

32−41

.4

31−40

30−39

38−47

37−46

36−45

35−44

34−43

33−42

32−41

31−40

30−39

.4

31−40

30−39

38−47

37−46

36−45

35−44

34−43

33−42

32−41

31−40

30−39

Figure 2: Smoking prevalence of role-model population by sex, age, and state

Males, 2006

Figure 3: Number of published magazine anti-smoking articles by state and year (weighted by state subscription
rate to each magazine)

4

Highest: Alaska, Hawaii
Lowest: Mississippi, Louisiana

3

2

1

0
1929

1939

1949

1959

1969

1979

1989

1999

2009

y e
a r

Figure 4: Cigarette taxes, by state and year ($)
2007

AK
AL
AR
AZ
CA
CO
CT
DC
DE
FL
GA
HI
IA
ID
IL
IN
KS
KY
LA
MA
MD
ME
MI
MN
MO
MS
MT
NC
ND
NE
NH
NJ
NM
NV
NY
OH
OK
OR
PA
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VA
VT
WA
WI
WV
WY

0

Inflation adjusted state cigarette tax
.5
1
1.5
2

2.5

2002

47

48

Birth cohort
2108−2121

2083−2096

2058−2071

2033−2046

2008−2021

1983−1996

.1

.12

.14

.16

.18

P(ever smoke) over age 10−18
.2

Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
District of Columbia
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

0

20,000

40,000

60,000

Figure 5: Real income per capita, by state and year ($)
2002

Figure 6: Forward projections of youth ever-smoking rates

Ceteris paribus

Half s.d. rise in tax

Half s.d. rise in socialization

2007

