NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMMIGRANTS' AND NATIVE WORKERS:
NEW ANALYSIS ON LONGITUDINAL DATA
Mette Foged
Giovanni Peri
Working Paper 19315
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19315
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2013

Previously circulated as "Immigrants and Native Workers: New Analysis Using Longitudinal Employer-Employee
Data." We thank the Economic Policy Research Network for funding this research project and Jakob
Roland Munch for helpful suggestions and discussions. Tito Boeri, David Card, Anna Piil Damm,
Christian Dustmann, Cedric Jean-Laurent Elie Gorinas, Jim Harrigan, Ethan Lewis, Lawrence Kahn,
Søren Leth-Petersen, Hillel Rappoport and three anonymous referees provided useful comments and
suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Mette Foged and Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Immigrants' and Native Workers: New Analysis on Longitudinal Data
Mette Foged and Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 19315
August 2013, Revised March 2015
JEL No. F22,J24,J61
ABSTRACT
Using longitudinal data on the universe of workers in Denmark during the period 1991-2008 we track
the labor market outcomes of low skilled natives in response to an exogenous inflow of low skilled
immigrants. We innovate on previous identification strategies by considering immigrants distributed
across municipalities by a refugee dispersal policy in place between 1986 and 1998. We find that an
increase in the supply of refugee-country immigrants pushed less educated native workers (especially
the young and low-tenured ones) to pursue less manual-intensive occupations. As a result immigration
had positive effects on native unskilled wages, employment and occupational mobility.
Mette Foged
Department of Economics
Univertsity of Copenhagen
Øster Farigmagsgade 5, building 26
1353 Copenhagen K
Denmark
Mette.Foged@econ.ku.dk
Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu

A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19315

1

Introduction

In this paper we use individual data on Danish workers over the period 1991-2008
to quantify the consequences of an exogenous change in the supply of immigrants
on the labor market outcomes of native workers. The administrative data that we
use follow over time every single individual in Denmark. Hence, we can analyze
different outcomes over time, control for unobserved individual characteristics and
allow for heterogeneous effects. The immigration flows that we consider combine a
refugee dispersal policy, in place in Denmark between 1986 and 1998 and designed
to distribute immigrants without regard to their preferences and economic considerations, and large inflows of immigrants from countries suffering from crises. These
features allow us to build a credible and new identification strategy. This way we
can make important progress in assessing the key causal questions in this literature: Do less educated immigrants displace similarly skilled native workers reducing
their employment opportunities and wages? Or do they complement native skills,
stimulate natives’ specialization and increase their opportunities and wages?
Studies of the effect of immigration on native labor market outcomes are abundant.1 Their ability to convincingly measure the causal effect of immigrants on
natives are limited, however, by two factors. First, genuinely supply-driven changes
of the inflow of immigrants are hard to find, especially in the variation across local
labor markets within a country. Immigrants, in fact, respond to labor demand by
moving to growing regions and leaving stagnating ones. Second, tracking the short
run and long run response of native workers’ outcomes is hard due to limited availability of nationally representative individual panel data that span several years.
Most studies have therefore opted for constructing average outcomes in regions (or
region-skill “cells”) over time using repeated cross sectional data. This, however,
results in combining the effects on incumbents and on those who selectively move
into those regions, and it misses the effects on those who selectively move out. This
paper makes significant progress on both fronts by improving on identification and
by following in the short and long run individual responses to immigrants and by
comparing these findings with average area effects.
The immigration flows that we consider are those of people from eight “refugeecountries” into Denmark. We define these countries as those with a large number of
1

Recent surveys of the literature are Longhi, Nijkamp, and Poot (2005); Blau and Kahn (2012);
Lewis and Peri (2015).

1

international refugees in the considered period. They include Bosnia, Afghanistan,
Somalia, Iraq which were hit by major crises between 1995 and 2003 and also Iran,
Vietnam, Sri Lanka and Lebanon. The distribution of these immigrants and of all
refugees (including those from other countries) across municipalities in Denmark was
implemented, between 1986 and 1998, following the Spatial Dispersal Policy (Damm,
2009). This policy allocated refugees to spread their burden across municipalities
and to create self-supporting enclaves. The authority in charge (Refugee Council)
did not even know the economic characteristics and preferences of the immigrants
and distributed them as public housing became available in different municipalities.
After 1994 a sequence of international crises and wars, beginning with the war
in Former Yugoslavia in 1992-95 produced large waves of immigrants from those
refugee countries. Those events provide a supply-driven flow of immigrants who,
especially after 1998, when the dispersal policy was abandoned, settled where their
family sponsors were located.2 Therefore the later distribution of these immigrants
mirrored the early distribution which was produced by the dispersal policy alone
and hence was independent of local labor demand. Using a dispersal policy as a
“quasi-experiment” in this literature is new. While few studies have used dispersal
policies of immigrants to obtain identification, most of them (e.g. Edin, Fredriksson,
and Åslund, 2004; Damm, 2009; Gould, Lavy, and Paserman, 2004) have used them
to analyze their effects on outcomes of immigrants. Only Glitz (2012) among the
papers we know uses an immigration dispersal policy (in Germany) to identify the
labor market effects on natives.3
With respect to the outcomes, our analysis is innovative in that it can track
three types of variables, both individually and for areas, in the short and in the
long run. We analyze for native workers the complex and manual content of tasks
performed on the job, the hourly wage compensation and the time worked in a year.
We also use two different types of empirical approaches. First, in a classic twostage least squares (2SLS) panel estimation, we absorb most confounding factors
in a very large set of fixed effects and use variation of each individual’s outcomes
in response to refugee-country immigrants in the municipality, instrumented by a
2

By law the sponsor needed “adequately sized accommodation” for the re-unified family. In
practice this meant that, at least initially, new family members lived at the same address as their
sponsor.
3
In that study, however, the author does not observe individual outcomes, he can only consider
a period of 5 years (1996-2001), he can only exploit small cross sectional variation because of the
design of the dispersal and he only analyzes wage and employment outcomes, and not occupation
upgrading and mobility.

2

constructed measure based on the dispersal policy. Second, and more novel to
this literature, by exploiting the surge in refugee-country immigration beginning
in 1995 we adopt a difference-in-differences approach. We leverage the differential
exposure of less educated native workers to refugee-country immigrants based on
their 1994 municipality of residence. We follow cohorts of natives that were more
or less exposed to immigrants based on their 1994 location and so we identify the
effect of differential exposure.
The reason for focussing on less educated natives in most of our analysis is that
refugee-country immigrants were largely concentrated among non-college educated
individuals, they usually spoke Danish language at low levels of proficiency and
they were employed typically in occupations with high manual content and low
complexity (as we will define more precisely below).4 Hence, they were most likely
to compete in the labor market with less educated Danish workers, especially those
in manual-intensive occupations. The canonical model implies that an increase in
supply of these immigrants worsens the employment and wage prospects of less
educated natives, as they compete with each other. However, more recent models
(e.g. Ottaviano and Peri, 2012; Peri, 2012; Card, 2009) have emphasized the role of
complementarity within education groups as well as upgrading and specialization
of native workers in response to immigrants and have found null or positive wage
effects for less educated natives. Our paper can provide evidence in favor of one or
the other model.
Our analysis has three main findings. First, the increase in refugee-country
immigrants pushed less educated native workers to change occupation. This move
was significant and towards non-manual occupations, and particularly strong when
workers changed establishment. Second, less educated natives experienced positive
or null wage effects and positive or null employment effects. Enhanced occupational
mobility was partly the reason for these positive effects, complementarity may have
also played a role. Third, as we compare a cohort-based analysis and an area-based
analysis we find that the direction and magnitude of the effects on native outcomes
are similar using either method and the wage and specialization effects persist in
the long run. This finding dispels the claim that estimates from the area analysis
are uninformative or significantly biased.
4
Asylum seekers are not in our data and not allowed to work in Denmark. Once (if) their case
has been approved they will be assigned to an address under the dispersion policy and allowed to
work; i.e. they formally enter the country as refugees this date.

3

This paper is related to several lines of research. We already mentioned the
traditional studies on the labor market effects of immigrants and the few examples
that use dispersal policies for identification, in particular Glitz (2012). Going beyond the advances in identification, recent studies have also suggested departures
from the canonical framework in rationalizing the finding that immigration may
have a positive effect on native labor market outcomes: Workers have skills that
differ systematically between immigrants and natives;5 immigrant labor generates
the possibility of specialization with positive efficiency effects;6 investment and technology are adjusted by firms to absorb immigrant labor in local markets in the most
efficient way.7 Our paper provides further evidence in favor of these theories.8 By
improving on the identification strategy, by tracking the dynamics of these effects,
and by following individuals and areas we provide a very robust picture consistent
with native upgrading, immigrant-native complementarity and persistent positive
effects.9
Related to our research are also papers that use similar Danish data. MalchowMøller, Munch, and Skaksen (2012) employ variation within establishment-worker
spells to analyze the correlation of immigrant supply with wages of native coworkers.
Malchow-Møller et al. (2013) analyze the impact of immigrant hiring on firm’s job
creation in the farm sector. Malchow-Møller, Munch, and Skaksen (2011) look at
the Danish preferential tax scheme for foreign professionals and estimate the effect
of hiring them on wages and productivity within the firm. Parrotta, Pozzoli, and
Pytlikova (2014) look at the effect of an ethnically diversified workforce on firm
productivity. All these papers use more traditional identification strategies that
do not rely on the dispersal policy. Finally Hummels et al. (2014) estimate the
effects of increased offshoring on wages in manufacturing firms using similar data
and a very careful identification. The ability of our analysis to estimate a dynamic
transition of the outcome variables relates our research to the few existing studies
that analyze the dynamic effects of immigration. Cohen-Goldner and Paserman
5

This line of analysis is emphasized in Manacorda, Manning, and Wadsworth (2012); Ottaviano
and Peri (2005, 2012); D’Amuri, Ottaviano, and Peri (2010).
6
One paper analyzing this channel is Peri and Sparber (2009).
7
Examples are Lewis (2011, 2013); Ottaviano, Peri, and Wright (2013).
8
See also the recent analysis of immigration and productivity in Peri (2012), immigration and
firm creation in Olney (2013) and immigration and economic growth in Ortega and Peri (2013).
9
The difference-in-difference methodology is somewhat reminiscent of Von Wachter, Song, and
Manchester (2007) who use a similar approach to track the long run effects of job separations in
recession.

4

(2011), for instance, allow for labor market effects of immigration on natives to
change over time assuming that this is due to the dynamic adjustment of capital
and not to a dynamic response of natives.
Our approach tackles also the criticisms moved by some recent studies to the
so-called “area” approach in analyzing immigration. Borjas (2003) and other argue
that wage effects of immigrants are not captured when limiting the analysis within a
geographic area. By following individuals, our approach captures the effects of immigrants on individuals that may “spill” to other regions through mobility. Moreover
by comparing municipality-based and individual-based dynamic responses over time
we can establish directly whether spillovers have an important role in understanding
the impact of immigrants.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the dispersal
policy and the characteristics of the refugee-county immigrants. Section 3 presents
the data, their trends and summary statistics. Section 4 describes our two empirical
approaches and the identification assumptions. Section 5 shows and discusses the
empirical results and some extensions. Section 6 concludes the paper.

2

Refugees in Denmark

Immigrants (foreign-born) represented three percent or less of total employment in
Denmark until 1994 and they were almost equally divided between those from the
European Union (EU)10 and those from outside the European Union (non-EU) as
shown in Figure 1. The figure shows that beginning in 1995 the presence of non-EU
immigrants started to grow reaching a peak of 4.7% in 2008. Part of this significant
growth of non-EU immigrants was driven by the inflow of immigrants from “refugee
countries” that experienced significant conflicts between 1995 and 2003, especially
Former Yugoslavia, Somalia, Afghanistan and Iraq. The inflow of immigrants from
those countries grew in the 1990’s and in the 2000’s first in the form of refugees and
then as families were re-unified with refugees. Let us describe in greater detail the
events involving the inflows and distribution of these immigrants.
A well-organized and centralized program to admit and distribute refugees across
275 Danish municipalities was set in place in 1986 and it was administered by
the Danish Refugee Council until 1998 (Damm, 2009).11 This program distributed
10

We call EU immigrants those from the EU15 countries plus Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein
(European Economic Area) and Switzerland (bilateral agreement).
11
In our analysis we use the new and larger municipalities as local labor markets. They are 97

5

all the incoming refugees based only on information about their nationality and
family size. The Refugee Council had no information on the skills, education, labor
market abilities and Danish language proficiency of those individuals. The goals
of the Refugee Council were two. First, it allocated refugees to obtain a balanced
distribution across communities as a way to even out their housing burden. A key
aspect of the dispersal policy, in fact, was the availability of temporary housing
to refugee families and the provision of assistance in finding permanent housing.
Access to temporary housing via this program ensured a very high take-up rate of
the settlement offers: refugees accepted in more than 90% of the cases and they
stayed in the municipality where they were assigned, on average for 18 months,
although they were not forced to do so (see Damm, 2009, page 286). The second
goal of the Refugee Council was to create ethnic clusters in the distribution of
refugees, with the idea that individuals were more likely to help each other when
living in enclaves of people of the same nationality. Hence, within the aggregate
distribution of refugees across municipalities, national clusters emerged because of
uneven distribution of nationalities. The location of national clusters was accidental,
as it depended on the timing of specific inflows and on the availability of houses at
that time. Local Danish communities (municipalities) had little say on which or
how many refugees they could accept as the decisions of the Refugee Council were
communicated to them once the temporary housing had already been arranged in
the community.
Such a dispersal policy, therefore, generated national clusters of refugees that
were independent of local labor market conditions between 1986 and 1994. Then,
between 1995 and 2003 a sequence of large waves of immigrants from the regions of
Former Yugoslavia and then from Somalia, Afghanistan and Iraq (refugee countries)
entered Denmark, driven by major conflicts in their countries of origin. Figure 2
shows the cumulated number of immigrants from each of these four countries standardizing to zero their population in Denmark as of 1995. While we see a growth
in immigrants from Somalia and Iraq already before 1995, we notice that 1995 ushers a period of sudden and large inflow of immigrants from these countries that
lasted until 2003. Notice, as term of comparison, that immigration from Eastern
Europe (reported as a solid line in Figure 2) did not pick up until the later accession of Romania and Bulgaria to the EU after 2005. Hence, the national clusters
distributed accidentally by the dispersal policy became focal points for new immiafter merging Frederiksberg and Copenhagen.

6

grants coming from conflict-torn areas. Beginning in the mid 1990’s several family
members re-unified with refugee-country immigrants and the dispersal policy was
abandoned. Hence, the large inflows from the eight “refugee countries” produced
differential variation in migrants across municipalities due to the spatial differences
in nationalities generated by the dispersal policy.
Table 1 shows the effect of the initial refugee-country concentration across municipalities on the subsequent inflow of immigrants from refugee countries. We
divide municipalities in quartiles according to the level of the eight refugee-country
immigrants relative to population as distributed by the Dispersal Policy.12 The
municipalities in the top quartile hosted a somewhat larger population of refugeecountry immigrants in 1994.13 However, their presence was limited and equal to
0.76 percent of employment in 1994. In municipalities at the bottom quartile only
0.23 percent of employment in 1994 was from refugee-country immigrants. This difference of 0.5 percentage points of employment was stable before 1994 but it grew
more than threefold to a difference of 1.6 percentage points by 2008 because of the
significant inflows from those countries. Table 1 shows also that such a differential
growth in refugee-country immigrants is responsible for about half of the differential growth in non-EU immigrants as share of employment across the top and the
bottom quartile of municipalities (that increased by 2.6 percentage points). To the
contrary the differential in the presence of EU immigrants across those municipalities remained almost unchanged (increase by only 0.3 percentage points) during the
period 1994-2008. This suggests that differential labor demand was not likely to be
the reason for differential growth of refugee-country immigrants, as EU immigrants,
free to locate where jobs were, would have responded to those.
Table 2 shows some important features of refugee-country immigrants, as a
group, relative to natives. They were significantly less educated than natives and
employed in elementary and often manual-intensive types of occupations. This feature is important as it informs what type of native workers would be more likely
to compete with them. Forty percent of refugee-country immigrants (and likely
more, if we consider most of those with unknown education as less educated) did
not have a post-secondary education while for natives it was only 32 percent. Most
12

Recall that the eight refugee countries are Yugoslavia, Somalia, Afghanistan, Iraq, Sri Lanka,
Vietnam, Iran and Lebanon as they generated a substantial inflow of refugees during the period
1994-2008.
13
Notice, that the actual stock (differently from the new inflow each year of the policy) include
relocated immigrants.

7

of the individuals from refugee countries did not speak Danish and they were culturally and ethnically different from natives. They were more likely than natives to
be employed in manual occupations and less likely than natives to be in the more
complex, cognitive-intensive and highly paid occupations. Table 2 shows also that
the least complex type of occupations (“sale and elementary service occupations” )
employed 13% of refugee-country immigrants while only 4% of natives. At the other
end of the spectrum the most complex type of occupations (“legislator and senior
officials”) did not employ any refugee-country immigrant.
Table 3 shows more evidence of the concentration of refugee-country immigrants
in occupations with high manual and low cognitive and communication content. The
table shows the five occupations with the smallest (Panel A) and the largest (Panel
B) net inflow of refugee-country immigrants in the period 1994-2008, measured as
change in their share of employment. We see that the low-inflow occupations are
very high in cognitive and communication content (as we will define more precisely
below) and they are low in manual task content, while vice-versa the large-inflow
occupations are high in manual content and low in cognitive-communication content.
Immigration from refugee-sending countries, therefore, represented an increase in the
supply of labor in manual-intensive, elementary types of occupations. Those were
overwhelmingly performed by natives with no post-secondary education, and hence
this is the group of workers whose response to refugee-country immigrants we will
analyze more closely as they may be the most negatively affected by competition.
High skilled natives, to the contrary, are likely to be complementary to these type
of workers, and we will also analyze refugee-country immigrants’ impact on their
labor market outcomes as comparison.
Figure 3 shows the dynamics of the average complexity index for high and low
skilled native workers and for refugee-country immigrants aggregating over Denmark. Panel A includes only people who were working as of 1995 (hence only one
cohort) while panel B includes all workers between 1995 and 2008. The figure clearly
shows that refugee-country immigrants exhibit a much lower level of occupational
complexity, and also that the level did not change much over time for a cohort or
including new entrants between 1995 and 2008. Less skilled natives had a complexity level that increased markedly over time while high skilled natives had high
average complexity that did not change as much over time. Hence, the aggregate
time behavior is consistent with the idea that refugee-country immigrants increased
permanently the supply of non-complex tasks in the labor market and less skilled
8

natives responded by moving towards more complex tasks.
Let us conclude this section with few important observations about the Danish
labor markets. Danish jobs exhibited high turnover rates, low costs of hiring and
layoffs and decentralization in wage setting during the considered period (Dahl,
le Maire, and Munch, 2013). In this flexible framework wage responses best reflect
marginal productivity. The findings from this case are informative of the potential
effect of unskilled immigrants on similar labor markets represented by the US or UK,
rather than other continental European countries, because of their higher level of
flexibility. Occupational and cross-firm mobility turn out to be important margins of
adjustment in Denmark and this may help explain the positive correlation between
immigration and employment/wage of natives that is also observed in the US (Card,
2009) and the UK (Dustmann, Frattini, and Preston, 2013).

3

Data and Descriptive Statistics

3.1

Sample and Variables

The core of our data is the Danish Integrated Database for Labor Market Research
(IDA), a collection of administrative registers that link data on individual characteristics of the workers and data on the characteristics of establishments. The
data are recorded annually, during the last week of November, for each individual
in Denmark and include detailed information on occupation, salary, hours worked,
individual demographics, and other workers’ characteristics. They also include the
industry, location and other basic characteristics of the establishment where the
person is employed.
We select individuals who were between 18 and 65 years old, who were not
attending school and not permanently disabled.14 We refer to this group as the
“working-age population”. We restrict our analysis of outcomes to a panel of Danishborn individuals. Those without college education, low skilled, are the workers in
more direct competition with refugee-country immigrants and we focus our attention
on their outcomes. For completeness and comparison we will also show the estimated
effect of refugee-country immigrants on college educated (high skilled) natives.
The panel regression analysis (described in section 4.1) includes all individuals
that are employed in November of each year. When turning to the difference-in14
Bratsberg, Raaum, and Røed (2010) show that large fraction of non-EU immigrants in Norway
take up disability pension. We do not include those immigrants in our analysis.

9

difference analysis (described in section 4.2) we consider instead a balanced panel
of individuals and we follow them without imposing further restrictions as they
transit into and out of employment and across jobs. In this second sample we select
natives aged 21 − 51 in year 1994 who therefore satisfy the age criterion for being
in working-age population (18 − 65) throughout our analysis. An individual will
be in the sample continuously unless he/she becomes disabled, leaves Denmark or
dies within the 1991-2008 period. In the analysis of the effect of immigration on
the employment margin we distinguish two subgroups in the balanced panel: those
employed as of November 1994 and those not employed in November 1994.
In all specifications of the empirical analysis we consider three main outcome
variables. The first is a measure of the complexity of tasks performed by a native
worker on the job. This index is obtained using information on the task intensity of
each occupation from the O*NET database (US Bureau of Labor Statistics) along
the dimensions of manual, communication and cognitive content and aggregating
them. The complexity index follows Ottaviano, Peri, and Wright (2013) and is
increasing in communication and cognitive content while it is decreasing in manual
content. We provide details about the underlying task data and the link to Danish
registers in the Online Appendix. We also show results using each component of
the index (Manual, Cognitive and Manual). The second outcome is the (logarithm
of) hourly wage of a native worker, calculated including mandatory payments to
pension schemes and deflated using the Danish consumer price index.15 The third
is a measure of individual labor supply captured by the fraction of a year worked.
This variable equals one if the worker was a full-time employee throughout the year.
If either the person was part-time employed and/or if the person was only employed
part of the year, the employment variable takes a fractional value equal to the share
of the regular working year which was spent at work. The employment variable is
measured for each Danish native individual while the occupational index and the
hourly wage measure are available only for those individuals who were employed at
the end of November.
We also construct a variable that we call “occupational mobility” that equals one
whenever an individual changes occupation between year t−1 and t. So our data, by
following people over time, allow us to study occupational mobility of individuals.
15
The mandatory pension contributions vary across industries. As data on the pension payments
are available only from 1995 onwards, we consider wage net of pension contributions when we
include pre-1995 data. The fixed effect analysis that can be implemented with net or gross earnings
proved to be robust to the choice of income measures.

10

The effect on the complexity index captures the direction of such mobility in the
complexity space. Namely, if a worker changes job and moves to an occupation with
higher complexity we consider such a move as a transition to more complex tasks,
usually associated with higher pay and lower unemployment risk.
The individual level characteristics that we use as controls are age, labor market experience (cumulative employment in years since first joining the labor force),
tenure in the current job (calculated as the period elapsed between the hiring in the
current establishment and the current period), level of education, marital status,
region and industry of employment. Summary statistics of the controls and of the
dependent variables used in the empirical analysis are provided in Table 4.16 The
table shows summary statistics for the sample of native workers used in the fixed
effect regressions.17

3.2

Local Labor Markets

The geographic units of analysis, that we use to approximate local labor markets,
are the municipalities that can be identified consistently in Denmark, beginning in
1988 up to 2008. We merge Frederiksberg and Copenhagen since those two municipalities constitute one integrated labor market. This leaves us with 97 areas where
Copenhagen, Aarhus and Aalborg are the biggest and most populous ones.18 While
these geographical units are rather small we can follow workers across municipalities and hence we do not have to make any assumptions about them being closed
economies. We are simply assuming that immigration in the municipality of work is
a good proxy of the intensity of exposure of a native worker to the competition and
to the opportunity brought by those immigrants. Most of the mobility of workers
takes place across firms within municipality confirming that municipalities are, even
in the long run, rather self-contained labor markets. Only around 10 percent of the
16
The empirical analysis is based on a 20 percent random sample of native individuals. Immigrant
shares (the explanatory variable of interest and the instrument) are calculated on the full sample
to avoid measurement error.
17
The balanced panel used in the difference-in-difference analysis has similar summary statsitics
in terms of age, labor market experience, education and wages to those reported in Table 4.
18
Copenhagen (including Frederiksberg) had 603 thousand inhabitants in 2008, and Aarhus and
Aalborg had, respectively, 298 and 195 thousand inhabitants. The smallest municipalities are islands with two to seven thousands inhabitants, which will count very little in our estimations.
The next smallest municipalities begin at around twelve thousand. In the large cities the employment/population ratio is about 60 percent, while it is 40 percent in the more isolated, rural
municipalities.

11

workers who move across establishments each year change municipality.19

4

Empirical Approach and Identification

4.1

Individual Workers: Fixed Effects Panel Regressions

The first empirical approach that we implement estimates panel regressions with
large number of fixed effects using 2SLS methods. By including different sets of
fixed effects, we identify the response of native low skilled workers either within
their establishment spells, or within their municipality spells or including their whole
working experience 1995-2008.
We indicate the outcomes of native (N AT ) individual i in establishment j in
N AT in regression (1) below. We anamunicipality m at time t as the variable yijmt

lyze occupational complexity, task intensity, occupational mobility, the logarithm of
hourly wages and employment, measured as fraction of working year, as outcome
variables. The main explanatory variable is the refugee-country immigrant share of
employment in municipality m and year t, Smt , calculated as Fmt /Pmt where Fmt
is the stock of employed immigrants from refugee-countries and Pmt is the total
employment in municipality m and year t. The regressions that we estimate have
the following structure:
N AT
yijmt
= x0it α + βSmt + φt,IN D + φt,REG + γ i,u + εijmt

(1)

The variable xit is a vector of time-varying individual characteristics which include
age, age squared, labor market experience, experience squared, tenure on the job,
tenure squared, education, and whether the person is married. The variables φt,IN D
and φt,REG are industry-by-year and region-by-year effects capturing regional and
industry-specific time patterns. Regions are the five administrative regions in Denmark and industries are the eight industries of the 1-digit NACE industrial classification scheme.20
In our 2SLS estimation analysis we instrument the explanatory variable Smt
with Sbmt that uses the refugee dispersal policy and is described in section 4.3. The
19
As Copenhagen is a metropolitan area significantly larger than the others and it attracts a
large part of non-refugee immigrants we have also performed the regression analysis in section 5.1
excluding it. The results are very similar to those obtained including Copenhagen and we did not
report them. They are available upon request.
20
The regions and the industries are listed in Table 4.

12

variables indicated by γ i,u represent fixed effects for each individual i and unit u
combination. Depending on which unit u we choose, the inclusion of these effects
allow us to identify the impact of immigration on outcomes within that unit. In
the first set of regressions we choose the unit u to be an establishment, j, so that
the set of fixed effects γ i,j will vary for each employee-establishment pair.21 Such
regression identifies the impact of an increased supply of refugee-country immigrants
on the outcome of native workers within an establishment. While such an extensive
set of fixed effects allows us to absorb any heterogeneity in employee-establishment
matches, reducing drastically the scope for omitted variable bias, it may also miss
important effects that are systematically different when workers change establishment.
For this reason the second group of regressions include a set of individualmunicipality fixed effects γ i,m instead. This specification estimates the impact of
immigrants on outcomes of native workers within their municipality spells but across
establishments. Differences with the previous specification reveal that some effects
might be more or less pronounced when leveraging workers’ experience across establishments. This help understand, for instance, whether the specialization adjustment
of natives takes place prevalently within or across establishments.
Finally, the third version of equation (1) includes individual fixed effects (with
no u interaction) so as to capture the response to immigrants within the whole
individual workers’s experience. This is a more classic panel fixed effect estimation
based only on within-individual variation. If immigration affects natives when they
move out of the municipality in a systematically different way than while they stay,
this method will provide estimates different from the previous two. To account for
the correlation of errors across individuals and years within municipality we cluster
standard errors at the municipality level (for individual fixed effects straddling over
several municipalities the level of the cluster is the initial municipality).
The three panel regressions described produce an informative picture of the
effects of refugee-country immigrants on native outcomes. Together they range from
very tightly identified, but possibly narrower effects within a worker-establishment
spell, to broader but possibly less cleanly identified effects, over individual working
experiences. However, as they are considering only the contemporaneous effects of
immigration on working natives, they can hardly be used to obtain an estimate of
21
This is similar to the fixed effects used in Hummels et al. (2014) and Malchow-Møller, Munch,
and Skaksen (2011).

13

the dynamic, short and long run effects of immigration and of the effect on the
employment/non-employment margin. These shortcomings are addressed by the
specification described next (section 4.2).

4.2

Following People or Municipalities: Difference-in-Difference

Our second approach uses a difference-in-difference design to identify the short and
long run effect of immigrants on less educated native workers who resided in a
Danish municipality in 1994. We follow their outcomes, including those who moved
out of the municipality or out of employment. We choose 1995 as beginning of
the treatment period as figures 1 and 2 show a discontinuous increase in refugeecountry immigration beginning in that year. We discretize immigration exposure
across municipalities using differences in refugee-country immigrants determined
by the dispersal policy. The exact construction is explained in section 4.3. We
define as “exposed to immigration” or “treated ” those municipalities in the top
quartile of the refugee-country immigration exposure ranking, and as “non-exposed”
or “control ” those in the bottom quartile.22 In order to leverage such a difference
we only include individuals in the top and bottom quartile municipalities in the
difference-in-difference regressions.
This set-up allows us to define a pre-treatment period represented by the years
1991-1994 during which refugee-country immigrants in Denmark were not abundant. Then, we consider a treatment period going from 1995 to 2008 during which
the number of refugee-country immigrants surged. The ethnic enclaves of refugeecountry immigrants, generated during the dispersal policy, were joined by many
more immigrants due to prolonged crises in the source countries. We then compare
the labor market outcomes of low skilled natives during the treatment period in
high exposure municipalities relative to low exposure to identify the effect. We can
also test the pre-1995 trend in native outcomes between exposed and non-exposed
municipalities to see whether the performance of native low skilled workers differed
already before the treatment period of large refugee-country immigration.
We implement the difference-in-difference estimation in a regression setting. The
N AT represents an outcome for native individual i in municipality m in
variable yimt

year t as in equation (1). The outcomes are occupational complexity, manual intensity, hourly wages and employment as fraction of year worked. The explanatory
22

Specifically, the population weighted distribution of the 1994-2008 difference in the predicted
refugeee-country immigrant share is our measure of immigration exposure.

14

variable of interest is the treatment dummy Mimt equal to one if individual i is
in an exposed municipality and 0 if the individual is in a non-exposed one. This
variable is interacted with a set of year dummies, D(year = t), equal to 1 in year t
and zero otherwise. The year variable is defined so that 1994 is year 0 and 1 to 14
corresponds to the treatment period, while −3 to 0 is the pre-treatment period.23
The variable x0it represents the same individual controls as included in (1) and
the variables φm are fixed effects for each municipality. The detailed year effects are
industry-by-year (φt,IN D ), region-by-year (φt,REG ), education-by-year (φt,EDU C ),
and occupation-by-year (φt,OCC ).24 The equation that we estimate is:
N AT
yimt

=

x0it α

+

−1
X

γ t Mimt D(year = t) +

t=−3

14
X

γ t Mimt D(year = t) +

t=1

+φt,IN D + φt,REG + φt,EDU C + φt,OCC + φmt + εit

(2)

The coefficients γ t capture the difference in individual outcomes from 1991 (year
−3) to 2008 (year 14) between individuals in treated and non-treated municipalities,
standardized to zero in year 0 which is 1994. We will show these coefficients in the
panels of section 5.
Within the common framework of expression (2) we specify two different regressions. One is designed to follow individual workers who were in a treated or
a control municipalities as of 1994. This specification implies that we define the
treatment, the controls and the fixed effects based on the location/characteristics
of worker i in 1994 and we characterize this specification as following the cohort of
individuals. The indicator Mimt is one in this specification if individual i was in
a treated municipality m in 1994 no matter where he/she is in year t. Hence, the
indicator variable does not vary with t. Similarly all covariates included as controls
are fixed for the worker in 1994.
The other regression tracks the evolution of outcomes in municipalities instead.
In this case the indicator Mimt is one if individual i is in a treated municipality m
in year t. Hence, individuals included in the “treated” group may change over time,
as they move in or out of treated municipalities. The control and fixed effects are
23
As we include municipality and year effects in the model we omit year 0 in the interactions
with the treatment dummy. Hence, 1994 is the reference year.
24
The occupation categories are unskilled worker (reference), skilled worker, intermediate professional, higher grade professional and manager. The education categories, the regions and the
industries are the same as in equation (1).

15

also relative to the individual in year t. This approach mirrors, in an individuallevel setting, the repeated cross-section regressions often seen in the literature that
estimate the effect for the average worker in the municipality. The effect obtained
this way will combine the impact of immigration on individuals who remain in the
municipality and the contribution of natives who (selectively) join and it will miss
the contribution of those who (selectively) leave. Hence, this second approach is
not as clean in terms of exogeneity of the explanatory variable as the first, but
it mirrors the typical area approach of the existing literature. The comparison of
the two approaches will tell us whether we miss some important features of the
impact of immigration on native outcomes when we follow the local labor market
(municipality) effect rather than the average individual effect. Standard errors are
clustered at the municipality level.
4.2.1

Cumulated Long Differences

Finally, we want to capture the effect of immigration on the cumulated individual
outcomes for the whole 1995-2008 period, in a framework similar to equation (2).
To do that we calculate as outcome the cumulative time (in years) spent in the
initial establishment or in establishments different from the first, the time spent
in the initial municipality or in different municipalities, and in employment or in
non-employment. We also calculate the cumulative effect on the present discounted
value of earnings to summarize the overall impact on the exposed workers from 1995
to 2008. The regression on these cumulated variables is as follows:
N AT
∆yi,m,1995−2008
= αx0i,1994 +β∆Sm,1994−2008 +φIN D +φREG +φEDU C +φOCC +εi (3)
N AT
∆yi,m,1995−2008
in expression (3) represents the cumulated outcome from 1995 to

2008 for less-skilled natives, and ∆Sm,1994−2008 is the total change in the refugeecountry immigrant share of employment in region m from 1994 (before the surge) to
2008. We instrument ∆Sm,1994−2008 with the change in the imputed refugee-country
immigrant share of population based on the dispersal policy described in section 4.3.
Equation (3) establishes whether refugee-country immigrants exposure has affected
the propensity of less educated natives to change establishment or labor market, or
to exit employment. By cumulating the effect and following individuals wherever
they go this specification summarizes the long run effects of exposure to immigration
in the initial location on individual mobility. Standard errors are clustered at the
16

1994-municipality level, the level of variation in the variable of interest.

4.3

Identification and Instrumental Variable

The explanatory variable of interest measures refugee-country immigrant supply as
their share of employment in municipality m at time t. In the light of the dispersal
policy and of the refugee-country immigrants inflows we build an instrument based
on the distribution of new refugee-country immigrants during the dispersal period
(1986-1998) but also leveraging the large flows from 1995 to 2008 where an increasing
number of immigrants arrived via family reunification.
Let Fct denote the total working-age population of immigrants from refugeecountry c (Bosnia, Afghanistan, Somalia, Iraq, Iran, Vietnam, Sri Lanka and Lebanon)
residing in Denmark in year t. Let scm indicate the share of new immigrants from
country c that settled, as first location, in municipality m between 1986 and 1998.25
During this period of full application of the dispersal policy all individuals from
refugee-countries were assigned according to it. Because of adherence to the policy the shares were independent of labor market conditions across municipalities.
Then, after 1994 the aggregate flow from refugee countries increased and, progressively, they were not any longer assigned according to the dispersal policy which
was phased out and many refugee-country immigrants came with family reunification permits. Hence for t > 1994 we construct Fbcmt the imputed working-age
population from refugee-sending country c in municipality m in year t as follows:
Fbcmt = scm ×Fct . This imputed population is constructed as a function of the shares
scm which were completely determined by the dispersal policies, and the total immigrant population from each country c after 1994 which was in large part driven
by refugee-country crises. We then aggregate across the refugee-countries and we
obtain the total refugee-country working-age population.26 We standardize it by
the total working-age population in municipality m in year 1988, Pm1988 . So the
P
imputed refugee-country immigrant share is: Sbmt = (
Fbcmt )/Pm1988 . The
c∈Ref ugee

variation of Sbmt , over the years, after 1994, is only driven by the changes in the
imputed refugee-country population distributed according to dispersal policy shares
scm . This variable is used as instrument for the employment share of refugee-country
25
26

This implies that

X

scm = 1

m

Bosnia is included in the measure of actual inflow but not in the instrument because a special
Bosnia Programme might have reduced the randomness of location of those refugees.

17

immigrants in municipality m at time t, Smt in the panel regressions.27 It is also
used to identify the top and the bottom quartile municipalities in their exposure to
refugee-country immigrants in the difference-in-difference approach.
Let us emphasize that, although we have firm-level data on immigrants, our
strategy uses the variation of immigrant supply across local labor markets (and not
firms) to identify their impact. Doing this we can exploit the exogeneity of the
dispersal policy that produced variation across municipalities, as described above.
To the contrary, the hiring of immigrants across firms even before 1994 was certainly
affected by firm-specific factors. If those factors were persistent they might be
correlated with native labor market outcomes in the period of analysis.28
The power of this instrument depends on how strong was the tendency of post1994 immigrants from refugee countries to cluster in the enclaves generated by the
dispersal policy, and we will test this in the first stage. The exclusion restriction for
the validity of the instruments requires that the imputed inflows of refugee-country
immigrants in municipalities are uncorrelated with the unobserved determinants of
municipal labor demand after 1995 once we control for fixed effects and observed
variables. The plausibility of the exclusion restriction is predicated on the independence of the dispersal policy from labor demand conditions. We perform, however,
some important tests of this restriction. Specifically, in Table 5 we analyze whether
the 1994-2008 change in the instrument Sbmt is correlated across municipalities with
trends in the outcome variables (occupational complexity, hourly wages and fraction
of year worked) for low skilled natives in the pre-1994 (pre-treatment) period. The
unit of observation in these regressions are the municipalities. A significant correlation with trends that pre-date the refugee-country immigrant surge would cast
doubts on the validity of the instrument as it would reveal some persistent trend
affecting outcomes and correlated with the instrument.
The regressions of Table 5 include age, labor market experience, job tenure,
(and each of them squared) and marital status averaged over the labor force in each
municipality in 1994 as controls. The regressions weight each municipality by its
labor force as of 1994. The first row shows the correlation of the (change in the)
27
Notice that while the explanatory variable Smt is constructed using employment data, the
instrument Sbmt is built using working-age population. This add a further degree of exogeneity to
the instrument.
28
Recently, Dustmann and Glitz (2011) also considered the immigrants’presence in local labor
markets, rather than in firms, when analyzing the adjustment mechanisms through which local
firms absorb them.

18

instrument Sbmt with the outcomes (in 1991-1994 differences) for low skilled. The
estimated coefficients on the pre-1994 changes are small and far from statistical
significance at any standard level. Reassuringly they imply that there was no correlation between the pre-1994 trends in outcomes and the successive imputed inflow
of refugee-country immigrant across municipalities.
The fourth column of table 5 shows another interesting fact, namely that there
is no correlation between the prediction of the instrument and the actual immigration from EU countries. As EU immigrants were free to locate where they choose
in Denmark, and most of them migrated for working reasons, we can infer that
the distribution of imputed refugee-country immigrants being orthogonal to that of
EU immigrants suggests very low correlation of the first with local labor demand
shifts in the 1995-2008 period. Finally, column 5 of Table 5 shows the power of the
instrument. The correlation of the change in the instrument with the actual change
in the refugee-country immigrant share of employment exhibits a very significant
coefficient and large F-statistic (close to 49). These tests together suggest that the
instrument is strong and valid as the correlation with pre-1994 economic outcomes
and with economically motivated migrants (the EU immigrants) are low, while the
correlation with the explanatory variable is high. A concern for identification can
also be the attenuation bias produced by measurement error. In this type of regressions, Aydemir and Borjas (2011) pointed out that the share of immigrants can
be measured with significant error in surveys leading to important bias. Our data,
however, are not subject to measurement error arising from sampling as we calculate the immigrant shares of each municipality based on the full population registers
(and not on a sample) thereby eliminating these concerns.

5
5.1

Results
Effects on Individual Workers

Table 6 shows the panel estimates of the effect of immigrants on low skilled natives.
The table shows only the estimates of the coefficient of interest, namely β in equation
(1) which captures the effect on the outcome variable of an increase in refugeecountry immigrants by 1 percentage point of employment. Each entry in the table
is an estimate from a different regression using different outcomes listed as entries in
the corresponding row. Columns 1, 3 and 5 show the OLS estimates, while columns

19

2, 4, and 6 show the 2SLS estimates of the coefficient of interest for three different
sets of fixed effects. The first two columns show the results when controlling for the
individual-establishment fixed effects; hence, they identify the effect of immigrants
on native workers within establishment spells. Columns 3 and 4 show the results
when including the individual-municipality fixed effects and capture the effect of
immigration on a native workers within municipality spells. Finally, columns 5 and
6 show results when only including individual fixed effects and hence capture the
impact on native workers including all working spells.
In the first row of Table 6 we show the effects of an increase in immigrants on
the occupational complexity of low skilled native workers. The second, third and
fourth rows report the estimated effects on the underlying skill intensities (manual,
communication and cognitive) used to construct the complexity index. As the task
intensity of jobs is inferred from occupations and changes in that intensity reveal
move across occupations in the fifth row we report, for completeness, the effects
of immigrants on unskilled native occupational mobility. Occupational mobility is
measured as a dummy that equals one if an individual changed (4-digit ISCO-88)
occupation from one year to the following. The sixth row shows the effects on (the
logarithm of) hourly wages, and the seventh row shows the effect on individual time
worked measured as fraction of the working year. The number of observations in
the regression is shown next and the F -statistic and the coefficient on the excluded
instrument in the first stage regression appear in the last two rows of the table. In
parenthesis under each estimated coefficient, we report the heteroskedasticity robust
standard errors clustered at the municipality level to account for correlation of errors
within-municipality.
A tendency of immigrants to settle in areas with fast growing labor demand
would usually generate an upward bias in the OLS estimates of the effect on native
wages and employment. However, we are considering a special group of immigrants
whose population, as shown above, grew from initial settlements of refugees whose
location was centrally decided and uncorrelated with initial economic conditions
and then grew because of co-location of families and groups rather than responding
to labor demand. Hence, the OLS estimates might not be upward biased in this
case. The IV regression, however, should isolate more cleanly the immigration due
to dispersal and refugee-country crises. The differences between the OLS and IV,
in Table 6, are rarely significant and usually they reveal a downward bias of OLS
estimates which may suggest a negative correlation between the actual inflow of these
20

immigrants and the contemporaneous labor market conditions for unskilled natives.
Refugee-country immigrants did not seem to settle in booming municipalities. The
instrument is usually fairly strong with an F -statistics of the first stage always above
50. A value of 10 or higher is considered as sufficient to avoid issues of significant
weak instrument bias (Stock and Yogo, 2005).
Several interesting results emerge from Table 6 which are all consistent with a
response of less skilled native workers to the immigrants in the direction of taking advantage of complementarity and opportunities generated by this group of workers.29
Focussing on the IV estimates, we see that unskilled native workers experienced
a significant transition towards more complex jobs. Two new and interesting features of this transition are revealed. On one hand, the more significant transition is
to jobs with lower manual task content, in line with the idea that refugee-country
immigrants concentrate in those type of jobs and pushed natives away from them.
On the other hand, the occupational transition is significant only when considering
workers across establishments and municipality. For spells within an establishment
there is not much skill/task adjustment.
The estimates of columns 4 and 6, that include workers’ spells across establishments and municipalities, imply that an increase in refugee-country immigrants by
1 percentage point of employment increases the complexity of native jobs between
1.3 and 3.1%. This is novel to the literature as previous studies could not identify whether occupational transitions and specialization took place within or across
firms. The current results suggest that the specialization response of native unskilled
takes place mainly with transitions across establishments. The second interesting
result is that within establishment, across establishments and across municipalities,
native workers’ hourly wages are affected positively by the refugee-country immigrants. The estimated effects are positive and usually significant (if not very precise)
and imply a 1 to 1.8% native wage increase for each immigrant inflow equal to 1
percentage point of employment. Interestingly, the wage effect is not very different
across the three different panel regressions. A plausible interpretation is that native
unskilled workers who remain within an establishment after new immigrants come
in are those performing the more complementary tasks (less manual and more cognitive). Hence, they benefit from their complementarity within firm and this shows
in higher wages and labor supply. Those leaving establishments, instead, are the
29
This is similar to what found in Peri and Sparber (2009) and D’Amuri and Peri (2014) but the
present analysis reveals much richer details and a clearer picture of the dynamics of this process.

21

ones doing more manual-intensive jobs, but they leave the establishment to transition into non-manual jobs, so that in the end this upgrade allows their wages to
increase too. The final interesting result from Table 6 is that for all native workers
the labor supply increases slightly or remains unchanged in response to immigrants,
confirming an effect consistent with complementarity in production.30
Quantitatively the estimated effects are not unreasonably large. As stated above
a one percentage points increase in the share of low skilled immigrants from refugeesending countries increased wages for low skilled native workers by 1 to 1.8 percent.
The overall increase in average real wages in Denmark during the 1994-2008 period
was 18 percentage points for less skilled workers, hence immigration of refugeecountry immigrants contributed, but only very little, to the good wage performance
of Danish low skilled in this period. As a comparison, the estimated effect of total
immigration 1990-2006 on unskilled US workers (no high school degree) calculated
using the preferred specifications of Ottaviano and Peri (2012, Table 6, columns 6-9)
range between 0.6 and 1.7 percent, and are therefore not very different from these.

5.2

Interpreting the Estimates

The panel regressions suggest that refugee-country immigrants, who specialized
mainly in manual, low skilled jobs, encouraged low skilled natives to take more
complex occupations, decreasing the manual content of their jobs especially when
changing establishment and this contributed to produce a positive effect on their
wages and employment. In no specification we find crowding out of native unskilled
workers (i.e. negative effects on employment) or depressing effects on their wages.
These results can be interpreted in a simple skill-specialization framework of the
type suggested by Peri and Sparber (2009) and used in Docquier, Ozden, and Peri
(2014) and similar to Card (2009). Low skilled natives and immigrants are imperfect
substitutes and this is because they perform different tasks. Moreover low skilled
immigrants and high skilled natives are complements as they perform very different
30
We are unable with our data to establish whether immigrants had an impact on local prices as
there is no information on those. We can emphasize, however, that most of the literature on the
effect of immigrants on house prices (the largest component of local prices) finds that highly skilled
immigrants (richer and more frequently home owners) had a significant impact (e.g. Peri, Sparber,
and Shih, forthcoming). Moreover in this case, we consider only refugee-country immigrants, the
majority of whom was given public housing, making it unlikely that they had a large effect on the
price of private housing.

22

tasks.31 This would explain a potentially positive effect of immigrants on native
unskilled wages and a positive larger effect on native skilled.
The results in section 5.1 show that low skilled immigration itself pushes natives
to become more complementary to immigrants through changing specialization, especially across establishments. Moving to complementary jobs and specializing in
non-manual tasks are key mechanisms in obtaining the positive results on low skilled
wages. The simple theoretical model implies also that low skilled immigrants are
complement of high skilled natives and for that group, already engaged in complex production tasks, there should be less (or no) effect on specialization but still
positive wage effect. To check this, we report in Table 7 the estimated effects on
the outcomes for high skilled natives. This table has the exact same structure as
Table 6. The table shows that in this case the effects on complexity and manual
tasks are much smaller (the point estimates are one half to one third of those for
less skilled) especially considering spells that include establishment and municipality
change (columns 4 and 6). The effects on wages, however, are significant and larger
for high skilled than for less skilled (at least considering workers within municipalities). These effects are consistent with the above interpretation of complementarity
in the productive skills of refugee-country immigrants and high skilled natives. As
high skilled are likely to perform cognitive and complex tasks, they have no need to
change specialization and they benefit from a positive complementarity effect from
workers who fill manual-type of jobs.
From the estimates of the wage effect of refugee-country immigrants in Table 6
and Table 7 we can also identify the implicit elasticity of substitution between high
and low skilled natives. This is given by the inverse of the high-low skilled difference
in logarithmic wage changes in response to an increase in relative low skill supply
by one percentage point, driven by refugee-country immigrants. Hence, taking the
average estimates from the statistically significant wage effects of Table 6 and 7, we
obtain a differential logarithmic impact of 0.5 (2.2 − 1.7) which implies an elasticity
of substitution equal to 2 between the high and low skilled. This is very close to the
one used in the literature (e.g. by Ottaviano and Peri, 2012, who choose a value of
1.75). Refugee-country immigrants, being imperfect substitutes of natives because
of their specialization, had a positive impact on wages of both skill groups of natives.
31
In the theoretical models as summarized in Lewis and Peri (2015) high and less skilled are
considered as two different labor inputs and they are combined in a CES production function.
Manual and non-manual tasks, within the less skilled group, are considered also as two inputs and
combined in a CES function nested in the previous one.

23

However, they also increased the wage differential between them as they were more
complementary to high than to low skilled.

5.3

Effects on Cohorts and Areas

The panels in Figure 4 show the estimated coefficients γ t (solid line) and their 95%
confidence interval (dashed lines) from equation (2) for each year, with 1994 (0)
as the reference year.32 These coefficients show the difference in native less skilled
workers’ outcomes between municipalities exposed to refugee-country immigrants
(treated) relative to less exposed municipalities (control). The panels from top to
bottom represent four different outcomes: Occupation complexity (panels A and B),
manual intensity (panels C and D), hourly wage (panels E and F) and fraction of
year worked (panels G and H). The left-right sets of figures represent estimates from
the specification that follows individual cohorts (left column) or the specification
that follows municipalities (right column). These pictures allow us to see how the
adjustments and effects of immigrants on natives unfolded over time. We see how
long it takes for the full impact to occur since year 0, the beginning of the large
refugee-country immigrant flow. We can also detect if the effect is temporary or
permanent. A second important feature of the pictures is that the trajectories
allow us to check whether there was a trend differentiating the treated and control
regions already before the large inflow started (between year −3 and 0). Finally,
by comparing the cohort and the area transitions we can see whether individual
mobility systematically attenuate the area effects.
Some results emerge clearly from the difference-in-difference approach, and they
are consistent with those from the panel approach and enrich our understanding of
the native response to immigrants. First, the cohort of native unskilled individuals
from highly exposed municipalities has a clear gradual and permanent shift towards
more complex and less manual tasks. The shift is significant (about 4% increase
in the complexity index in the exposed municipalities) and it took place gradually
in the years between one and nine, corresponding to the period 1995-2003 where
the refugee-country immigrant populations grew (Figure 2). The effects is still
significant after 15 years (in 2008) suggesting a permanent shift.
Comparing the effects following the cohort of individuals (left panels) to those
following the municipality (right panels) we notice a small (not statistically signifi32

For completeness Table A.1 in Online Appendix reports the estimates and standard errors for
selected years, and Figure A.1 shows the corresponding graphs for high skilled natives.

24

cant) difference, with the second response somewhat attenuated relative to the first.
This is true also for the wage and employment effects, which may indicate that
some of the effects on native workers spilled to other municipalities. However, the
magnitude and direction of the effects are consistent and similar between cohort and
municipality suggesting that, differently to what argued in some previous research
(e.g. Borjas (2008) and Borjas (2014) chapter 6), the area analysis is quite informative of the overall direction and magnitude of the effects of immigrants on native
labor market outcomes. Panel E and F show the positive wage effect on native
unskilled which follows a gradual trajectory, mirroring the change in specialization.
Especially, when following the individual cohort (panel E), we observe a positive
effect on wages that is still significant after 15 years. Wages of native unskilled exhibit a permanent increase by 2.4% in more exposed municipalities when we follow
the individual cohort. The average wage effect when following the municipality is
closer to 1.4%. Both effects are significant in almost each year after year 3. Finally
the effect on labor supply is mostly insignificant and it is negative in the case of the
cohort and positive for the municipality. In this case following the individual cohort
shows an effect on natives which is less positive than following the municipality. The
take away, however, is that the difference is not significant, and we will return to
the lower employment of the cohort in the latest years in section 5.3.2.
A final thing to notice in these difference-in-difference estimates of Figure 4 is
that the pre-1994 treatment-control difference for all outcomes (except one) are not
significantly different from 0. This is reassuring as it shows that there is no pre-event
trend in native labor market performances. Let us emphasize that these estimated
transitions, especially those following a cohort of individuals are, to the best of
our knowledge, really new in this literature. In part because the use of individual
panel data covering all native workers is new, in part because it is hard to identify
an immigration episode that has a clear beginning, that is randomly allocated and
continued over time, it has been hard to analyze the short and long run transition
in response to immigration. Figure 4 provides the first analysis of this type in the
literature.
The magnitudes of the positive effects estimated for the medium-long run in
Table A.1 are somewhat larger than (but comparable to) those estimated in the
panel regression. After nine years from 1994, in year 2003, the difference in the share
of refugee-country immigrants between treated and non-treated municipalities was
about 1.1 percent of the labor force (see Table 1). The estimated effect on the wage
25

of less skilled natives was a positive 2.4 percent. This implies a wage elasticity of 2.2.
The within establishment estimates of those elasticities was 1.6 while the estimates
across municipalities were 1.8 in the panel regression (Table 6). The difference can
be interpreted as the difference between a short and long run elasticity as the panel
regression identifies the effect within spells while the difference-in-difference follows
the cohort over 18 years. Overall both approaches capture a significant and large
effect of refugee-country immigrants on less skilled native workers.
5.3.1

Effects on out-of-employment Natives

One form of crowding out of native unskilled workers that could still elude our
analysis is represented by the possibility that refugee-country immigrants made it
harder for unskilled natives who were not employed to find a job. The differencein-difference analysis has considered, so far, only people who were employed in year
1994, and it does not show the potential effect on native unskilled who were not
employed but could enter employment. If those (rather than the incumbents) were
“crowded out” by immigrants we need an alternative approach to find it out. In
Figure 5 we address this issue. The two panels (A and B) in the figure show the
treatment-control difference in employment (measured as fraction of year worked)
considering only people in working age who were not employed as of 1994 (but
not permanently disabled). As in Figure 4, the left panel follows the cohort of
individuals across municipalities while the right panel measures the response of those
non-employed following a municipality. Both graphs show that native individuals
who were non-employed in 1994 were more likely to supply labor after 1994 if they
were in the highly exposed municipalities than if they were in the less exposed but
the effect is not significant for the cohort.
The wave of refugee-country immigrants crowded in (rather than out) native
unskilled workers in regions with high exposure relative to regions with low exposure.
While for the cohort analysis the standard error reported in Figure 5 is large, the
point estimates imply that natives who were initially non-employed in regions with
high immigrant exposure were on average employed for 10% more hours than those
in municipalities with low exposure, six to ten years after 1994. This is reasonable
if we think that most of those less skilled natives out of job in 1994 were young and
would find jobs in occupations with high communication-cognitive content, rather
than manual, which are complement to the manual skills provided by refugee-country
immigrants. This is also consistent with the effects on young workers described
26

below.
To gain further insight in the native labor market dynamic effects of refugeecountry immigrants we consider in Figure 6 and 7 two partitions of the native low
skilled labor force, and we present the estimates for the specifications following a
cohort. First, in Figure 6 we consider young and old workers. Those who were
21 to 46 years old in 1994 are considered “young” and those who were 47 to 61
are considered “old”. The older workers all turned 60 within the last years of the
transitions and thereby a large group of them became eligible for early retirement
pension (“efterløn”). The second dimension we consider is the tenure of workers in
the establishment as of 1994. We call “low tenure” those workers with less than
the average tenure in our sample (4.35 years in the same establishment) and “high
tenure” those with more average tenure. In both cases we expect that the group
of young, low-tenure workers had lower costs and more opportunities to upgrade
specialization and change their occupation because they had less specific human
capital and higher potential benefits from re-qualifying themselves. If the opportunity of wage gains from immigration is in part linked to the ability of upgrading
and increasing one’s specialization and skills, then young workers with low tenure
should be the group better positioned to take advantage of it.
5.3.2

Effects for Different Groups of Natives

Figure 6 shows the dynamics for the treatment-control differences in occupational
complexity (panel A and B), hourly wage (panel C and D) and fraction of the year
worked (panel E and F), separately for young (left panels) and for old (right panels)
unskilled native individuals. Figures 7 shows the dynamics for the same outcomes
for low tenure (left panel) and high tenure (right panel) unskilled native. The results strongly confirm our hypothesis and are consistent with costs and incentives
of upgrading. The young and low-tenure native low skilled workers were those who
responded to immigration with stronger transitions towards higher occupational
complexity in highly exposed municipalities (panel A). This implies larger hourly
wage gains (panel C) and no clear employment change for them (panel E). To the
contrary old and high-tenure workers exhibit much less change in skill in response
to high exposure (panel B) and essentially no wage increase as consequence of immigrants (panel D). In terms of employment, while old and high tenure workers
did not seem to suffer displacement in the first 5-10 years, in the long run (12-15
years after 1994) they seem to have a lower propensity to work in highly exposed
27

municipalities. This may be the result of early retirement, for those who could not
upgrade their skills and suffered somewhat from the immigrant competition. The
decline observed in labor supply after 10-plus years from the event can be a mild
long run displacement effect of immigrants concentrated on older less educated natives as some of them are pushed into early retirement. Overall, the largest benefit
from immigration accrued to young, low-tenure workers who upgraded their careers
towards more complex occupations, complementary to immigrant skills. Their upgrade is evident from wage increase and it may have required some further training,
that is consistent with the small (however insignificant) negative effect on fraction
of year employed.

5.4

Cumulated Effects

Table 8 reports the estimated effects of an increase in refugee-country immigrants
by one percentage point of employment on cumulated native outcomes over 14 years
(1995-2008). The estimates are based on equation (3). The first line reports the
cumulated impact on employment. The second and third rows report the effect on
the length of employment in the initial establishment and in new establishments.
The fourth and fifth rows show the length of employment in the same and new
municipalities. The last three rows show the effects on the length of cumulated unemployment, the length of cumulated self-employment and on the present discounted
value of annual earnings.
Column 1 of Table 8 shows the estimated coefficient on the low skilled native
labor force while column 2 and 3 separate outcomes for young and old individuals
and columns 4 and 5 show outcomes for low and high tenure individuals. The
coefficients in the first row imply that less educated native workers in municipalities
receiving an increase in immigrants equal to one percentage point of the labor force
experienced a non-significant decline in cumulated employment (over 14 years) by
three percent of one work-year, namely 1.3 working weeks.33 Hence, refugee-country
immigration did not have any significant effect on cumulative employment of less
educated natives. Similarly, immigration did not affect the cumulative time spent as
unemployed (sixth row) or the probability of moving into self-employment (seventh
row). The effects on these variables are also negligible for each sub-group considered
in columns 2-5, confirming no evidence of cumulated crowding out of employment
33

We are using 46 weeks as the usual full-time work-year for a Danish worker.

28

or push into unemployment.
Not very significant is also the effect of immigration on the probability that
native workers move out of the initial establishment. To the contrary, a higher
inflow of refugee-country immigrants make it more likely for natives to move out of
the municipality. On average unskilled natives spent 13-14 working weeks less in the
original municipality and they spent that time in a new municipality, over the 14
years following 1994 if they started in a more exposed municipality. Such an effect
was even stronger for young workers (whose mobility costs were lower and benefits
higher). They spent 23 fewer weeks in the current municipality if they were in a high
exposed areas as of 1994. Low tenure workers had also somewhat larger effects than
high tenure ones. Thus, the cumulated regressions show that cross-municipality
mobility of natives was positively affected by refugee-country immigration.

6

Discussion and Conclusions

In this paper we use rich longitudinal data and an exogenous increase in the supply of immigrants from refugee-sending countries to identify the effect of unskilled
immigration on the labor market outcomes of low skilled natives. We estimated
the short and long run effects of this supply shift on native workers specialization,
wages, mobility and employment. The fact that our data allow us to follow every
single worker in Denmark and the high quality of the register information imply
high reliability. It also implies, for the first time to our knowledge, that we can
analyze details about the individual response of native workers within and across
establishments and municipalities. The novelty of our identification strategy is that
a refugee dispersal policy, in place between 1986 and 1998 in Denmark, produced
a distribution of refugees across municipalities unrelated to labor demand. Subsequent large migration flows added significant variation to this exogenously dispersed
migrant supply and we use it to estimate its effects on natives.
We find robust evidence that less skilled native workers responded to refugeecountry immigration, mainly composed of low-educated individuals in manual-intensive
jobs, by increasing significantly their mobility towards more complex occupations
and away from manual tasks. Immigration also increased native low skilled wages
and made them more likely to move out of the municipality. We do not observe an
increased probability of unemployment, nor a decrease in employment for unskilled
natives.
29

Our approach reveals another new result. By comparing the estimates obtained
by following a cohort of native individuals and the estimates obtained by following
the average outcome of natives in an area (as done in previous studies using repeated
cross sectional data) we find that for wages, employment and specialization of natives
the two approaches give similar results in terms of direction and magnitude. Hence,
we dispel the idea that area-based analyses are uninformative due to large spillovers
of the wage and employment outcomes, as suggested by some studies (e.g. Borjas,
2006; Borjas, Freeman, and Katz, 1997).
We think that this study present analysis of effects of immigrants that are more
detailed and better identified than earlier studies in this literature. It produces a
more comprehensive picture of the impacts of immigration by tracking occupations,
wages and employment of individual natives within and across establishments. We
also show the profile of the dynamic adjustment in response to a sustained immigration inflow for native workers and we add a difference-in-difference approach to the
usual 2SLS approach used in this literature. We hope that the future analysis of the
impact of immigration in several other countries may follow the approach adopted
in this paper and improve upon it.

30

References
Aydemir, Abdurrahman and George J. Borjas. 2011. “Attenuation Bias in Measuring the Wage Impact of Immigration.” Journal of Labor Economics 29 (1):69–112.
Blau, Francine and Lawrence Kahn. 2012. “Immigration and the Distribution of
Incomes.” NBER Working Paper No. 18515:Cambridge, MA.
Borjas, George J. 2003. “The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact of Immigration on the Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 118 (4):1359–1374.
———. 2006. “Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of Immigration.” Journal of Human resources 41 (2):221–258.
———. 2008. Issues in the Economics of Immigration. University of Chicago Press.
———. 2014. Immigration Economics. Harvard University Press.
Borjas, George J., Richard B. Freeman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 1997. “How Much
Do Immigration and Trade Affect Labor Market Outcomes?” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity :1–90.
Bratsberg, Bernt, Oddbjørn Raaum, and Knut Røed. 2010. “When Minority Labor
Migrants Meet the Welfare State.” Journal of Labor Economics 28 (3):633–676.
Card, David. 2009. “Immigration and Inequality.” American Economic Review:
Papers & Proceedings 99 (2):1–21.
Cohen-Goldner, Sarit and M. Daniele Paserman. 2011. “The Dynamic Impact of Immigration on Natives’ Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from Israel.” European
Economic Review 55 (8):1027–1045.
Dahl, Christian M., Daniel le Maire, and Jakob R. Munch. 2013. “Wage Dispersion and Decentralization of Wage Bargaining.” Journal of Labor Economics
31 (3):501–533.
Damm, Anna Piil. 2009. “Determinants of recent immigrants’ location choices:
quasi-experimental evidence.” Journal of Population Economics 22 (1):145–174.

31

D’Amuri, Francesco, Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano, and Giovanni Peri. 2010. “The Labor Market Impact of Immigration in Western Germany in the 1990’s.” European
Economic Review 55 (4):550–570.
D’Amuri, Francesco and Giovanni Peri. 2014. “Immigration, Jobs, and Employment
Protection: Evidence from Europe Before and During the Great Recession.” Journal of the European Economic Association 12 (2):432–464.
Docquier, Frédéric, Çağlar Ozden, and Giovanni Peri. 2014. “The labour market
effects of immigration and emigration in OECD countries.” The Economic Journal
124 (579):1106–1145.
Dustmann, Christian, Tommaso Frattini, and Ian P. Preston. 2013. “The Effect
of Immigration along the Distribution of Wages.” Review of Economic Studies
80 (1):145–173.
Dustmann, Christian and Albrecht Glitz. 2011. “How Do Industries and Firms
Repond to Changes in Local Labor Supply.” CReAM Discussion Paper No. 18/11.
Edin, Per-Anders, Peter Fredriksson, and Olof Åslund. 2004. “Settlement Policies
and the Economic Success of Immigrants.” Journal of Population Economics
17 (1):133–155.
Glitz, Albrecht. 2012.

“The Labor Market Impact of Immigration: A Quasi-

Experiment Exploiting Immigrant Location Rules in Germany.” Journal of Labor
Economics 30 (1):175–213.
Gould, Eric D., Victor Lavy, and M. Daniele Paserman. 2004. “Immigrating to
Opportunity: Estimating the Effect of School Quality Using a Natural Experiment
on Ethiopians in Israel.” 119 (2):489–526.
Hummels, David, Rasmus Jørgensen, Jakob Roland Munch, and Chong Xiang. 2014.
“The Wage Effects of Offshoring: Evidence from Danish Matched Worker-Firm
Data.” American Economic Review 104 (6):1597–1629.
Lewis, Ethan. 2011. “Immigration, Skill Mix, and Capital-Skill Complementarity.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (2):1029–1069.
———. 2013. “Immigration and Production Technology.” Annual Review of Economics 5 (1):165–191.
32

Lewis, Ethan and Giovanni Peri. 2015. “Immigration and the Economy of Cities
and Regions.” Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics 5A.
Longhi, Simonetta, Peter Nijkamp, and Jacques Poot. 2005. “A Meta-Analytic
Assessment of the Effect of Immigration on Wages.” Journal of Economic Surveys,
Wiley Blackwell 19 (3):451–477.
Malchow-Møller, Nikolaj, Jakob Roland Munch, Claus Aastrup Seidelin, and
Jan Rose Skaksen. 2013. “Immigrant Workers and Farm Performance: Evidence
from Matched Employer-Employee Data.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 95 (4):819–841.
Malchow-Møller, Nikolaj, Jakob Roland Munch, and Jan Rose Skaksen. 2011. “Do
Foreign Experts Increase the Productivity of Domestic Firms?” IZA Discussion
Paper (No. 6001):1–44.
———. 2012. “Do Immigrants Affect Firm-Specific Wages?”

The Scandinavian

Journal of Economics 114 (4):1267–1295.
Manacorda, Marco, Alan Manning, and Jonathan Wadsworth. 2012. “The Impact
of Immigration on the Structure of Wages: Theory and Evidence from Britain.”
Journal of the European Economic Association 10 (1):120–151.
Olney, William W. 2013. “Immigration and Firm Expansion.” Journal of Regional
Science 53 (1):142–157.
Ortega, Francesc and Giovanni Peri. 2013. “Migration, Trade and Income.” IZA
Discussion Paper No. 7325:1–42.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco I. P. and Giovanni Peri. 2005. “Cities and Cultures.” Journal
of Urban Economics 58 (2):304–307.
———. 2012. “Rethinking the Effect of Immigration on Wages.” Journal of the
European Economic Association 10 (1):152–197.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco I. P., Giovanni Peri, and Greg C. Wright. 2013. “Immigration,
Offshoring and American Jobs.” American Economic Review 103 (5):1925–1959.
Parrotta, Pierpaolo, Dario Pozzoli, and Mariola Pytlikova. 2014. “Labor Diversity
and Firm Productivity.” Review of Economics and Statistics 66:144–179.
33

Peri, Giovanni. 2012. “The Effect of Immigration on Productivity: Evidence from
U.S. States.” Review of Economics and Statistics 94 (1):348–358.
Peri, Giovanni and Chad Sparber. 2009. “Task Specialization, Immigration and
Wages.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (3):135–169.
Peri, Giovanni, Chad Sparber, and Kevin Shih. forthcoming. “STEM workers, H-1B
Visas and Productivity in U.S. Cities.” Journal of Labor Economics .
Stock, James H. and Motohiro Yogo. 2005. “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear
IV Regression. Chapter 5 in D. W. K. Andrews and J. H. Stock (Eds.).” Identification and Inference in Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas J.
Rothenberg (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Von Wachter, Till, Jae Song, and Joyce Manchester. 2007. “Long-Term Earnings
Losses due to Job Separation During the 1982 Recession: An Analysis Using
Longitudinal Administrative Data from 1974 to 2004.” Columbia University,
Department of Economics, Discussion Paper No. 0708-16.

34

0

1

Percent of employment
2
3
4
5

6

7

Figure 1: Foreign born share in Denmark, 1991-2008

1991

1994

1997

Total

2000

2003

Non−EU origin

2006

2009

EU origin

−5

0

1000 immigrants
5
10 15 20

25

30

Figure 2: Drivers of non-EU immigration growth, 1991-2008

1991

1994

1997

2000

Former Yugoslavia
Afghanistan
Eastern Europe

2003

2006

2009

Somalia
Iraq

Notes: Growth in immigrant populations since January
1, 1995, from major source countries for refugee inflows
between 1986-1998 and from Eastern Europe.

35

Table 1: Immigrants’ share of employment across municipalities
Panel A. Refugee
Upper quartile 0.616
Lower quartile 0.224
Difference
0.392

0.763
0.230
0.533

1.936
0.820
1.116

2.537
0.987
1.550

Panel B. Total non-EU
Difference
2.052 2.177

4.029

4.797

Panel C. EU
Difference

1.005

1.031

0.689

0.693

Notes: The actual share of immigrants in percent of
employment in the upper and lower quartile of the
1994-2008 difference in predicted refugee share.

Table 2: Skills levels
Refugee

Natives

Panel A. Education
Primary
Secondary
Vocational
Higher
Unknown

0.292
0.104
0.293
0.214
0.097

0.265
0.059
0.403
0.265
0.008

Panel B. Occupation
Most complex
Least complex
Best paid
Least paid

0.000
0.134
0.003
0.026

0.002
0.041
0.030
0.030

Notes: Observations with unknown education in
the register likely have foreign education. Occupation groups are the 2-digit ISCO classifications.

36

Table 3: Skill content of occupations and change in refugee immigrants share 1994-2008
Refugee share

Skill content of occupation

37

1994-2008 dif.

Cognitive

Communication

Manual

Complexity

Panel A. Lowest inflow
Managers of small enterprises
Legislators and senior officials
Skilled agricultural and fishery workers
Corporate managers
Armed forces

-0.003
0.001
0.001
0.002
0.002

0.666
0.897
0.362
0.796
0.441

0.677
0.989
0.248
0.796
0.390

0.432
0.303
0.736
0.367
0.633

1.136
1.828
-0.328
1.488
0.225

Panel B. Highest inflow
Laborers in mining, construction, manufacturing and transport
Drivers and mobile plant operators
Other elementary occupations
Machine operators and assemblers
Sales and services elementary occupations

0.022
0.023
0.027
0.036
0.051

0.215
0.352
0.260
0.276
0.126

0.156
0.265
0.205
0.146
0.103

0.769
0.810
0.742
0.790
0.695

-0.783
-0.322
-0.633
-0.655
-1.234

Notes: Complexity index = ln((Communication+Cognitive)/Manual). The skill content of each occupational grouping (2-digit ISCO) is the population
weighted average of the underlying occupations (4-digit ISCO).

Figure 3: Mean complexity of tasks over time for groups of workers

Occupational complexity
0
.2
.4
.6
−.2

−.2

Occupational complexity
0
.2
.4
.6

.8

Panel B. All

.8

Panel A. Employed in 1995

1995

1998

2001
Year

2004

2007

1995

Refugee−country immigrants
Low skilled natives
High skilled natives

1998

2001
Year

2004

2007

Refugee−country immigrants
Low skilled natives
High skilled natives

Notes: Each year the figure shows (for three groups) the mean complexity of tasks performed
by either those employed in 1995 (Panel A) or all i.e. including new entrants to Danish
employment (Panel B).

38

Table 4: Summary statistics for employed low skilled

Age
Labor market experience
Job tenure
Married
Education, primary
secondary
vocational
higher
Region, Northern Jytland
Central Jytland
Southern Denmark
Greater Copenhagen Area
Zealand
Agriculture, fishing and quarrying
Manufacturing
Electricity, gas and water supply
Construction
Wholesale and retail sale, hotels and rest.
Transport, post and telecommunications
Finance and business activities
Public and personal services
Occupational complexity
ln(Hourly wagerate)
Fraction of year worked
Observations

Mean

S.d.

37.77
14.68
4.16
0.48
0.63
0.15
0.16
0.05
0.11
0.23
0.23
0.28
0.15
0.03
0.23
0.00
0.08
0.18
0.10
0.10
0.28

12.26
10.13
5.45
0.50
0.48
0.36
0.37
0.22
0.31
0.42
0.42
0.45
0.36
0.16
0.42
0.07
0.28
0.38
0.30
0.29
0.45

0.14
5.02
0.92

0.90
0.39
0.17

1864027

Notes: Employed natives 1995-2008. Low skilled is defined as the individual enters the panel. Some low skilled upgrade their education level
while at the labor market (16% that start out with no post-secondary
education obtain a vocational education and 5% obtain a higher education).

39

Table 5: Instrument power and correlation with pre-trends in outcomes for low-skilled natives
1991-1994 difference in average
Occupational Hourly Fraction of
complexity
wage
year worked
1994-2008 dif. in imputed share
40

F -statistic instrument
Observations
R-squared

-0.609
(0.904)
0.45
97
0.37

0.664
(0.516)
1.65
97
0.64

-0.152
(0.436)
0.12
97
0.81

1994-2008 dif.
in actual
EU share

1994-2008 dif.
in actual
refugee share

0.030
(0.088)
0.12
97
0.74

0.858***
(0.123)
48.88
97
0.79

Notes: *** p< 0.001, ** p< 0.01, * p< 0.05. Each regressions is at the municipality level and weighted by the size of the
labor force in the municipality. The table shows correlation of instrument with pre-trends in outcomes for low skilled natives
and with actual change in foreign born share. Controls are those listed in Table 4 averaged for each municipality in 1994.

Table 6: Fixed-effect regressions, low skilled
(1)
(2)
Worker-establishment

Occupational complexity
Manual intensity
Communication intensity
Cognitive intensity
Occupational mobility
Hourly wage
Fraction of year worked
Observations
First stage F -statistic
First stage coefficient

(3)
(4)
Worker-municipality

(5)

(6)
Worker

FE

FE-IV

FE

FE-IV

FE

FE-IV

0.255
(0.326)
-0.122
(0.143)
-0.144
(0.315)
0.327
(0.198)
0.320
(0.295)
0.620*
(0.265)
0.151
(0.129)
1564737

0.259
(0.580)
-0.289
(0.337)
-0.514
(0.526)
0.144
(0.488)
1.004
(0.785)
1.601**
(0.507)
0.554*
(0.262)
1564737
53.53
0.551***
(0.075)

1.310*
(0.612)
-0.717**
(0.224)
0.200
(0.512)
0.821*
(0.407)
0.502
(0.412)
0.169
(0.351)
0.259*
(0.106)
1816727

3.170*
(1.534)
-1.947**
(0.680)
0.559
(1.001)
1.417
(0.855)
1.933*
(0.983)
0.983
(0.601)
0.794**
(0.287)
1816727
58.01
0.603***
(0.079)

0.602*
(0.275)
-0.388**
(0.131)
0.156
(0.210)
0.213
(0.148)
0.931***
(0.214)
0.787**
(0.300)
0.408***
(0.066)
1864027

1.340**
(0.478)
-0.851***
(0.230)
0.668*
(0.333)
0.238
(0.233)
1.781***
(0.457)
1.802**
(0.642)
0.735***
(0.101)
1864027
468.87
0.476***
(0.022)

Notes: *** p< 0.001, ** p< 0.01, * p< 0.05. Each entry of the table is the coefficient on the explanatory variable
of interest in equation (1) using a sample of employed low skilled natives between 1995 and 2008. The dependent
variables (left column) have the same first stage except for occupational complexity that has fewer observations (some
missings). Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by initial municipality.

41

Table 7: Fixed-effect regressions, high skilled
(1)
(2)
Worker-establishment

Occupational complexity
Manual intensity
Communication intensity
Cognitive intensity
Occupational mobility
Hourly wage
Fraction of yea employed
Observations
First stage F -statistic
First stage coefficient

(3)
(4)
Worker-municipality

(5)

(6)
Worker

FE

FE-IV

FE

FE-IV

FE

FE-IV

-0.038
(0.256)
-0.132
(0.112)
-0.346
(0.224)
-0.084
(0.184)
0.106
(0.235)
0.512***
(0.148)
-0.083
(0.080)
2860183

0.245
(0.457)
-0.448
(0.243)
-0.239
(0.361)
-0.447
(0.522)
1.301*
(0.546)
2.068***
(0.452)
0.178
(0.176)
2860183
63.28
0.563***
(0.071)

0.406
(0.256)
-0.308*
(0.120)
0.005
(0.246)
0.101
(0.199)
0.395
(0.272)
0.522*
(0.203)
-0.048
(0.073)
3125934

1.149**
(0.410)
-0.777**
(0.246)
0.484
(0.352)
-0.009
(0.396)
1.944***
(0.569)
2.316***
(0.584)
0.120
(0.166)
3125934
68.02
0.607***
(0.074)

0.288*
(0.139)
-0.237***
(0.070)
0.050
(0.122)
0.021
(0.111)
0.209
(0.160)
-0.301
(0.381)
0.096*
(0.040)
3160757

0.477*
(0.220)
-0.387***
(0.096)
0.218
(0.176)
-0.096
(0.197)
0.378
(0.260)
-0.034
(0.483)
0.223***
(0.060)
3160757
294.85
0.495***
(0.029)

Notes: *** p< 0.001, ** p< 0.01, * p< 0.05. Each entry of the table is the coefficient on the explanatory variable
of interest in equation (1) using a sample of employed high skilled natives between 1995 and 2008. The dependent
variables (left column) have the same first stage except for occupational complexity that has fewer observations (some
missings). Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by initial municipality.

42

Figure 4: Treatment-control estimated differences in outcomes, low skilled
Panel B. Area, occupational complexity

−.04

−.04

−.02

−.02

0

0

.02

.02

.04

.04

.06

.06

Panel A. Cohort, occupational complexity

−3

0

3

6

9

12

15

−3

0

6

9

12

15

12

15

12

15

12

15

.04
.02
0
−.02
−.04

−.04

−.02

0

.02

.04

.06

Panel D. Area, manual intensity

.06

Panel C. Cohort, manual intensity

3

−3

0

3

6

9

12

15

−3

0

6

9

.04
.02
0
−.02
−.04

−.04

−.02

0

.02

.04

.06

Panel F. Area, hourly wage

.06

Panel E. Cohort, hourly wage

3

−3

0

3

6

9

12

15

−3

0

6

9

.04
.02
0
−.02
−.04

−.04

−.02

0

.02

.04

.06

Panel H. Area, fraction of year worked

.06

Panel G. Cohort, fraction of year worked

3

−3

0

3

6

9

12

15

−3

0

3

6

9

Notes: Parameter estimates (—–) and 95% confidence limits (- - -) on the interaction terms of immigration exposure and year dummies in equation (2) using a
strongly balanced panel of low skilled natives employed in 1994. All control variables are either specific to the worker in 1994 (cohort) or the actual values for the
worker (area). Accordingly, standard errors are clustered at the 1994-municipality
for the cohort regressions and at the actual municipality for the area regressions.

43

Figure 5: Treatment-control estimated differences in employment for those not employed in 1994, low skilled

.2
.1
0
−.1

−.1

0

.1

.2

.3

Panel B. Area, fraction of year worked

.3

Panel A. Cohort, fraction of year worked

−3

0

3

6

9

12

15

−3

0

3

6

9

12

15

Notes: Parameter estimates (—–) and 95% confidence limits (- - -) on the interaction terms of immigration exposure and year dummies in equation (2) using a
strongly balanced panel of low skilled natives not employed in 1994. All control variables are either specific to the worker in 1994 (cohort) or the actual values for the
worker (area). Accordingly, standard errors are clustered at the 1994-municipality
for the cohort regressions and at the actual municipality for the area regressions.
No one in this figure (the non-employed in November 1994) has firm tenure and
industry affiliation in November 1994 and these variables are therefore left out of
the regression.

44

Figure 6: Treatment-control cohort estimated differences in outcomes by age group,
low skilled
Panel B. Old, occupational complexity

−.04

−.04

−.02

−.02

0

0

.02

.02

.04

.04

.06

.06

Panel A. Young, occupational complexity

−3

0

3

6

9

12

15

−3

0

6

9

12

15

12

15

12

15

.04
.02
0
−.02
−.04

−.04

−.02

0

.02

.04

.06

Panel D. Old, hourly wage

.06

Panel C. Young, hourly wage

3

−3

0

3

6

9

12

15

−3

0

6

9

−.04

−.04

−.02

−.02

0

0

.02

.02

.04

.04

.06

Panel F. Old, fraction of year worked

.06

Panel E. Young, fraction of year worked

3

−3

0

3

6

9

12

15

−3

0

3

6

9

Notes: Parameter estimates (—–) and 95% confidence limits (- - -) on the interaction terms of immigration exposure and year dummies in equation (2) using a
strongly balanced panel of low skilled natives employed in 1994. Standard errors
are clustered at the 1994-municipality. Young (old) are those aged 21-36 (37-51) in
1994.

45

Figure 7: Treatment-control cohort estimated differences in outcomes by tenure
group, low skilled
Panel B. High tenure, occupational complexity

−.04

−.04

−.02

−.02

0

0

.02

.02

.04

.04

.06

.06

Panel A. Low tenure, occupational complexity

−3

0

3

6

9

12

15

−3

0

6

9

12

15

12

15

12

15

.04
.02
0
−.02
−.04

−.04

−.02

0

.02

.04

.06

Panel D. High tenure, hourly wage

.06

Panel C. Low tenure, hourly wage

3

−3

0

3

6

9

12

15

−3

0

6

9

−.04

−.04

−.02

−.02

0

0

.02

.02

.04

.04

.06

Panel F. High tenure, fraction of year worked

.06

Panel E. Low tenure, fraction of year worked

3

−3

0

3

6

9

12

15

−3

0

3

6

9

Notes: Parameter estimates (—–) and 95% confidence limits (- - -) on the interaction terms of immigration exposure and year dummies in equation (2) using a
strongly balanced panel of low skilled natives employed in 1994. Standard errors
are clustered at the 1994-municipality. Low (high) tenure are those with less than
(at least) 4.35 years in the firm in 1994.

46

Table 8: The cumulative effect on employment and mobility for low skilled, 1995-2008

Cumulative employment
- same establishment
- new establishment
- same municipality
- new municipality
Cumulative unemployment
Cumulative self-employment
PDV of annual earnings

Observations
First stage F -statistic

All

Young

Old

Low tenure

High tenure

-3.318
(6.886)
-5.881
(5.363)
2.563
(6.250)
-29.516*
(12.006)
26.198**
(9.284)
1.801
(3.551)
-1.797
(1.622)
0.984
(1.120)

-2.633
(6.761)
-8.848
(5.457)
6.215
(7.156)
-52.280**
(16.921)
49.647***
(13.670)
0.439
(3.602)
-3.560*
(1.518)
1.989
(1.073)

1.681
(6.389)
0.449
(6.870)
1.233
(6.883)
1.557
(7.133)
0.124
(6.325)
0.739
(3.347)
-1.122
(2.021)
0.854
(1.257)

-2.848
(8.153)
4.699
(4.311)
-7.548
(7.591)
-30.123*
(13.096)
27.275**
(9.957)
0.910
(3.936)
-3.835
(2.067)
0.841
(1.296)

-2.816
(5.668)
-23.975*
(10.706)
21.159*
(9.621)
-25.294*
(10.734)
22.478*
(9.928)
3.753
(3.091)
0.964
(1.357)
1.433
(1.021)

71053
81.56

35583
77.11

35470
86.93

45751
80.87

25302
82.49

Notes: *** p< 0.001, ** p< 0.01, * p< 0.05. Each entry of the table is the coefficient on the explanatory
variable of interest (immigration exposure) in equation (3) using a strongly balanced panel of natives
employed in 1994. Standard errors in parentheses and F -statistic for significance of excluded instrument
are clustered at the 1994-municipality. The final row is the discounted sum of the 1995-2008 earnings
stream using a four percent annual discount rate.

47

