                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     IF MY BLOOD PRESSURE IS HIGH, DO I TAKE IT TO HEART? BEHAVIORAL
    IMPACTS OF BIOMARKER COLLECTION IN THE HEALTH AND RETIREMENT
                                 STUDY

                                         Ryan D. Edwards

                                       Working Paper 19311
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19311


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2013




I developed this research while I was a visitor on sabbatical in the Department of Demography at the
University of California, Berkeley, to whose faculty and staff I am indebted for good hospitality and
lifelong learning. I am grateful to David Weir, Heidi Guyer, David Card, Jennifer Beam Dowd, Luis
Rosero-Bixby, Will Dow, Ron Lee, Jesse Cunha, and Elda Pema for helpful remarks and advice, and
to seminar participants at the University of San Francisco and the Naval Postgraduate School. All
opinions and errors are mine alone. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Ryan D. Edwards. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
If My Blood Pressure Is High, Do I Take It To Heart? Behavioral Impacts of Biomarker Collection
in the Health and Retirement Study
Ryan D. Edwards
NBER Working Paper No. 19311
August 2013
JEL No. D84,I1,J14

                                              ABSTRACT

Starting in 2006, respondents in the U.S. Health and Retirement Study were asked to submit biomarkers
and were notified of certain results. Respondents with very high blood pressure were given a card
during the interview; all respondents were notified by mail of their BP, hemoglobin A1c, and total
and HDL cholesterol readings alongside recommended thresholds. About 5.8 percent received the
high blood pressure card, and 5.4 percent had high A1c levels, an indicator of diabetes. Rates of undiagnosed
high BP and diabetes according to these biomarkers were 1.5 and 0.7 percent. Average treatment effects
of biomarker collection on the panel overall were effectively zero, but notification of rare and dangerous
readings triggered new diagnoses, increased pharmaceutical usage, and altered health behaviors among
small subsamples of respondents and their spouses. Very high BP or A1c readings raised new diagnosis
and medication usage by 20 to 40 percentage points. Uncontrolled high BP triggered reductions in
own smoking and own and spouse’s drinking. High A1c was associated with a 2.2 percent drop in
weight and an increase in exercise among respondents without a previous diagnosis of diabetes, but
with no changes among those already diagnosed, whose self-reported health and disability worsened.


Ryan D. Edwards
Department of Economics
Queens College, CUNY
Powdermaker Hall 300-S
Flushing, NY 11367
and NBER
redwards@qc.cuny.edu
1     Introduction

There is great interest in the ability of biomarkers to enhance our knowledge about the

determinants of healthy aging, longevity, and disparities (Weinstein, Vaupel and Wachter,
2007).1 Biomarkers convey rich information to researchers and potentially also to survey

respondents as well. Principles surrounding the protection of human subjects, and in par-

ticular informed consent, may require a data collection team to inform the research subject

about observed biomarkers when the withholding of such information could be harmful.2

The natural question is whether notifying individuals about their biomarker readings causes

any changes in behavior or circumstances that are distinct from any effects of the underlying

conditions indexed by the biomarkers.3

    In 2006, the fourteen year-old Health and Retirement Study (HRS) of the University of
Michigan’s Institute for Social Research expanded to include biomarkers and several other

new measures in an Enhanced Face-to-Face interview conducted on randomly selected ro-
tating halves of the sample.4 During the eighth and each subsequent biennial HRS wave,
    1 Biomarkers vary widely in what they measure, running from relatively standard objective measurements

of body characteristics, such as height, weight, and waist circumference, but also extending to genetic analy-
sis of the DNA in blood samples. Between these two extremes are metrics that physicians commonly collect
during routine physicals in addition to height and weight, such as blood pressure and blood characteris-
tics like the levels of cholesterol, triglycerides, and blood sugar. Recent years have brought the addition
of biomarkers to several preexisting longitudinal surveys, including the National Longitudinal Study of
Adolescent Health (Add Health) in its third wave, and the Health and Retirement Study in its eighth wave.
    2 The National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) also notifies participants of a wide

array of biomarker levels, including overweight, blood pressure, oral health, and so on. The Add Health
collected biomarkers in its third wave and notified respondents of results of testing for HIV, chlamydia, and
gonorrhea. By contrast, the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) measure HIV status in developing
countries but explicitly do not inform respondents about results, ostensibly to preserve anonymity and
respondents’ safety. Instead, DHS participants are offered referrals for free counseling and testing.
    3 Researchers are increasingly aware that participation in a panel study can change some types of behavior

under some conditions (Halpern-Manners and Warren, 2012), no matter how much the researcher would like
to minimize his or her footprint. In the present context, the possibility that observation becomes a treat-
ment seems considerably more likely than in standard cases of panel conditioning, because the motivating
presumption of the IRB is that information about risky levels of biomarkers has measurable impacts on
behavior and outcomes. If it did not, withholding it would cause no harm.
    4 HRS ostensibly chose to collect biomarkers and other measures on half the panel once every other wave,

so that every respondent would submit biomarkers every four years, because the core HRS survey was
already lengthy, and because of the increased costs involved with in-person collection of biomarkers. As
discussed by Weir (2007), the original plan was for a third of the sample to be biomarked every wave, for
a six-year gap between readings. A pilot consisting of a subset of the 2006 biomarkers was conducted in
the 2004 wave, during which 3,734 HRS respondents were asked for consent. Of those, 3,447 complied and
most completed breath and hand strength tests. About half completed walking tests, and 515 completed
height and weight measurements. No measures of blood pressure or blood composition were attempted. As
shown in Figure 5, the 2004 wave was abnormal in that most interviews were conducted in person in hopes
of raising rates of consenting to the Social Security earnings match.




                                                      2
respondents in one rotating half or “biomarker group” were asked their consent to physical

measures including three measures of blood pressure (BP), a saliva sample, and a blood

sample, all collected by an interviewer roughly in the middle of the core interview. For

respondents whose minimum blood pressure was greater than 160 systolic or 110 diastolic,
interviewers left behind a “high blood pressure card,” which recommended that the re-

spondent immediately see a physician for a recheck of blood pressure. HRS later notified
all participants of up to four results by mail, accompanied by suggestions to see a physi-

cian if their biomarkers were outside normal ranges: blood pressure, hemoglobin A1c, total
cholesterol, and HDL or “good” cholesterol.

    Whether information about biomarkers that is new to the researcher may trigger any

behavioral change by the respondent is unclear. First, the information may not be new to

the respondent. Individuals who already know their biomarkers, even if they are at risky
levels, either may have already attempted to change their behavior without successfully

altering the biomarker, may not be able to change their behavior, or may have chosen not
to do so. Second, even new information may not trigger behavioral change if respondents

do not understand or believe it, do not visit or believe their doctors, or if their doctors do
not adequately help control the condition (Berlowitz et al., 1998; Hyman and Pavlik, 2001).
Third, there are measurement issues. The “white coat effect” in a physician’s office (Verdec-

chia et al., 1997) may translate to biomarker collection during a home visit. Readings could

be influenced by events prior to the interview,5 and lab irregularities could produce classical

measurement error or missing data. Pre-existing knowledge about biomarker levels, or other

characteristics that are correlated with biomarkers may determine a subject’s willingness

or ability to be biomarked, and it could alter observed relationships between biomarkers

and outcomes.6 Fourth, it is challenging to distinguish statistically between effects of the
   5 This is not true of hemoglobin A1c, which measures average blood sugar over several preceding months

(Weir, 2007). Likewise, total and HDL cholesterol appear to be unaffected by fasting. But there are well-
known daily patterns in blood pressure, which may also respond to the stress of an in-person interview.
   6 If respondents are aware of their health conditions and are taking medication to return biomarkers to

normal ranges, like high blood pressure medication or insulin shots, then one would expect the biomarkers not
to register outside of normal ranges and thus not prompt behavioral change. Thus in terms of the biomarker,
an individual who is successfully managing the biomarker via medication should be indistinguishable from
one whose biomarker was normal all along. But health outcomes may well differ between these two groups,
even if behavioral responses seem likely not to differ.




                                                     3
notification versus effects of the abnormal biomarker level, because informed consent does

not permit some individuals to submit biomarkers but not be informed in order to serve

as a control group. Whether the revelation of an objectively risky biomarker reading in a

household panel survey may change behavior is thus an open question, and it is the focus
of this paper.

   Two key aspects of the data are the prevalence of biomarker readings outside normal
range and the extent of preexisting knowledge of the underlying condition. The HRS is

nationally representative of Americans over age 50, a group that has relatively good access
to health insurance and care and seems likely to be aware of their health. Of the roughly

7,000 individuals who submitted biomarkers in the eighth wave of the HRS in 2006 and

were interviewed again in 2008, 5.8 percent received the high blood pressure card, and 5.4

percent had A1c levels of 7.0 percent or higher, an indicator of diabetes. A majority of
individuals in these two interesting subgroups had also reported a preexisting diagnosis of

the underlying disease, but 25 and 12 percent of them respectively had not, suggesting rates
of undiagnosed high blood pressure and diabetes of 1.5 and 0.7 percent. Individuals with

HDL cholesterol below the recommended threshold of 40 mg/dL were only 8.5 percent of the
sample, about half of whom were already on cholesterol medication. As one might expect,
the prevalence of high blood pressure more broadly defined, in this case anything over

120/80, high total cholesterol above 200 mg/dL, and previous diagnoses of those conditions
and usage of associated medications were much higher, often approaching half the sample.
Those most at risk for screening outside of normal range on these four biomarkers were

disproportionately male, African-American, Hispanic, not homeowners, and did not report
health insurance coverage.

   Probably because dangerous levels of biomarkers were relatively rare in the sample, and

rarer still among those previously undiagnosed, an intent-to-treat (ITT) analysis reveals

that average treatment effects of collecting biomarkers and notifying participants of results

tend to be indistinguishable from zero. The only statistically significant findings are that

biomarker collection may have reduced rates of doctor visits and prescription medication

usage by about 1.5 percent on average. This is a small amount relative to average rates of


                                             4
around 80 to 90 percent reported in the sample, and the reduction does not extend to the

average number of doctor visits, but it is an interesting result that could reflect a perception

that biomarker collection substitutes for a physical examination. Thus a blanket policy of

screening Americans over age 50 in households seems unlikely to produce tangible health
benefits. Given the high rates of insurance coverage and care utilization reported by HRS

respondents, this result is not surprising.
   More interesting findings are that conditions and behavior among subgroups with biomark-

ers outside normal range appear to have responded to notification. This is especially true
among the smaller subsets of those not reporting a previous diagnosis of the underlying

condition, who presumably were surprised by the news. For those who did not know they

had high blood pressure, receiving the high blood pressure card raised the prevalence of

diagnosis and medication usage two years later by around 20 percentage points. Effects for
respondents with A1c above 7.0 were larger, around 40 percentage points in increased diag-

nosis and medication usage for the previously undiagnosed, and self-reported weight appears
to fall among these individuals by around 2 percent while frequency of physical activity in-

creases. Perhaps most interesting is that spouses seem to react to the abnormal biomarker
readings of their partners in addition to their own, revealing some nuanced household-based
approaches to health maintenance and production. In particular, an undiagnosed spouse’s

high A1c reading also increases own exercise, while a diabetic spouse’s reading appears to
reduce own weight, suggesting responses of a shared input like diet, which unfortunately
the HRS does not measure. Spouses of respondents with uncontrolled high blood pressure

appear to reduce their drinking, and in particular their binge drinking, at the same time as
the respondents themselves.

   These results are interesting in view of their implications for behavior and policy, and

for interpreting dynamics in panel studies with biomarker collection. Estimated impacts

of abnormal biomarker notification can be statistically significant and meaningful for the

individual but are often but not always relegated to the 1 or 2 percent of the eligible

sample who screened positive without prior knowledge of the condition. Biomarker collection

and notification, or by extension visits by trained medical professionals, thus has real but


                                               5
extremely circumscribed average effects on outcomes among Americans over 50. Compared

to the likely costs involved with a blanket extension of such services, the benefits seem

minimal to nonexistent without additional targeting. A strategy of screening individuals

whose characteristics place them more at risk of screening outside normal range might
maximize the benefits. Analysis of panel datasets that include biomarker collection and

notification is likely prone to small amounts of bias unless the panel information is utilized
to control for the effects of biomarking, which appear real but certainly not as large as the

effects of mode of interview on self-reports. The tight correlation between mode of interview
and biomarker collection in the HRS implies that an analysis of either should account for

both whenever that correlation is present.

    In the sections that follow, I describe HRS biomarker collection and notification in greater

detail and briefly discuss my statistical approaches. Then I present the basic characteristics
of the panel interviewed in 2006 before revealing the main results and discussing robustness

and persistence. The final section concludes.



2     Biomarkers in the Health and Retirement Study

The Health and Retirement Study (HRS) is a biennial panel survey of U.S. households
sponsored by the National Institute on Aging and conducted by the University of Michigan’s

Institute for Social Research (Juster and Suzman, 1995). Originally begun in 1992 with a
representative sample of Americans born between 1931 and 1941, the HRS was merged with

a sister dataset and expanded in its fourth wave in 1998 to represent Americans aged 50 and
over, and it has periodically added new birth cohorts in order to maintain representative

coverage. In the eighth wave of data collection in 2006, when biomarker collection was

added, there were a total of 18,469 respondents.


2.1    Biomarker collection and notification

Starting in 2006, the HRS expanded to include biomarkers and several other new measures in

Enhanced Face-to-Face (EFTF) interviews conducted on randomly selected rotating halves


                                                6
of the panel each wave. Consenting respondents would thus be biomarked once every four

years.7 During EFTF interviews, interviewers measured and collected biomarkers including

blood pressure, pulse, saliva and blood samples; conducted tests of grip strength, breath,

balance, and walking; and left behind a questionnaire on psychosocial topics. Weir (2007)
describes biomarking as having occurred roughly in the middle of the EFTF interview, after

the self-reports of health, height and weight, and disability.8

    A key feature of biomarker collection in the HRS was the commitment to notifying

respondents about four biomarker results: blood pressure, A1c, total cholesterol, and HDL

cholesterol.9 Notification of very high blood pressure occurred immediately, and notification
by mail of all four results followed within about a month for all respondents who submitted

biomarkers. When the minimum of three measures of blood pressure exceeded 160 mmHg
systolic or 110 diastolic, HRS interviewers left behind a “high blood pressure card” similar to

that depicted in Figure 1. The card, which here shows the average readings for the subsample

that received it in 2006, recommends that the respondent see a physician immediately, with

bold and underline emphasis on the word “immediately.” Later, all recipients received

a mailed notification letter reporting all four biomarker levels, the recommended normal
ranges, and suggestions to see a physician if the biomarkers were outside normal range. A

representative mockup of the notification letter is shown in Figure 2, which lists biomarker

levels for the sample average and the thresholds as they were specified in 2006.10
   7 Both respondents in a couple household in HRS would be measured in the same wave; new spouses who

enter the survey are asked to biomark with the other spouse. In addition to new spouses, new additions to
the biomarked pool include non-respondents in previous waves who are asked to biomark when they reenter
the panel. The method of assignment of previous non-responders to biomarking waves is unknown.
   8 Section C of the computerized HRS questionnaire asks about health, height, and weight, while disability

questions appear in section G. The biomarkers were in section I, presumably followed by questions on
employment (J), work history (L), work-related disabilities (M), and so on. An open question is whether
respondents knew in advance of the self reports what biomarker collection was going to entail and changed
their responses in a special way. I cannot rule this out, but I think it is more likely their self reports changed
only because it was an in-person rather than telephone interview, an effect that I find in the data and that
I control for as I discuss later.
   9 Consent forms for biomarker collection included language indicating that HRS would communicate

blood pressure, cholesterol, and blood sugar results to the respondent, as well as an indication if they are
outside normal range, and an instruction to share the information with a doctor.
  10 The recommended thresholds that appear here and in the instructions for the high blood pressure

card roughly match official guidelines from the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI), Mayo
Clinic, and other sources that can be found online. Thresholds for the high BP card correspond to stage-2
hypertension as defined by the NHLBI. The A1c threshold of 7.0 is higher than that of 6.5 recommended
by International Expert Committee (2009), but the Mayo Clinic’s target for diabetes control in diagnosed
populations is 7.0 or lower. Respondents whose blood work was incomplete due to lab errors or other
considerations received a letter including text to that effect on the first page. In the 2012 wave, the high blood


                                                        7
    On average, mailed notification letters followed collection by about 10 days. More than

half of the reports occurred before July 2006, and over ninety percent were reported before

November 2006, but about 50 were delayed into the first two months of 2007. Most reports

were marked either the same month as the collection or in the following month. For com-
parison, the earliest core interview in wave 9 was conducted in February 2008, or a full year

after the latest blood spot report. The average gap between the report and the starting
date of the core interview in the following wave was about 23 months. The timing of data

collection and biomarker notification in the HRS panel is depicted in two timelines in Figure
3, one for each of the two rotating biomarker groups in the HRS. The black arrows show the
timing of the five information flows: z0 , the high blood pressure card; and z1 through z4 , the

four biomarkers in the notification letter. The gray arrows depict collection of self-reported
outcomes y and covariates x as well as the objective biomarker data b measured every other
wave.


2.2      Treatment and control groups

The structure of the HRS allows me to test two hypotheses about the effects of biomarker

collection and notification:

   1. Average treatment effects (ATE) of submitting biomarkers and receiving notification

        among the entire 2006 biomarker group are nonzero.

   2. Average treatment effects on the treated (ATET) of screening outside normal range

        in 2006 are nonzero.

I can assess the average treatment effects of biomarker collection and notification using

the random assignment of respondents to biomarker collection in 2006 like an instrumental

variable (Imbens and Angrist, 1994); here, it suffices to estimate the reduced form equation
pressure thresholds in the notification letters were changed to 140/90, and the total cholesterol threshold
was changed to 240. Thresholds for A1c and HDL cholesterol have remained the same. Starting with the
2008 wave, HRS ceased mailing results to respondents in the states of New York and California based on a
determination by legal advisors to HRS. Respondents in those states were sent a different notification letter
listing a call-in number they could use to obtain results. I obtained information about these thresholds via
email discussions with HRS investigators; aside from the high BP card instructions, they are otherwise not
mentioned in the public data releases.



                                                     8
of the outcome on the instrument. This approach benefits from the rigorous identification

provided by randomization, but if behavioral changes are concentrated among the small

subgroups who screen outside normal range, the average treatment effect could be near

zero even when there are interesting but rare reactions in the sample. I can test for these
average treatment effects on the treated by exploiting the panel nature of the HRS. Analysis

of pooled longitudinal data with individual fixed effects (FE) is a generalized difference-in-
differences approach where past observations of treated cases serve as additional controls.

   Figure 4 provides a visualization of treatment and control groups. Within the group
of respondents C2006 shown at left who submitted biomarkers in 2006 are the partially
overlapping subgroups A2006 and B2006 , those who screened outside normal range and those

who had a preexisting diagnosis. It is natural to expect behavioral change to be concentrated
here. Subgroups D2006 , E2006 , and F2006 were assigned to the 2006 biomarker group but

did not or could not comply with the treatment. From an intent-to-treat perspective, the

average treatment effects of biomarker collection in hypothesis 1 are revealed by comparing
the entire 2006 biomarker group shown at left with the entire 2008 biomarker group shown

at right, in which there are analogous subgroups that are not all observable in 2006. If
randomization is strong, this can be done by simply comparing means in 2008; a generalized

approach is a panel FE regression using pooled data up to 2008:

                                     X
                        yit = αi +       Dt + β IT T b2006
                                                      it−1 + Xit B + ǫit ,                (1)
                                     t


where β IT T is the intent-to-treat estimate of the effect of being randomly assigned to the
2006 biomarker group in the prior wave, when the indicator b2006
                                                            it−1 = 1; the αi are individual

fixed effects; the Dt are wave or time dummies; the Xit are additional time-varying controls

like age and marital status; and ǫit is a white-noise error.
   For testing hypothesis 2, the ideal comparison would be between those who screened out

of normal range in 2006, A2006 , and the unobservable group of respondents who would have

screened out of normal range, A2008 . This comparison is infeasible because everyone who




                                                9
submitted biomarkers in 2006 was also notified.11 With a pooled dataset of all respondents,

a panel FE estimator of the effects of screening outside normal range, when the indicator

zk = 1, draws identification from the behavior in the panel of all subgroups, including

the unobservable control group A2008 and the treated group A2006 . In particular, past
observations of A2006 serve as additional controls in a panel regression. This equation takes

a similar form:
                                        X           X
                                                    4
                           yit = αi +        Dt +         βk zkit−1 + Xit B + ǫit ,                        (2)
                                         t          k=0

where the zkit−1 are the biomarker notifications sent out after the previous wave.


2.3     Mode of interview

A complication is that biomarker collection and telephone interviewing are inversely corre-

lated in the HRS, and both appear to affect self-reported outcomes. Biomarkers are collected
in person via EFTF interviews, but the HRS has historically been a telephone-based sur-

vey, with in-person interviews limited to first-time respondents, nursing home residents, and
others for whom a telephone interview was inadequate. As revealed by Figure 5, which plots
the share of the groups assigned to biomarking in 2006 and 2008 interviewed by telephone

in each wave starting with 1998, mode of interview has shifted dramatically first in 2004,
and then again in 2006 with the initiation of regular biomarker collection.12 Since then, the
group not asked for biomarkers is almost exclusively telephoned each wave, while the other

group requires EFTF interviews for biomarker collection.
    Patterns in the data suggest that mode of interview affects several important self reports

in the HRS. Figure 6 shows averages and confidence intervals in self-reported weight since
1998 separately for the two groups who submitted biomarkers in 2006 and in 2008. The two

track each other closely prior to 2006, when they sharply diverge. Before they submitted
  11 Although respondents in group A
                                       2008 submitted biomarkers two years later in 2008, it is unclear whether
their 2008 biomarkers would be good proxies for what their 2006 biomarkers would have been. The key
unknown is the persistence of biomarkers over the life course, which likely depends both on biological and on
socioeconomic conditions. If high blood pressure, A1c, and cholesterol are chronic and stable among those
undiagnosed, and if those undiagnosed in the HRS tend to remain undiagnosed, then the 2008 biomarker
levels would be good proxies for the 2006 levels among the key subgroup A2008 − B2008 . But it is easy to
speculate otherwise.
  12 See footnote 4 for a discussion of why 2004 was different.




                                                      10
biomarkers during the 2006 wave, respondents told their EFTF interviewers that their weight

had risen by about 0.25 kg, while the rest of the sample on telephone interview indicated

they had not gained any weight on average. A similar pattern appears in 2008, when the

group on telephone interview indicated they lost an average of 1 kg while those submitting
biomarkers in person said they had gained about 0.5 kg. Similar fluctuations are apparent

in self-reported current smoking behavior. The most plausible explanation for this is that
face-to-face interviews elicit more accurate responses about characteristics with a visible or

otherwise apparent component.
    When mode of interview and biomarker collection both affect self-reported outcomes

and are themselves tightly correlated, not only are simple mean comparisons between the

rotating biomarker groups confounded, so too are simple differences in differences.13 One

could simply avoid this problem by comparing outcomes within rather than between rotating
biomarker groups, but hypothesis 1 could not be directly tested in this way, and rigorously

testing hypothesis 2 requires a better control group than the members of the 2006 biomarker
group who did not screen outside normal range. A better alternative is to alter the panel

FE regression equations to control for effects of interview mode, which will be separately
identified by the exogenous variation not perfectly correlated with biomarker collection that

is apparent in Figure 5. Inserting an indicator for interview mode mit into my regression

equations produces

                                    X
                       yit = αi +            Dt + β IT T b2006
                                                          it−1 + γ mit + Xit B + ǫit ,                     (3)
                                        t


and
                                   X               X
                                                   4
                      yit = αi +            Dt +         βk zkit−1 + γ mit + Xit B + ǫit .                 (4)
                                    t              k=0
  13 Suppose in-person interview mode changes outcome y contemporaneously by an amount m, while

biomarking notification changes y by an amount b with a one-wave lag. Assume no other trending effects.
Then in 2006, biomarked group A2006 will register y + m, while telephone-interviewed group A2008 will
register y. In 2008, group A2006 is interviewed by telephone but feels the effect of notification and thus will
register y +b, while group A2008 is biomarked and will register y +m. In 2008, the simple difference in means
DIM = b − m, while the difference in differences DID = [(y + b)(y + m)] − [(y + m)y] = b − m − m = b − 2m.
Neither method separately recovers b nor m, although one could proceed by subtracting those measures:
m = DIM − DID. This is sufficiently nonstandard that I elect to use panel FE with mode-of-interview
effects instead.




                                                           11
A final helpful modification is to interact the biomarker notification indicators zk with

indicators of preexisting diagnoses at t − 1 of the health conditions ck that indexed by the

biomarkers, such as high blood pressure or diabetes. With these interactions, equation (4)

becomes
                              X            X
                                           4
                 yit = αi +         Dt +         βk zkit−1 ckit−1 + γ mit + Xit B + ǫit ,                (5)
                                t          k=0

where the treatments are now defined as screening outside normal range either with or

without a previous diagnosis of the condition. As I show, this distinction is important.



3     Results

3.1     The sample submitting biomarkers in 2006

The rows in Table 1 list an array of salient characteristics of the 2006 biomarker group
stratified across the columns according to their biomarker results.14 Of the five subgroups

shown, three small groups of around 400 respondents each screened positive for what I

loosely term “rare and dangerous” conditions: blood pressure high enough to receive the
high BP card (above 160/110 mmHg), A1c above 7.0 percent, or HDL cholesterol below 40

mg/dL. Between 2,400 and 3,800 screened positive for high BP (above 120/80 but not over
160/110) or high total cholesterol (above 200 mg/dL), shares that approach half the sample.

In 2010, HRS revised upward their normal-range thresholds for these two biomarkers.
    The broad messages in Table 1 are that screening out of normal range on these four
biomarkers is associated with many preexisting characteristics; undiagnosed health con-

ditions apparently exist even though insurance coverage rates and utilization tend to be

high; and although health care utilization and behavior may not vary much in the sample,

there is room for behavioral responses. The top of the table reveals familiar socioeconomic

patterns in disease incidence, with African American and Hispanic males overrepresented
  14 I restrict attention to respondents who appeared in both the 2006 and 2008 waves, which effectively

drops about 10 percent of the sample submitting biomarkers across the board, of whom typically 6 percent
had died and the other 4 percent HRS apparently could not reach. As I discuss shortly, there did not appear
to be substantial differentials in attrition or mortality across these groups defined by biomarker results by
2008, a finding that seems surprising.




                                                       12
among those with very high blood pressure or high A1c. Depending on the biomarker,

screening out of normal range may also be associated with marital status, homeownership,

and health insurance coverage. The middle of the table shows that self-reported rates of

physicians’ diagnoses of health conditions certainly vary across these groups but are not
universally reported by those who screened out of normal range on the relevant biomarker,

and that rates of new diagnosis for these conditions hover around 2–6 percent between bi-
ennial waves.15 Health care utilization is high across the board, with 90 percent or more

reporting at least one visit to a doctor, ER, or clinic in the past 2 years, and pharmaceutical
usage rates above 75 percent. The bottom of the table shows reduced self-reported health

and increased disability among respondents with high A1c, which appear to correlate with

weight and less exercise, but also less drinking and somewhat less smoking. Aside from

that and some limited evidence that respondents with high blood pressure are behaving less
healthily, there is much similarity across these groups in these behavior metrics. Smoking

is not very prevalent at around 14 percent, but exercise and drinking could probably be
altered. Unfortunately the HRS does not measure diet.

    With five distinct types of “morbidities” represented by screens outside normal range,
the structure of comorbidity is challenging to summarize but potentially important for
understanding behavioral responses. In addition, comorbidity across spouses is potentially

relevant because some responses to biomarker notification may be made at the level of the
household. Table 2 shows pairwise correlations between respondents’ and spouses’ screens
outside of normal range.16 Notable results here are the significant but small correlations

between the high BP card and high A1c, and between high A1c and low HDL, which

are around 0.05. Other significant correlations appear between high A1c and high total

cholesterol, and between high total cholesterol and low HDL cholesterol, which range from

−0.04 to −0.13. Correlations across spouses are also small and follow an interesting matching
pattern: the correlations between spouses’ high A1c screens or between spouses’ high total
   15 For the current level of condition diagnosis here and in the panel FE analysis later, I use the raw

responses, in which respondents can dispute records from past waves. In this table, the change in diagnosis
is calculated using the current statements about present and past diagnosis. Differences between these data
definitions are minimal and do not appreciably affect results.
   16 Pairwise correlations between levels of these biomarkers are qualitatively similar to the correlations

between screens out of normal range shown in Table 2.



                                                    13
cholesterol screens are around 0.1 and significant, and there is some weak evidence that

blood pressure may be jointly elevated among spouses, but both typically do not receive the

high BP card.17 Altogether, while correlations in screens among respondents and between

respondents and their spouses are sometimes significant, they are also small, indicating that
notification of an abnormal screen is often an independent and isolated event.18


3.2     Mortality and sample attrition

The HRS tracks mortality well (Weir, 2010), and attrition is low compared to other house-

hold surveys (Banks, Muriel and Smith, 2010). An important question is whether respon-
dents who screen out of normal range on these biomarkers might have experienced differential
mortality or panel attrition, which could inject bias into estimates of the effects of biomarker

notification. I tested for differential mortality and attrition among the 2006 biomarker group

by separately modeling death or nonresponse in 2008 as functions of indicator variables for
screens out of normal range and an array of socioeconomic control variables using probit

and logit specifications.19 Once I controlled for self-reported health conditions, scores out-
side normal range were not significantly associated with either mortality or attrition after
2 years.20
  17 Similarity in spousal characteristics probably due to assortative mating suggest that if anything, we

might expect to see more correlation in these notifications than we do. Correlations between spouses’
weight or body mass indexes, smoking, and frequencies of physical activity are between about 0.12 and 0.4
in this sample.
  18 Another way to summarize the comorbidity structure is by cross tabulation. Within each group of

roughly 400 respondents in Table 1 with one of the three rare screens, the high BP card, high A1c, or low
HDL, only between 21 and 41 individuals received a second notification of a rare screens, such as a high BP
card combined with high A1c or low HDL, or high A1c combined with low HDL. Only 5 respondents scored
outside normal range on all three. Respondents with spouses who also screened outside normal range on
the same one of these three rare measures similarly numbered between 16 and 33 in total depending on the
biomarker.
  19 I used the same covariates that are shown in Table 3 plus 9 indicators of diagnosed health conditions:

high blood pressure, diabetes, cancer, lung disease, heart problems, stroke, psychological problems, memory-
related disease, and arthritis. Results are available from the author upon request.
  20 This is not to say that biomarkers do not affect mortality. Rosero-Bixby and Dow (2012) reveal signifi-

cant effects of biomarkers on mortality in a Costa Rican panel. Rather, this is a statement about how scoring
above particular thresholds of biomarkers does or does not affect mortality and other forms of attrition over
two years in the HRS. In these HRS data, the levels of A1c and total cholesterol are significant predictors of
death by 2008 even though screens out of normal range on those biomarkers are not. Presumably the infor-
mation contained in the thresholds alone is picked up well by other covariates, likely the health conditions
in particular.




                                                     14
3.3     Predictors of screens outside normal range

Table 3 displays selected marginal effects of respondents’ characteristics on the probability

of screening outside normal range in 2006 on the five biomarker categories either with or

without a previous diagnosis of the disease. HRS directly asks about high blood pressure

and diabetes but not about diagnoses of high or low cholesterol per se. To proxy the

latter, I experimented with using diagnoses of heart problems, the closest match among the

questions, and results were comparable to what I show here, which instead differentiates by
whether the respondent was taking cholesterol medication.21

   Differences according to preexisting knowledge of the disease are evident in Table 3,
as are familiar correlations between socioeconomic status and disease incidence, especially

when uncontrolled. There are large and significant effects of many covariates, including
most prominently sex, race, Hispanic origin, and weight, on the probability of rare and
dangerous screens resulting in the high BP card or high A1c among those with preexisting

diagnoses. These respondents could be termed “noncompliers,” because they know they have
the underlying condition but are unable or unwilling to control the biomarker. In contrast,
there are small and insignificant effects of most characteristics on the incidence of rare and

dangerous screens among those whom we might call the “undiagnosed.” Although the latter
are not unpredictable, the patterns in Table 3 imply that such screens are probably more

unexpected. Finally, the marginal effects of not having health insurance on undiagnosed

moderately high blood pressure and on the cholesterol screens are interesting but apparently
do not reflect a universal trend.

   Results here also bolster the argument that there is room for behavioral change. Un-

fortunately they also reveal that unhealthy behaviors are more significantly linked to the

noncompliers than to the undiagnosed.
  21 I can similarly define previous knowledge of high blood pressure and diabetes by whether or not the

respondent is taking the associated medicine. Results are similar to those reported here.




                                                  15
3.4     Average treatment effects

Findings thus far suggest that any new information conveyed by biomarker notification is

likely to be very limited in scope within the sample. Tables 1 and 3 report that only around
1.5 percent of participants in the biomarker wave received a high blood pressure card and did
not know they had high blood pressure, and perhaps 0.7 percent screened positive for high

A1c and did not already have a diabetes diagnosis. If these notifications are most salient,
one would expect the average treatment effects of biomarker collection and notification on

all panel respondents to be small.

    Table 4 confirms this, reporting insignificant effects of assignment to the 2006 biomarker
group on 18 of 20 outcomes in 2008 obtained by estimating equation (3) with a linear panel

FE estimator on the pooled sample of all HRS respondents observed between 1998 and

2008.22 Two outcomes appear to respond significantly to assignment: having seen a doctor
and regularly taking prescription drugs since the previous wave, which fall by 1.5 and 1.2

percentage points respectively. The average number of doctor visits since the previous wave

does not respond significantly (not shown), which could be consistent with small changes
in the prevalence of a common event like this. Both of these results pass a falsification

test of regressing the variable contemporaneously on the assignment rather than on the lag
assignment. That does not reproduce these coefficients, and it should have if the association

were preexisting or due to an third variable. Simple difference-in-differences estimation, valid
here because mode of interview is insignificant in these two cases, roughly confirms these

findings. Given later results that indicate elevated medication usage among some subgroups

after biomarker notification and no effects on doctor visits, it is hard to know what to make

of these two outliers. It is possible that respondents may have viewed biomarker collection,

which could not have resulted in a new or refilled prescription, as a substitute for a doctor

visit or routine physical examination, which could have.
   22 All regressions in Tables 4–7 are linear, including those modeling dichotomous outcomes. As shown in

Table 1, these outcomes tend to be quite common in the sample, removing a typical concern about applying
the linear probability model to limited dependent variable analysis. An additional motivation for using the
linear model, aside from its more straightforward asymptotic characteristics in the presence of fixed effects,
is that interaction terms are better defined. Results of nonlinear logit models tended to be consistent with
those of the linear probability model.




                                                     16
    In 13 of the 20 regressions, mode of interview is significantly associated with the self-

reported outcome. On average, these effects are not particularly large, but due to the tight

correlation between biomarker collection and mode of interview, they are important here.

Self-reported weight is 0.3 percent lower for those on telephone interview, significant at the 1
percent level, but this is only about one sixth the size of the average percent understatement

of self-reported weight relative to objective weight as measured in the EFTF, which is about
1.8 percent in the data and has been discussed elsewhere (Weir, 2007). Without controlling

for mode of interview, however, estimating equation (1) with log weight as the endogenous
variable attaches that highly significant estimate of −0.003 to lagged biomarker assignment,
a clear case of omitted variable bias.


3.5     Average treatment effects on the treated

While the average treatment effects on the entire 2006 biomarker sample tend to be insignif-
icant, a different picture emerges when I model effects on individuals specifically treated by

notifications of screens outside normal range. In particular, I observe statistically significant
and interesting responses among individuals who screened positive for either of two of the
three rare and dangerous conditions, very high BP or high A1c, and especially among those

without a preexisting diagnosis of the underlying condition.23 These results pass a falsifica-
tion test, and they are accompanied by some interesting effects of spouses’ notifications.


3.5.1    Respondents’ notifications

Table 5 reports estimates of the marginal effects of biomarker notification interacted with
preexisting conditions on 20 outcomes using panel fixed effects applied to equation (5).

To no great surprise, the largest effects here of biomarker screens out of normal range

are on condition diagnoses and related pharmaceutical use by the 2008 wave, particularly
among respondents who did not previously report having the condition. The second-largest

coefficient in the table is the 42.8 percentage point increase in diabetes diagnosis among those
  23 For brevity, I skip over the results of estimating equation (4), without condition interactions. Those

results are close to the weighted averages of the effects shown in Table 5 and are thus often less clear and
less interesting, They are available from the author upon request.



                                                    17
who screened positive for high A1c and who did not report having diabetes, followed by the

39.7 percent increase in the rate of diabetes medication usage among that group. Among

those who received the high BP card without a previous diagnosis of high BP, diagnoses

increase 17 percent and drug usage increase 16.1 percent. Respondents with high BP but
below the card threshold were 5.9 percentage points more likely to have a high BP diagnosis

and 3.9 percent more likely to be on BP medication by 2008, increases that roughly double
the usual rates shown in Table 1. Patterns in other diagnoses and medication usage are less

clear probably due in part to the lack of alignment between high cholesterol and a condition
the HRS asks. Noteworthy is the elevated risk of diagnosis of heart problems or stroke, by
4.7 and 4.6 percent, among those who received the high BP card and who already knew

they had high blood pressure.

    Notifications are correlated with some measures of health and disability, but many of
these patterns seem to reflect preexisting characteristics rather than plausible effects of the

notification. This is revealed by the falsification tests in Table 6 where I have modeled
outcomes in 2006 rather than 2008 as functions of biomarker notifications from the 2006

wave. The marginal effects on contemporaneous diagnoses and medication usage here are
as they should be: positive for the group that had them and negative for the group that

did not. But coefficients on the disability indexes for those with high BP but no card are

similar in Tables 5 and 6, suggesting that those are not effects of notification. Positive

and significant coefficients on 2008 disability measures among those with high A1c and a

diabetes diagnosis in Table 5 are not present in 2006, however, nor is the protective effect

against IADL disability for respondents with high A1c but without a diabetes diagnosis,
implying those effects may be real.

    There appear to be relatively few significant effects for the groups with high BP but no

card or for those with cholesterol screens out of normal range that can pass the falsifica-
tion tests shown in Table 6. Obvious effects are the 14–15 percent increases in cholesterol

medication usage rates among those with such screens who had not already been taking
it.24 Another effect that passes the falsification test is the 4.9 percent additional increase in
 24 The large and significant negative coefficients here on abnormal cholesterol screens among those who

were already taking those medications are real. These subgroups report less than 100 percent usage in 2008


                                                   18
diabetes diagnosis among those with low HDL cholesterol who were already taking choles-

terol medication. This is roughly a doubling of the usual incidence reported by Table 1 and

is striking in light of concerns that using statins to treat cholesterol may raise the risk of
diabetes onset (Sattar et al., 2010). Statins are thought to be more effective at lowering

high cholesterol rather than raising HDL cholesterol, which makes this result and the lack

of an association with high screens on total cholesterol somewhat puzzling. But as shown

by Table 1, the subsample in 2006 with low HDL cholesterol was more likely to be taking

cholesterol medication than those with high total cholesterol.

    Probably the most interesting results in Table 5 concern weight, drinking, and exercise
among undiagnosed diabetics, those respondents with high A1c but without a diagnosis.

The coefficient on log weight for this subgroup in 2008 is −0.022 and is significant at the
4.9 percent level (t-stat of −1.97). There is no sign of any contemporaneous association
from the falsification test in Table 6. In addition to large increases in diabetes diagnosis

and medication usage, this group also reports 0.306 fewer drinking days per week, the other
insignificant coefficients on their drinking behavior are all negative, and while they may

report less frequent vigorous physical activity, the frequencies of moderate and especially
light activity appear to rise. These outcomes are fully consistent with practitioners’ common

recommendations for diabetes control and appear to be the clearest evidence of behavioral

responses here.

    The other behavioral changes of note that we see in Table 5 are concentrated among
the “noncompliers” who received the high BP card and already knew they had high BP.

Among this group, and also among those with high BP but no card who did not already have
the diagnosis, the coefficient on smoking is negative and significant, here −0.023 (t-stat of

−2.06). Coefficients on drinking are also negative but insignificant among the noncompliers

with the high BP card, with the largest coefficient of any significance in the table, −0.523
(t-stat of −1.91), appearing here on the number of binge drinking days (4+ drinks on one

occasion) in the past 90 days, fully one third of the average response. Frequency of light
exercise also falls among this group, which may reflect the redistribution of household chores,
for unknown reasons. Given that the notification thresholds in question are not extreme, one interpretation
is that the notification is not a good indicator of a persistent condition in these cases.


                                                    19
the primary examples of light exercise given in the question, away from the respondent with

a history of high blood pressure following receipt of the high BP card.


3.5.2   Spouses’ notifications

Although doing so will require dropping the third of the biomarker sample who are not

coupled, I can also examine the effects on respondents’ outcomes and behaviors of their

spouses’ receiving notification of screens outside normal ranges using a similar methodology.
Adding spouses’ notifications and their interactions with spouses’ preexisting conditions to

equation 5 and reestimating produces a set of coefficients on own-notifications that are

similar to those in Table 5, because own and spousal notifications are largely independent
per Table 2. It also produces a new set of coefficients on spousal notifications, which appear

in Table 7.
   As one might expect, there are far fewer significant results here, especially among diag-
noses and other variables that measure own status. When effects on diagnoses and disability

are significant here, they are often also similarly signed and significant in the falsification
regression (not shown) and thus are probably not real effects.

   One of the results that passes the falsification test is the marginal effect of a known

diabetic spouse’s high A1c screen on the respondent’s own log weight of −0.015, significant
at the 1.2 percent level (t-stat of −2.52). This result is not mirrored by any reaction in own

physical activity, suggesting that this weight loss may have been obtained through shifts in
diet, which the HRS does not measure. For respondents whose spouses screened high on

A1c but did not have a preexisting diabetes diagnosis, there was no response of own weight,

while the frequency of light exercise increased significantly, roughly as much as reported by
the spouse in question, with a coefficient here of −0.425 (t-stat of −3.13) compared with

−0.372 (t-stat of −2.01) shown in Table 5.

   The other behavioral responses of note by spouses in Table 7 concern drinking behavior.
Relatively strong evidence suggests a spouse’s high blood pressure causes reductions in own

binge drinking. The coefficient of −0.962 (t-stat of −2.71) in the first column, for spouses
of respondents who received the high BP card and had already had a diagnosis of high


                                              20
blood pressure, is greater in size and significance than the own-coefficient of −0.523 (t-stat

of −1.91) in Table 5. If binge drinking is a shared activity between spouses, it stands to

reason that behaviors might shift together in response to a notification.


3.5.3    Robustness and persistence

Several other estimation strategies produced results similar to those shown here.25 Simple

differences in differences (DID) are unbiased within the 2006 biomarker group because mode

of interview is changing uniformly. Those estimates mirrored the results of linear panel FE
regression, which is a generalization of DID. I also explored balancing the panel by selecting

only treated respondents and choosing controls from individuals in the 2008 biomarker group
using nearest neighbors matching from a propensity score algorithm. That technique, along

with restricting the panel regression sample to just the 2006 biomarker group, also produced
panel FE estimates that were very similar to those presented here. The broad conformity
of results suggests that much of the identification stems from changes among the treated

observations.
    Testing for the persistence of results is hampered by the fact that while the other half of
the sample submitted biomarkers in 2008, most of their notifications are currently omitted

variables because the data have been unavailable.26 This motivated me to simply drop
the 2010 wave in my analysis thus far, although including it does not appreciably alter

results. Testing for twice-lagged effects of biomarker notification requires including the 2010
wave, and results of that analysis suggest that the effects on diagnoses and medication

usage appeared to persist and possibly strengthen. But those results did not support the

hypothesis that effects on self-reported weight, drinking, and exercise persisted.
  25 An exception was an approach based on regression discontinuities, and the likely reason is that the

HRS is too small for the approach to work well in this context. In the case of A1c readings and weight,
for example, there was too much noise in the relationship between the two among the sample above the
reading of 7.0 percent to generate a clear discontinuity in behavior as one would expect there to be. Graphs
of diabetes diagnosis against A1c similarly did not depict sharp cutpoints around the threshold. Panel
FE results suggest that conditioning on preexisting diagnosis appears to be important for revealing many
effects, but doing so unfortunately reduces sample size even further and increases noise enough so that
clear regression discontinuities remain elusive. Multivariate regression seems better suited to understanding
behavior when sample size is limited and many characteristics affect outcomes.
  26 Email correspondence with the HRS team revealed that the 2008 biomarker group was also notified in

a staggered fashion because of laboratory issues and legal constraints in New York State and California.




                                                     21
    Another interesting and feasible test of the persistence of behavioral effects is whether

objective weight had fallen between 2006 and 2010, the second round of biomarker collection

for the group that went first, among the undiagnosed subgroup with high A1c. As shown in

Table 8, objective weight fell rather uniformly among respondents who submitted biomarkers
in both waves. Although weight fell between 1.6 and 1.7 percent faster among those with

high A1c in 2006, the difference was not statistically significant mostly because of small

subsample size and the strength of the background trend, the latter of which presumably

reflected the aging of the panel.



4     Discussion

The evidence suggests that notifications of biomarker screens outside normal range in the
2006 wave of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) triggered significant changes in out-

comes and behavior two years later among select subgroups of respondents under certain
circumstances. After biomarker collection, HRS interviewers immediately notified respon-

dents of very high blood pressure by leaving behind a high BP card, and HRS later mailed

out to respondents the full results of their blood pressure, hemoglobin A1c, total cholesterol,

and HDL cholesterol readings, as well as indications of whether those readings were outside
normal range. Three types of the five possible notifications were “rare and dangerous”: the

high BP card received by 5.8 percent of respondents, high A1c registered by 5.4 percent,
and low HDL cholesterol registered by 5.4 percent. Two of these notifications, very high

blood pressure above 160/110 and A1c above 7.0, each produced the most extensive and

interesting effects on outcomes and behavior two years later in the panel.
    By far the largest and most statistically significant impacts of these screens were on

rates of new disease diagnosis, which by definition affected the previously undiagnosed.

Respondents who already knew they had the disease and either were unable or unwilling

to control the biomarker, who can be termed “noncompliers” for simplicity, also responded

but in different ways. Rates of diagnosis among the previously undiagnosed jumped 17
percent for recipients of the high BP card and almost 40 percent for high A1c screens.



                                              22
Connected with these were similarly large increases in usage rates of associated medications.

The prevalence of such undiagnosed cases among the 2006 biomarker group was small, only

about 1.5 percent in the case of the high BP card and 0.7 percent with high A1c. Subsequent

patterns in self-reported doctor’s diagnosis suggest either that significant shares were false
positives or that respondents or their doctors did not find the information salient. Applying

the observed increases in diagnosis rates by 2008 to the prevalence of abnormal screens
among those without a diagnosis produces estimates of the lower bound of undiagnosed

disease prevalence in the 2006 sample overall of only 0.3 percent for each of the two.
   Behavioral adjustment was apparent and arguably strongest among undiagnosed diabet-

ics with high A1c, and it also appeared among spouses of these and other respondents. The

0.7 percent of respondents with high A1c and without a diabetes diagnosis reported losing

an average of 2.2 percent of their body weight by the following wave, and they also reported
less drinking and more frequent exercise. Trends in objective measures of weight, collected

in 2006 and again in 2010, lend support to this finding but are not definitive. Spouses of
undiagnosed respondents with high A1c also reported increased frequency of light exercise,

roughly in line with what their partners reported. These patterns were not found among
the 4.7 percent with high A1c who were already known diabetics, who instead suffered dete-
riorations in self-reported disability rates and health status. Interestingly, spouses of these

diabetics reported reductions in their own weight of 1.5 percent, even while spouses of the
undiagnosed with high A1c reported effectively no weight loss. Exercise and drinking among
these spouses of noncompliers was unaffected, which could indicate that their weight loss

came through a change in diet, which the HRS does not measure. Were that the case, it
would suggest households may take a multi-staged approach to diabetes management, fo-

cusing at first on exercise and then later on diet. Signs of rising disability among those with

uncontrolled diabetes imply that such a strategy may become more feasible than exercise

promotion as the disease progresses.

   In contrast, changes in behavior were more visible among noncompliers who received

the high BP card than among the undiagnosed who received it. This might be expected

if high blood pressure is viewed as less serious at onset than is type 2 diabetes, which


                                              23
seems plausible. Respondents already diagnosed with high blood pressure who received the

high BP card appeared to significantly reduce their smoking, by 2.3 percentage points or

about one fifth of the baseline prevalence, and also reduced their drinking intensity. Their

frequency of light exercise actually fell, possibly reflecting a reallocation of household chores
away from the respondent. Although they did not report picking up the slack, spouses of

these respondents did report less binge drinking, mirroring the effects of the screen on own
behavior and suggesting that binge drinking tends to be a joint activity.

   Exactly why uncontrolled high blood pressure appears to trigger changes in own behavior
while uncontrolled diabetes apparently does not remains somewhat of an open question.

Only a very small share of respondents with high A1c are likely to be type 1 or lifelong

diabetics, probably less than 1 percent. It is conceivable that diabetic HRS respondents

and their doctors may have set A1c targets above 7.0. The reason for the asymmetry may
well be rising disability among those with uncontrolled diabetes, which presumably impedes

exercise. Smoking is addictive, which may explain why it does not appear to respond even
though it probably should be a part of diabetes control (Gunton et al., 2002). Drinking

is already reduced among this subsample, per Table 1, and may not be easy to lower any

further.
   As Tables 1 and 3 reveal, the characteristics of respondents with high A1c suggest that

uncontrolled diabetes is a condition associated with minority identity and lower socioe-
conomic status. Whether these characteristics are important for behavior because they

constrain choices or because they alter preferences is a perennial question in health eco-

nomics, and the present study offers no new insights. With added detail from the restricted

HRS geocodes file, perhaps elucidating neighborhood characteristics, some headway might

be made in understanding the determinants of response and nonresponse to notifications.

More work could also be done to examine psychological covariates of these behaviors, since
the EFTF interviews during biomarker waves ended with the interviewers’ leaving behind

new “lifestyle” questionnaires on psychosocial topics.
   Ultimately, these data may thus provide insights about preventable hospitalizations

among older Americans, some of which are attributable to uncontrolled hypertension or


                                               24
diabetes, especially among poor communities, and to access to care (Bindman et al., 1995;

Jiang, Russo and Barrett, 2009). Although it does not ask separately about emergency room

visits, the HRS does ask about the frequency of overnight hospitalization between waves,
which was highest in 2006 among subsets of “noncompliers” with very high BP or high

A1c and a preexisting diagnosis. Known diabetics with high A1c in 2006 were significantly

more likely to report overnight hospitalization (panel FE coefficient of 0.096, t-stat of 3.58)

and more stays (0.170, t-stat of 2.11) in 2008. But it is unclear what to draw from this,

besides motivation for a fuller assessment of their characteristics and what drives them to

hospitalization compared with other diabetics. I leave such efforts for future inquiry.
   One coefficient in Table 5 suggests that low HDL cholesterol screens may trigger a

doubling of the typical 2-year increase in new diabetes prevalence. It seems wise not to
place much emphasis on a single result like this, especially when there appears to be no
connection between high cholesterol screens and subsequent diabetes. But it is interesting

in light of concerns about statins (Sattar et al., 2010) and is probably worth future study.
   Stepping back, important questions are whether these behavioral responses to biomarker

notification are empirically important on average and thus potentially policy relevant. The
intent-to-treat estimates of the average impacts of biomarker collection in the sample are

effectively zero, except insofar as they may reduce doctor visits and medication usage by 1 or

2 percent, and this must be because screening does not generate much salient information on

average. Undiagnosed “rare and dangerous” conditions are uncommon in the sample, and

while uncontrolled conditions are less rare, it appears that notification of their uncontrolled

nature does not change behavior by a lot. Averaged across all respondents, a policy of
collecting biomarkers and informing about results and normal ranges will have few tangible

effects because those treated by salient information are a small subset, and while their

conditions change, they do not change drastically. A more targeted intervention would have
larger average effects. A question I leave for future study is whether a policy of screening

based on observable characteristics like those in Table 3 could produce average treatment

effects that would be worth the costs. Certainly these findings suggest there are unmet

surveillance and care needs among Americans aged 50 and over, but they appear to be


                                              25
concentrated among relatively small subgroups.

   A key methodological question is whether these effects on those treated by the notifi-

cations are in fact attributable to notification and thus to the intervention as defined by

collecting biomarkers and notifying abnormal screens, or whether they instead simply reflect
the impacts of the biomarker levels themselves and thus would have happened regardless.

Because all respondents who screen abnormally were also notified, there is no way to an-
swer this question to the standards of a randomized controlled trial. But my reading of the

evidence is that these effects are indeed associated with the arrival of information and not
the biomarker level. Key results pass the falsification test of contemporaneous association,

and the robustness of results across specifications and samples lends further credence to the

view that the effects are causal. Further examination of this question with the 2008 results

may shed more light on the topic.
   The impacts of biomarker notification on economic outcomes presumably via their inter-

mediate effects on health may be interesting to explore. Labor supply and spending might
respond to screens out of normal range if they produce new health conditions, and the HRS

panel includes respondents who are not yet retired. Labor force participation among HRS
respondents with high A1c screens was about the sample average of 54 percent, while it was
about 62 percent among those who received the high BP card. For those under age 65 in

the U.S., of course, the onset of a new health condition might actually increase participa-
tion for insurance purposes, as long as disability permits working. New disease onset before
retirement seems likely either to generate precautionary saving or financial stress.

   Implications of these results range from practical insights to new understanding of be-
havior and unmet health services needs in the U.S. population around the age at retirement,

and ultimately to informing policy. Methodologically, this research contributes the insight

that the strong correlation between biomarker collection and mode of interview will proba-

bly affect self-reported measures. Collecting biomarkers in a cross-sectional survey like the

core NHANES will affect self reports relative to a telephone survey but not relative to itself,

if all respondents are interviewed in person. Panel studies like HRS, Add Health, and others

that include biomarking in some but not all waves are more likely to be impacted.


                                              26
References

Banks, James, Alastair Muriel and James P. Smith. 2010. “Attrition and Health in Ageing

  Studies: Evidence from ELSA and HRS.” Rand Labor and Population Working Paper
  Series WR-784:1–40.

Berlowitz, Dan R., Arlene S. Ash, Elaine C. Hickey, Robert H. Friedman, Mark Glickman,

  Boris Kader and Mark A. Moskowitz. 1998. “Inadequate Management of Blood Pressure
  in a Hypertensive Population.” New England Journal of Medicine 339(27):1957–1963.

Bindman, Andrew B., Kevin Grumbach, Dennis Osmond, Miriam Komaromy, Karen
  Vranizan, Nicole Lurie, John Billings and Anita Stewart. 1995. “Preventable Hospi-

  talizations and Access to Health Care.” JAMA 274(4):305–311.
  URL: + http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.1995.03530040033037

Gunton, Jenny E., Linda Davies, Errol Wilmshurst, Greg Fulcher and Aidan McElduff. 2002.
  “Cigarette Smoking Affects Glycemic Control in Diabetes.” Diabetes Care 25(4):796–797.

  URL: http://care.diabetesjournals.org/content/25/4/796.2.short

Halpern-Manners, Andrew and John Robert Warren. 2012. “Panel Conditioning in Longi-
  tudinal Studies: Evidence From Labor Force Items in the Current Population Survey.”
  Demography 49:1499–1519.

Hyman, David J. and Valory N. Pavlik. 2001. “Characteristics of Patients with Uncontrolled

  Hypertension in the United States.” New England Journal of Medicine 345(7):479–486.

Imbens, Guido W. and Joshua D. Angrist. 1994. “Identification and Estimation of Local
  Average Treatment Effects.” Econometrica 62(2):467–475.

International Expert Committee. 2009. “International Expert Committee Report on the
  Role of the A1C Assay in the Diagnosis of Diabetes.” Diabetes Care 32(7):1327–1334.

Jiang, H. Joanna, C. Allison Russo and Marguerite L. Barrett. 2009. “Nationwide Frequency

  and Costs of Potentially Preventable Hospitalizations, 2006.” HCUP Statistical Brief 72.



                                           27
  U.S. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Rockville, MD.

  URL: http://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/reports/statbriefs/sb72.pdf

Juster, F. Thomas and Richard Suzman. 1995. “An Overview of the Health and Retirement

  Study.” Journal of Human Resources 30, supplement:S7–S56.

Rosero-Bixby, Luis and William H. Dow. 2012. “Predicting mortality with biomarkers: a

  population-based prospective cohort study for elderly Costa Ricans.” Population Health

  Metrics 10(11):1–15.

Sattar, Naveed, David Preiss, Heather M. Murray and et al. 2010.         “Statins and risk

  of incident diabetes: a collaborative meta-analysis of randomised statin trials.” Lancet
  375(9716):735–42.

Verdecchia, Paolo, Giuseppe Schillaci, Claudia Borgioni, Antonella Ciucci and Carlo Porcel-

  lati. 1997. “Prognostic Significance of the White Coat Effect.” Hypertension 29(6):1218–

  1224.

Weinstein, Maxine, James W. Vaupel and Kenneth W. Wachter, eds. 2007. Biosocial Sur-
  veys. Washington: National Academies Press.

Weir, David. 2007. Elastic Powers: The Integration of Biomarkers into the Health and
  Retirement Study. In Biosocial Surveys, ed. Maxine Weinstein, James W. Vaupel and

  Kenneth W. Wachter. Washington: National Academies Press chapter 4, pp. 78–95.

Weir, David R. 2010. “Socio-economic Status and Mortality: Perceptions and Outcomes.”

  Unpublished manuscript presented at the 2010 annual meeting of the Population Associ-

  ation of America.




                                            28
                          Figure 1: A high blood pressure card from HRS



                  !"#$%&'()$&%*%&+,&*%&-../&

                  01(2%34115%62$77(2$%8"7%9$"7(2$5%#15":%(7;)<%")%=921)%"(#19"#$5%
                  34115%62$77(2$%91);#12>%

                  ?@$%9$"7(2$9$)#7%8$2$%#"A$)%3$#8$$)%&+&&B&C.&%")5%&+&&B&CC&&%DE*FE>

                  01(2%34115%62$77(2$%9$"7(2$9$)#7%"2$B
                  &+G+&%*%&+..&%99H<
                  &+IJ&%*%&%JG&&%99H<
                  &+II&%*%&%JI&&%99H<

                  K;)L$%#@$7$%9$"7(2$7%"2$%1(#7;5$%#@$%2")<$%2$L199$)5$5%3:%)"#;1)"4%
                  12<");M"#;1)7%N+-.*G.OP%8$%2$L199$)5%#@"#%:1(%7$$%"%6@:7;L;")%#1%@"Q$%
                  :1(2%34115%62$77(2$%L@$LA$5%"<";)%!""#$!%&#'(>




Notes: The appearance of this card is derived from correspondence with Health and Retirement Study investiga-
tors. The listed levels are the average readings in the 2006 sample for respondents who received the high blood
pressure card. Emphasis in the actual cards as shown. Interviewers were instructed to leave this card behind with
respondents whose minimum systolic BP was greater than 160 or whose minimum diastolic BP was greater than
110.




                                                       29
     letter like this one. See the text for details.
                                                       listed levels are the average readings in the 2006 sample. All respondents who submitted biomarkers received a
                                                                                                                                                                        Notes: This letter is based on a Word template provided by Health and Retirement Study investigators. The



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      "#$%!&'!()*+#%,)%-!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 "#$%&'($)*!+,!-$./$01#!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 $23454647!89:!(9;5<=!'737<:;>!          +,--./01233412/526.7893:/




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 2: A biomarker notification letter from HRS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ?@A!)>9BC392!(4D!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 122!1:E9:F!-5;>5G<2!?HIJ?!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 K>D!LHAAM!AIINA?OA!                                           !                3H*-#M2J!       !    ?21*-#M2J!       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 >44CPQQ>:3C<:45;5C<243D53:D6B5;>D7R6!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       625)!.D!                    .<.!         Z!      [/!       55LK!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                              625)!;D!                    .;\!         Z!      ]\!       55LK!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "#$%!&'!()*+#%,)%-!                                                                                                                            625)!<D!                    .;[!         Z!      ][!       55LK!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .///!012%!3-4))-!                                                                                                                              VWJ!X!1*(9./2!*11%1!%1!./)(<.9!1*,&<-!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3#5)!6#7%8!9:!.;<=>!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                        @JJ#4,2%K!-#!-$)!@5)42J1%!L)14-!@**#J21-2#%8!*H*-#M2J!+4)**E4)!P-#+!%E5N)4R!#I!.;/!55LK!#4!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                $2K$)48! 1%,! 1! ,21*-#M2J! +4)**E4)! PN#--#5! %E5N)4R! #I! [/! 55LK! #4! $2K$)4! 51H! 2%,2J1-)!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                $H+)4-)%*2#%!P$2K$!NM##,!+4)**E4)R'!!6$)!L)1M-$!1%,!()-24)5)%-!3-E,H!51H!%#-!5)1*E4)!NM##,!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !       !       !        !        !       !        !        !!!!!!?@6A!BC!6A36D!"E%)!.>-$8!;//F!                    +4)**E4)! 2%! -$)! *15)! 71H! -$1-! H#E4! NM##,! +4)**E4)! 2*! 5)1*E4),! 2%! H#E4! ,#J-#4^*! #II2J)'!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L#7)O)48!2I!H#E4!NM##,!+4)**E4)!2*!.;/Z[/!55LK!#4!$2K$)48!H#E!*$#EM,!*))!H#E4!+$H*2J21%!#4!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                                       #-$)4!$)1M-$!+4#I)**2#%1M!-#!4)J$)JG!-$2*!4)*EM-!1%,!,2*JE**!2-!72-$!-$)5'!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ?)14!04'!"#$%!&'!()*+#%,)%-8!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                            ;-<6,/+,--./=>-,23<21-,:/!?$/@9A.,/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6$1%G! H#E! I#4! +14-2J2+1-2%K! 2%! -$)! L)1M-$! 1%,! ()-24)5)%-! 3-E,H'! ! 6$)! -)*-! 4)*EM-*! #I! H#E4!                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        J$#M)*-)4#M!1%,!$)5#KM#N2%!@.J!-)*-*!$1O)!N))%!4)-E4%),!I4#5!-$)!M1N#41-#4H'!!B%!-$)!)%JM#*),!                                   @JJ#4,2%K! -#! -$)! @5)42J1%! L)14-! @**#J21-2#%8! -#-1M! J$#M)*-)4#M! #I! ;//! 5KZ,M! #4! $2K$)4! 51H!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        +1K)!H#E!72MM!I2%,!H#E4!4)*EM-*!I#4!H#E4!NM##,!+4)**E4)!4)1,2%K*8!J$#M)*-)4#M!PN#-$!-#-1M!1%,!L?Q!                               2%,2J1-)! $H+)4J$#M)*-)4#M)521! P$2K$! J$#M)*-)4#MR'! ! SI! H#E4! -#-1M! J$#M)*-)4#M! 2*! ;//! 5KZ,M! #4!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        J$#M)*-)4#MR8!1%,!$)5#KM#N2%!@.J!-)*-*'!!@*!H#E!G%#7!7)!J1%%#-!+4#O2,)!1%H!5),2J1M!1,O2J)!-#!
30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         $2K$)4! H#E! *$#EM,! *))! H#E4! +$H*2J21%! #4! #-$)4! $)1M-$! +4#I)**2#%1M! -#! 4)J$)JG! -$2*! 4)*EM-! 1%,!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        H#E'!SI!H#E!$1O)!1%H!TE)*-2#%*!1N#E-!-$)*)!4)*EM-*!+M)1*)!J#%-1J-!H#E4!,#J-#4'!                                                  ,2*JE**!2-!72-$!-$)5'!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        U)! M##G! I#4714,! -#! H#E4! J#%-2%E),! 2%-)4)*-! 1%,! +14-2J2+1-2#%! 2%! 1MM! 1*+)J-*! #I! -$2*! %1-2#%1MMH!                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4)J#K%2V),!1%,!$2K$MH!4)*+)J-),!*-E,H'!!SI!H#E!$1O)!TE)*-2#%*!1N#E-!-$2*!*-E,H8!+M)1*)!J#%-1J-!E*!                               BCD/+,--./=>-,23<21-,:/((/@9A.,/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1-!!"#$$"!%&"'()*'!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                @JJ#4,2%K!-#!-$)!@5)42J1%!L)14-!@**#J21-2#%8!$2K$_,)%*2-H!M2+#+4#-)2%!PL?QR!J$#M)*-)4#M!M)O)M!#I!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                K4)1-)4!-$1%!=/!5KZ,M!$)M+*!-#!4),EJ)!-$)!42*G!#I!$)14-!,2*)1*)'!!SI!H#E4!L?Q!J$#M)*-)4#M!2*!M#7)4!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        32%J)4)MH8!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -$1%!=/!5KZ,M!H#E!*$#EM,!*))!H#E4!+$H*2J21%!#4!#-$)4!$)1M-$!+4#I)**2#%1M!-#!4)J$)JG!-$2*!4)*EM-!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                1%,!,2*JE**!2-!72-$!-$)5'!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                                    !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "1%)!W'!3J2)%-2*-8!X$'?'!                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ?24)J-#4!Y!L)1M-$!1%,!()-24)5)%-!3-E,H!                                                                                          B2@-9,-E78/F!=:/(G)H/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                                       6$)!$)5#KM#N2%!@.J!-)*-!*$#7*!-$)!1O)41K)!15#E%-!#I!*EK14!2%!H#E4!NM##,!#O)4!-$)!M1*-!-$4))!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                                       5#%-$*'!!6$)!@5)42J1%!?21N)-)*!@**#J21-2#%!4)J#55)%,*!-$1-!-$)!K#1M!#I!-$2*!4)*EM-!*$#EM,!N)!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                                       M)**! -$1%! ]`'!! SI! H#E4! 4)*EM-! 2*! ]`! #4! $2K$)4! H#E! *$#EM,! *))! H#E4! +$H*2J21%! #4! #-$)4! $)1M-$!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "#!$%&!'()*!+&*,-.%/,!(0%&-!$%&1!1.2'-,!(,!(!1*,*(13'!4(1-.3.4(/-5!%1!6.,'!-%!%0-(./!./#%17(-.%/5!(,8!+&*,-.%/,!%1!              +4#I)**2#%1M!-#!4)J$)JG!-$2*!4)*EM-!1%,!,2*JE**!2-!72-$!-$)5'!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9.,3&,,!(/$!3%/3*1/,!(0%&-!-'.,!,-&9$!6.-'!,%7*%/*!%-'*1!-'(/!-'*!1*,*(13'*1:,;5!4<*(,*!3%/-(3-!-'*!=/.)*1,.-$!%#!                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        >.3'.2(/!?*(<-'!@3.*/3*,!(/9!A*'().%1(<!@3.*/3*,!"/,-.-&-.%/(<!B*).*6!A%(195!CDE!F!G.0*1-$!@-H5!@-*!IEI5!J//!J10%15!>"!             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DKLEDMIILE5!:NOD;!POQMEPOO!R%1!-%<<!#1**5!:KQQ;!POQMEPOOS5!.10',0,T&7.3'H*9&H!U<*(,*!1*#*1!-%!41%-%3%<!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         C#4!5#4)!2%I#451-2#%8!+M)1*)!4)I)4!-#!-$)!I#MM#72%K!7)N!*2-)*D!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ?=>EEEQLLIKH!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                  !                                                                                             @5)42J1%!L)14-!@**#J21-2#%! !          $--+DZZ777'$)14-'#4K!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         @5)42J1%!?21N)-)*!@**#J21-2#%!         $--+DZZ777',21N)-)*'#4K!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a1-2#%1M!S%*-2-E-)*!#I!L)1M-$! !       $--+DZZ%2$'K#O!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a1-2#%1M!S%*-2-E-)!#%!@K2%K! !         $--+DZZ777'%21'%2$'K#O!



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1                                                                                                                    2
     Figure 3: Timing of measurements and treatments during biomarking in the HRS



         Wave 8                                Wave 9                                  Wave 10
         in 2006                               in 2008                                 in 2010

       2006 Biomarker Group

                                Time

                      1-2 months:
                      Mailed notice of
                                                                                                 Mailed
                      BP, A1c, total
                                             Self-reports                                        notice
                      chol., HDL
               High                             status                                        High
               blood (z1, z2, z3, z4)        (x2008, y2008)                                   blood
               pressure                                                                       pressure
               card left (z0)                                                                 card left

            Biomarkers (b2006)                                                               Biomarkers
       Self-reports                                                               Self-reports (b2010)
          status                                                                     status
       (x2006, y2006)                                                             (x2010, y2010)


       2008 Biomarker Group



                                                              1-2 months:
                                                              Mailed notice of
                                                              BP, A1c, total
       Self-reports                                                                   Self-reports
                                                              chol., HDL
          status                                      High                               status
                                                               (z1, z2, z3, z4)
       (x2006, y2006)                                 blood
                                                                                      (x2010, y2010)
                                                      pressure
                                                      card left (z0)

                                                  Biomarkers (b2008)
                                             Self-reports
                                                status
                                             (x2008, y2008)




Source: Health and Retirement Study, various waves.




                                                      31
               Figure 4: Disposition of the HRS panel during biomarking in 2006


                             2006 Biomarker Group                     2008 Biomarker Group
         Biomarker
          is out of
           normal
                                         A2006                                     A2008
         range (A)

           Knows
         diagnosed               B2006                                     B2008
        condition (B)


        Biomarked (C)                    C2006                                     C2008


         Consented but
     failed to biomark (D)               D2006                                     D2008


         Asked but did
                                         E2006                                     E2008
        not consent (E)




         Not asked to
         biomark (F)                     F2006                                     F2008




Source: Health and Retirement Study, 2006 various wave. All depicted subgroups are present in both the 2006
and 2008 waves. The collection of subgroups on the left are those randomly selected to submit biomarkers in 2006;
those on the right are the remaining half selected to submit in 2008. The intent-to-treat (ITT) estimate of the
effect of biomarker collection is the simple comparison of the two groups in 2008. An average treatment effect on
the treated associated with screening outside normal range would be revealed by comparing group A2006 with the
unobservable group A2008 .




                                                       32
                                                   Figure 5: Mode of interview in the Health and Retirement Study
                                              1
       Share conducting telephone interview
                                              .8
                                              .6
                                              .4
                                              .2
                                              0




                                                   1998     2000        2002           2004   2006      2008        2010
                                                                                       Year

                                                                   Biomarked in 2006           Biomarked in 2008



Source: Health and Retirement Study, various waves, and the RAND HRS file version L.




                                                                                  33
Figure 6: Self-reported weight across biomarker groups in the Health and Retirement Study
                              80
                              79.5
       Average weight in kg
                              79
                              78.5
                              78
                              77.5




                                     1998   2000        2002           2004   2006      2008       2010
                                                                       Year

                                                   Biomarked in 2006           Biomarked in 2008
                                                   Upper 2.5%                  Upper 2.5%
                                                   Lower 2.5%                  Lower 2.5%



Source: Health and Retirement Study, various waves, and the RAND HRS file version L.




                                                                  34
     Table 1: Characteristics of HRS respondents asked to submit biomarkers in 2006

                                               All                 High     High             High      Low
                                         assigned    Biomarker      BP     BP, no    High    total    HDL
                                            resp’s   submitters    card      card     A1c     chol.   chol.
 Number                                     8,587        7,127      412     3,809     387    2,399      383
 Average age                                  67.2         67.0    71.6      67.7    66.8      65.4    67.5
 Percent:
  Male                                       41.1          40.6    41.0       45.6    46.0    33.7     73.1
  African American                           14.1          13.2    23.1       13.9    22.5    10.9     11.2
  Hispanic                                    9.1           8.0     9.2        7.8    16.0     8.6      8.6
  Married or coupled                         67.9          68.8    59.5       69.4    67.7    70.4     77.5
  Does not own home                          19.7          18.0    24.8       18.0    29.7    16.5     18.3
  Does not report health insurance            5.7           5.3     5.8        5.2     7.8     7.3      7.6
 Percent with condition this wave:
  High blood pressure                        56.2          55.8    74.5       61.7    68.7    49.7     61.9
  Diabetes                                   19.6          19.3    26.9       20.0    87.9    13.0     28.2
  Heart problems                             23.5          23.6    26.7       22.5    28.9    16.1     32.9
 Percent with new condition this wave:
  High blood pressure                         5.1            5.1     4.9       5.3     3.9      5.1     5.5
  Diabetes                                    2.8            2.8     3.2       2.8     6.0      2.1     5.2
  Heart problems                              3.5            3.4     3.0       3.1     5.7      1.8     3.9
 Percent:
  Visited doctor past 2 years                94.8          95.0    90.3       94.7    94.3    93.4     93.2
  Regularly taking Rx past 2 years           80.9          81.3    81.8       81.8    91.7    74.7     81.7
  Taking BP medication                       50.4          50.0    65.2       54.8    62.3    42.9     55.6
  Taking diabetes medication                 16.3          16.0    22.8       16.5    80.9    10.0     22.7
  Taking cholesterol medication              38.9          39.3    38.7       40.8    55.4    25.7     45.5
 Self-reported health status 1-5
  1 = excellent, 5 = poor                    2.81          2.76    2.98       2.75    3.40    2.64     2.96
 Sum of some difficulty on 0-5 ADLs          0.31          0.24    0.26       0.23    0.39    0.21     0.34
 Self-reported weight in kg                  79.8          79.9    80.6       81.4    88.8    78.6     91.3
 Objective weight in kg                      80.5          80.5    81.1       82.0    88.3    79.7     90.9
 Percent smokes now                          13.7          13.5    13.0       13.0    12.0    14.8     18.8
 Cigarettes per day                          2.16          2.12    1.97       2.03    1.79    2.44     3.48
 Percent drinking alcohol now                69.4          70.3    72.4       75.2    47.7    75.0     49.0
 Drinking days per week                      1.15          1.19    1.16       1.25    0.41    1.29     0.74
 Drinks per drinking day                     0.69          0.70    0.72       0.75    0.48    0.75     0.49
 Binge drinking days in last 90              1.28          1.28    1.49       1.53    0.77    1.33     0.97
 Phys. activity freq. 1-5, 1 = most, 5 = least:
  Vigorous                                   4.06          4.02    4.16       4.03    4.42    3.99     4.14
  Moderate                                   2.85          2.78    2.92       2.77    3.16    2.73     2.98
  Light                                      2.52          2.45    2.53       2.45    2.78    2.31     2.69

Notes: Data are from the 2006 wave of the HRS, distributed via the HRS website and from the RAND
HRS file version L. The universe is all individuals randomly selected to submit biomarkers in 2006, including
blood pressure (BP), blood sugar (A1c), total and HDL or “good” cholesterol, and other measures, who were
also present in the 2008 wave. The second column shows respondents who submitted any biomarkers at all,
including the physical measures such as grip, breath, and balance. Respondents in the third column received
the High BP card if the minimum blood pressure out of three measures exceeded 160 mmHg systolic or 110
diastolic. Those in the fourth column had minimum blood pressure outside the recommended ranges of 120
systolic or 80 diastolic but did not receive the High BP card. Those in the fifth column had hemoglobin
A1c readings of 7.0 percent or higher. Respondents in the sixth column had total cholesterol readings of
200 mg/dL or higher. Those in the seventh column had HDL cholesterol readings below 40 mg/dL. For the
2006 prevalence of high BP, diabetes, and heart problems, I report the raw responses, in which respondents
can dispute reports from previous waves. New incidence is calculated using respondents’ current statements
about present and past conditions, which they may have updated. Average intensive measures of smoking
and drinking are calculated by assigning zeros to abstentions.



                                                     35
                     Table 2: Pairwise correlations between respondents’ and spouses’ screens out of normal range, 2006 HRS
                                                                               Resp.         Resp.                                           Spouse       Spouse
                                        Resp.         Resp.       Resp.         high           low     Spouse         Spouse    Spouse         high          low
                                     high BP       high BP,        high        total         HDL      high BP       high BP,      high         total        HDL
                                         card       no card        A1c          chol.         chol.       card       no card      A1c          chol.        chol.
          Resp. high BP card            1.000
          Resp. high BP, no card      −0.280***       1.000
          Resp. high A1c                0.058***      0.019      1.000
          Resp. high total chol.        0.013         0.016     −0.036***      1.000
          Resp. low HDL chol.         −0.002          0.011      0.044***     −0.120***     1.000
          Spouse high BP card           0.024         0.027*     0.016         0.010        0.011       1.000
          Spouse high BP, no card       0.026*        0.008      0.014        −0.004       −0.010      −0.259***       1.000
          Spouse high A1c               0.026         0.020      0.101***      0.026                    0.051***       0.022    1.000
36




                                                                                           −0.004
          Spouse high total chol.       0.003        −0.002      0.018         0.100***    −0.028       0.027*         0.003   −0.046***      1.000
          Spouse low HDL chol.          0.013        −0.008      0.003        −0.021        0.009       0.000          0.023    0.048***     −0.130***      1.000

     Notes: See notes to Table 1. All correlations are pairwise between respondents’ (“Resp.”) and, when present, spouses’ screens out of normal range, which are all
     binary variables. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 10% (*), 5% (**), and 1% (***) levels.
                                        Table 3: Marginal effects on probabilities of screening outside normal range

                                                                              Dichotomous independent variable is whether the respondent:
                                                Received high               Had high BP,                                         Had high                        Had low
                                                BP card and:                no card and:          Had high A1c and:           total chol. and:               HDL chol. and:
                                            Already had high BP         Already had high BP     Already had diabetes        Already was taking             Already was taking
                                            condition diagnosed?        condition diagnosed?     condition diagnosed?           chol. meds?                   chol. meds?
                                              Yes           No            Yes           No          Yes          No          Yes            No              Yes           No
      Male                                −0.011          0.006        −0.020         0.087***    0.012         0.001    −0.026**      −0.066***          0.036***      0.056***
                                           (0.006)       (0.004)       (0.014)       (0.012)     (0.007)       (0.003)     (0.010)      (0.015)          (0.007)       (0.008)
      African American                      0.035***      0.002         0.090***    −0.057***     0.023***      0.003       0.002      −0.034*          −0.023**      −0.006
                                           (0.007)       (0.005)       (0.018)       (0.017)     (0.008)       (0.003)     (0.013)      (0.020)          (0.010)       (0.009)
      Hispanic                              0.026**     −0.003          0.006       −0.016        0.033***      0.005       0.008      −0.017             0.018       −0.017
                                           (0.010)       (0.007)       (0.024)       (0.021)     (0.010)       (0.004)     (0.017)      (0.025)          (0.012)       (0.013)
      Married or coupled                  −0.002        −0.001          0.021       −0.015        0.006         0.005       0.004      −0.006             0.012         0.002
                                           (0.006)       (0.004)       (0.014)       (0.012)     (0.007)       (0.003)     (0.010)      (0.015)          (0.008)       (0.008)
      Does not own home                     0.008       −0.001          0.027       −0.022        0.025***    −0.001     −0.008        −0.007             0.004         0.006
                                           (0.007)       (0.004)       (0.017)       (0.015)     (0.008)       (0.004)     (0.012)      (0.018)          (0.009)       (0.009)
      Does not report health insurance      0.009         0.009        −0.030         0.054**     0.016         0.003    −0.022           0.070***      −0.032*         0.034***
                                           (0.013)       (0.007)       (0.029)       (0.023)     (0.013)       (0.005)     (0.020)      (0.027)          (0.019)       (0.011)
      Log weight                            0.045***      0.001***      0.298***    −0.094***     0.094***      0.003       0.043**    −0.118***          0.093***      0.054***
37




                                           (0.014)       (0.008)       (0.029)       (0.026)     (0.015)       (0.006)     (0.022)      (0.031)          (0.016)       (0.015)
      Smokes cigarettes now               −0.005          0.007        −0.047         0.056**   −0.020        −0.002        0.016      −0.009             0.005         0.015
                                           (0.014)       (0.007)       (0.029)       (0.024)     (0.016)       (0.006)     (0.022)      (0.030)          (0.014)       (0.013)
      Drinks alcohol now                    0.003         0.000        −0.001       −0.012      −0.017**      −0.005     −0.001           0.004         −0.001        −0.008
                                           (0.006)       (0.004)       (0.014)       (0.013)     (0.007)       (0.003)     (0.010)      (0.015)          (0.007)       (0.007)
      Drinking days per week                0.001       −0.000          0.003         0.003     −0.012***       0.000    −0.001           0.013***      −0.003        −0.005**
                                           (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.004)       (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.001)     (0.003)      (0.004)          (0.002)       (0.002)
      Phys activity freq 1-5, 1 = most, 5 = least:
      Vigorous                            −0.000          0.001         0.015***     −0.009**        0.009***     −0.001      0.006*      −0.008*         0.001         0.001
                                           (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.005)       (0.004)        (0.003)       (0.001)    (0.003)      (0.005)        (0.002)       (0.003)
      Moderate                              0.002       −0.002          0.004        −0.004          0.004*        0.001      0.006*      −0.001          0.005**       0.005*
                                           (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.002)       (0.001)    (0.004)      (0.005)        (0.002)       (0.003)
      Light                               −0.003        −0.002         −0.008        −0.008          0.006**       0.002*    −0.004       −0.016**        0.002         0.002
                                           (0.003)       (0.002)       (0.006)       (0.005)        (0.003)       (0.001)    (0.004)      (0.007)        (0.003)       (0.003)

      N                                       6,469         6,511         6,667         6,673         5,821        5,700       5,576         5,607         4,407         4,562
      Pseudo R2                               0.064         0.067          0.04         0.026         0.122        0.086       0.019          0.04         0.148         0.121
      Average of independent variable         0.045         0.015         0.34          0.211         0.056        0.008       0.101         0.301         0.039         0.044

     Notes: See notes to Table 1. Each column reports marginal effects and their standard errors from a separate probit regression of the dichotomous measure of whether
     the respondent scored out of normal range on a particular biomarker in 2006 interacted with the self-reported condition in 2006. For example, the first column shows
     the marginal effects of the covariates shown on the probability that a respondent received the high blood pressure (BP) card in 2006 and also had reported in 2006
     already having a preexisting diagnosis from a doctor of high blood pressure. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 10% (*), 5% (**), and 1% (***) levels. The
     universe in each column is the respondents who submitted the biomarker in 2006 for whom HRS analyzed and reported results for that biomarker, and who were also
     present in the 2008 wave. Additional covariates not shown, which were more often insignificant, are indicators for the 9 census regions of residence and for five-year
     age groups, years of education, an indicator of Medicaid coverage, and additional measures of smoking and drinking intensity. Weight is self-reported.
     Table 4: Intent-to-treat estimates of the average treatment effects of biomarker collection and notification, pooled HRS sample
     1998-2008
                                     Self-report     Sum of        Sum of                    Seen         Num. of         Reg.
                                        health      some diff.   some diff.                 doctor         doctor      take Rx                                 Heart
                                        status        on 0-5        on 0-3     CESD         in past       visits in     in past     High BP     Diabetes     problems
                                     1-5, 1=exc       ADLs         IADLs        score       2 years      past 2yrs      2 years     diagnosis   diagnosis    diagnosis
          Assigned to 2006             0.004        −0.011       −0.008       −0.046       −0.015***     −0.390        −0.012**       0.004     −0.001         0.004
          biomarker group             (0.014)        (0.013)      (0.008)     (0.028)      (0.004)       (0.304)        (0.005)      (0.006)     (0.004)      (0.005)
          On telephone interview     −0.006           0.006        0.011***    0.032**      0.002        −0.429***       0.002      −0.005*       0.000      −0.003*
                                      (0.006)        (0.006)      (0.004)     (0.013)      (0.002)       (0.143)       (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)
          N                            114,477       114,530       114,505    104,178       113,977       110,351      114,453       114,424     114,470      114,465
          Individuals                  26,479         26,480       26,475      24,873       26,340         26,265        26,464       26,476      26,479       26,479
          R2                            0.042          0.177        0.212       0.011        0.003          0.010         0.059       0.084       0.057        0.053
38




                                                                                                                                                                 Binge
                                                    Smokes                                                           Drinks       Drinking      Drinks per     drinking
                                                   cigarettes    Cigarettes   Vigorous     Moderate      Light       alcohol       days per      drinking       days in
                                   Log weight          now        per day      activity     activity    activity       now            week          day         past 90
        Assigned to 2006           −0.001          −0.003        −0.049        0.036         0.005       0.010       0.006          0.015         0.012         0.109
        biomarker group             (0.001)        (0.003)       (0.074)      (0.023)      (0.025)      (0.021)     (0.006)        (0.022)       (0.016)       (0.107)
        On telephone interview     −0.003***       −0.007***     −0.235***    −0.041***    −0.016        0.006     −0.009***      −0.039***     −0.027***    −0.264***
                                    (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.037)      (0.013)      (0.014)      (0.011)    (0.003)        (0.010)        (0.008)       (0.051)
        N                            112,915        114,205       114,136       55,591       55,608      55,613      114,531        114,410       114,283       114,027
        Individuals                  26,382          26,476        26,472       21,069       21,073      21,074       26,477         26,476       26,465        26,460
        R2                            0.044           0.017         0.016        0.004        0.010      0.024        0.012          0.005         0.004         0.001

     Notes: See notes to Table 1. Each column reports marginal effects and their standard errors from a separate linear fixed effects regression of the endogenous variable
     on the two variables shown, an indicator of whether the respondent was assigned to the 2006 biomarker group, and an indicator of whether the respondent was on
     telephone interview, as well as nursing home status, proxy interview status, five-year age groups, marital status, and wave fixed effects. Asterisks denote statistical
     significance at the 10% (*), 5% (**), and 1% (***) levels. The universe in each column is HRS respondents observed in the panel between 1998 and 2008. Weight is
     self-reported.
               Table 5: Average treatment effects of respondent’s abnormal biomarker notifications, pooled HRS sample 1998-2008

                                                                                      Biomarker notifications in 2006 as covariates:
                                              Received high               Had high BP,                                               Had high                     Had low
                                               BP card and:               no card and:            Had high A1c and:              total chol. and:             HDL chol. and:
                                           Already had high BP        Already had high BP        Already had diabetes          Already was taking           Already was taking
                                           condition diagnosed?       condition diagnosed?       condition diagnosed?              chol. meds?                 chol. meds?
      Endogenous variable in 2008:           Yes           No           Yes           No           Yes            No            Yes            No            Yes           No
      Diagnosis of high BP                 0.008         0.170***     0.004         0.059***   −0.015         −0.020        −0.020*        −0.008        −0.019        −0.013
                                          (0.014)       (0.050)      (0.007)       (0.011)      (0.016)        (0.041)       (0.011)        (0.008)       (0.020)       (0.022)
      Diagnosis of diabetes                0.017         0.001        0.018***    −0.023***      0.028**        0.428***    −0.002         −0.023***       0.049**       0.007
                                          (0.014)       (0.022)      (0.006)       (0.005)      (0.013)        (0.081)       (0.010)        (0.005)       (0.024)       (0.019)
      Diagnosis of heart problems          0.047**     −0.021         0.006       −0.008         0.013          0.004       −0.000         −0.015**        0.049**       0.019
                                          (0.019)       (0.022)      (0.007)       (0.008)      (0.017)        (0.034)       (0.011)        (0.007)       (0.024)       (0.019)
      Diagnosis of stroke                  0.046***      0.039        0.005       −0.006         0.017        −0.001        −0.009         −0.003          0.015       −0.016*
                                          (0.016)       (0.024)      (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.012)        (0.035)       (0.007)        (0.004)       (0.016)       (0.009)
      Takes BP medication                  0.028         0.161***     0.015*        0.039***     0.002          0.014       −0.025*        −0.012        −0.021        −0.034
                                          (0.020)       (0.044)      (0.008)       (0.010)      (0.019)        (0.055)       (0.013)        (0.009)       (0.022)       (0.022)
      Takes diabetes medication          −0.003        −0.001         0.016***    −0.018***      0.080***       0.397***    −0.007         −0.025***       0.053**       0.002
                                          (0.014)       (0.023)      (0.006)       (0.005)      (0.016)        (0.078)       (0.010)        (0.005)       (0.025)       (0.015)
      Takes cholesterol medication         0.056**       0.047        0.019**     −0.016       −0.005           0.148*      −0.172***        0.138***    −0.135***       0.150***
39




                                          (0.025)       (0.037)      (0.010)       (0.011)      (0.024)        (0.077)       (0.015)        (0.011)       (0.026)       (0.030)
      Self-reported health status        −0.028          0.014        0.017         0.057**      0.094**      −0.012        −0.057           0.014       −0.053        −0.002
                                          (0.044)       (0.091)      (0.019)       (0.023)      (0.046)        (0.123)       (0.035)        (0.021)       (0.065)       (0.055)
      Sum of some diff on 0-5 ADLs       −0.015        −0.123**      −0.039**     −0.050***      0.091*       −0.065        −0.043         −0.055***     −0.004          0.018
                                          (0.052)       (0.048)      (0.018)       (0.018)      (0.049)        (0.061)       (0.030)        (0.017)       (0.049)       (0.055)
      Sum of some diff on 0-3 IADLs        0.016       −0.024        −0.035***    −0.028**       0.074**      −0.118***       0.000        −0.020*       −0.075***     −0.022
                                          (0.034)       (0.042)      (0.010)       (0.011)      (0.030)        (0.038)       (0.017)        (0.011)       (0.027)       (0.027)
      Log weight                         −0.008          0.003       −0.001       −0.001       −0.002         −0.022**      −0.000           0.007***      0.012**     −0.004
                                          (0.006)       (0.007)      (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.004)        (0.011)       (0.004)        (0.002)       (0.005)       (0.006)
      Smokes cigarettes now              −0.023**        0.010        0.004       −0.014**     −0.002           0.019         0.009          0.015***    −0.001          0.008
                                          (0.011)       (0.015)      (0.004)       (0.006)      (0.011)        (0.012)       (0.008)        (0.005)       (0.018)       (0.015)
      Cigarettes per day                 −0.110        −0.690         0.114       −0.136         0.030          0.023         0.112          0.164       −0.566        −0.107
                                          (0.198)       (0.562)      (0.091)       (0.136)      (0.238)        (0.332)       (0.142)        (0.128)       (0.403)       (0.317)
      Drinks alcohol now                 −0.016        −0.046        −0.011         0.001      −0.027         −0.039          0.006          0.023**       0.040         0.027
                                          (0.019)       (0.030)      (0.008)       (0.010)      (0.018)        (0.044)       (0.014)        (0.009)       (0.029)       (0.027)
      Drinking days per week             −0.113        −0.056        −0.014         0.057        0.006        −0.306**      −0.059           0.014       −0.024        −0.020
                                          (0.078)       (0.118)      (0.031)       (0.038)      (0.044)        (0.150)       (0.057)        (0.036)       (0.094)       (0.083)
      Drinks per drinking day            −0.076        −0.021        −0.009       −0.006         0.041        −0.145          0.009          0.040*      −0.020          0.074
                                          (0.046)       (0.103)      (0.020)       (0.027)      (0.043)        (0.174)       (0.038)        (0.023)       (0.060)       (0.091)
      Binge drinking days in past 90     −0.523*       −0.336         0.037       −0.044         0.256        −1.815        −0.447*        −0.062        −0.386        −0.301
                                          (0.273)       (0.945)      (0.169)       (0.162)      (0.157)        (1.191)       (0.254)        (0.157)       (0.275)       (0.402)
      Phys activity freq 1-5, 1 = most, 5 = least:
      Vigorous                             0.059       −0.009         0.008        −0.024         0.003         0.311*       −0.031         0.025          0.075         0.011
                                          (0.067)       (0.128)      (0.029)       (0.037)       (0.063)       (0.183)       (0.050)       (0.034)        (0.077)       (0.086)
      Moderate                             0.088       −0.134         0.020        −0.004        −0.081        −0.411*        0.109**       0.004          0.007       −0.110
                                          (0.082)       (0.130)      (0.031)       (0.036)       (0.072)       (0.219)       (0.055)       (0.033)        (0.101)       (0.096)
      Light                                0.219***      0.011       −0.014        −0.001         0.030        −0.372**       0.065        −0.018          0.151*      −0.082
                                          (0.067)       (0.111)      (0.026)       (0.031)       (0.068)       (0.185)       (0.047)       (0.028)        (0.085)       (0.087)

     Notes: See notes to Table 1. Each row reports marginal effects and their standard errors from a separate linear fixed effects regression of the endogenous variable
     shown in the first column on the covariates shown along the row, mode of interview, nursing home status, proxy interview status, five-year age groups, marital status,
     and wave fixed effects. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 10% (*), 5% (**), and 1% (***) levels. The universe in each column is HRS respondents observed
     in the panel between 1998 and 2008. Weight is self-reported.
     Table 6: Falsification tests: Effects of respondent’s abnormal biomarker notifications in 2006 on contemporaneous outcomes in 2006,
     pooled HRS sample 1998-2008

                                                                                      Biomarker notifications in 2006 as covariates:
                                              Received high               Had high BP,                                               Had high                     Had low
                                               BP card and:               no card and:            Had high A1c and:              total chol. and:             HDL chol. and:
                                           Already had high BP        Already had high BP        Already had diabetes          Already was taking           Already was taking
                                           condition diagnosed?       condition diagnosed?       condition diagnosed?              chol. meds?                 chol. meds?
      Endogenous variable in 2006:           Yes           No           Yes           No           Yes            No            Yes            No            Yes           No
      Diagnosis of high BP                 0.057***    −0.172***      0.113***    −0.151***    −0.015         −0.056        −0.016           0.014*      −0.029        −0.000
                                          (0.015)       (0.018)      (0.006)       (0.005)      (0.017)        (0.037)       (0.011)        (0.008)       (0.020)       (0.020)
      Diagnosis of diabetes                0.017       −0.033***      0.015***    −0.021***      0.095***     −0.177***       0.023*       −0.016***       0.012         0.012
                                          (0.013)       (0.012)      (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.016)        (0.033)       (0.012)        (0.005)       (0.020)       (0.017)
      Diagnosis of heart problems          0.015       −0.014         0.007       −0.031***      0.007        −0.025**      −0.018*        −0.029***       0.060**       0.000
                                          (0.015)       (0.018)      (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.018)        (0.012)       (0.011)        (0.006)       (0.026)       (0.014)
      Diagnosis of stroke                  0.018       −0.031***      0.002       −0.009***    −0.002         −0.014        −0.009         −0.011***       0.011         0.000
                                          (0.012)       (0.006)      (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.009)        (0.027)       (0.006)        (0.004)       (0.015)       (0.009)
      Takes BP medication                  0.022       −0.134***      0.098***    −0.130***    −0.018         −0.091***     −0.003         −0.003        −0.034          0.000
                                          (0.019)       (0.011)      (0.007)       (0.005)      (0.020)        (0.031)       (0.014)        (0.009)       (0.025)       (0.020)
      Takes diabetes medication            0.003       −0.038***      0.006       −0.017***      0.101***     −0.134***       0.023*       −0.023***       0.024       −0.014
                                          (0.014)       (0.013)      (0.004)       (0.004)      (0.019)        (0.026)       (0.012)        (0.004)       (0.021)       (0.014)
40




      Takes cholesterol medication       −0.015        −0.003         0.005         0.019**    −0.019         −0.191**        0.159***     −0.126***       0.141***    −0.116***
                                          (0.022)       (0.039)      (0.009)       (0.009)      (0.028)        (0.083)       (0.018)        (0.013)       (0.029)       (0.035)
      Self-reported health status          0.002       −0.217***     −0.004       −0.017       −0.059           0.076         0.036        −0.060***       0.008       −0.061
                                          (0.039)       (0.064)      (0.015)       (0.018)      (0.045)        (0.101)       (0.035)        (0.023)       (0.059)       (0.059)
      Sum of some diff on 0-5 ADLs       −0.012        −0.117**      −0.035***    −0.049***      0.015          0.029       −0.011         −0.015          0.073         0.040
                                          (0.030)       (0.048)      (0.012)       (0.012)      (0.040)        (0.080)       (0.029)        (0.015)       (0.055)       (0.048)
      Sum of some diff on 0-3 IADLs      −0.021        −0.058*       −0.023***    −0.026***      0.041        −0.009        −0.034***        0.003         0.036       −0.020
                                          (0.020)       (0.030)      (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.027)        (0.066)       (0.013)        (0.010)       (0.033)       (0.024)
      Log weight                           0.006         0.007        0.007***      0.007***     0.003          0.006         0.007**        0.007***      0.014**       0.000
                                          (0.004)       (0.006)      (0.001)       (0.002)      (0.005)        (0.019)       (0.003)        (0.002)       (0.006)       (0.005)
      Smokes cigarettes now                0.004         0.022        0.006*        0.005        0.007          0.033       −0.001           0.008*        0.014       −0.012
                                          (0.008)       (0.015)      (0.003)       (0.004)      (0.012)        (0.029)       (0.008)        (0.005)       (0.013)       (0.018)
      Cigarettes per day                   0.036         0.570        0.091       −0.191*        0.202          0.370         0.203          0.433***      0.313         0.445
                                          (0.216)       (0.387)      (0.083)       (0.110)      (0.286)        (0.577)       (0.165)        (0.165)       (0.267)       (0.566)
      Drinks alcohol now                 −0.011        −0.002         0.004       −0.006       −0.002         −0.022          0.021        −0.008        −0.024        −0.025
                                          (0.017)       (0.024)      (0.007)       (0.008)      (0.021)        (0.036)       (0.015)        (0.010)       (0.031)       (0.028)
      Drinking days per week               0.017         0.046       −0.014         0.025      −0.137**         0.193         0.061          0.071*      −0.089        −0.166**
                                          (0.080)       (0.113)      (0.027)       (0.033)      (0.063)        (0.186)       (0.065)        (0.042)       (0.085)       (0.069)
      Drinks per drinking day              0.079         0.045       −0.000         0.035      −0.099*          0.329         0.049          0.015       −0.022        −0.103
                                          (0.055)       (0.076)      (0.018)       (0.023)      (0.053)        (0.239)       (0.044)        (0.028)       (0.054)       (0.085)
      Binge drinking days in past 90     −0.503        −0.247         0.115         0.133      −0.318           1.795         0.335        −0.323*       −0.363*       −0.048
                                          (0.337)       (0.780)      (0.151)       (0.159)      (0.254)        (1.860)       (0.352)        (0.180)       (0.197)       (0.297)
      Phys activity freq 1-5, 1 = most, 5 = least:
      Vigorous                           −0.019        −0.007         0.014         0.012        −0.018          0.037        0.002         0.029        −0.121          0.014
                                          (0.067)       (0.125)      (0.027)       (0.032)       (0.080)        (0.227)      (0.059)       (0.039)        (0.091)       (0.092)
      Moderate                           −0.043        −0.017        −0.052**      −0.039        −0.015          0.164       −0.004         0.053        −0.026        −0.015
                                          (0.070)       (0.100)      (0.026)       (0.029)       (0.080)        (0.215)      (0.065)       (0.036)        (0.096)       (0.103)
      Light                              −0.011        −0.054        −0.056**      −0.019         0.061          0.272*      −0.043        −0.008        −0.006          0.116
                                          (0.060)       (0.082)      (0.022)       (0.025)       (0.076)        (0.147)      (0.049)       (0.030)        (0.090)       (0.080)

     Notes: See notes to Table 1. Each row reports marginal effects and their standard errors from a separate linear fixed effects regression of the endogenous variable
     shown in the first column on the covariates shown along the row, mode of interview, nursing home status, proxy interview status, five-year age groups, marital status,
     and wave fixed effects. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 10% (*), 5% (**), and 1% (***) levels. The universe in each column is HRS respondents observed
     in the panel between 1998 and 2008. Weight is self-reported.
     Table 7: Average treatment effects of spouse’s abnormal biomarker notifications on respondent’s outcomes, pooled HRS sample
     1998-2008
                                                                  Spouse’s biomarker notifications in 2006 as covariates of respondent’s outcomes:
                                         Spouse received high        Spouse had high BP,                Spouse                Spouse had high            Spouse had low
                                             BP card and:                 no card and:            had high A1c and:            total chol. and:          HDL chol. and:
                                          Spouse already had          Spouse already had         Spouse already had          Spouse already was       Spouse already was
      Respondent’s                        high BP condition?          high BP condition?         diabetes condition?         taking chol. meds?        taking chol. meds?
      endogenous variable in 2008:          Yes          No            Yes           No           Yes           No            Yes           No          Yes          No
      Diagnosis of high BP              −0.003        −0.030        −0.015*      −0.029***      −0.032*     −0.052         −0.001          0.007       0.003     −0.008
                                         (0.025)       (0.031)       (0.009)      (0.010)       (0.019)      (0.039)        (0.015)       (0.010)     (0.022)     (0.022)
      Diagnosis of diabetes             −0.030*         0.010       −0.006         0.001         0.019      −0.007         −0.008        −0.015**    −0.016        0.023
                                         (0.017)       (0.029)       (0.007)      (0.008)       (0.019)      (0.034)        (0.011)       (0.008)     (0.015)     (0.020)
      Diagnosis of heart problems         0.009         0.015         0.006      −0.007          0.027      −0.062           0.027*        0.014       0.009     −0.043***
                                         (0.021)       (0.030)       (0.009)      (0.009)       (0.018)      (0.038)        (0.015)       (0.009)     (0.023)     (0.015)
      Diagnosis of stroke                 0.007         0.018       −0.004       −0.003          0.037**    −0.023           0.010       −0.003      −0.000        0.019
                                         (0.017)       (0.020)       (0.005)      (0.006)       (0.016)      (0.023)        (0.009)       (0.005)     (0.018)     (0.016)
      Takes BP medication                 0.003       −0.020        −0.015       −0.023**       −0.026        0.038        −0.009        −0.004        0.019       0.004
                                         (0.027)       (0.033)       (0.010)      (0.011)       (0.022)      (0.054)        (0.016)       (0.011)     (0.025)     (0.025)
      Takes diabetes medication         −0.013          0.006       −0.000         0.003         0.008        0.019        −0.004        −0.009        0.000       0.022
                                         (0.015)       (0.032)       (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.018)      (0.042)        (0.010)       (0.007)     (0.016)     (0.021)
      Takes cholesterol medication        0.054*        0.070         0.005      −0.003          0.023      −0.021         −0.003        −0.008        0.018     −0.019
41




                                         (0.032)      (0.046)        (0.012)      (0.013)       (0.025)      (0.064)        (0.019)       (0.012)     (0.037)     (0.027)
      Self-reported health status         0.002         0.039         0.014        0.011        −0.039        0.108          0.015         0.028       0.050     −0.066
                                         (0.062)      (0.091)        (0.025)      (0.028)       (0.055)      (0.142)        (0.040)       (0.027)     (0.062)     (0.070)
      Sum of some diff on 0-5 ADLs      −0.031          0.153         0.001      −0.009          0.060        0.013          0.015         0.043*    −0.032        0.019
                                         (0.047)      (0.110)        (0.020)      (0.021)       (0.052)      (0.138)        (0.029)       (0.022)     (0.053)     (0.056)
      Sum of some diff on 0-3 IADLs     −0.030          0.084         0.005        0.006         0.064*     −0.129***        0.010         0.027**     0.016       0.047
                                         (0.024)      (0.060)        (0.013)      (0.014)       (0.034)      (0.034)        (0.020)       (0.014)     (0.038)     (0.041)
      Log weight                        −0.002          0.003       −0.000         0.001        −0.015**    −0.006           0.010**     −0.003        0.008     −0.002
                                         (0.006)      (0.007)        (0.002)      (0.003)       (0.006)      (0.009)        (0.004)       (0.003)     (0.006)     (0.005)
      Smokes cigarettes now             −0.024          0.007       −0.001       −0.006          0.000      −0.026           0.007         0.004     −0.033*       0.003
                                         (0.015)      (0.010)        (0.005)      (0.007)       (0.010)      (0.035)        (0.009)       (0.005)     (0.018)     (0.012)
      Cigarettes per day                −0.331        −0.944        −0.015       −0.210          0.320        0.194          0.050       −0.060      −0.592*       0.171
                                         (0.292)      (0.654)        (0.136)      (0.151)       (0.205)      (0.346)        (0.176)       (0.146)     (0.334)     (0.301)
      Drinks alcohol now                  0.009       −0.030          0.002        0.011        −0.026      −0.030           0.031*        0.018       0.032       0.037
                                         (0.027)      (0.053)        (0.010)      (0.012)       (0.025)      (0.044)        (0.018)       (0.011)     (0.026)     (0.029)
      Drinking days per week            −0.135        −0.052        −0.030         0.093*       −0.019        0.166          0.037       −0.001      −0.070      −0.003
                                         (0.134)      (0.137)        (0.042)      (0.050)       (0.082)      (0.164)        (0.074)       (0.050)     (0.124)     (0.092)
      Drinks per drinking day           −0.107        −0.172          0.040        0.054        −0.097        0.001          0.065       −0.025      −0.039        0.047
                                         (0.069)      (0.133)        (0.027)      (0.033)       (0.090)      (0.113)        (0.050)       (0.035)     (0.049)     (0.056)
      Binge drinking days in past 90    −0.962***     −0.454        −0.129       −0.769***       0.132        1.553        −0.338          0.338       0.157       0.314**
                                         (0.355)      (0.303)        (0.197)      (0.195)       (0.419)      (2.970)        (0.361)       (0.285)     (0.179)     (0.144)
      Phys activity freq 1−5, 1 = most, 5 = least:
      Vigorous                            0.122       −0.246           0.007      0.006        −0.059       −0.049        −0.133**      0.036        −0.167*    −0.056
                                         (0.100)      (0.176)         (0.038)    (0.045)       (0.088)      (0.187)       (0.065)      (0.043)        (0.092)    (0.104)
      Moderate                            0.059         0.329**        0.094**    0.058         0.090       −0.023        −0.076        0.028          0.048    −0.037
                                         (0.096)      (0.161)         (0.038)    (0.045)       (0.086)      (0.189)       (0.067)      (0.041)        (0.099)    (0.096)
      Light                               0.024         0.191          0.047     −0.019        −0.051       −0.425***      0.128**      0.015        −0.017     −0.057
                                         (0.088)      (0.146)         (0.034)    (0.037)       (0.074)      (0.136)       (0.060)      (0.037)        (0.079)    (0.086)

     Notes: See notes to Table 1. Each row reports marginal effects and their standard errors from a separate linear fixed effects regression of the endogenous variable
     shown in the first column on the covariates shown along the row, mode of interview, nursing home status, proxy interview status, five-year age groups, marital status,
     and wave fixed effects. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 10% (*), 5% (**), and 1% (***) levels. The universe in each column is HRS respondents observed
     in the panel between 1998 and 2008. Weight is self-reported.
    Table 8: Trends in objective weight between 2006 and 2010 by A1c reading in 2006
                                                  Had high     Had normal
                                                 A1c and no    A1c and no
                     Had high     Had normal       diabetes      diabetes    Diff in    Diff in
                        A1c           A1c         condition     condition     diffs      diffs
                        (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)      (1)–(2)    (3)–(4)
      ∆ log weight   −0.028***    −0.012***      −0.029***     −0.011***     −0.016     −0.017
                     (0.011)       (0.002)        (0.012)       (0.002)      (0.011)    (0.012)

      N                  233         4,234            33          3,623

Notes: Data are from the 2006 and 2010 waves of the HRS. Each element in the first four columns is the
change between 2006 and 2010 in the log objective weight for the group indicated. The last two columns
show difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of a high A1c screen above 7.0 percent in 2006.




                                                 42
