                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     OPTIMAL CONSUMPTION AND SAVINGS WITH STOCHASTIC INCOME AND
                         RECURSIVE UTILITY

                                           Chong Wang
                                           Neng Wang
                                          Jinqiang Yang

                                       Working Paper 19319
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19319


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2013




We thank Cristina De Nardi, Lars Peter Hansen, Dirk Krueger, Ricardo Lagos, Tom Sargent, Stijn
Van Nieuwerburgh, Suresh Sundaresan, Amir Yaron, Steve Zeldes, and two anonymous referees for
helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Chong Wang, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Consumption and Savings with Stochastic Income and Recursive Utility
Chong Wang, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 19319
August 2013, Revised August 2016
JEL No. E21

                                         ABSTRACT

We develop a tractable incomplete-markets model with an earnings process Y subject to
permanent shocks and borrowing constraints. Financial frictions cause the marginal (certainty
equivalent) value of wealth W to be greater than unity and decrease with liquidity w = W/Y .
Additionally, financial frictions cause consumption to decrease with this endogenously
determined marginal value of liquidity. Risk aversion and the elasticity of inter-temporal
substitution play very different roles on consumption and the dispersion of w. Permanent earnings
shocks, especially large discrete stochastic jumps, make consumption smoothing quantitatively
difficult to achieve. Borrowing constraints and permanent discrete jump shocks can generate
empirically plausible values for marginal propensities to consume in the range of 0.2 to 0.6.


Chong Wang                                                Jinqiang Yang
Naval Postgraduate School                                 Shanghai University of Finance
Graduate School of Business and Public Policy             and Economics
1 University Circle                                       Guoding Rd. 777
Monterey, CA 93943                                        Shanghai, 200433
cwang@nps.edu                                             China
                                                          huda518@gmail.com
Neng Wang
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 812
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
nw2128@columbia.edu
1         Introduction
A fundamental question in economics is how an agent dynamically chooses consumption when
markets offer limited opportunities for her to smooth consumption and manage earnings risk.
Since Friedman’s permanent-income hypothesis and Modigliani’s life-cycle hypothesis devel-
oped in 1950s, economists have developed a large body of research on income-fluctuation,
self-insurance, and optimal savings problems.1
        We contribute to this literature by (1) generalizing standard buffer-stock savings models
(e.g., Deaton, 1991, and Carroll, 1997) along preferences and earnings specifications, (2)
deriving a tractable consumption rule via continuous-time dynamic programming, which
sharpens the underlying economic mechanism and develops new economic intuition, and (3)
generating new quantitative implications and empirical predictions consistent with data.

Model Generalization and New Results. For preferences, we choose the non-expected
homothetic utility developed by Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil (1990) to separate risk
aversion γ from the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS) ψ. Why do we want to
separate these two preference parameters? Conceptually speaking, a priori, there is no the-
oretical reason to impose ψ = 1/γ, as implied in CRRA-utility-based models as these two
parameters reflect different economics. Additionally, this generalization is well motivated by
ample (though not yet conclusive) evidence that calls for the separation of these two parame-
ters. For example, Bansal and Yaron (2004) and the follow-up long-run-risk finance literature
critically rely on high risk aversion and high EIS (greater than one) to match asset-pricing
moments.2 Additionally, empirical estimates of the EIS reflect significant heterogeneity.3
        Moreover, we show that separating risk aversion from the EIS generates new economic
insights. We find that consumption decreases with risk aversion at all levels of wealth. The
    1
     Early work includes Leland (1968), Levhari and Srinivasan (1969), Sandmo (1970), Dreze and Modigliani
(1972), and Schechtman (1976), among others. Hall (1978) formalizes Friedman’s permanent-income hy-
pothesis via martingale (random-walk) consumption in a dynamic programming framework. Zeldes (1989),
Caballero (1990, 1991), Deaton (1991, 1992), and Carroll (1997) study optimal consumption using discrete-
time dynamic programming method. For additional related work, see Chamberlain and Wilson (2000),
Gourinchas and Parker (2002), Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2004), Aguiar and Hurst (2005), Guvenen
(2006, 2007), Fernández-Villaverde and Krueger (2007), and Kaplan and Violante (2010), among others.
   2
     Tallarini (2000) is an early application of Epstien-Zin utility to asset pricing with production. Also
for related applications of risk-sensitive preferences to asset pricing, see Hansen, Sargent, and Tallarini
(1999). In an equilibrium model with Epstein-Zin utility, Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008) show that
the restrictions on the joint distribution of financial wealth returns, human wealth returns, and consumption
depends only on the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, not on the coefficient of risk aversion.
   3
     For example, see Vissing-Jorgensen (2002), Attanasio, Banks, and Tanner (2002), and Guvenen (2006).


                                                     1
higher risk aversion, the stronger precautionary savings demand and the lower consumption.
In contrast, the effect of the EIS on consumption is ambiguous. The higher the EIS, the more
flexible consumption responds to changes in the interest rate. When W is low, the agent
with a higher EIS consumes less as she is more willing to reduce her current consumption
for higher consumption in the future, ceteris paribus. When W is high, the higher the EIS
the more she is more willing to substitute her consumption over time. Therefore, the effects
of the EIS on consumption at the two ends of wealth W are opposite. By separating risk
aversion from the EIS, we identify different effects of these two key parameters.
      For earnings shocks, we find that permanent shocks make consumption smoothing quan-
titatively much more difficult. Additionally, discrete large downward earnings shocks matter
much more than small continuous diffusive shocks. Guvenen et al. (2015) show that most
individuals experience small earnings shocks, but a small and non-negligible experience very
large shocks. Large earnings losses are often due to unemployment and job displacement.4
By incorporating jumps into diffusion models, we well capture these empirical features for
the earnings process Y and also generate empirically plausible predictions for consumption.
With jumps, annual marginal propensities to consume (MPCs) typically range from 0.2 to
0.6, which are in line with empirical estimates in Parker (1999) and Souleles (1999). In
contrast, MPCs implied by standard buffer-stock models typically range from 0.04 to 0.07.
      Why do jumps (even when they rarely occur and are of moderate sizes) generate much
higher MPCs than diffusion models? This is because jump risk is much harder to manage
than continuous diffusive shocks and hence consumption has to adjust discretely in response
under incomplete markets causing the MPC to be large especially when liquidity is low.
Additionally, jump risks can potentially increase wealth dispersion as jump risks remain
significant for the wealthy and hence the wealthy’s savings motives remain strong. We
can also incorporate transitory shocks into our tractable framework. Next, we discuss how
tractability helps us generate new economic insights.

Tractability and Intuition. We measure the agent’s welfare via her certainty equivalent
wealth P (W, Y ), which is the minimal amount of wealth that she requires in order for her to
permanently giving up her status quo (with wealth W , labor income process under incomplete
markets and subject to borrowing constraints) and living with no labor income thereafter.
  4
   For example, Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan (1993) and Low, Meghir, and Pistaferri (2010) show that
wages may fall dramatically at job displacement.


                                                  2
   The model’s homogeneity property implies that the effective state variable is w = W/Y ,
the liquidity ratio between wealth W and income Y . The scaled certainty equivalent wealth
p(w) = P (W, Y )/Y solves a nonlinear ordinary differential equation (ODE).
   Our model’s tractability allows us to conveniently demonstrate the following important
implications of financial frictions (incomplete markets and/or borrowing constraints): 1)
p(w) is increasing and bounded from the above by the linear CM benchmark p∗ (w); 2) the
marginal value of liquidity p0 (w) decreases with w and approaches unity, the CM benchmark
value, as w → ∞; 3) the consumption-income ratio c(w) is increasing and bounded from the
above by the classic Ramsey-Friedman’s linear consumption rule; 4) the MPC c0 (w) decreases
with w and approaches the CM MPC, m∗ , the CM benchmark value, as w → ∞.
   These results are consistent with our intuition, as financial frictions cause the agent to
value earnings less and to consume less than under the CM benchmark. Additionally, as
liquidity w increases, self insurance becomes more effective hence both p0 (w) and c0 (w) should
intuitively decrease and approach their respective CM benchmarks as w → ∞. Moreover,
under CM, risk aversion has no role on consumption as a risk-averse agent optimally chooses
to bear no risk if not being compensated by risk premium, risk aversion has very important
effects on consumption under incomplete markets and/or borrowing constraints.
   The tight connection between analytical results and key features of the model makes
economic intuition transparent: (1) the left-end boundary condition c(0) ≤ 1 maps to the
economics of the borrowing constraint; (2) the right-end boundary describes the CM solution
as the limit of our self-insurance model’s solution; and (3) the deviations of solutions for p(w)
and c(w) from their respective CM benchmark levels reflect the impact of financial frictions.
Next, we discuss our model’s quantitative implications and empirical predictions.

Quantitative Implications and Empirical Predictions. While self insurance against
transitory shocks is generally effective, we find that self insurance against permanent shocks
is much less effective and a large savings buffer is generally necessary to manage permanent
shocks. For example, with standard coefficient of relative risk aversion, e.g., γ = 3, the
steady-state savings target is around six times of her earnings. Additionally, savings are
sensitive to risk aversion. For example, by increasing γ from three to six, steady-state
savings increases by about three folds from six times of her earnings to almost eighteen
times.
   Empirically, Parker (1999) and Souleles (1999) document that the MPCs range from 0.2

                                               3
to 0.6. We find that it is generally difficult to generate MPCs in this range if we only rely
on incomplete-markets-induced precautionary savings demand. We show that the MPCs for
borrowing-constrained agents tends to be much higher at low levels of w. The intuition is
as follows. An agent whose savings demand is sufficiently large optimally avoids binding
borrowing constraints and hence her MPC out of wealth cannot be high as the additional
value of liquidity for an unconstrained agent cannot be that high as she could have chosen
to increase her consumption from current income.
        Finally, we generate predictions that are consistent with empirical findings, e.g., excess
sensitivity (Flavin, 1981) and excess smoothness (Campbell and Deaton, 1989). We show
analytically how the drift and volatility of the endogenous consumption process naturally
arise in a model with buffer-stock savings demand giving rise to “excess sensitivity” and
“excess smoothness” documented in the empirical consumption literature.


2         Model
We consider a continuous-time setting where an infinitely-lived agent receives an exogenously
given perpetual stream of stochastic earnings. The agent saves via a risk-free asset that pays
interest at a constant rate r > 0. There exist no other traded financial assets. Additionally,
the agent is not allowed to borrow implying that wealth is non-negative at all times.

Labor-income/earnings process. A commonly used labor-income process involves both
permanent and transitory shocks that our framework is able to fully capture.5 For expo-
sitional convenience, in our baseline model, we specify Y as one with permanent diffusion
shocks only and leave the generalization to allow for large jump shocks to Section ?? and
the generalization to allow for both permanent and transitory shocks to Appendix ??.
        Consider the following widely used labor-income process specification:

                                   dYt = µYt dt + σYt dBt , Y0 > 0 ,                               (1)

where B is a standard Brownian motion, µ is the expected income growth rate, and σ
measures income growth volatility. The labor-income process (??) implies that the growth
rate of income, dYt /Yt , is independently, and identically distributed (i.i.d.)
    5
    See MaCurdy (1982), Abowd and Card (1989), and Meghir and Pistaferri (2004), for example. Given
our focus, we also ignore life-cycle variations and various fixed effects such as education and gender.


                                                  4
   Empirical labor-income processes are often specified in terms of logarithmic income ln Y .
We may also write the dynamics for logarithmic income, ln Y as follows by using Ito’s formula:

                                    d ln Yt = α dt + σdBt ,                                (2)

where the expected change of the logarithmic income, i.e., the drift in (??), equals
                                                    σ2
                                         α=µ−          .                                   (3)
                                                    2
Here, σ 2 /2 is the Jensen’s inequality correction term. Equation (??) is an arithmetic Brow-
nian motion which implies the following discrete-time specification:

                                 ln Yt+1 − ln Yt = α + σt+1 ,                             (4)

where the time-t conditional distribution of t+1 is the standard normal.
   In our baseline model, ln Y is a unit-root process and its first difference is independently
and normally distributed with mean α and volatility σ. That is, our labor-income model
(??) is the same as the simplest form among commonly used empirical specifications.
   Note that due to the Jensen’s inequality, the growth rate of income in logarithm, α, can
differ significantly from µ, the growth rate of labor income Y in levels. For example, at the
annual frequency, with µ = 1.5% and σ = 10%, we have α = 1%, which is one third lower
than the growth rate µ = 1.5% due to the Jensen’s term, σ 2 /2 = 0.5%. While income growth
shocks are i.i.d., shocks are permanent in levels of Y .

Non-expected recursive utility. The widely-used standard preference in the consump-
tion/savings literature is the expected utility with constant relative risk aversion (CRRA).
While this utility has the homogeneity property, it unfortunately ties the elasticity of in-
tertemporal substitution (EIS) to the inverse of the coefficient of relative risk aversion.
Conceptually, risk aversion and the EIS are fundamentally different and have very differ-
ent effects on consumption-savings decisions, as we will show. By using the non-expected
recursive utility developed by Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil (1990), who build on the
work by Kreps and Porteous (1978), we are able to disentangle the effect of risk aversion
from that of EIS. Specifically, we use the continuous-time formulation of this non-expected
utility developed by Duffie and Epstein (1992a), and write the recursive utility process V as,
                                        Z ∞               
                                Vt = Et      f (Cu , Vu )du ,                              (5)
                                            t


                                                5
   where f (C, V ) is known as the normalized aggregator for consumption C and utility V .
   Duffie and Epstein (1992a) show that f (C, V ) for the Epstein-Zin utility is given by
                                                        −1
                                             ρ     C 1−ψ − ((1 − γ)V )θ
                              f (C, V ) =                               ,                          (6)
                                          1 − ψ −1     ((1 − γ)V )θ−1

   and
                                                1 − ψ −1
                                           θ=            .                                         (7)
                                                 1−γ
   Here, ψ is the EIS, γ is the coefficient of relative risk aversion, and ρ is the subjective discount
   rate. The widely used time-additive separable CRRA utility is a special case of the recursive
   utility where the coefficient of relative risk aversion γ equals the inverse of the EIS, γ = ψ −1
   implying θ = 1. For the expected utility special case, we thus have f (C, V ) = U (C) − ρV ,
   which is additively separable in C and V , with U (C) = ρC 1−γ /(1 − γ). For the general
   specification of the recursive utility, θ 6= 1 and f (C, V ) is non-separable in C and V .

   Wealth dynamics and borrowing constraints. The agent’s wealth W evolves as:

                                dWt = (rWt + Yt − Ct )dt,     t ≥ 0.                               (8)

   The agent cannot borrow against her future incomes, i.e. wealth is non-negative at all t,

                                                Wt ≥ 0 ,                                           (9)

   which implies Ct ≤ Yt when Wt = 0. Therefore, we have two mutually exclusive cases:

Type A: The agent’s savings motive is sufficiently strong such that (??) never binds;

Type B: The agent may run out of savings at stochastic time τ and then will choose Cτ = Yτ
         thereafter permanently living from paycheck to paycheck. For this case, whenever
         Wt > 0, the agent is unconstrained in the short term. But the fact that she may be
         constrained in the future influences her current decisions.

      In summary, the agent maximizes the non-expected recursive utility given in (??)-(??)
   subject to the labor-income process (??), the wealth accumulation process (??), and the
   borrowing constraint (??). Before analyzing the incomplete-markets model, we first present
   the complete-markets (CM) solution and introduce the certainty-equivalence-based PIH.


                                                    6
3         CM and PIH
We first develop the CM benchmark and then compare it with Friedman’s PIH.

3.1        CM Solution
To make the model dynamically complete, we introduce a traded asset that is perfectly
correlated with earnings shocks. By applying the standard dynamic replicating portfolio
argument as in Black and Scholes (1973), we know that CM can be achieved by dynamically
and frictionlessly trading the risk-free asset and the newly introduced financial asset. As
all labor income risks are assumed to be idiosyncratic in self-insurance models, the newly
introduced financial asset must demand no risk premium. Appendix ?? provides details.
        Next, following Friedman (1957) and Hall (1978), we define “human” wealth, denoted by
H, as the expected present value of labor incomes, discounted at the interest rate r:
                                       Z ∞                
                                              −r(u−t)
                              Ht = Et        e        Yu du .                                            (10)
                                                  t

With CM, (??) gives the market value of labor income because labor income risk is fully
diversifiable earning no risk premium and thus can be discounted at the risk-free rate.6
        To ensure that human wealth H is finite, which is necessary for convergence under CM,
we assume that the expected income growth rate µ is lower than the interest rate r, in that

                                          Condition 1 : r > µ .                                          (11)

Then human wealth H is thus proportional to contemporaneous income, Ht = hYt , where
                                                       1
                                                h=        .                                              (12)
                                                      r−µ
        Our models (both CM and incomplete-markets settings) have the homogeneity property
(in wealth W and income Y ).7 We use the lower case to denote the corresponding variable
in the upper case scaled by contemporaneous earnings Y . For example, wt = Wt /Yt and
ct = Ct /Yt denote the wealth-income ratio and the consumption-income ratio, respectively.
        To ensure that the problem is well posed under CM, we require the following:

                                    Condition 2 : ρ > (1 − ψ −1 ) r .                                    (13)
    6
     Obviously, in general under incomplete markets, with borrowing constraints, or other frictions, H defined
in (??) does not provide true economic valuation of labor incomes.
   7
     Deaton (1991) and Carroll (1997) show the homogeneity property for the CRRA utility case and numer-
ically solves for the optimal consumption rule in the discrete-time setting.

                                                      7
The subjective discount rate ρ needs to be sufficiently large so that the MPC is sufficiently
large ensuring that the optimization problem is well defined. We next summarize the main
results for our CM benchmark.

Proposition 1 Under Condition 1 and Condition 2 given by (??) and (??) that ensure
convergence, the agent’s value function under CM, denoted by V ∗ (W, Y ), is given by

                                                (bP ∗ (W, Y ))1−γ
                                V ∗ (W, Y ) =                     ,                      (14)
                                                      1−γ
where the coefficient b is given by
                                                           1
                                                          1−ψ
                                      r + ψ(ρ − r)
                                  b=ρ                            ,                       (15)
                                           ρ

and the “total” wealth P ∗ (W, Y ) = W + H = p∗ (w)Y with
                                                            1
                                p∗ (w) = w + h = w +           .                         (16)
                                                           r−µ

   The optimal consumption-income ratio ct = Ct /Yt = c(wt ) is given by

                            c∗ (w) = m∗ p∗ (w) = m∗ (w + h) ,                            (17)

and m∗ is the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) under CM and is given by

                                      m∗ = r + ψ (ρ − r) .                               (18)

For the case with ψ = 1, we have b = ρe(r−ρ)/ρ and c∗ (w) = ρ (w + h).

   Next, we discuss key intuition for the CM solution.

3.2    Intuition
First, the “total” wealth P ∗ = W + H measures the agent’s economic value. Under CM with
no frictions, total wealth P ∗ is simply additive in wealth W and “human” wealth H.
   Second, consumption follows the linear Ramsey rule given by (??). The agent consumes
a fixed fraction m∗ of her total wealth P ∗ = W + H. Note that m∗ is the CM MPC given by
the sum of the interest rate r and ψ(ρ − r), the latter being the product of the EIS ψ and the
wedge (ρ − r). If and only if ρ > r, the agent behaves relatively impatiently by consuming


                                                 8
more than rP ∗ (W, Y ), the annuity value of her total wealth. Additionally, the higher the
EIS ψ, the more elastic/responsive her consumption is to changes in the wedge (ρ − r).
       Why is consumption independent of risk aversion under CM? Because labor-income risk
is purely idiosyncratic and can be fully diversified away at no risk premium. A risk-averse
agent optimally chooses zero net risk exposure for her total wealth Pt∗ at all time t, which
is achievable via dynamic hedging. As a result, the consumption problem under CM is
converted into a deterministic one and Pt∗ evolves deterministically as:

                            dPt∗ = (r − m∗ )Pt∗ dt = −ψ(ρ − r)Pt∗ dt .                                (19)

If ρ = r, we have Pt∗ = W0 + hY0 , constant at all time t. In general, Pt∗ evolves exponentially
at the rate of −ψ(ρ−r), consistent with the intuition as that in the Ramsey’s model. Neither
total wealth P ∗ (Wt , Yt ) nor the MPC m∗ depends on risk aversion γ. Indeed, risk aversion
cannot be identified because there is no net risk exposure under optimality. As the EIS and
risk aversion are two independent parameters in our model, we can thus clearly show that it
is the EIS ψ rather than risk aversion γ that matters under CM.
       Third, the value function V ∗ (W, Y ) is increasing and homothetic with degree (1 − γ) in
“total” wealth P ∗ (W, Y ) due to the geometric earnings process and homothetic preferences.
The only effect that risk aversion γ has for the CM solution is to make the value function
V ∗ (W, Y ) homogenous in P ∗ (W, Y ) with degree (1 − γ).
       Our intuition for the homogeneity of the value function V ∗ (W, Y ) builds on Samuelson-
Merton’s insight and closed-form solution that the demand for risky assets decreases in
−W VW W /VW , which equals γ in the original Merton (1971) formulation. By conjecturing
that V ∗ (W, Y ) is homogeneous with degree (1 − γ) in W and Y in our model, we link the
curvature of the value function to risk aversion, not the EIS.8

Certainty Equivalence and PIH. Our CM model has the certainty-equivalence property
and by further assuming ρ = r, we uncover Friedman-Hall’s certainty-equivalence rule:

                                  Ct = rP ∗ (Wt , Yt ) = r (Wt + Ht ) .                               (20)
   8
    Conjecturing that V ∗ (W, Y ) is homogeneous in W and Y with degree (1 − ψ −1 ) would have generated
counter-intuitive and wrong portfolio predictions in our model with Epstein-Zin utility. This is consistent
with the result that the demand for risky assets only depends on γ not the EIS ψ even in a generalized
Merton’s (1971) problem with Epstein-Zin utility.




                                                    9
However, importantly, consumption is a martingale under the PIH, but is deterministic in
our CM setting because financial market structures differ. The only financial claim in the
PIH framework is the risk-free asset. Next, we turn to the incomplete-markets problem.


4         Incomplete Markets
We first characterize our model’s analytical solution and then provide economic intuition.

4.1        Solution
The continuous-time methodology allows us to analytically solve the model in closed form up
to an ordinary differential equation (ODE) with economically intuitive boundary conditions.
        We proceed in three steps. First, we consider the agent’s decision problem in the interior
region. Second, we analyze the boundary behaviors (e.g., W = 0.) Third, we explore
the homogeneity property to convert the two-dimensional optimization problem into a one-
dimensional one. Let V (W, Y ) denote the value function.

The Interior Region. Using the standard dynamic programming method, we know that
optimal consumption solves the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation,9

                                                                              σ2Y 2
        0 = max f (C, V ) + (rW + Y − C)VW (W, Y ) + µY VY (W, Y ) +                VY Y (W, Y ) .    (21)
            C>0                                                                 2
Equation (??) reflects incomplete markets as labor income has the volatility VY Y term but
there is no traded risky financial asset to hedge earnings shocks.10 The first-order condition
(FOC) for consumption is given by

                                        fC (C, V ) = VW (W, Y ) ,                                     (22)

which equates the marginal benefit of consumption fC (C, V ) with the marginal utility of
savings VW (W, Y ). Note that fC (C, V ) is non-separable in C and V , which is in sharp
contrast with the standard FOC for expect utility where the marginal utility of consumption
does not depend on V . Before characterizing the solution for the general case, it is useful to
first summarize the solution for the case with no labor income, Y = 0.
    9
     Duffie and Epstein (1992b) generalize the standard HJB equation for the expected-utility case to allow
for non-expected recursive utility such as the Epstein-Weil-Zin utility used here.
  10
     Hence, technically speaking, in the HJB equation (??), we do not have a term involving VW W nor the
hedging term involving VW Y .

                                                    10
No Labor Income: Y = 0. Because Y is assumed to follow a GBM process, both the
drift and volatility of Y are zero and hence Y = 0 is an absorbing state, in that Yt = 0 for all
t ≥ τ if Yτ = 0. Therefore, the last two terms in the HJB equation (??) involving VY (W, 0)
and VY Y (W, 0) are zero. In Appendix ??, we show that the value function V (·, 0) for the
case with no labor income has the following closed-form solution:
                                                  (bW )1−γ
                                     V (W, 0) =            ,                               (23)
                                                    1−γ
where b is given by (??). Because b in (??) is the same as the value of b in the CM value
function V ∗ (W, Y ) given in (??), we thus have for any given level of wealth W ,

                                     V (W, 0) = V ∗ (W, 0) .                               (24)

Consumption and utils are the same path by path for the deterministic case (with no labor
income) and the CM case as all risks are idiosyncratic and are completely diversified away.
   Next, we analyze the general case where W > 0 and Y > 0.

Value Function V (W, Y ) and Certainty Equivalent Wealth P (W, Y ). We show that
the value function V (W, Y ) is given by
                                             (bP (W, Y ))1−γ
                                 V (W, Y ) =                 ,                             (25)
                                                  1−γ
where we set b to the value given by (??). By doing so, we may interpret P (Wt , Yt ) as the
certainty equivalent wealth, which is the time-t total wealth that makes the agent indiffer-
ent between (i) the status quo (with wealth W and the earnings process Y ) and (ii) the
alternative of living with no earnings permanently thereafter. Therefore, P (W, Y ) solves:

                        V (W, Y ) = V (P (W, Y ), 0) = V ∗ (P (W, Y ), 0) ,                (26)

where the second equality follows from (??).
   Why do we work with certainty equivalent wealth P (W, Y ) rather than directly with the
value function V (W, Y )? First, certainty equivalent wealth is an intuitive concept and is
measured in units of consumption goods, while the unit for value function V (W, Y ) is utils,
which cannot be directly measured. Second, P (W, Y ) is analytically convenient to work
with. For example, by using P (W, Y ) and its derivative, the marginal (certainty equivalent)
value of wealth PW (W, Y ), we can clearly explain how consumption depends on P (W, Y )
and PW (W, Y ). Third, PW (W, Y ) is a natural measure for the impact of financial frictions.

                                                11
   Let c(w) = C(W, Y )/Y and p(w) = P (W, Y )/Y . By using the homogeneity property,
the “effective” state variable is w = W/Y and PW (W, Y ) = p0 (w). The following proposition
summarizes the main results on c(w) and p(w).

Proposition 2 The optimal consumption-income ratio c(w) is given by

                                  c(w) = m∗ p(w)(p0 (w))−ψ ,                               (27)

where m∗ is the CM MPC given in (??) and the certainty equivalent wealth p(w) solves:
               ∗ 0
               m (p (w))1−ψ − ψρ              γσ 2
                                                   
      0 =                            +µ−             p(w) + p0 (w) + (r − µ + γσ 2 )wp0 (w)
                        ψ−1                    2
                 σ 2 w2             (p0 (w))2
                                             
                           00
               +          p (w) − γ              .                                          (28)
                    2                 p(w)

The above ODE for p(w) is solved subject to the following condition:
                                                             1
                        lim p(w) = p∗ (w) = w + h = w +         .                          (29)
                        w→∞                                 r−µ

Additionally, the ODE (??) for p(w) satisfies the borrowing constraint at the origin,

                                      0 < c(0) ≤ 1 .                                       (30)

   Equation (??) state that c(w) is given by the CM MPC m∗ multiplied by p(w) and also
importantly (p0 (w))−ψ . Unlike in the CM setting, where p0 (w) = 1 and consumption is linear
in w, with financial frictions, both p(w) and p0 (w) directly influence c(w). The ODE (??)
reflects the nonlinearity of p(w). The condition (??) describes the convergence result that
self insurance against income shocks becomes as effective as CM risk sharing as w → ∞.
Finally, whether the constraint binds or not is captured by the boundary condition (??). We
will focus on the implications of binding borrowing constraints in Subsection ??.
   Next, we discuss key qualitative economic insights for the main results in Proposition
??. It is useful to graphically sketch out the shapes and highlight the key properties of the
certainty equivalent wealth p(w) and the optimal consumption-income ratio c(w).

4.2    Graphic Illustrations of Key Insights
We plot p(w) and the marginal value of liquidity, p0 (w), in Panels A and B of Figure ??,
respectively. To aid our discussions, we also plot the dotted straight lines for the CM

                                              12
         A. scaled certainty equivalent wealth p(w)             B. marginal value of wealth p′(w)




         p*(w)=w+h
             ↓
     h



                                                           1.

     0                       w                              0                  w


            C. consumption−income ratio c(w)                      D. MPC out of wealth c′(w)


         c*(w)=m*(w+h)
              ↓




                                                           m*

     0                                                     0
                  wealth−income ratio w                              wealth−income ratio w




Figure 1: Graphical Illustrations: the scaled certainty equivalent wealth p(w),
marginal (certainty equivalent) value of wealth p0 (w), consumption-income ra-
tio c(w), and the MPC out of wealth c0 (w). The dashed straight lines in all panels
correspond to the CM benchmark results.

results. We see that p(w) is increasing and concave, lies below the CM line p∗ (w) = w + h,
i.e., p(w) ≤ p∗ (w). The monotonicity of p(w) is immediate. The intuition for p(w) ≤ p∗ (w)
and the concavity of p(w) is as follows. Financial frictions make the agent worse off, i.e.,
p(w) ≤ p∗ (w) and cause her to value wealth more than its accounting value, i.e., p0 (w) ≥ 1.
Additionally, the higher the liquidity w, the more effective her self insurance against financial
frictions and the less she values her wealth at the margin, i.e., a lower p0 (w). As w → ∞,
self insurance is very effective achieving the CM benchmark, hence limw→∞ p(w) = p∗ (w)
and limw→∞ p0 (w) = 1. Next we discuss intuition for optimal consumption and the MPC.
   In Panels C and D of Figure ??, we plot c(w) and the MPC out of wealth, c0 (w), re-
spectively. Again, we plot the CM results via dotted straight lines to aid our discussions.
First, c(w) is increasing and concave in w. Additionally, c(w) lies below the CM line c∗ (w),


                                                      13
i.e., c(w) ≤ c∗ (w). The monotonicity of c(w) is immediate. But why is c(w) concave
in w? This is due to the agent’s optimal response to buffer shocks and mitigate borrow-
ing constraints. The higher the value of w, the more effective her self insurance against
financial frictions and the less her consumption responds to wealth explaining that c0 (w)
decreases with w or equivalently consumption is concave in w, as conjectured by Keynes
(1935).11 Finally, as w → ∞, self insurance achieves perfect risk sharing as under CM, in
that limw→∞ c(w) = c∗ (w) = m∗ (w + h) and limw→∞ c0 (w) = m∗ = r + ψ(ρ − r).
       Our analysis and intuition essentially go throughout regardless of whether the borrowing
constraint binds at w = 0 or not. Having qualitatively characterized the key features of our
model solution, we next turn to the model’s quantitative implications in the next section.


5        Buffer-Stock Savings and Stationary Distribution
Parameter value choices. Despite being parsimonious, our model generates sensible
quantitative predictions. The entire model only has six parameters including three (γ, ψ,
and ρ) for preferences, two for labor income (µ and σ), and the interest rate r. Parameters
µ, σ, ρ, and r are annualized and continuously compounded. We set the annual expected
growth rate and volatility of the earnings process to µ = 1.5% and σ = 10%, respectively, in
line with values used in the consumption literature, e.g., Deaton (1991) and Carroll (1997).
The implied logarithmic annual income growth rate α = 1%. The Jensen’s inequality term
σ 2 /2 = 0.5% is quantitatively significant, which is one third of the growth rate µ = 1.5%.
       We choose the annual interest rate r = 3.5% and set the annual discount rate ρ = 4%,
commonly used values in the literature.12 The agent is relatively impatient (compared with
the market), with a wedge of ρ − r = 0.5%, as typically done in the buffer-stock savings
literature so that the rich has incentives to dis-save when w is sufficiently high.
       There are significant disagreements about a reasonable value for the EIS. For example,
Hall (1988) obtains an estimate of EIS near zero by using aggregate consumption data.
Vissing-Jorgensen (2002), Attanasio, Banks, and Tanner (2002), and Guvenen (2006) choose
a low EIS for non-stock holders but a higher value for stock holders. Bansal and Yaron
  11
     Carroll and Kimball (1996) show that the consumption function is concave under certain conditions for
the expected-utility case.
  12
     For example, Caballero (1990), Krusell and Smith (1998), and Guvenen (2007) choose an annual interest
rate around 4%. In order to meet Condition 2 for convergence purposes, we need to choose r satisfying
r > µ. A choice of 3.5% with µ = 1.5% gives a “human wealth” multiple of h = 1/(r − µ) = 50 when
converting labor income to “human” wealth. A lower interest rate will give an even higher multiple h.


                                                   14
                                    Table 1: Parameter choices.
This table summarizes the parameter values for our baseline quantitative analysis. Parameter
values are annualized and continuously compounded when applicable.


                    Parameters                                          Symbol     Value

                    Risk-free rate                                         r        3.5%
                    Subjective discount rate                               ρ         4%
                    Coefficient of relative risk aversion                  γ          3
                    Elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS)         ψ          1
                    Expected income growth rate in levels                  µ        1.5%
                    Income growth volatility                               σ        10%



(2004) choose a high estimate of EIS in the range of 1.5 to 2 in order to fit long-run risk
asset pricing models with aggregate evidence. While an EIS parameter larger than one has
become a common practice in the macro-finance literature, however, there is no consensus on
what the sensible value of EIS should be. The Appendix in Hall (2009) provides a brief survey
of estimates in the literature. For the baseline analysis, we set ψ = 1, which is in the mid-
range of the EIS values and is the estimated EIS value for stockholders by Vissing-Jorgensen
(2002), Attanasio, Banks, and Tanner (2002), and Guvenen (2006).13 As in Guvenen (2006),
we set risk aversion at γ = 3, which is within the range of plausible estimates viewed by
many economists. Note that our non-expected utility features γ = 3 > 1 = 1/ψ.

5.1       p(w), p0 (w), Consumption c(w), and MPC c0 (w)
To highlight the impact of risk aversion, we consider two levels of risk aversion, γ = 3, 6.
Panel A and B of Figure ?? plot p(w) and p0 (w), respectively. Quantitatively, frictions
significantly lower p(w) from its CM benchmark value p∗ (w) and the marginal value of
liquidity p0 (w) is much higher than unity, the value under CM. For example, with γ = 3, we
have p(0) = 28.7, which is only 57.4% of p∗ (0) = h = 50 under CM, and the marginal value
of liquidity p0 (0) = 1.34 implying a 34% premium over the face value of liquidity.
      Panels C of Figure ?? plots c(w). For γ = 3, the agent consumes 85% of her labor income
at w = 0, in that c(0) = 0.85, which is only 43% of the CM benchmark consumption level
c∗ (0) = 2.00. Even with a very high level of liquidity, e.g., w = 20, c(20) = 1.86, which is
 13
      We are not using any special property for the case with ψ = 1 as results are continuous in ψ.

                                                      15
              A. scaled certainty equivalent wealth p(w)                    B. marginal value of wealth p′(w)
                                                                  1.5
     70               γ=3
                      γ=6                                         1.4
     60               CM
                                                                  1.3
     50
                                                                  1.2
     40
                                                                  1.1
     30
                                                                   1
     20
          0            5        10         15          20               0       5        10         15          20
                       wealth−income ratio w                                    wealth−income ratio w

                 C. consumption−income ratio c(w)                             D. MPC out of wealth c′(w)
                                                             0.065

    2.5                                                          0.06

      2                                                      0.055

                                                                 0.05
    1.5
                                                             0.045

      1                                                          0.04


          0            5        10         15          20               0       5        10         15          20
                       wealth−income ratio w                                    wealth−income ratio w




Figure 2: Certainty equivalent wealth p(w), marginal value of liquidity p0 (w),
consumption-income ratio c(w), and the MPC c0 (w): Type A where borrowing con-
straints do not bind, i.e., c(0) < 1. We plot for two levels of risk aversion: γ = 3 and γ = 6.
Other parameter values are: r = 3.5%, ρ = 4%, σ = 10%, µ = 1.5%, and ψ = 1.

still only 67% of the CM benchmark level, i.e. c(20)/c∗ (20) = 67%.
   Panel D of Figure ?? plots the MPC c0 (w), which decreases in w and is greater than the
CM MPC is m∗ = 4%. In this case, the agent’s savings motive is sufficiently strong so that
she voluntarily chooses not to be in debt even if she can borrow at the risk-free rate. As a
result, the variation in MPC is somewhat limited and only ranges from 4% to 6% for w ≥ 0.
   Now consider the impact of increasing risk aversion. At the origin w = 0, the marginal
value of liquidity increases from p0 (0) = 1.34 to p0 (0) = 1.48 and consumption decreases
substantially from c(0) = 0.85 to c(0) = 0.61, as we increase γ from 3 to 6. The more risk
averse, the lower her consumption. With γ = 6, even with plenty liquidity, e.g., w = 20, the
agent only consumes 59% of the CM benchmark level, i.e. c(20)/c∗ (20) = 59%.
   It is clear that the quantitative effects of risk aversion γ on consumption are very large


                                                            16
under incomplete markets even for high levels of w because earnings shocks are permanent
and self insurance is generally not very effective. This is in sharp contrast with the prediction
that risk aversion plays no role at all on consumption for any level of w in the CM benchmark.

5.2    Buffer-Stock Savings and Stationary Distributions
We next turn to the model’s implications on buffer stock savings. By using the Ito’s formula,
we express the dynamics for scaled liquidity wt as:

                               dwt = wt [µw (wt ) dt − σ dBt ] ,                              (31)

where the drift process µw (w) is given by
                                            1
                               µw (wt ) =      (n(wt ) − c(wt )) ,                            (32)
                                            wt
and

                                 n(w) = 1 + r − µ + σ 2 w .
                                                       
                                                                                              (33)

Next, we write down the discrete-time implication that we later use for simulation. Over a
small time interval (t, t + ∆t), we may write the implied dynamics as:
                                                       √        
                         wt+∆t − wt = wt µw (wt ) ∆t − σ ∆t t+∆t ,                           (34)

where t+∆t is a standard normal random variable with mean of zero and variance of one.
   Let wss denote the value of w at which the drift of w satisfies µw (w) = 0 under optimality.
The implied consumption-income ratio, denoted by css , is then given by

                          css = c(wss ) = 1 + r − µ + σ 2 wss .
                                                          
                                                                                              (35)

In Figure ??, we graphically determine the steady state (scaled) liquidity and consumption
(wss , css ) as the coordinates for the point of intersection between (i) the optimal concave
consumption rule c(w) given in (??) and (ii) the linear function n(w) given in (??). For
γ = 3, (wss , css ) = (5.96, 1.18). That is, at the steady state, the agent targets her wealth
to be 5.96 times of and consumes 1.18 times of her current earnings. Consumption demand
that is not covered by her current earnings is financed from the interest income rW . Risk
aversion has very large effects on steady-state savings. As we increase γ from 3 to 6, (wss , css )
increases significantly from (5.96, 1.18) to (17.6, 1.53) demonstrating strong savings motives
for risk-averse agents in sharp contrast with the CM or PIH benchmark results where risk
aversion has no impact on (wss , css ) at all.

                                                  17
                                          consumption−income ratio: c(w)
                  2
                               c(w),γ=3
                               c(w),γ=6
                               n(w)




                 1.5                                                              ← wss




                                              ←wss



                  1




                 0.5
                       0   2        4     6       8      10     12      14   16   18      20
                                                wealth−income ratio w




Figure 3: Determining the steady-state scaled wealth and consumption (wss , css ).
The steady-state (wss , css ) is determined as the coordinates for the point of intersection be-
tween the optimal consumption rule c(w) and the linear function n(w) = 1 + (r − µ + σ 2 ) w.
For γ = 3 and γ = 6, we have (wss , css ) = (5.96, 1.18) and (wss , css ) = (17.6, 1.53), respec-
tively. Parameter values are: r = 3.5%, ρ = 4%, σ = 10%, µ = 1.5%, and ψ = 1.

Stationary Distributions of w and c. Next, we report the stationary distributions of
w and c. We simulate our model by starting from the steady state, i.e., (w0 , c0 ) = (wss , css ),
and generating four thousand sample paths via the dynamics of w given in (??) and the
optimal consumption rule c(w) given in (??). Each sample path is 5,000-year long with a
time increment of ∆t = 0.05 year implying 5, 000 × 20 = 100, 000 observations per path.
   In Table ??, we report the Gini coefficient, steady-state values, mean, standard deviation,
and various quantiles for the stationary distribution of w, and that of c in Panels A and B,
respectively. In the long run and/or the steady state, risk aversion has first-order effects on
wealth and consumption. While the level and dispersion (e.g., measured by Gini coefficients)
for both w and c increase with risk aversion, (scaled) wealth responds more than consumption
does as risk aversion changes. For example, as we increase γ from 3 to 6, the steady-state
wealth-consumption ratio wss /css increases from 5.05 to about 11.5. Also the dispersion of
(scaled) consumption is significantly smaller than that of (scaled) wealth. For example, with


                                                        18
          Table 2: Stationary distributions of w and c for γ = 3 and γ = 6.

This table reports the Gini coefficient, steady-state target wss , mean, standard deviation,
and various quantiles for the stationary distributions of w and c for γ = 3, 6.

  γ    Gini      wss    mean     std dev     1%         5%   25%     50%     75%     95%     99%
                                          A. Scaled liquidity w
  3   48.1%      5.96    6.15     3.65      2.19    2.75     3.95    5.25     7.22   12.35   19.40
  6   49.9%     17.55    18.39    12.99     5.98    7.59     11.15   15.16   21.47   39.17   65.61
                                   B. Consumption-income ratio c
  3   35.4%     1.18     1.17      0.18     0.97    1.00     1.06    1.13    1.23    1.49    1.83
  6   40.9%     1.53     1.52      0.59     0.93    0.99     1.17    1.38    1.68    2.49    3.63



γ = 3, the Gini coefficient for c is 35.4%, which is 25% lower than 48.1%, the Gini coefficient
for w. These results are consistent with our intuition that the agent builds her buffer stock
to smooth consumption over time.
   We have so far focused on Type A where the constraint Wt ≥ 0 given in (??) does not
bind, and hence c(0) < 1. For this case, voluntary savings demand is sufficiently strong so
that Wt > 0 for all t, and therefore, relaxing the borrowing constraint (e.g., by offering a
credit line even at the risk-free rate r) has no effect on consumption and thus we can just
ignore the borrowing constraint when solving for p(w) for Type A. The only friction in this
case is the inability to perfectly hedge risk under incomplete markets. Next, we turn to
Type B, where the constraint Wt ≥ 0 given in (??) eventually binds as the agent runs out of
wealth.

5.3       Binding Borrowing Constraints at W = 0 (Type B)
Campbell and Mankiw (1989) document that about 50% of households in their sample do
not save. We show that this behavior can be consistent with optimality. Consider at time t
an agent with no wealth, i.e., Wt = 0, and if it is optimal for her to consume all her earnings,
in that Ct = Yt , then she will remain permanently constrained at Ws = 0 for all time s ≥ t
living from paycheck to paycheck, or “hand to mouth,” thereafter. The corresponding steady
state is at the corner, in that (wss , css ) = (0, 1) as c(0) = 1.
   It is worth emphasizing that the behaviors that we analyze in this subsection apply not


                                                   19
              A. scaled certainty equivalent wealth p(w)                    B. marginal value of wealth p′(w)
                                                                  1.6
     70               γ=0.5
                      γ=1.5                                       1.5
                      CM
     60                                                           1.4

                                                                  1.3
     50
                                                                  1.2

     40                                                           1.1

                                                                   1
     30
          0            5        10         15          20               0         5        10         15        20
                       wealth−income ratio w                                      wealth−income ratio w

                 C. consumption−income ratio c(w)                             D. MPC out of wealth c′(w)
                                                                  0.3

    2.5                                                          0.25

                                                                  0.2
      2
                                                                 0.15

    1.5                                                           0.1

                                                                 0.05
      1
          0            5        10         15          20               0     2         4      6        8       10
                       wealth−income ratio w                                      wealth−income ratio w




Figure 4: Certainty equivalent wealth p(w), marginal value of wealth p0 (w),
consumption-income ratio c(w), and the MPC c0 (w): Type B where the borrowing
constraints bind, i.e., c(0) = 1. We plot for two levels of risk aversion: γ = 0.5 and γ = 1.5.
Other parameter values are: r = 3.5%, ρ = 4%, σ = 10%, µ = 1.5%, and ψ = 1.

only to “hand-to-mouth” consumers (with no savings, i.e., W = 0) but to those (with positive
wealth, i.e., W > 0) who are not presently constrained but may be permanently constrained
in the future, i.e., c(0) = 1. We define an agent as Type B as long as her consumption when
she has no wealth satisfies c(0) = 1. Not surprisingly, these consumers even when W > 0
behave very differently from those who are never constrained (i.e., Type A.)
   Figure ?? plots p(w), p0 (w), c(w), and the MPC c0 (w) for γ = 0.5 and γ = 1.5 while
keeping all other parameters the same as in the baseline case. For both cases, borrowing
constraints bind at W = 0, i.e., c(0) = 1.
   Binding borrowing constraints generate new empirically testable predictions and eco-
nomic insights. First, they cause the marginal value of liquidity p0 (w) to decrease with risk
aversion for low to medium values of w. As long as w < 7.02, p0 (w) for γ = 0.5 is larger


                                                            20
than for γ = 1.5. For example, at w = 0, p0 (0) = 1.53 for γ = 0.5, which is greater than
p0 (0) = 1.35 for γ = 1.5. This is opposite to the prediction that p0 (w) increases with γ when
the constraint does not bind, i.e., Type A. The intuition is as follows. When facing a binding
constraint at w = 0, the less risk-averse agent has a higher borrowing demand against her
future earnings to finance her current consumption, and therefore values liquidity more at
the margin implying that p0 (w) decreases with γ near w = 0 for Type B, where c(0) = 1.
       We next analytically prove this result by using the closed-form expression for p0 (0) and
p(0). Substituting c(0) = 1 into (??) and substituting w = 0 into the ODE (??) yield14

                                             p0 (0) = (m∗ p(0))1/ψ ,                          (36)

and
                                                   1
                                                  1−ψ
                                            1                                      ψ
                                                             ρ − (1 − ψ −1 )ν
                                                                                1−ψ
                               p(0) =                                                   ,     (37)
                                            m∗

where ν is a risk-aversion-adjusted and variance-adjusted income growth rate defined as

                                                                    γσ 2
                                                   ν =µ−                 .                    (38)
                                                                     2
       It is straightforward to show that for all admissible parameter values (i.e., regardless of
values for r, ρ, and ψ,) p(0) and p0 (0) satisfy:

                                             ∂p(0)                           ∂p0 (0)
                            Type B :               > 0,             and              > 0.     (39)
                                              ∂ν                              ∂ν
Therefore, p(0) and p0 (0) decrease with γ and σ 2 , and increase with µ. Because p0 (w) and
p(w) are continuous in w, p0 (w) and p(w) must also decrease with γ for sufficiently low values
of w. This binding borrowing-constraint channel, which is absent in Type A, causes p0 (w) to
decrease with γ for low values of w in Type B.
       The other striking and non-obvious result is that the MPC for a constrained agent near
w = 0 is much higher than an unconstrained agent in general. For example, at w = 0.05, the
MPC equals c0 (0.05) = 0.43 when γ = 0.5, and c0 (0.05) = 0.23 when γ = 1.5. These results
are consistent with empirical evidence documented by Parker (1999) and Souleles (1999) who
  14
       For the case with ψ = 1, applying L’hopital’s rule to (??), we obtain the following:

                                              γσ 2
                                                 
                   0           1                                       1
                  p (0) = exp     ρ−r+µ−                 and p(0) = p0 (0) for ψ = 1 .
                               ρ               2                       ρ



                                                               21
find that annual MPCs typically vary from 0.2 to 0.6. Why a binding borrowing constant
at W = 0 generally causes the MPC to be high near W = 0? The intuition is as follows. An
agent who is constrained at W = 0 has a strong consumption demand and wants to borrow
against future. Hence when receiving a unit of wealth windfall, she optimally consumes a
larger fraction of the windfall near W = 0 than if she were unconstrained.
    What types of agents are more likely to face binding borrowing constraints when W =
0? They tend to have lower risk aversion, higher income growth, lower income growth
volatility, and a higher subjective discount rate. For Type B, both frictions (incomplete
markets and borrowing constraints) are important. The borrowing constraint tends to play
a more important role for low/medium values of w while the standard precautionary savings
motive are relatively more important for higher values of w.
    Next, we use our model’s non-expected utility feature to analyze the distinct effect of the
EIS on consumption and wealth dispersion.


6     Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution (EIS)
The empirical estimates for the EIS vary widely. Given the wide spectrum of the EIS value
used in the literature, we choose three values: ψ = 0.1, 1, 2 including both a low estimate as
in Hall (1988) and a high estimate as in Bansal and Yaron (2004) and other asset pricing
models. We fix risk aversion at γ = 3 as in our baseline calculation.

Effects of the EIS on Consumption c(w). Figure ?? plots c(w) for three levels of the
EIS: ψ = 0.1, 1, 2. Interestingly, how the EIS influences c(w) depends on the level of w.
    For sufficiently high levels of w, (e.g., w ≥ 19.8), c(w) increases with the EIS ψ. The
intuition essentially follows from the CM benchmark Ramsey/Friedman’s consumption rule,
as in the limit, self insurance approaches perfect CM risk sharing, in that limw→∞ c(w) =
c∗ (w) = m∗ (w + h) and the MPC m∗ = r + ψ(ρ − r) increases with the EIS for a relatively
impatient agent, i.e., ρ > r. However, for w < 19.8, c(w) decreases with the EIS ψ. Here,
the explicit consumption rule c(w) = m∗ p(w)p0 (w)−ψ helps us understand the mechanism.
The component p0 (w)−ψ plays a more significant role in determining consumption for low
values of w as p0 (w) is higher for low values of w. For example, with ψ = 0.1, p0 (0)−ψ = 0.97
and c(0) = 0.98 but for ψ = 2, p0 (0)−ψ = 0.59 and c(0) = 0.76.
    Putting the opposite effects of the EIS on c(w), we see that graphically c(w) rotates


                                              22
                                           consumption−income ratio c(w)
                   3.5
                                 ψ=0.1
                                 ψ=1
                                 ψ=2
                    3




                   2.5




                    2




                   1.5




                    1




                   0.5
                         0   5       10   15    20      25     30      35   40   45   50
                                               wealth−income ratio w




Figure 5: Consumption-income ratio c(w) where the EIS ψ = 0.1, ψ = 1, and ψ = 2.
Other parameter values are: r = 3.5%, ρ = 4%, σ = 10%, µ = 1.5%, and γ = 3.

counter-clock-wise as we increase the EIS ψ. This is in sharp contrast with the monotonically
decreasing relation between consumption and risk aversion. The opposing effects of the EIS
on c(w) have important implications on wealth dispersion to which we now turn.

Stationary Distribution of w. Table ?? reports the Gini coefficient, steady-state target
wss , mean, standard deviation, and various quantiles for the stationary distribution of w
for ψ = 0.1, 1, and 2. Risk aversion is set at γ = 3 in Panel A and γ = 10 in Panel B,
respectively.
   First consider the case with γ = 3 reported in Panel A. For this commonly used risk
aversion, the quantitative impact of the EIS ψ on the Gini coefficient is non-monotonic
but very limited, but the impact of the EIS on long-run savings and steady state wss are
very large. The Gini coefficient is around 47% to 48% even as we vary the EIS over the
entire economically relevant range from ψ = 0.1 to ψ = 2. Changes in the EIS drive small
variations in the Gini coefficient at least partly reflects the non-monotonic effect of the EIS ψ
on consumption at low and high ends of w, as we just discussed. Despite its limited effect on
dispersion, increasing the EIS from ψ = 0.1 to ψ = 2 substantially increases the steady-state
savings wss by 9.5 times from 0.92 to 8.72.

                                                       23
        Table 3: Stationary distribution of w: Effects of the EIS ψ and γ.

This table reports the Gini coefficient, steady-state target wss , mean, standard deviation,
and various quantiles for the stationary distribution of w. In Panel A, we set γ = 3 and in
Panel B, we set γ = 10 including the long-run risk case with ψ = 2 (the last row.)

   ψ      Gini    wss    mean    std dev    1%     5%     25%     50%     75%        95%   99%
                                           A. γ = 3
  0.1    48.0%   0.92     0.96     0.59    0.30    0.39   0.59    0.80    1.12 1.97         3.12
   1     48.1%   5.96     6.15     3.65    2.19    2.75   3.95    5.25    7.22 12.35       19.40
   2     46.9%   8.74     8.91     4.64    3.40    4.22   5.96    7.79   10.48 17.15       25.75
                                           B. γ = 10
  0.1 55.2%      25.02   27.57    34.05    6.94 9.05 14.07 20.20 30.83 66.66               134.4
   1 50.8%       26.46   27.73    20.76    8.58 10.96 16.33 22.46 32.31 60.6               104.2
   2 48.2%       27.60   28.31    15.96    9.76 12.35 17.93 24.01 33.31 57.61               90.7



   We find very different effects of the EIS on the steady-state wss and variation/dispersion
of w for higher levels of risk aversion, e.g., γ = 10. For this case, while the impact of the
EIS on steady-state savings wss is limited, the impact of the EIS on variation and dispersion
of w is much greater. Panel B of Table ?? shows that as we increase the EIS from ψ = 0.1
to ψ = 2, wss does not change much (ranging from 25.0 to 27.6.) This suggests that steady-
state and/or average savings for a sufficiently risk-averse agent is effectively independent of
the EIS ψ. However, increasing the EIS from 0.1 to 2 discourages the savings for the super
w-rich reducing the standard deviation of w and more generally the dispersion of w. For
example, as we increase the EIS from ψ = 0.1 to ψ = 2, the top-1% w-rich quantile decreases
from 134.4 to 90.7, the standard deviation of w decreases from 34.05 to 15.96, and the Gini
coefficient decreases from 55.2% to 48.2%. That is, the effects for the EIS on the variation
and dispersion of w are much larger for sufficiently high levels of risk aversion.
   The intuition is as follows. With high risk aversion, e.g., γ = 10, the 1% w-rich quantile
is super rich with w being in the range of 90 to 134 for essentially all sensible values of the
EIS. With a high EIS, these super w-rich dis-saves much more as under the CM case where
it is the EIS not risk aversion that influence savings hence reducing standard deviation of w
and causing the distribution of w to be less dispersed.



                                              24
The Case with Long-Run Risk Parameters. Explaining asset pricing facts (e.g.,
high equilibrium risk premium and low risk-free rate) is very challenging. One widely-
used approach to match asset pricing facts is to incorporate long-run risk (LRR) into a
representative-agent model with Epstein-Zin utility following Bansal and Yaron (2004). LRR
models require both large risk aversion and high EIS, e.g., γ = 10 and ψ = 2, which is infea-
sible with expected utility models but is of course well captured by the Epstein-Zin recursive
utility. Given the importance of LRR parameter values in the asset pricing literature, we
next analyze optimal consumption and wealth dispersion with these parameter values.
    The last row in Panel B of Table ?? reports the results with LRR parameters, γ = 10
and ψ = 2. The steady-state savings target is wss = 27.60, which is 3.2 times of wss = 8.74,
the steady-state target when γ = 3 and ψ = 2. Not surprisingly, given high risk aversion,
incentives to accumulate wealth are very strong.
    In summary, we have shown that the choices of the EIS ψ and risk aversion γ have first-
order quantitative effects on wss and the stationary distribution for w. Additionally, how the
EIS impacts the steady-state and dispersion of w depends on the level of risk aversion and
the sign for the comparative static effect of the EIS on the accumulation and dispersion of w
differently significant with risk aversion, as we see from Table ?? due to the non-monotonic
effect of the EIS on consumption. As the effects of risk aversion and the EIS are quite
different, both qualitatively and quantitatively, our analysis in this section strongly call for
separating the EIS from risk aversion in future work.


7     Comparative Statics
We discuss the comparative static effects of volatility σ, income growth µ, interest rate r,
and the subjective discount rate ρ on consumption and wealth dispersion.

Volatility σ. Panel A of Figure ?? plots the marginal value of liquidity p0 (w) for three levels
of volatility: σ = 0.05, 0.1, and 0.15. For sufficiently high values of w, the higher the volatility
σ, the more valuable liquidity is to buffering against shocks implying a higher p0 (w). This
is the standard incomplete-markets-induced precautionary savings channel. However, for
low values of w, the volatility effect on p0 (w) depends on whether the borrowing constraint
c(0) ≤ 1 binds or not. If the borrowing constraint does not bind, i.e., Type A, the same
precautionary savings mechanism operates. However, if the borrowing constraint binds, i.e.,


                                                25
               A. marginal value of wealth p′(w)                         B. consumption−income ratio c(w))
     1.5
                                            σ=0.05             2.2
    1.45
                                            σ=0.1               2
     1.4                                    σ=0.15
                                                               1.8
    1.35
                                                               1.6
     1.3
                                                               1.4
    1.25
                                                               1.2
     1.2
                                                                1
    1.15
                                                               0.8
     1.1
                                                               0.6
    1.05
           0       5        10         15            20              0        5        10         15         20
                   wealth−income ratio w                                      wealth−income ratio w



Figure 6: The marginal (certainty equivalent) value of wealth p0 (w) and
consumption-income ratio c(w) for σ = 0.05, σ = 0.1, and σ = 0.15. Other parameter
values are: r = 3.5%, ρ = 4%, µ = 1.5%, ψ = 1, and γ = 3.

Type B, p0 (w) then decreases with σ for low values of w. For example, as we decrease σ from
10% to 5%, p0 (0) increases from 1.34 to 1.47. This is because the marginal value of moving
away from the borrowing constraint is higher when income volatility is lower, analogous to
the impact of risk aversion on p0 (w) for the binding case as discussed in Subsection ??. Next,
we use closed-form expressions to confirm our intuition for Type B.
   When the constraint binds, differentiating (??) with respect to σ 2 gives:

                                     ∂p0 (0)     γ(p0 (0))ψ
                                             = −            < 0.                                                  (40)
                                      ∂σ 2        2ψm∗
For a borrowing-constrained agent, the lower the income growth volatility σ, the more costly
it is to be permanently constrained at w = 0, i.e., the higher the value of p(0). Therefore,
providing liquidity when w = 0 to a borrowing constrained agent with a higher value of
p(0) is more valuable implying a higher marginal value of liquidity p0 (0). This borrowing-
constraint channel, which is absent in Type A, causes the reverse order of p0 (0) with respect to
σ 2 for low values of w. Panel B plots c(w) for the three levels of σ. Consumption decreases
with σ regardless of whether the borrowing constraint binds or not. This is intuitive as
precautionary savings demand is monotonically increasing in volatility σ.


                                                          26
               A. marginal value of wealth p′(w)                         B. consumption−income ratio c(w)
     1.4                                                        2
                                           µ=0.01
    1.35                                   µ=0.015             1.8
                                           µ=0.02

     1.3                                                       1.6


    1.25                                                       1.4


     1.2                                                       1.2


    1.15                                                        1


     1.1                                                       0.8
           0       5        10         15            20              0        5        10         15        20
                   wealth−income ratio w                                      wealth−income ratio w



Figure 7: The marginal (certainty equivalent) value of wealth p0 (w) and
consumption-income ratio c(w) for µ = 0.01, µ = 0.015, and µ = 0.02. Other pa-
rameter values are: r = 3.5%, ρ = 4%, σ = 10%, ψ = 1, and γ = 3.

Expected Growth Rate µ. Panel A of Figure ?? plots p0 (w) for three levels of drift:
µ = 0.05, 0.1, and 0.15 showing that p0 (w) is increasing in µ. The higher income growth µ,
the more willing the agent is to borrow against her future labor incomes, and hence the higher
the value of p0 (w). Whether the constraint binds or not does not change the comparative
static effects of µ on p0 (w) and c0 (w). For Type B, we can show the comparative statics for
low values of w in closed form. By differentiating (??) with respect to µ, we have:
                                         ∂p0 (0)   (p0 (0))ψ
                                                 =           > 0.                                                (41)
                                          ∂µ         ψm∗
Therefore, borrowing constraints have the same effect on p0 (w) as the incomplete-markets
friction does. Panel B of Figure ?? shows that optimal consumption increases with the
income growth rate µ, which is clearly intuitive.

Interest Rate r and Subjective Discount Rate ρ. Table ?? shows that the quantitative
effects of the interest rate on savings and wealth dispersion are very large. For example, by
increasing r from 3% to 4%, wss increases by almost six folds from 2.29 to 13.48, and the
long run mean increases by 6.4 times from 2.32 to 14.78. The Gini coefficient for w also
increases substantially from 45.1% to 54.5%. While our model is partial equilibrium with an

                                                          27
           Table 4: Stationary distribution of w: Effects of interest rate r.

This table reports the Gini coefficient, steady-state target wss , mean, standard deviation,
and various quantiles for the stationary distribution of w for r = 3%, 3.5%, and 4%.

       r      Gini    wss     mean    std dev    1%     5%     25%     50%      75%     95%     99%
   3%         45.1%    2.29    2.32     1.03    0.97    1.19   1.63    2.08    2.72      4.19   5.92
  3.5%        48.1%    5.96   6.15     3.65     2.19    2.75   3.95    5.25    7.22     12.35   19.40
   4%         54.5%   13.48   14.78    18.61    3.84    5.01   7.73   11.00    16.59    34.91   69.08



 Table 5: Stationary distribution of w: Effects of subject discount rate ρ.

This table reports the Gini coefficient, steady state target wss , mean, standard deviation,
and various quantiles for the stationary distribution of w for ρ = 3.5%, 4%, and 4.5%.

       ρ      Gini    wss     mean    std dev    1%     5%     25%     50%      75%     95%     99%
  3.5%        54.5%   15.08   16.41    19.13    4.26    5.56   8.59   12.25    18.49    39.05   77.12
   4%         48.1%   5.96    6.15      3.65    2.19    2.75   3.95    5.25    7.22     12.35   19.40
  4.5%        44.8%   2.08    2.12     0.94     0.88    1.08   1.49    1.90    2.48      3.82   5.40



exogenous interest rate, our results indicate that in Bewley-Aiyagari equilibrium models, the
equilibrium determination of interest rate will lower the Gini coefficient of w hence reducing
wealth dispersion.15 This is why the impact of risk aversion on wealth dispersion is not
obvious in equilibrium models.
       Table ?? demonstrates the large quantitative effects of the subjective discount rate ρ
on savings and wealth dispersion. A comparison between Table ?? and Table ?? reveals
that the quantitative effect of the discount rate ρ effectively negatively mirrors that of the
interest rate r. For example, as ρ decreases from 4.5% to 3.5%, wss increases by 7.5 times
from 2.08 to 15.08, and the long-run mean increases by 7.7 times from 2.12 to 16.41. The
Gini coefficient for w also increases substantially from 44.8% to 54.5%, comparable to the
increase of the Gini coefficient in response to a 1% increase of the interest rate from 3% to
4%.
  15
    Ljungqvist and Sargent (2004) offers a textbook treatment on equilibrium Bewley-Aiyagari wealth dis-
tribution models. De Nardi (2015) provides a survey on quantitative models of wealth distribution.




                                                  28
8     Consumption Dynamics and Empirical Puzzles
In this section, we demonstrate that our model’s predictions are consistent with well known
empirical regularities such as the “excess sensitivity” and “excess smoothness” properties
of consumption dynamics documented in the empirical literature. These two findings are
referred to as empirical puzzles as they are inconsistent with the predictions of the PIH.

8.1     Excess Sensitivity and Smoothness Puzzles
Under incomplete markets, given the labor-income process (??), we may write the following
dynamics implied by the Friedman-Hall’s PIH consumption rule (??):
                                                r
                                     dCt = σ       Yt dBt .                                 (42)
                                               r−µ

Consumption dynamics (??) generates the following two key empirical predictions:

    1. Consumption is a martingale as the drift in (??) equals zero. However, this prediction
       is rejected in the data as consumption changes are predictable by anticipated changes in
       labor income. Flavin (1981) refers to this empirical regularity as the excess sensitivity.

    2. In levels, the volatility of consumption changes is larger than the volatility of income
       changes, σ Yt , in that
                                  r
                                     σ Yt > σ Yt , if and only if µ > 0 .                   (43)
                                 r−µ
       Note that µ > 0 is the condition for labor income Y to be non-stationary. Here we
       have reproduced the PIH’s prediction that consumption changes are more volatile than
       income changes for a non-stationary labor-income process. However, this prediction
       is also empirically counterfactual. Campbell and Deaton (1989) document that con-
       sumption is “excessively smooth” to unanticipated changes in labor income and refer
       to this inconsistency between the US data and the PIH as the excess smoothness.

Next, we show that our model generates predictions that are consistent with “excess sensi-
tivity” and “excess smoothness.”




                                                 29
8.2    Addressing the Puzzles
Using Ito’s formula, we write the dynamics for ct = c(wt ) as:
                          1
      dct = c0 (wt )dwt + c00 (wt )d < wt , wt >                                           (44)
                         2                       
                                  1
          = wt µw (wt )c0 (wt ) + c00 (wt )wt2 σ 2 dt − c0 (wt )wt σ dBt                   (45)
                                  2
                                                                        
                                                         1 00
                wt (r − µ + σ ) + 1 − c(wt ) c (wt ) + c (wt )wt σ dt − c0 (wt )wt σ dBt , (46)
                             2
                                               0                    2 2
          =
                                                         2
where the second and third lines use the dynamics (??)-(??) for w. Again by using Ito’s
formula, we obtain the following process for stochastic consumption growth:
               dCt   dc(wt ) dYt dc(wt ) dYt
                   =        +    +           = gC (wt )dt + σC (wt )dBt ,                 (47)
                Ct   c(wt )   Yt   c(wt ) Yt
where the expected consumption growth rate gC (w) (drift) is given by

                                  c0 (w)                         σ 2 w2 c00 (w)
                   gC (w) = µ +          [(r − µ)w + 1 − c(w)] +                ,         (48)
                                  c(w)                              2 c(w)
and the stochastic volatility of consumption growth, σC (w), is given by
                                                   c0 (w)
                                                         
                                  σC (w) = σ 1 − w          .                             (49)
                                                   c(w)

Excess Sensitivity. Our model offers a natural explanation for the “excess sensitivity”
puzzle via the expected consumption growth gC (w) given in (??) for consumption dynam-
ics (??). For a fixed increment ∆, consumption changes over time interval (t, t + ∆) are
predictable by wt . To be in line with the PIH’s assumption so as to compare our model’s
predictions with the PIH’s, we set ρ = r = 3.5% for numerical analysis in this section.
   Panel A of Figure ?? plots the expected consumption growth gC (w) for γ = 3. First,
gC (w) decreases with w, which implies that the lower the value of w, the more predictable
consumption growth. What is the intuition? Consumption changes are predictable due to
financial frictions. The lower the value of w, the larger the precautionary savings demand,
and hence the more predictable consumption changes are. This intuition is consistent with
our model’s prediction that gC (w) is decreasing.
   Additionally, we may use income Yt to predict consumption growth dCt /Ct . The higher
the value of Y , the lower the value of w = W/Y , and hence the higher the value of gC (w)
as gC0 (w) < 0. Therefore, income Yt should positively predict consumption changes, which is

                                                30
             A. expected consumption growth rate g (w)                     B. volatility of consumption growth σ (w)
                                                 C                                                             C
      0.03
                                                γ=3              0.1
     0.025                                      PIH

      0.02                                                      0.09


     0.015
                                                                0.08

      0.01
                                                                0.07
     0.005

                                                                0.06
         0

    −0.005                                                      0.05
             0        5        10         15          20               0           5        10         15              20
                      wealth−income ratio w                                        wealth−income ratio w



Figure 8: Understanding “excess sensitivity” and “excess smoothness” puzzles:
Expected consumption growth gC (w) and consumption growth volatility σC (w).
Parameter values are: r = ρ = 3.5%, σ = 10%, µ = 1.5%, and ψ = 1.

consistent with the empirical “excess sensitivity” property of consumption. To sum up, unlike
the martingale consumption property implied by the PIH, our model implies that current
income positively predicts consumption growth/changes, consistent with excess sensitivity.
   Panel B of Figure ?? plots σC (w), the volatility of consumption growth dC/C, which
decreases with w and is lower than the PIH-implied consumption growth volatility. The
higher the value of w, the more effective savings buffer income shocks, and the smoother
consumption growth. Additionally, precautionary savings motive weakens the impact of
income shocks on consumption growth thus lowering σC (w) from the PIH-implied volatility
level. Next we use our model to address the “excess smoothness” puzzle.

Excess Smoothness. Using the Ito’s formula comparing the diffusion coefficient in (??)
with that in (??), we conclude that consumption changes are less volatile than income
changes in levels, if and only if

  the diffusion part of dCt = CY (Wt , Yt )σYt dBt < the diffusion part of dYt = σYt dBt , (50)




                                                           31
where CY (Wt , Yt ) is the MPC out of current labor income. Therefore, consumption exhibits
“excess smoothness” relative to income if and only if the MPC out of labor income satisfies:

                                           CY (Wt , Yt ) < 1 .                                   (51)

The intuition is as follows. Equation (??) implies that consumption responds less to an
unexpected change in income, and hence consumption is smoother than labor income in
response to unexpected income shocks, if and only if CY < 1.
   Quantitatively, we show that CY < 1 holds for plausible parameter values. Using the
homogeneity property, we have

                                           ∂(c(w)Y )
                            CY (W, Y ) =             = c(w) − c0 (w)w .                          (52)
                                              ∂Y
Figure ?? plots CY (W, Y ) and shows that the MPC CY is in the range of (0.77, 0.84) for
the plotted range: 0 < w < 20. Therefore, our model’s prediction is consistent with the
“excess smoothness” of consumption for plausible parameter values while the PIH generates
the opposite empirically counter-factual predictions.
   To highlight the stark contrast between our model’s and the PIH’s predictions, we also
plot the PIH-implied MPC out of current income, which is given by CY = rh = r/(r − µ) =
3.5% × 50 = 1.75, about twice as large as the MPC CY in our model even for a reasonably
large level of liquidity such as w = 20.
   It is worth noting that CARA-utility-based tractable self-insurance models are also able
to address these two puzzles. For example, by using different conditionally heteroskedastic
income processes, Caballero (1990) and Wang (2006) show that consumption exhibits excess
sensitivity and excess smoothness.16 These CARA-utility-based models feature no borrow-
ing constraints and consumption can be negative, while our model incorporates borrowing
constraints and consumption is required to be positive. Also our model generates more
plausible quantitative implications than they do as we use Epstein-Zin utility, while CARA
utility misses wealth effects. Thus, CARA-utility models predict that CY is independent
of wealth and hence wealth is not stationary due to CARA utility’s lack of wealth effects,
while our model features an intuitive property that CY increases w. CARA utility (with
CARA coefficient κ) is a special case of the expected utility where the EIS equals 1/(κC)
  16
     Caballero (1990) uses ARMA processes in discrete time settings and Wang (2006) uses conditionally
heteroskedastic income processes that belong to the widely-used “affine” models in finance. See Duffie
(2001) for a textbook treatment on these affine models.


                                                   32
                                         MPC out of current income CY(W,Y)
                        2
                                                                                       γ=3
                                                                                       PIH


                      1.8




                      1.6




                      1.4




                      1.2




                        1




                      0.8
                            0   2   4     6     8      10     12      14     16   18         20
                                              wealth−income ratio w




Figure 9: Explaining excess smoothness: The MPC out of current income
CY (W, Y ). Parameter values are: r = ρ = 3.5%, σ = 10%, µ = 1.5%, and ψ = 1.

which is time-varying and hard to calibrate, while Epstein-Zin utility allows us to easily cal-
ibrate both CRRA coefficient and the EIS. For these reasons, Epstein-Zin utility (including
the standard iso-elastic utility) is much preferred for quantitative and qualitative purposes
especially when the use of this utility does not come at a cost of losing tractability.


9       Large Discrete (Jump) Earnings Shocks
We have so far specified the income process with diffusive permanent shocks for parsimony.
Guvenen et al. (2015) document that earnings shocks display substantial deviations from
log-normality and most individuals experience very small earnings shocks while a small but
non-negligible number experience very large shocks. It has also been well documented that
wages fall dramatically at job displacement, generating so-called “scarring” effects.17 Wages
may be low after unemployment due to fast depreciation of skills as in Ljungqvist and Sargent
(1998). Specific human capital can be lost and it may be hard to replace upon re-entry as in
Low, Meghir, and Pistaferri (2010). To capture large infrequent income shocks within a very
short period in addition to small diffusive shocks, it is necessary to incorporate stochastic
jumps into our baseline lognormal diffusion model.
 17
      See Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan (1993) for example.

                                                      33
9.1     Model and Solution
We model large income shocks as jumps with stochastic size occurring at a constant proba-
bility λ per unit of time (i.e. Poisson arrivals). When a jump occurs at time t, labor income
changes from Yt− to Yt− Z where Z follows a well-behaved probability density function (pdf)
qZ (z) with Z > 0. There is no limit to the number of jump shocks and a jump does not
change the likelihood of another. We write the labor-income process as:

                    dYt = µYt− dt + σYt− dBt − (1 − Z)Yt− dJt , Y0 > 0 ,                   (53)

where J is a pure jump process. That is, dJt = 1 if the jump happens and dJt = 0 otherwise.
For each realized jump, the expected percentage loss of income is (1 − E(Z)). Since jumps
occur with probability λ per unit of time, the expected income growth is thus lowered to
µ − λ(1 − E(Z)) from µ. To ensure that human wealth Ht to be finite, we impose:

                            Condition 3 : r > µ − λ(1 − E(Z)) .                            (54)

   Under Condition 3, human wealth H, defined by (??), is proportional to the contempo-
raneous income Yt , Ht = hJ Yt , where the multiple hJ is given by
                                                 1
                                hJ =                         .                             (55)
                                       r − [µ − λ(1 − E(Z))]

The CM benchmark consumption rule is then given by Ct = m∗ (Wt + hJ Yt ), where m∗ is
the CM MPC given in (??). With CM and purely idiosyncratic diffusion and jump risks,
consumption C is continuous and deterministic, in that

                        Ct = e−ψ(ρ−r)t C0 = e−ψ(ρ−r)t (rW0 + hJ Y0 ) .                     (56)



   Similar to the baseline model, the agent chooses consumption C to maximize her value
function V (W, Y ) by solving the following HJB equation:

                                                   σ2Y 2
0 = max f (C, V ) + (rW + Y − C)VW + µY VY +             VY Y + λE [V (W, ZY ) − V (W, Y )] .(57)
      C>0                                            2
The expectation E ( · ) is with respect to the probability density function qZ (z). Next, we
summarize the main results.



                                              34
Proposition 3 The optimal consumption-income ratio c(w) is given by (??), the same as
in the baseline model. The scaled certainty equivalent wealth p(w) solves the following ODE:
                ∗ 0
                 m (p (w))1−ψ − ψρ                γσ 2
                                                       
        0 =                             +µ−              p(w) + p0 (w) + (r − µ + γσ 2 )wp0 (w)
                         ψ−1                       2
                                                               "           1−γ      #
                                         0
                  σ 2 w2                        2
                                                 
                                      (p   (w))          λ         Zp(w/Z)
                +         p00 (w) − γ               +       E                    − 1 p(w) .     (58)
                     2                  p(w)           1−γ           p(w)

       The above ODE for p(w) is solved subject to the following conditions:
                                                                       1
                    lim p(w) = p∗ (w) = w + hJ = w +                               .                  (59)
                   w→∞                                       r − [µ − λ(1 − E(Z))]
Additionally, we require 0 < c(0) ≤ 1 , the same condition as (??).

Jumps have two effects. First, when E(Z) 6= 1, jumps change the expected value of future
labor incomes and hence reduce hJ if E(Z) < 1. Second, jumps also generate additional
precautionary savings demand since jump risk is not spanned and/or borrowing constrained.
The last term in (??) captures both mean and higher-order moments effects.18

9.2        An Example
The solution presented above applies to any well-behaved distribution for Z. For the nu-
merical example, we consider the case where jumps always lead to losses, i.e. Z < 1. We
assume that Z follows a power distribution over [0, 1] with parameter β > 0. Thus, the
density function is qZ (z) = βz β−1 where 0 ≤ z ≤ 1. A large value of β implies a small
expected income loss of E(1 − Z) = 1/(β + 1) in percentages. For β = 1, Z follows a uniform
distribution. For any β > 0, − ln Z is exponentially distributed with mean E(− ln Z) = 1/β.
       Figure ?? demonstrates the effects of the jump’s mean arrival rate λ on p(w), p0 (w), c(w),
and the MPC c0 (w). We set β = 4 implying an average loss E(1 − Z) is 20% when a jump
occurs. An annual rate of λ = 0.05 implies a jump every twenty years on average. Therefore,
the unconditional expected annual loss is then λE(1 − Z) = 0.05 × 20% = 1% per year.
       Given these parameter values, jumps lower the certainty equivalent wealth at w = 0 by
30% from p(0) = 28.7 under pure diffusion to p(0) = 20.07 and reduce consumption at w = 0
by 44% from c(0) = 0.85 under pure diffusion to c(0) = 0.48.
  18
       Similarly, the continuity of the ODE (??) for p(w) implies an additional condition at w = 0:
                          ∗ 0
                           m (p (0))1−ψ − ψρ         γσ 2
                                                                              
                                                             λ
                                                                 E Z 1−γ − 1 p(0) + p0 (0) .
                                                                             
                     0=                       +µ−         +
                                  ψ−1                 2     1−γ



                                                       35
              A. scaled certainty equivalent wealth p(w)                   B. marginal value of wealth p′(w)
     55                                                          1.7
                      λ=0
     50                                                          1.6
                      λ=0.02
     45               λ=0.05                                     1.5
     40
                                                                 1.4
     35
                                                                 1.3
     30
                                                                 1.2
     25
     20                                                          1.1

     15                                                           1
          0            5        10         15          20              0       5        10         15          20
                       wealth−income ratio w                                   wealth−income ratio w

                 C. consumption−income ratio c(w)                            D. MPC out of wealth c′(w)
      2                                                          0.6

                                                                 0.5
    1.5
                                                                 0.4

                                                                 0.3
      1
                                                                 0.2

    0.5                                                          0.1

          0            5        10         15          20              0       5        10         15          20
                       wealth−income ratio w                                   wealth−income ratio w




Figure 10: Large income shocks: The effects of the mean arrival rate λ.       The
expected income loss in percentage upon jumps is E(1 − Z) = 1/(1 + β) = 20%. Other
parameter values are: r = 3.5%, ρ = 4%, σ = 10%, µ = 1.5%, γ = 3, and ψ = 1.

   Additionally, jumps substantially increase the MPC c0 (w) even for the unconstrained
case. For example, with jumps at the rate of λ = 0.05, the MPC at w = 0.04 increases from
c0 (0.04) = 0.06 under pure diffusion to c0 (0.04) = 0.62. Parker (1999) and Souleles (1999)
report empirical estimates of MPCs in the range of 0.2 to 0.6. Even though these jumps
only happen with 5% probability per year and the average loss for each jump event is 20%,
jumps are very costly in terms of consumption smoothing as it is very hard to self insure
against these jump shocks in the absence of complete markets. Unlike diffusion shocks which
are continuous locally, jump shocks cause discrete random changes in both liquidity w and
consumption C due to missing markets to manage these jump risks. Therefore, consumption
profiles are particularly steep at low values of w, implying that with jumps the MPCs can
be particularly large near the origin.
   In summary, large downward income shocks even when occurring with low probability

                                                            36
can be very costly in terms of consumption smoothing causing the consumption profile c(w)
to be very steep especially for low values of w and hence a high MPC in that region.


10     Concluding Remarks
In this section, we first summarize the main quantitative results of our model and then discuss
our plan for future work on wealth distribution by building on the insights and lessons that
we have learned from the model developed here. For the quantitative implications, the
following results are potentially useful in guiding our future work on wealth distribution.

Summary on Quantitative Results. First, we find that increasing risk aversion (while
holding the EIS fixed) substantially increases the steady state (scaled) savings and generates
a more dispersed distribution for w. Second, the impact of the EIS on dispersions of scaled
wealth and consumption is ambiguous as the EIS has opposing effects on consumption at low
and high ends of w. For high levels of risk aversion, increasing the EIS tends to discourage
the super rich to save causing the dispersion of w to decrease. This is not desirable given that
the empirical facts on wealth dispersion call for the rich to save a lot. For standard values
of risk aversion, e.g., around three, the impact of the EIS on dispersion of w can be limited.
Third, the impact of the subjective discount rate on wealth dispersion is large, which is line
with findings in Krusell and Smith (1998), and the interest rate effect on wealth dispersion
essentially mirrors the negative impact of the discount rate ρ, which make intuitive sense,
as the wedge ρ − r has a first-order effect on buffer-stock savings.
   Fourth, uninsurable labor-income continuous diffusion shocks (under incomplete mar-
kets) alone generate annual MPCs that are typically around 4-7% (even when liquidity w
is low), which are substantially lower than the empirical range of 0.2 to 0.6 as in Parker
(1999) and Souleles (1999). This suggests that pure precautionary savings demand does not
generate sufficient consumption demand for the wealth-poor. We can generate MPCs in the
empirically plausible range by either choosing parameters to make the borrowing constraint
eventually binding (when the agent runs out of her wealth, i.e., W = 0,) or incorporating
empirically sensible jump features into her labor-income process. Guvenen et al. (2015)
report that most individuals experience small earnings shocks and a small but non-negligible
number experience very large shocks, which are consistent with our generalized labor-income
process with both diffusive shocks and discrete jumps that occur with low probability but


                                              37
induce sufficiently large movements conditioning on the arrival of a jump.
   Next we discuss our future work. Inevitably, we may be a bit more subjective and perhaps
speculative than the main body of the paper, where we stay closely to our model.

Some Thoughts on Future Work. While our model’s implications on the dispersion
of w cannot be directly interpreted as those for the dispersion of wealth, insights that we
have gained from the self insurance model are useful for constructing models to understand
wealth distribution. A key challenge for equilibrium models is that the wealthy do not save
enough and hence the wealth concentration among the rich is too low compared to the data.
Based on the 1989 survey of consumer finances (SCF), the top 1% wealth-rich own 29% of
the total wealth in the U.S., but Aiyagari (1994) only generates 3.2% wealth holdings by the
top 1% wealthy. How do we provide strong incentives for the wealthy to save?
   We find that permanent earnings shocks have much more significant effects on savings
than transitory shocks do because permanent shocks are much harder to self insure against
than the transitory shocks causing the agent to hold much larger stocks of savings. As a
first step, permanent earnings shocks in our model increase savings demand in equilibrium.
This is different from the standard approach as in Aiyagari (1994) where earnings shocks are
transitory hence self insurance is effective causing wealth to be less dispersed than income
in equilibrium. Additionally, jumps capture some key features of the earnings processes as
shown in Guvenen et al. (2015) and may also be helpful in further increasing savings motives
also for the rich as these large discrete shocks are much harder to self insure against.
   How do we reconcile a non-stationary earnings process at the micro level with a sta-
tionary cross-sectional distribution of wealth? We need an overlapping-generations model
with finitely-lived agents, as in Huggett (1993) and De Nardi (2004), for example. While
we have focused on the infinite-horizon setting, we can tractably extend our model to life-
cycle settings. Although standard finite-horizon OLG models and infinite-horizon models
(with stationary income shocks) may not be able to incentivize the rich to save a lot hence
failing to match the wealth concentration by the rich, our model may be different as we
have permanent earnings shocks with jumps. These risks will be large even for the wealthy
over their finite lives and hence their savings motives can remain very strong generating a
more concentrated wealth holdings by the wealthy. Additionally, in a life-cycle setting, we
can incorporate bequest motives and inter-generational links (e.g., transmission of ability)
as in De Nardi (2004) to further strengthen incentives for the rich to save inducing a more

                                              38
persistent intergenerational wealth dynamics and concentrating wealth among the rich.
   In Aiyagari (1994) and the follow-up literature on wealth distribution, the interest rate r
will be lower than the subjective discount rate ρ to clear the market, and hence the rich in
equilibrium dis-saves as ρ > r. How do we encourage the wealthy to continue saving much?
This is feasible in OLG models with ex ante heterogeneity for preferences and earnings.
Here is the intuition. Provided that the wealthy have a low wedge ρ − r (e.g., being close
to zero) in equilibrium, their savings demand will remain sufficiently strong causing them
to continue saving at a high rate. Then, how do we make the equilibrium wedge ρ − r
low for the wealthy? One possibility is to let a small fraction of agents with low ρ and/or
high risk aversion γ to face high earnings risks (e.g., large downward earnings jumps) so
that in equilibrium this group has strong savings demand but exerts little impact on the
equilibrium interest rate which is primarily determined by other agents (large population
but less wealthy per capita, however contributing to the majority of aggregate savings and
hence exerting first-order effects on the determination of the equilibrium interest rate.) In
summary, by incorporating some forms of ex ante heterogeneity (preferences and earnings)
across agents, we may be able to generate more concentrated wealth holdings by the wealthy
who have strong incentives to continue saving.
   Finally, incorporating entrepreneurship into our baseline model in an equilibrium setting
is potentially a fruitful direction of research that allows us to tie models closer to data. In-
deed, the importance of entrepreneurship for wealth distribution has been emphasized and
studied in Quadrini (1999), Cagetti and De Nardi (2006), and Buera and Shin (2011), among
others. While our model takes the earnings process as exogenously given, we can generalize
our model by allowing career choices (e.g., whether being an entrepreneur or an employee.)
Intuitively speaking, as entrepreneurs are often exposed to greater business risks than em-
ployees and also face capital-intensive investments, they tend to have higher marginal valu-
ation of wealth for both consumption smoothing and investment purposes. We thus expect
entrepreneurs have strong savings motives and therefore that incorporating entrepreneurship
can help generating substantial wealth concentration among the rich, as shown earlier. Our
tractable model may allow us to provide new insights from an entrepreneur’s perspective.




                                              39
References
Abowd, J. M., and D. Card, 1989, “On the covariance structure of earnings and hours
    changes,” Econometrica, 57(2), 411-445.

Aguiar, M., and E. Hurst, 2005, “Consumption vs. expenditure,” Journal of Political
    Economy, 113(5), 919-948.

Aiyagari, S. R., 1994, “Uninsured idiosyncratic risk and aggregate saving,”Quarterly Jour-
    nal of Economics, 99(3), 659-684.

Attanasio, O. P., J. Banks, and S. Tanner, 2002, “Asset holding and consumption volatil-
    ity,”Journal of Political Economy, 110(4), 771-792.

Bansal, R., and A. Yaron, 2004, “Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset
    pricing puzzles,” Journal of Finance, 59(4), 1481-1509.

Black, F., and M. Scholes, 1973, “The pricing of options and corporate liabilities,” Journal
    of Political Economy, 81, 637-659.

Buera, F. J., and Y. Shin, 2011, “Self-insurance vs. self-financing: A welfare analysis of the
    persistence of shocks,”Journal of Economic Theory, 146(3), 845-862.

Caballero, R. J., 1990, “Consumption puzzles and precautionary savings,” Journal of Mon-
    etary Economics, 25(1), 113-136.

Caballero, R. J., 1991, “Earnings uncertainty and aggregate wealth accumulation,” Amer-
    ican Economic Review, 81(4), 859-871.

Cagetti, M., and M. De Nardi, 2006, “Entrepreneurship, frictions, and wealth,”Journal of
    Political Economy, 114(5), 835-869.

Carroll, C. D., 1997, “Buffer-stock saving and the life cycle/permanent income hypothesis,”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1), 1-55.

Carroll, C. D., and M. S. Kimball, 1996, “On the concavity of the consumption function,”
    Econometrica, 64(4), 981-992.

Campbell, J., and A. Deaton, 1989, “Why is consumption so smooth?,”The Review of
    Economic Studies, 56(3), 357-373.

                                             40
Campbell, J. Y., and N. G. Mankiw, 1989, “Consumption, income, and interest rates:
    Reinterpreting the time series evidence ” in O. J. Blanchard and S. Fischer eds. NBER
    Macroeconomics Annual, MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, 185-216.

Chamberlain, G., and C. A. Wilson, 2000, “Optimal intertemporal consumption under
    uncertainty,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 3, 365-395.

Deaton, A., 1991, “Saving and liquidity constraints,” Econometrica, 59, 1221-1248.

Deaton, A., 1992, “Understanding consumption,” Oxford University Press, Oxford.

De Nardi, M., 2004, “Wealth inequality and intergenerational links,”The Review of Eco-
    nomic Studies, 71, 743-768.

De Nardi, M., 2015, “Quantitative models of wealth inequality: A survey,”National Bureau
    of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper 21106.

Dreze, J. H., and F. Modigliani, 1972, “Consumption decisions under uncertainty,” Journal
    of Economic Theory, 5, 308-335.

Duffie, D., 2001, “Dynamic Asset Pricing Theory,”Princeton University Press, Princeton.

Duffie, D., and L. G. Epstein, 1992a, “Stochastic differential utility,” Econometrica, 60,
    353-394.

Duffie, D., and L. G. Epstein, 1992b, “Asset pricing with stochastic differential utility,”
    Review of Financial Studies, 5(3), 411-436.

Epstein, L. G., and S. E. Zin, 1989, “Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior
    of consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework,” Econometrica, 57(4),
    937-969.

Fernández-Villaverde, J. and D. Krueger, 2007, “Consumption over the life cycle: Facts from
    consumer expenditure survey data,”The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(3),
    552-565.

Flavin, M., 1981, “The adjustment of consumption to changing expectations about future
    income,”Journal of Political Economy, 89, 974-1009.



                                            41
Friedman, M., 1957, “A theory of the consumption function,”Princeton University Press,
    Princeton.

Gourinchas, P. O., and J. A. Parker, 2002, “Consumption over the life cycle,”Econometrica,
    70(1), 47-89.

Guvenen, F., 2006, “Reconciling conflicting evidence on the elasticity of intertemporal
    substitution: A macroeconomic perspective,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(7),
    1451-1472.

Guvenen, F., 2007, “Learning your earning: Are labor income shocks really very persis-
    tent?,”American Economic Review, 97(3), 687-712.

Guvenen, F., F. Karahan, S. Ozcan, and J. Song, 2015, “What do data on millions of U.S.
    workers reveal about life-cycle earnings risk?,”University of Minnesota Working Paper.

Hall, R. E., 1978, “Stochastic implications of the life cycle-permanent income hypothesis:
    Theory and evidence,” Journal of Political Economy, 86, 971-987.

Hall, R. E., 1988, “Intertemporal substitution in consumption,” Journal of Political Econ-
    omy, 96(2), 339-357.

Hall, R. E., 2009, “Reconciling cyclical movements in the marginal value of time and the
    marginal product of labor,” Journal of Political Economy, 117(2), 281-323.

Hansen, L. P., T. Sargent, and T. Tallarini, 1999, “Robust permanent income and pric-
    ing,”The Review of Economic Studies, 66(4), 873-907.

Huggett, M., 1993, “The risk free rate in heterogeneous agent incomplete insurance economies,”Journal
    of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17(5-6), 953-969.

Jacobson, L., LaLonde, R., and D. Sullivan, 1993, “Earnings losses of displaced workers,”
    American Economic Review, 83(4), 685-709.

Kaplan, G., and G. L. Violante, 2010, “How much consumption insurance beyond self-
    insurance?” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(4), 53-87.

Kreps, D. M., and E. L. Porteus, 1978, “Temporal resolution of uncertainty and dynamic
    choice theory,” Econometrica, 46(1), 185-200.

                                           42
Krusell, P., and T. Smith, 1998, “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy,”
    Journal of Political Economy, 106(5), 867-896.

Leland, H. 1968, “Saving and uncertainty: The precautionary demand for saving,” Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics, 82(3), 465-473.

Levhari, D., and T. N. Srinivasan, 1969, “Optimal savings under uncertainty,” Review of
    Economic Studies, 36(2), 153-163.

Ljungqvist, L., and T. J. Sargent, 1998, “The european unemployment dilemma,” Journal
    of Political Economy, 106(3), 514-550.

Ljungqvist, L., and T. J. Sargent, 2004, “Recursive macroeconomic theory,” The MIT Press.

Low, H., C. Meghir, and L. Pistaferri, 2010, “Wage risk and employment risk over the life
    cycle,” American Economic Review, 100, 1432-1467.

Lustig, H., and S. Van Nieuwerburgh, 2008, “The returns on human capital: Good news on
    wall street is bad news on main street,”Review of Financial Studies, 21(5), 2097-2137.

MaCurdy, T. E., 1982, “The use of time series processes to model the error structure of
    earnings in a longitudinal data analysis,” Journal of Econometrics, 18, 83-114.

Meghir, C., and L. Pistaferri, 2004, “Income variance dynamics and heterogeneity,”Econometrica,
    72(1), 1-32.

Meghir, C., and L. Pistaferri, 2011, “Earnings, consumption and lifecycle choices,”Handbook
    of Labor Economics, O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds), 4, 774-854.

Merton, R. C., 1971, “Consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-time model,” Jour-
    nal of Economic Theory, 3, 373-413.

Parker, J. A., 1999, “The reaction of household consumption to predictable changes in
    social security taxes, ”The American Economic Review, 89(4), 959-973.

Quadrini, V. 1999, “The importance of entrepreneurship for wealth concentration and mo-
    bility, ”Review of income and Wealth, 45, 1-19.

Sandmo, A., 1970, “The effect of uncertainty on saving decisions,”Review of Economic
    Studies, 37(3), 353-360.

                                             43
Schechtman, J., 1976, “An income fluctuation problem,”Journal of Economic Theory, 12(2),
    218-241.

Souleles, N. S., 1999, “The response of household consumption to income tax refunds,”American
    Economic Review, 89(4), 947-958.

Storesletten, K., C. I. Telmer, and A. Yaron, 2004, “Consumption and risk sharing over the
    life cycle,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 51(3), 609-633.

Tallarini, T. D., 2000, “Risk-sensitive real business cycles,”Journal of Monetary Economics,
    45(3), 507-532.

Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2002, “Limited asset market participation and the elasticity of in-
    tertemporal substitution,”Journal of Political Economy, 110(4), 825-53.

Wang, N., 2006, “Generalizing the permanent-income hypothesis: revisiting Friedman’s
    conjecture on consumption,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(4), 737-752.

Weil, P., 1990, “Non-expected utility in macroeconomics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    105, 29-42.

Zeldes, S. P., 1989, “Consumption and liquidity constraints: An empirical investigation,”
    Journal of Political Economy, 97(2), 305-346.




                                            44
Appendices
    We provide various technical details for the main results in appendices.


A      Complete Markets (CM)
First, we compete markets by introducing a traded financial asset that is perfectly correlated
with labor income. As labor income risks are idiosyncratic and can be fully diversified away
at no premium, we write the dynamics of price process for this new asset as:

                                      dSt = St (rdt + σS dBt ) ,                                      (A.1)

where σS is the volatility parameter and B is the same Brownian motion driving the labor-
income process (??). Let ηt denote the fraction of the agent’s wealth allocated to this risky
asset. Then, wealth W accumulates as follows:

                            dWt = (rWt + Yt − Ct )dt + σS ηt Wt dBt .                                 (A.2)

    Using the standard principle of optimality, we may write the HJB equation as follows:
                                                                                η 2 σS2 W 2
    0 = max f (C, V ) + (rW + Y − C)VW (W, Y ) + µY VY (W, Y ) +                            VW W (W, Y )
         C, η                                                                        2
                                          σ2Y 2
                + ησS σW Y VW Y (W, Y ) +       VY Y (W, Y ) .                                        (A.3)
                                            2
Unlike the incomplete-markets setting, we have VW W due to the stochastic returns for the
newly introduced risky asset and also the cross-partial term VW Y due to dynamic hedging.
Obviously, W and Y are perfectly (negatively) correlated.
    By using the homogeneity property of the value function, which holds for all the cases in
our paper, we conjecture that the value function is given by
                                                  (bP (W, Y ))1−γ
                                    V (W, Y ) =                   ,                                   (A.4)
                                                       1−γ
where b is given in (??) and p(w) = P (W, Y )/Y . Therefore, we have

                VW = b1−γ (p(w)Y )−γ p0 (w),                                                          (A.5)
                VY   = b1−γ (p(w)Y )−γ (p(w) − wp0 (w)),                                              (A.6)
           VW W = b1−γ (p(w)Y )−1−γ p(w)p00 (w) − γ(p0 (w))           2
                                                                        
                                                                            ,                         (A.7)
           VW Y      = b1−γ (p(w)Y )−1−γ (−wp(w)p00 (w) − γp0 (w)(p(w) − wp0 (w))) ,                  (A.8)
                     = b1−γ (p(w)Y )−1−γ w2 p(w)p00 (w) − γ(p(w) − wp0 (w))2 .
                                                                            
            VY Y                                                                                      (A.9)

                                                   45
   The FOCs for consumption C and hedging demand η imply

                               fC (C, V ) = VW (W, Y ) ,                                                (A.10)
                                              σ Y VW Y (W, Y )
                                       η = −                   .                                        (A.11)
                                             σS W VW W (W, Y )
Substituting the value function (??), (??), (??) and (??), into the FOCs given in (??) and
(??) we obtain the following decision rules:

                        c(w) = m∗ p(w)(p0 (w))−ψ ,                                                      (A.12)
                                                γp(w)p0 (w)
                                                                   
                               σ
                        η(w) =      1−                                ,                                 (A.13)
                               σS       w(γ(p0 (w))2 − p(w)p00 (w))
where m∗ is defined by
                                              m∗ ≡ b1−ψ ρψ .                                            (A.14)
Substituting the consumption rule (??), the hedging demand (??) and the value function
(??) into the HJB equation (??), and simplifying, we obtain:
           m∗ (p0 (w))1−ψ − ψρ     γσ 2                                        γ 2 σ 2 p(w)
                                         
  0=                           +µ−            p(w) + [(r − µ)w + 1] p0 (w) +               00 (w)
                                                                                                   .   (A.15)
                   ψ−1              2                                       2 γ − p(w)p
                                                                                      (p0 (w))2



   By using the perfect risk-sharing and consumption smoothing insights for the CM case,
we substitute the conjecture p(w) = p∗ (w) = w + h into the ODE (??) and obtain:
              ∗
                               γσ 2                              γσ 2
                                    
               m − ψρ
        0=              +µ−           (w + h) + [(r − µ)w + 1] +      (w + h)    (A.16)
                ψ−1             2                                 2
              ∗            
               m − ψρ
          =             + µ (w + h) + [(r − µ)w + 1]                             (A.17)
                ψ−1
              ∗                   ∗            
               m − ψρ                m − ψρ            1
          =             +r w+                 +µ          + 1.                   (A.18)
                ψ−1                    ψ−1           r−µ

As (??) must hold for all w, we obtain m∗ = r + ψ(ρ − r) as given by (??). And then using
(??), we obtain the explicit formula (??) for the coefficient b.
   Substituting p(w) = p∗ (w) = w + h into (??) gives the CM consumption rule (??). And
substituting p(w) = p∗ (w) = w + h into (??) gives the following hedge portfolio:
                                               
                                  σ        p(w)          σh
                           η(w) =      1−          =−        .                                          (A.19)
                                  σS         w          σS w
Note that the hedge portfolio position has to be short in the risky asset to hedge against the
idiosyncratic labor-income risk. The total position in the hedge portfolio is then η(w)W =

                                                     46
−σhY /σS , which is negative and proportional to contemporaneous income Y . Using Ito’s
formula, we obtain the following dynamics for wealth Wt∗ :

                    dWt∗ = [rWt∗ + Yt − Ct∗ ] dt + σS ηt∗ Wt∗ dBt ,
                            = [−ψ(ρ − r)Wt∗ + (1 − m∗ h) Yt ] dt − σhYt dBt .               (A.20)

Note that Wt∗ is negatively correlated with labor income Y , so that the total wealth P ∗ (Wt , Yt )
is deterministic as the risk-averse agent engages in perfect risk sharing. Therefore,

             dP ∗ (Wt , Yt ) = d(Wt∗ + hYt ) = [−ψ(ρ − r)Wt∗ − ψ(ρ − r)hYt ] dt ,
                                             = −ψ(ρ − r)P ∗ (Wt , Yt ) dt .                 (A.21)

Special case: Y = 0. Note that Y = 0 is an absorbing state, as both the drift and
volatility of Y for a GBM process are zero at Y = 0. Therefore, the terms in (??) involving
VY (W, 0), VY Y (W, 0) and VW Y (W, 0) are zero. And we write the HJB equation as:
                                                                η 2 σS2 W 2
                0 = max f (C, V ) + (rW − C)VW (W, 0) +                     VW W (W, 0) .   (A.22)
                     C, η                                            2
The FOC for consumption C is fC (C, V ) = VW (W, 0) and there is no hedging demand, η = 0.
It is then straightforward to show that V (·, 0) have the following closed-form solution:
                                                   (bW )1−γ
                                      V (W, 0) =            ,                               (A.23)
                                                     1−γ
where b is given by (??).


B      Incomplete Markets
We provide a sketch of proofs for main results involving incomplete markets.

Proof of Proposition ??. Using the homogeneity property P (W, Y ) = p(w)Y and sub-
stituting the conjectured value function given by (??, (??), (??), and (??) into the HJB
equation (??), we obtain:
                  1−ψ−1               
               c(w)
        ψρ bp(w)          − ψρ     γσ 2                    0                 2   0
 0 =                           +µ−       p(w) + (1 − c(w))p (w) + (r − µ + γσ )wp (w)
                  ψ−1                2

      σ 2 w2              (p0 (w))2
                                   
                 00
    +           p (w) − γ             .                                                       (B.1)
         2                  p(w)

                                                47
Substituting the value function (??) into the FOC condition for C given in (??), we obtain
the optimal consumption-income ratio that is given by (??). Substituting (??) into (??),
using m∗ = b1−ψ ρψ , and simplifying, we obtain (??), the ODE for p(w).
   Next, we turn to the boundary conditions. As w → ∞, it is straightforward to verify
limw→∞ p(w) = p∗ (w) = w + h . Substituting w = 0 into the ODE (??), we have
                        ∗ 0
                         m (p (0))1−ψ − ψρ         γσ 2
                                                        
                   0=                       +µ−           p(0) + p0 (0) .
                                ψ−1                 2

Finally, borrowing constraints imply 0 < c(0) ≤ 1.


Conditions for Stationarity of w. How do we ensure that w is stationary in the region
[0, ∞)? First, the drift in (??) should turn negative for sufficiently high w, so that w
eventually reverts back to the mean in expectation. As w → ∞, self insurance achieves the
CM outcome, ct = c∗ (wt ). Therefore,
                                      1
                                         1 + r − µ + σ 2 w − m∗ (w + h) ,
                                                                      
                lim µw (w) =       lim
               w→∞              w→∞ w
                                                          1 − m∗ h
                                                                  
                                         2    ∗
                              = r − µ + σ − m + lim                  ,
                                                  w→∞        w
                              = − µ − σ 2 + ψ(ρ − r) ,
                                                    
                                                                                           (B.2)

where we use limw→∞ c(w) = c∗ (w) = m∗ (w +h) and the CM MPC result m∗ = r +ψ(ρ−r).
Note that the borrowing constraint implies that the drift is nonnegative at w = 0, µw (0) ≥ 0.
Therefore, there must exist a value of w ≥ 0 such that µw (w) = 0. We denote this value wss .
   As wt → ∞, its process converges to a GBM with drift given by (??) and volatility
coefficient −σ. The following condition is sufficient for the mean of w to exist as t → ∞:

                            Condition 4 : µ − σ 2 + ψ(ρ − r) > 0 .                         (B.3)

The following ensures that the second moment for the stationary distribution of w exists:

                            Condition 5 : α − σ 2 + ψ(ρ − r) > 0 .                         (B.4)

As α = µ − σ 2 /2 < µ, Condition 5 is stronger than Condition 4.
   Condition 4 and Condition 5 suggest that in order to generate a stationary distribution
of w, we want one of or a combination of the following three: (i) a sufficiently high growth
rate µ lowering w = W/Y , (ii) a sufficiently low volatility σ decreasing the probability for low

                                               48
Y and hence high w (the denominator effect via Jensen’s correction), and (iii) a sufficiently
large MPC in excess of the interest rate, ψ(ρ − r) reducing savings (the numerator effect.)
    It is worth noting that risk aversion γ appears in neither Condition 4 nor Condition 5.
Why? Because stationarity of w only requires that w mean reverts in the limit as w → ∞
and risk aversion has no effect on consumption when w → ∞ as self insurance achieves the
CM consumption rule. Note that the standard impatience condition ρ > r in the buffer-stock
savings literature is neither necessary nor sufficient to ensure that w is stationary.


Solution: Type B. When c(0) = 1, the value function V (0, Y ) satisfies the following:

                                                          σ2Y 2
                      0 = f (Y, V ) + µY VY (0, Y ) +           VY Y (0, Y ) .                  (B.5)
                                                            2
                           (bp(0)Y )1−γ
Substituting V (0, Y ) =       1−γ
                                          into (??) and simplifying, we obtain (??) and (??).


Proof of Proposition ??. We extend the methodology for the baseline model to account
for jumps. We substitute the value function V (W, Y ) given by (??) into the HJB equation
(??) and using (??)-(??), we obtain the ODE (??) for p(w) and (??) for c(w) as in the
baseline case. Similarly, as w → ∞, p(w) takes the following form

                                            lim p(w) = w + hJ .                                 (B.6)
                                           w→∞


Substituting the above into ODE (??), and simplifying the expression, we obtain (??).


C      Transitory and Permanent Shocks
Empirical labor-income specifications often feature both permanent and transitory shocks.
Meghir and Pistaferri (2011) provide a comprehensive survey. We next generalize the income
process to have both permanent and transitory components. We show that transitory income
shocks also have an important effect on consumption, especially for the wealth-poor.
    We continue to use Y given in (??) to denote the permanent component of income. Let
x denote the transitory component of income. The total income (in levels), denoted by X, is
given by the product of Y and x, Xt = xt Yt . Empirical researchers often express the income
process in logs, ln Xt = ln Yt + ln xt . In our model, the logarithmic permanent component
ln Y given by (??) follows an arithmetic Brownian motion.


                                                    49
       Let {st : t ≥ 0} denote the transitory income state. For simplicity, we suppose that st
is in one of the two states, G and B, which we refer to the good and bad state respectively.
The transitory income value x equals xG in state G and equals xB in state B, with xB < xG .
Over a small time period (t, t + ∆t), if the current state is G, the transitory state switches
from xG to xB with probability φG ∆t, and stays unchanged with the remaining probability
1 − φG ∆t. Similarly, the transition probability from B to G over a small time period ∆t is
φB ∆t. Technically, we model the transitory income state via a two-state Markov chain.19
       We first summarize the CM setting where the modified PIH consumption rule is optimal.
To construct a CM setting, we need to introduce Arrow securities to span the jump risks.


Human wealth and the PIH. As before, we define human wealth Ht under state st as
the present value of future labor incomes, discounted at the risk-free rate,
                                      Z ∞                    
                                              −r(u−t)
                              Ht = Et        e        xu Yu du .                                     (C.1)
                                                t

Note that transitory income {xu : u ≥ 0} follows a stochastic process. Transitory income
shocks affect human wealth in an economically relevant and interesting way. We denote by
ht the agent’s human wealth scaled by the permanent component Y , i.e. ht = Ht /Yt .
       We show that hB and hG have explicit forms given by
                                                                  
                               xG               φG         xB − xG
                        hG =         1+                              ,                               (C.2)
                             r−µ         r − µ + φG + φB x G
                                                                  
                              xB                φB         xG − xB
                        hB =         1+                              .                               (C.3)
                             r−µ         r − µ + φG + φB x B
As the formula for hG is symmetric to that for hB , we only discuss hG . First consider the
special case where state G is absorbing, i.e. the probability of leaving state G is zero, φG = 0.
Transitory shocks become permanent and hG = xG /(r−µ). More generally, transitory shocks
(φG > 0) induce mean reversion between G and B, which we see from the second term in
(??) for hG .The higher the mean arrival rate φG from state G to B, the lower the value of
hG . Also, the larger the gap (xG − xB ), the lower the value of hG .
       With CM, consumption is given by the PIH rule, c∗s (w) = m∗ (w + hs ), which implies that
scaled consumption is proportional to total wealth x+hs . As expected, the MPC is the same
as (??) for the baseline case. Note that (unscaled) consumption C is continuous under the
  19
   Markov chain specifications of the income process are often used in macro consumption-savings literature.
Our model can be generalized to allow for multiple discrete states for the transitory income component.

                                                    50
CM setting when transitory regime switching risks are purely idiosyncratic. We next solve
for the general incomplete-markets case with both permanent and transitory income shocks.


Incomplete-markets solution. Let V (W, Y ; s) denote the value function with wealth W ,
the permanent component of income Y , and the transitory income state s. In the interior
region with positive wealth, i.e. Wt > 0, we have the following HJB equation,

                                                                              σ2Y 2
  0 = max f (C, V ) + (rW + xs Y − C)VW (W, Y ; s) + µY VY (W, Y ; s) +             VY Y (W, Y ; s)
       C>0                                                                      2
             + φs [V (W, Y ; s0 ) − V (W, Y ; s)] ,                                           (C.4)

where s0 denotes the other discrete state. Note that the total income flow is X = xs Y . The
last term in (??) gives the conditional expected change of V (W, Y ; s) due to transitory income
shocks. Consumption satisfies the FOC, fC (C, V ) = VW (W, Y ; s). Using the homogeneity
property, we write the certainty equivalent wealth P (W, Y ; s) = p(w; s)Y. The following
proposition summarizes the main results.

Proposition 4 The optimal consumption-income ratio cs (w) is given by

                                cs (w) = m∗ ps (w)(p0s (w))−ψ , s = G, B,                      (C.5)

where m∗ is given in (??) and ps (w) solves the following system of ODEs:
            ∗ 0
             m (ps (w))1−ψ − ψρ            γσ 2
                                                
     0 =                          +µ−             ps (w) + xs p0s (w) + (r − µ + γσ 2 )wp0s (w)
                      ψ−1                    2
                 σ 2 w2             (p0s (w))2
                                              
                          00
               +         ps (w) − γ              + φs (ps0 (w) − ps (w)) , s, s0 = G, B .       (C.6)
                    2                ps (w)

The above system of ODEs is solved with the following boundary conditions:

                                  lim ps (w) = w + hs , s = G, B,                              (C.7)
                                 w→∞

where hs is given by (??) and (??) for state G and B, respectively.
   Additionally, consumption at the origin cannot exceed total income which implies

                                       0 < cs (0) ≤ xs , s = G, B.                             (C.8)

We now have two inter-linked ODEs that jointly characterize pG (w) and pB (w). Liquidity
constraints in the two states are now different. In state G, cG (0) can possibly exceed one as

                                                      51
                   A. marginal value of wealth p ′(w)                           B. consumption−income ratio c (w)
                                                 s                                                           s
        1.45                                                         1.15
                                      state G
                                      state B                         1.1
         1.4                          no transitory state
                                                                     1.05

        1.35                                                           1

                                                                     0.95
         1.3
                                                                      0.9

        1.25                                                         0.85

                                                                      0.8
               0      1         2      3        4           5               0      1         2      3        4      5
                          wealth−income ratio w                                        wealth−income ratio w



Figure 11: Permanent and transitory income shocks. Parameter values are: r = 3.5%,
ρ = 4%, σ = 10%, µ = 1.5%, γ = 3, ψ = 1, φG = 0.5, φB = 0.5, xG = 1.2, and xB = 0.8.

the transitory income shock xG > 1. In State B, cB (0) < xB < 1. Therefore, the borrowing
constraint is tighter in state B than in state G.20
       Figure ?? demonstrates the effects of transitory income shocks on marginal value of
liquidity p0s (w) and consumption cs (w) in both G and B states. We choose xG = 1.2 in state
G and xB = 0.8 in state B. The mean transition rates from state B to G and from G to B
are set at φB = φG = 0.5 which implies that the expected durations for both state B and
G are 2 year. Using the formulas for hB and hG , we obtain hB = 49.80 and hG = 50.20.
Because φG = φB , the probability mass for the stationary distribution is πG = πB = 1/2.
       Intuitively, one can view our exercise in this section as a dynamic “mean-preserving”
spread of transitory income shocks around the baseline case where x = 1. The precautionary
savings demand induced by this mean-preserving spread of transitory shocks generates large
curvatures for consumption rules cs (w) in both state G and B especially for low values of w.
       The agent becomes constrained at w = 0 in state B, in that cB (0) = xB = 0.8. In-
  20
    Similarly, following the continuity of the ODE (??) for ps (w) at w = 0 there is an additional condition
at w = 0:
                  ∗ 0
                   m (ps (0))1−ψ − ψρ         γσ 2
                                                       
            0=                        +µ−          − φs ps (0) + xs p0s (0) + φs ps0 (0), s, s0 = G, B .
                          ψ−1                  2




                                                                52
terestingly, when the transitory income switches out of state B and transitions to state G,
consumption jumps from cB (0) = xB = 0.8 to cG (0) = 0.86. Once in state G, the agent
saves xG − cG (0) = 1.2 − 0.86 = 0.34 per unit of permanent component Y , which is much
larger than 0.15 × Y , savings in the benchmark case with permanent earnings shocks only.
Panel A shows that p0 (w) is high for low values of w in state B. For example, p0 (0) = 1.43.
Intuitively speaking, in state B, the agent anticipates her future earnings to be higher and
wants to smooth her consumption by borrowing against her future (higher) earnings, which
may cause the borrowing constraint to bind. As a result, liquidity not only buffers against
uninsurable shocks but also mitigates the impact of a binding borrowing constraint, both of
which contribute to a higher p0 (w) in state B near w = 0. Panel B confirms the intuition
that consumption’s curvature is larger especially near w = 0 in state B than in state G. In
summary, transitory income shocks are critically important in understanding consumption
and savings for the poor and can generate large consumption responses in state B especially
for the w-poor (low w). Finally, we provide a sketch of the proof for Proposition ??.


Proof of Proposition ??. We conjecture that the value function is given by

                                               (bP (W, Y ; s))1−γ
                              V (W, Y ; s) =                      ,                     (C.9)
                                                     1−γ

where b is given in (??) and P (W, Y ; s) is the certainty equivalent wealth. Using (??)
and the consumption FOC, we jointly solve ps (w) and the consumption cs (w) via (??) and
the interrelated ODEs (??) for G and B. As w → ∞, ps (w) → w + hs , where hs is the
corresponding human wealth under state s. Substituting ps (w) = w + hs into (??), we
obtain (??) and (??) for hG and hB , respectively. At w = 0, we have (??). Using the
borrowing constraint at w = 0, i.e. C(0, Y ; s) ≤ X = xs Y , we have (??).




                                               53
