                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    DO FIRMS USE COUPONS AND IN-STORE DISCOUNTS TO STRATEGICALLY
    MARKET EXPERIENCE GOODS OVER THE CONSUMPTION LIFE-CYCLE? THE
                         CASE OF CIGARETTES

                                           Andrew Sfekas
                                           Dean R. Lillard

                                        Working Paper 19310
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19310


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2013




We gratefully acknowledge funding from the National Cancer Institute (Award 5 R01 CA120338-02
) and expert research assistance from Eamon Molloy. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛¸˛

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Andrew Sfekas and Dean R. Lillard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Do Firms Use Coupons and In-store Discounts to Strategically Market Experience Goods
Over the Consumption Life-Cycle? The Case of Cigarettes
Andrew Sfekas and Dean R. Lillard
NBER Working Paper No. 19310
August 2013
JEL No. I1,L1,L66

                                             ABSTRACT

Cigarettes are experience goods – most of their utility value only gets revealed when one consumes
them. We hypothesize a three phase consumer life cycle for experience goods. Consumers initially
do not know their utility from the good or their preferences for particular characteristics, and may
initially choose the most familiar brand. In the second phase, they are informed about the good and
may experiment with different brands. In the third phase, they may become loyal to one brand or exit
the market. Firms could target price discounts for each phase, either to encourage experimentation
(pay-to-switch), to retain customers (pay-to-stay), or to price-discriminate. We use market-level data
on price, sales, in-store discounts, and coupon offers of 15 brands from 1995 to 2007 and individual-level
data on brand choices from 1995 to 2004 to explore whether firms discount cigarettes in ways consistent
with a life-cycle consumption model. We find that the three highest-selling brands primarily discount
as price discrimination and pay-to-stay strategies, while smaller, specialty brands discount to encourage
smokers to switch brands.


Andrew Sfekas
The Fox School of Business and Management
Temple University
Alter Hall
1801 Liacouras Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19122
andrew.sfekas@temple.edu

Dean R. Lillard
Department of Human Sciences
The Ohio State University
1787 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
lillard.13@osu.edu
 Do Firms Use Coupons and In-store Discounts to
 Strategically Market Experience Goods Over the
 Consumption Life-Cycle? The case of cigarettes
      Andrew Sfekas                          Dean R. Lillard
    Temple University            Ohio State University, DIW, and NBER
    sfekas@temple.edu                      lillard.13@osu.edu

                                       Abstract
          Cigarettes are experience goods – most of their utility value only gets
     revealed when one consumes them. We hypothesize a three phase consumer
     life cycle for experience goods. Consumers initially do not know their utility
     from the good or their preferences for particular characteristics, and may
     initially choose the most familiar brand. In the second phase, they are
     informed about the good and may experiment with different brands. In the
     third phase, they may become loyal to one brand or exit the market. Firms
     could target price discounts for each phase, either to encourage
     experimentation (pay-to-switch), to retain customers (pay-to-stay), or to
     price-discriminate. We use market-level data on price, sales, in-store
     discounts, and coupon offers of 15 brands from 1995 to 2007 and
     individual-level data on brand choices from 1995 to 2004 to explore whether
     firms discount cigarettes in ways consistent with a life-cycle consumption
     model. We find that the three highest-selling brands primarily discount as
     price discrimination and pay-to-stay strategies, while smaller, specialty
     brands discount to encourage smokers to switch brands.


1    Introduction
Certain categories of goods are experience goods–most of their utility value is only
revealed when one consumes them (Nelson 1970). Firms in markets for experience
goods face consumers at several different stages of their consumption life-cycle.
New consumers are uninformed about both the products within a category and

                                           1
about the utility of the entire category. Consumers at this pre-initiation stage may
choose to follow the “herd” and experiment with the most popular brands, under
the assumption that current consumers of the product may have useful information
(Banerjee 1992). Following initiation of consumption, consumers gain information
about the category as a whole and about their tastes for specific characteristics of
the good. They then move to a different stage in their life cycle, in which they may
be willing to seek brands that match their preferences more closely, or they may
decide that they prefer not to consume products in the category. Finally, they may
reach a point in their life cycle at which it no longer makes sense to consume the
product.
     The different stages of consumption suggest different pricing and promotional
strategies for firms in this type of industry. Previous studies have shown that firms
can gain an advantage (under some circumstances) by capturing market share
among new consumers (Villas-Boas 2004), and that new entrants may need to
provide discounts to new consumers to encourage them to try the product
(Bergemann and Välimäki 2006). In order to attract the pre-initiation group, firms
may find an advantage in having one heavily advertised and promoted brand with a
large market share. This type of brand could encourage positive word-of-mouth
(Bayus 1985; Keller and Fay 2009) and gain an edge with uninformed consumers.
For the second group, firms may have an alternate goal of attracting targeted
groups of consumers to niche brands. These niche brands may be produced by the
same firms as the major brands (as is generally the case in this paper’s analysis) or
by smaller companies. Regardless, firms may wish to use promotions to pull
consumers away from the major brands and into brands to which they will be more
loyal.
     To investigate how different types of promotions can target consumers at
different points in their life cycle, we examine coupons and in-store discounts in the
cigarette industry. The market for cigarettes is a natural case to study because
life-cycle consumption patterns of cigarettes fit the stylized patterns for other
experience goods. Most consumers start smoking one of three major brands: in
1999, 83.5 percent of smokers ages 18-24 named Marlboro, Camel, or Newport as
their preferred cigarette (Kopstein 2001). In 2004 and 2006 77 percent of
middle-school students and 86 percent of high school students who smoked named
one of these three brands as their preferred cigarette (CDC 2009). In the middle of
the typical smoking life-cycle, smokers either quit, remain loyal to the brand they
started with, or switch to brands that better suit their tastes and/or that are
cheaper. Among smokers age 26 and older, only 46.1 percent still prefer to smoke
Marlboro, Newport, or Camel brands. The remaining smokers choose among other


                                          2
brands which firms markets to more narrowly defined demographic groups (e.g.
Virginia Slims targets women), smokers with specialized tastes (e.g. the niche
brand Gauloises uses very strong tobacco and is well-known for its unfiltered
cigarettes), or to more price-sensitive consumers (e.g. GPC and Basic emphasize
price over quality). After some time, smokers settle on a “final” brand. In the final
stage of the typical smoking life-cycle, almost no smoker switches brands. They
either quit or die as smokers of their chosen brand.
    Given the above consumption patterns, we assign cigarette brands into one of
three categories: brands that command high market share; lesser-known brands
that target niche consumers; and lesser-known brands that target price-sensitive
consumers. We refer to brands in these categories as “major,” “minor,” and
“generic” brands respectively.1 Table 1 lists the brands we assign to each category.
    –Table 1 about here –
    One would expect that firms will offer different types of discounts for brands in
each of the above categories. Firms selling one of the major brands may discount to
existing customers to keep them from switching brands. As we describe below,
firms can target existing customers if they offer discounts that can only be
redeemed if a consumer buys a relatively large minimum amount of a given brand.
Firms selling one of the minor or generic brands may discount to get smokers to try
their brand. They will target smokers of other brands and may focus on relatively
younger smokers of one of the major brands. To target these smokers, firms can
offer discounts on small quantities and that can be redeemed immediately. To
prevent existing customers from exploiting these discounts, the firms limit how
many packs a consumer can buy at the discounted price.
    To examine how discounting behavior relates to the goals of maintaining brand
share or encouraging current consumers to try new brands, we analyze how sales
and consumption vary with three types of discounts: coupons (clipped from
magazines), in-store free pack discounts (e.g. buy 1 get 1 free), and in-store price
discounts (e.g. $1 off). We match market-level data on these discounts to
brand-level sales data from supermarket scanners. The data track discounts and
sales in each of 51 markets from 1994 to 2007. We match the same discount data to
individual data from surveys administered between 1994 and 2004. These data,
from a major marketing survey of individual consumers, measure whether or not a
person smokes and, if he does, the brand he prefers to smoke. With these data we
explore whether brand–level sales and individual brand choices systematically vary
with temporal and geographic variation in discounts of different types.
  1
   To avoid having empty cells of less common brands, we rank brands by sales volume over our
sample period and retain only the top 15 brands.


                                             3
    While existing studies do not directly examine whether firms use price
promotions as suggested above, previous studies provide some empirical support for
the proposition that price promotions affect sales in ways generally consistent with
the above logic. In reviewing studies of price promotions, Blattberg et al. (1995)
find that sales respond strongly to price promotions, but that the effect diminishes
when promotions become more frequent. The evidence they review is inconclusive
about whether price promotions affect sales in the long run or whether promotions
increase sales in the short run primarily because the promotions induce consumers
of other brands to switch or if the promotions induce new consumers to start. In a
meta-analysis, DelVecchio et al. (2006) find mixed evidence about the dynamic
effects of price discounts. They find that effects of discounts depend on whether the
discounts are attached to a service or a packaged good, whether the brand faces a
large number of competitors, and whether consumers are familiar with the brand.
In a study of firm behavior, Allender & Richards (2012) find that firms offer more
frequent but less generous promotions when the firm sells a brand to which
customers are more rather than less loyal. Nevo & Wolfram (2002) investigate
promotions offered by firms selling ready-to-eat breakfast cereals. They explore
what type of strategies the promotions serve. They empirically test whether firms
discount breakfast cereals as a strategy of price discrimination in a given period, to
induce people to switch brands and/or to purchase repeated times, to smooth
seasonal fluctuations in demand, or to help brand managers meet some
performance objective. They find no evidence that firms discount as a way to price
discriminate in a given period but do find some evidence that firms discount to
encourage consumers of other cereal brands to switch to the discounted brand.2
    Our study contributes to the literature on price promotions in several ways.
First, we describe the characteristics of each of three common types of discounts in
terms of how those characteristics allow firms to target groups of consumers in
different life-cycle stages of consumption. Second, we describe strategies that firms
might pursue with each type of discount and relate them to individuals’ life-cycle
patterns of consumption. Third, we use supermarket scanner data from 51
geographic markets to empirically describe the relationship between the number of
discounts of particular types that firms offer for cigarette brands in the three
categories. Finally, we use data from a national consumer survey to examine
whether and how discounts affect the cigarette brands individuals choose to
consume.
   2
    They also find that couponing activity seems to increase towards the end of the fiscal year - a
finding they interpret as consistent with the hypothesis that brand managers issue coupons to meet
performance targets.


                                                4
    Our aggregate and individual results suggest that firms use different types of
discounts for particular types of brands to pursue one or more of both strategies.
For major cigarette brands, firms use free pack discounts to retain less brand-loyal
customers (pay-to-stay). An important component of this retention is in
participation–free pack discounts are associated with greater smoking participation
for older smokers, suggesting that they encourage older smokers not to quit. For
minor cigarette brands, firms use free-pack and coupon discounts to encourage
current smokers to experiment with their brand (pay-to-switch). The effect of
minor brand discounts is greatest in the 26-34 year old age group–a group that will
have experience with cigarettes, but may not yet be locked into a particular brand.
The responsiveness of consumers by age group suggests that the life-cycle
framework is correct: firms target younger smokers for brand-switching and older
smokers for brand retention.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In the next section we
describe the three main strategies we examine and the concomitant patterns one
should observe in our aggregate sales data and data on individual brand choices. In
section 3 we describe the data. There we also estimate a descriptive model of the
number of discounts issued for brands in each category to illustrate factors
associated with variation in each type of discount for each type of brand category.
This analysis reveals patterns consistent with the use of each type to target
particular types of smokers. In section 4 we specify the equations we estimate and
the expected patterns for the coefficients of interest. In section 5 and section 6, we
present results and relate them to the implications predicted by the competing
models. Section 7 summarizes our results.


2    Conceptual framework and hypothesis
     development
To set the stage for the empirical analysis we review models that have been
advanced to accommodate discounts as a profit maximizing strategy and the
empirical patterns those models predict. Nevo & Wolfram (2002) detail most of the
relationships so we only briefly summarize them here. We relate each strategy to
our proposed framework, in which manufacturers try to move some individuals to
niche brands, while also offering promotions for major and generic brands to price
discriminate. We also describe how each type of promotion may be more or less
appropriate for each purpose.



                                          5
2.1     Static price discrimination
In the introduction, we describe a dynamic approach to discounting in which firms
target different groups of consumers at different points in their life cycle.
Additionally, certain discounts would affect consumers’ future behavior by
encouraging them to experiment with other brands. However, a simpler possibility
is that discounts primarily serve a static price discrimination function. This section
describes the expected patterns from such a use.
    To our knowledge, ours is the first study to directly examine whether firms use
price discounts as a static price discrimination strategy. To price discriminate,
firms must have some market power. Although the industry is not a monopoly,
previous research supports the hypothesis that cigarette firms do have some market
power (Sumner 1981; Sullivan 1985; Keeler et al. 1996).3
    Nevo & Wolfram (2002) describe three patterns one should expect when a
monopolist engages in static price discrimination. First, if a firm can price
discriminate it will discount cigarettes for the most price sensitive consumers and
charge other consumers more. Therefore one should observe more discounts when
the average price is higher. Second, overall sales should be higher in periods that
one observes more price discounts. By definition, a firm that pursues a static price
discrimination strategy decides each period whether or not to discount prices.
Consequently, current period sales should not vary with past period discounts.
Finally, if a firm pursues a pure price discrimination strategy, the discounts should
have little effect on brand choice, since all firms target the discounts only at
price-sensitive smokers of their own brand. Note that, because the industry
developed generic cigarette brands to specifically appeal to price sensitive smokers,
discounts on generic cigarette brands are likely to be a price discrimination strategy.
    The above description suggests that price discrimination should lead to the
following patterns:

Hypothesis 1. Sales will be higher in a period that a firm offers more discounts.

Hypothesis 2. Current period sales will not vary with past discounts.

Hypothesis 3. Current period brand choice will not vary with past discounts
(though it may vary with current discounts).

Hypothesis 4. In a given period, price will be positively associated with the
number of discounts.
   3
    In 2010 three firms sold nearly 85 percent of all cigarettes bought in the United States (Maxwell
2011).

                                                 6
   Although retailers may choose the actual sale price, manufacturers could affect
the retail price by changing the wholesale price. As in Agrawal (1996), retailers
would then partially pass through any wholesale price discounts to the consumer.

2.2    Pay-to-switch and pay-to-stay
Corts (1998) and Shaffer & Zhang (2000) offer a dynamic explanation for discounts
that can be adapted to our proposed life cycle model. In both models, firms target
price discounts at either their own customers (Shaffer & Zhang refer to this as
“pay-to-stay”) or other firms’ customers (“pay-to-switch”). In Corts’s model,
relative to the case when firms do not price discriminate, consumers pay a lower
average price if one firm employs the “pay-to-stay” strategy. In Shaffer & Zhang’s
model, however, prices may be higher for some consumers even when one firm pays
its customers to stay. We do not attempt to distinguish between these models in
our analysis. We use Shaffer & Zhang’s pay-to-stay/pay-to-switch framework here,
since its logic is more intuitive.
    A key feature that determines whether a firm adopts a pay-to-stay or
pay-to-switch strategy is the extent and depth of customers’ loyalty to a brand.
Sometimes analysts use a brand’s share of market sales as a proxy for the loyalty of
consumers for that brand. By that metric, younger smokers 18-25 are quite loyal
customers of the dominant cigarette brands–Marlboro, Camel, and
Newport–because those brands accounted for a high share of all sales. Among older
smokers, these three brands account for a smaller share of sales. The falling market
shares suggest that a smoker’s loyalty for these three brands erodes as smokers age.
    If cigarette brands were marketed independently, manufacturers might use a
pay-to-stay strategy to keep consumers from switching to other (minor or generic)
brands. However, the manufacturers of the major brands also have several minor
brands in their portfolio. While pay-to-switch makes sense as a strategy for minor
brands, pay-to-stay might not be an optimal strategy for major brands if they were
paying consumers not to switch to a minor brand. On the other hand, pay-to-stay
would make sense as a strategy if these firms were paying consumers not to quit.
    The pay-to-stay strategy involves a period-by-period choice (i.e. the consumer
decides not to switch in one period, but may choose differently in the following
period). If price discounts serve a pay-to-stay role, one would expect them to have
a positive effect on brand choice in the current period, but have no effect in
subsequent periods. However, there may be a dynamic effect if consumers
eventually become locked into a brand. We expect that only major brands will use
this strategy. This leads us to our next hypotheses:


                                         7
Hypothesis 5. Discounts for major brands will increase current sales but will not
affect future sales.
Hypothesis 6. Discounts for a major brand will raise the probability that a person
chooses the discounted brand in the current period but will not affect the probability
of the brand choice in subsequent periods.
    Of the three discount types, free pack offers may more effectively prevent
consumers from exiting the market than do other types of discounts because
cigarettes are addictive and the consumer must exercise some willpower to cease
smoking. A smoker might be less likely to quit smoking if he uses a free pack offer
because doing so implies that the smoker will have extra packs in his hands. For
that reason, we propose an additional hypothesis:
Hypothesis 7. Firms selling major brands will use free pack discounts to keep
consumers from exiting the market.
    Firms may also use discounts to induce smokers to switch brands. Firms may
be able to take advantage of some consumers’ willingness to search for a better
“fit”, especially since switching behavior may be asymmetric (Blattberg, Briesch,
and Fox 1995). A firm will benefit if they induce consumers to switch because they
will gain consumers who are less likely to be enticed away by competitors’
strategies (Dick and Basu 1994). For a firm that sells both major and minor
brands, one strategy might be for the firm to target its own consumers of the major
brand who are less brand loyal (perhaps because the major brand doesn’t satisfy
their preferred tastes). If the firm can get such customers to switch to one of the
firm’s own smaller targeted brands, it gains a set of consumers of the minor brand
who are more loyal and thus ensures a more stable flow of revenue.
    In the framework of Shaffer & Zhang (2000), offering discounts to switch brands
is referred to as “pay-to-switch.” The firm might not observe any given smoker’s
tastes, but could offer discounts to encourage a broad set of smokers to experiment
with the brand. Some fraction of the smokers will discover the brand matches their
tastes and they will then become loyal customers. We expect that such brands are
more often represented among the “minor” brands because they tend to occupy
special niches. We would therefore expect to see minor brands employ a
pay-to-switch strategy.
    This discussion leads to the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 8. Firms will offer discounts on minor brands as a pay-to-switch
strategy. Successful pay-to-switch discounts will raise the probability a smoker buys
the discounted brand and will increase current and future sales.

                                          8
   By extension, the logic of our proposed consumption life-cycle implies that
consumers will be most susceptible to switching when they are younger; over time
consumers settle on a preferred brand and subsequently respond less to promotions.
This logic leads to one more hypothesis:

Hypothesis 9. Younger consumers will respond more to minor brand discounts
than older consumers.

    Anderson & Song (2004) also suggest that firms pursuing this strategy may find
it optimal to lower their price at the same time as a discount offer. This suggests
the following additional hypothesis:

Hypothesis 10. Holding constant the number of outstanding discount offers, the
price of cigarettes will be lower when more discounts are offered on minor brands.

    An additional consideration is the type of discount that would be appropriate
for pay-to-switch. Ault et al. (2000) and Busse et al. (2006) show that different
methods of discounting are not equivalent. A coupon is likely to be passed through
to consumers at a higher rate than an in-store discount. Coupons also have the
advantage that they can be targeted to some degree (potentially by placing them in
magazines read by the desired demographic). Buy-one-get-one-free offers may not
be suitable as a switching device, since consumers’ primary uncertainty is whether
they will like the new brand. An extra free pack would simply be an offer of two
goods with uncertain quality.
    This leads to one more hypothesis:

Hypothesis 11. Minor brands will use coupons to encourage brand switching,
rather than other types of price promotion.

2.3    Expected empirical patterns
In the aggregate, the static price discrimination and pay-to-stay strategies predict
similar empirical patterns: current sales should increase when current discounts
increase, but current sales should not vary with the number of discounts firms offer
in previous periods. The expected pattern differs for a pay-to-switch strategy.
Current period sales should increase with pay-to-switch discounts in both the
current and past periods. Past period discounts should raise current period sales
because, to be a long run solution, a firm must successfully expand its market and
keep the new smokers loyal or it must successfully steal customers from another
firm who remain loyal at least one more period.

                                         9
    Similar patterns should be evident in the analyses of brand choice in the
individual data. If firms use pay-to-stay strategies, current discounts should
increase the probability of choosing a brand, while past discounts should have little
or no effect. If firms use discounts for static price discrimination, we would only see
this pattern if the discounts caused people to remain in the market. By contrast, if
firms use pay-to-switch strategies, both current and lagged discounts should raise
the probability that a person smokes the discounted brand.
    Table 2 summarizes the expected patterns in aggregate and individual smoking
data associated with each strategy.4
    – Table 2 about here –
    Our hypotheses also predict which types of discounts should fit these patterns,
and which age groups should be most affected. In those cases, the patterns in table
2 should fit for those specific discounts and age groups.


3       Data
We draw data from three sources. We draw aggregate data from AC Nielsen’s
ScanTrack on cigarette brand sales from 1995 to 2007 in 51 metropolitan markets.
We draw individual data from the Simmons National Consumer Surveys (NCS) on
the brands individuals smoke. We pool data from the cross-sectional NCS
administered between 1995 and 2004. To both the aggregate and individual data,
we append data on coupons that cigarette marketers issued in print media in up to
75 metropolitan markets. The coupon data, collected by Marx Promotion
Intelligence, vary over time and across geographic markets.
    In each market AC Nielsen samples stores with total annual sales of at least $1
million. However, the sample excludes convenience stores and WalMart stores. The
data, measured over four week periods, include all information encoded on a
product’s “Uniform Product Code” label (the UPC is the barcode now ubiquitous
on all products). UPC labels include detailed information on the quantity,
packaging, brand, flavor, and many other characteristics of the product. The UPC
also contains information on discounts associated with a product.5
    4
      Others suggest but we do not try to test two other strategies firms might pursue when they
offer discounts. Warner & Barsky (1995) provide evidence to support the hypothesis that firms
discount more on weekends because it costs price-sensitive shoppers less to search on those days.
Aguirregabiria (1999) propose that firms discount to manage inventory and perhaps to reduce
wastage costs.
    5
      We ignore promotional “giveaways” – discounts that give customers a complimentary item –
because it is difficult to know either their retail value or how consumers value them.


                                               10
    We aggregate all data for a given brand to create measures for each quarter of
each year.6 To construct a measure of per-capita sales of each brand, we sum the
number of packs of a given brand sold in each market in each quarter and then
divide by the population in the market. To compute an average price without
discounts, we divide total sales revenue by total packs sold. For that computation
we sum revenue and quantity sold for all cigarettes of a given brand that were sold
without any type of discount. We adjust the resulting prices for inflation (to real
2008 dollars). To measure discounts in each quarter, we create an indicator that
equals “1” if a given UPC code included a price or quantity discount. We then sum
the indictor for all UPC codes of each brand in each quarter. This measure
corresponds to a count of the total number of each type of discount available for
any product within a particular brand in a market and time period.
    We measure coupons as the total number of new coupons issued within a
particular quarter. We track new issues only because coupons often remain in effect
for several weeks after they are originally issued.
    It is important to note that our scanner data probably capture purchases of
smokers who are older than the average smoker. The AC Nielsen sample excludes
cigarettes sold at WalMart and convenience stores. For brands that older smokers
buy, the omission does not matter much but it is reflected in the share of total sales
of brands favored by younger smokers. For example, according to the report
Tobacco Use in America (Kopstein 2001), in 1999 Marlboro had a market share of
56.6 percent among 18-25 year olds and a share of 35.3 percent among smokers
older than 25. In our supermarket scanner data, Marlboro accounts for 31 percent
of all sales. The share of total sales of other cigarette brands in the scanner data
match closely with the share those brands command in nationally representative
data of overall sales.
    Despite the above caveats, our supermarket scanner data are superior in other
ways to data used in previous studies. First, with those data we are able to
construct a time series of detailed brand–specific price data for each quarter from
1995 through 2007. Most studies characterize the price of cigarettes in much less
detail.7 Second, we have detailed data on three different types of discounts: in-store
free pack discounts, in-store cents-off discounts, and coupons. Finally, we
supplement our analysis of the aggregate sales data with individual-level data on
brand choice that complements and enriches the analysis.
   6
     We do not differentiate between different types of the same brand (e.g. “king-size” versus
“regular” Marlboros).
   7
     Most studies use the time series of annual average cigarette prices in each state reported in the
Tax Burden on Tobacco (Orzechowski and Walker 2008).


                                                 11
    The Simmons National Consumer Survey (NCS) is a biannual random-digit dial
phone survey of individuals age 18 and older.8 On average each NCS includes
information on about 15,000 respondents. With sample weights, these data are
nationally representative of the US population living in the 48 states (excluding
Alaska and Hawaii). The surveys collect detailed information on respondents’
demographic characteristics, income, cigarette consumption (including brands
smoked) and smoking behavior. To append time and geographic specific
information on discounts in each market, we use survey information to identify
those respondents who live in one of the areas that AC Nielsen labels as
“Designated Marketing Areas” or DMAs. DMAs generally correspond to
metropolitan areas but specifically Nielsen defines DMA as the geographic area
within which television viewers can receive television signals from the major
television broadcast stations. Because the NCS uses the DMA to define geographic
areas, we can match data on coupon offers and cigarette sales from supermarket
scanner data to individual NCS respondents. Data on each smoker’s preferred
brand is collected in every survey between 1995-2004.
    – Table 3 about here–
    Table 3 presents summary statistics for each of our variables of interest by
brand category. On average, the major brands command the highest price and
generics sell at the lowest price. In terms of absolute numbers, major brands offer
the most free pack and coupon promotions. Generics offer the next largest number
in those categories, and the largest number of cents-off discounts. Minor brands
offer the fewest of all three promotion types. The probability that a firm offered at
least one coupon was similar across the brand categories, but minor brands offered
the fewest.
    Table 4 presents summary statistics from the NCS sample. Approximately 20
percent of the sample were current smokers, close to the national average found in
other samples. Smokers consumed an average of about 17 cigarettes per day,
slightly less than one pack. Seven percent of the sample reported their race as
black, which is below the national average, while about 18 percent reported
Hispanic ethnicity, which is close to the national average. Reported household
income is higher than the national average.
    – Table 4 about here –
  8
      In 1995 and 1996 Simmons administered only one survey per year.




                                               12
3.1    Multi-variate description
In addition to the summary statistics that describe each sample, we use
multivariate analysis to explore patterns in the type of discounts firms offer (free
packs, cents-off, coupons). We estimate the relationship between the number of
promotions of a particular type, price, current and future taxes, other types of
discounts for the same brand and discounts of all for other brands. These estimates
will provide preliminary evidence on our model through hypotheses 4 and 10.
Hypothesis 4 states that if discounts are used for static price discrimination, then
price and number of discounts should be positively related. Hypothesis 10 states
that if discounts are used for pay-to-switch, then price and number of discounts
should be negatively related or unrelated.
    For every cigarette brand i sold in market j in period t we estimate the
following equation:


 DiscountT ypeijt = β0 + β1 P riceijt + β2 T axjt + β3 T axj,t+1             (1)
                    + β3 DiscountOthT ypesijt + β4 Discountojt + ψij + τt + εijt

     where, in market j in period t, DiscountT ypeijt refers to the number of
discounts of a given type offered for brand i, P ricetijt refers to the undiscounted
price of brand i, DiscountOthT ypesijt refers to the other types of discounts offered
for brand i, and Discountojt refers to discounts offered by other brands o that are
in the same brand category and therefore compete with brand i. As before
Discount is a vector of variables that describe how many promotions of other types
a firm concurrently offers on the brand in question. Of course the vector does not
include the discount of the type that is being modeled. We also include market and
time-period fixed effects.
     Table 5 presents results from Equation 1. Among major and generic brands,
more coupons are issued in periods when price is higher. These associations are
consistent with a static price discrimination strategy, in which firms target more
price-sensitive consumers with coupons (allowing the firms to raise the price for
other consumers). For minor brands, price is negative but insignificant, which is
still consistent with (though not strong evidence for) hypothesis 10.
     By contrast, across all three brand categories, firms issue fewer free pack
discounts in markets or periods when the undiscounted price is higher. One
possible reason for this result is that free-pack offers differ from cents-off discounts
because firms must discount in discrete and set amounts. For example, a
“buy-one-get-one-free” offer constitutes a price discount of 50 percent. As the price

                                          13
increases, the opportunity cost of issuing another free pack discount rises relative to
a discount of cents-off because firms cannot offer fractional free-pack discounts.
Consequently, when overall demand or costs increase sufficiently, firms offer fewer
free-pack discounts for all cigarette brands, regardless of type.
    Discounts should be related to cigarette taxes because states and the federal
government impose an excise tax that levies the same per pack tax on all cigarette
brands. When the tax changes, firms can use discounts to affect the relative price
of a particular brand that selected groups pay. In markets or periods when the
current tax is higher, firms selling major brands of cigarettes absorb some of the
current cigarette tax by issuing more free pack and more cents-off discounts. Firms
selling minor brands of cigarettes issue more free pack discounts but fewer cents-off
discounts.
    When the tax is going to rise in the next quarter, firms selling major brands
issue fewer free pack discounts but more cents-off discounts.9 Future taxes do not
affect the number of discounts of other types for minor or generic cigarette brands.
    The relationships shown in Table 5 between current and future taxes and free
pack and cents-off discounts for major brands are consistent with both static price
discrimination and pay-to-stay strategies. Issuing more free pack and cents-off
discounts in response to higher current taxes is equivalent to a firm absorbing some
of the tax increase. That act could either reflect paying one’s customers to stay, or
static price discrimination. However, firms issue fewer free pack discounts for major
brands when the future tax is going to be higher.
    This association suggests firms use the free-pack discounts as a pay-to-stay
strategy because paying customers to stay is less profitable when future demand
falls. If firms cannot pass on all of the tax increase, a higher future tax implies a
lower profit margin.
    Firms issue more cents-off discounts for major brands when both the current
tax is higher (consistent with static price discrimination and pay-to-stay) and when
the future tax is going to be higher. Note that when states increase cigarette taxes,
they almost always simultaneously impose a “floor stock tax” that is equal the
difference between the future and current cigarette tax. That tax is levied on all
cigarettes held in stock on the date the new tax rate takes effect. The latter
association suggests that firms use cents-off discounts as a way to lower inventories
ahead of a tax increase.
    For minor brands, a higher current tax leads firms to issue more free pack
discounts but fewer cents-off discounts. The former association is consistent with
  9
    Because of the legislative process states use to raise taxes, firms usually know well in advance
when the tax will increase.


                                                14
static price discrimination and pay-to-stay strategies. The latter association is a
puzzling result that is not consistent with any of the strategies we consider. In all
other cases, the future cigarette tax does not affect the coupons, free pack, or
cents-off discounts firms offer on minor cigarette brands.
    – Table 5 about here –
    The pattern of coefficients on the other types of own-brand discounts in Table 5
suggests either that firms selling major brands of cigarettes treat discounts of each
type as substitutes for each other, or that they pursue only one type of strategy at
a time. In general, a firm offers fewer discounts of a particular type in markets or
periods the firm offers more of the other two types of discounts. For firms selling
minor brands of cigarettes, cents-off discounts substitute for coupons. For firms
selling generic brands of cigarettes, cents-off discounts complement coupon
discounts and free pack discounts substitute for cents-off discounts.
    The more detailed descriptive results in Table 5 provides the first evidence that
firms use particular types of discounts on particular types of brands to implement
one or more of the above three strategies. We now turn to the aggregate sales
models and models of individual brand choice.


4     Methods and Estimation Equation
In this section, we specify equations that relate discounts to aggregate measures of
consumption and individual brand choice. We relate the models and their
coefficients to each of the hypotheses specified in Section 2.

4.1     Model of per-capita sales
Hypotheses 1, 2, 5, and 8 can be tested using brand-level aggregate per capita sales
data. Hypotheses 1 and 2 state that if firms use discounts for static price
discrimination, then discounts will affect current sales, but not future sales.
Hypothesis 5 is essentially the same as hypotheses 1 and 2, but applies to major
brands pursuing a pay-to-stay strategy: discounts should affect current but not
future sales for major brands. Finally, hypothesis 8 states that minor brands will
use discounts as a pay-to-switch strategy, and thus discounts should increase both
current and future sales.
    We specify a simple model of per capita sales:

    Cbjt = β0 + β1 P ricebjt + β2 Discountbjt + β3 Discountbj,t−1 + ψbj + τt + εbjt   (2)


                                           15
where subscripts b refers to the brand, j refers to the market, and t refers to the
quarter. The dependent variable, Cbjt , is per capita sales of brand b in market j in
quarter t. P ricebjt is the undiscounted price of the brand. Discountsbjt is a vector
of the three brand-specific discount variables. We include a fixed efffect, ψbj , for
each brand b in a given market j and a fixed effect τt for time period t. We
estimate separate models for each brand category. We estimate the model using
ordinary least squares.
    The expected results are that β1 will be negative and significant in all models,
β2 will be positive and significant in all models, and β3 will be positive and
significant for minor brands but insignificant for major and generic brands.
Collectively, this pattern would indicate that major and generic brands pursue
either pay-to-stay or static price discrimination strategies and minor brands pursue
pay-to-switch strategies.
    An alternative model would be the rational addiction model of Becker,
Grossman, & Murphy (1994). The rational addiction model accounts for the
addictive nature of cigarettes by including a lagged consumption term, and
accounts for forward-thinking consumers by including a lead consumption term.
This specification is appropriate if consumers are rational and forward looking.
Empirically, results are qualitatively the same from the specification that includes
leads and lags of consumption and our simpler model. We use the simpler
specification above because rational addiction is not a focus of this paper.

4.2    Model of Individual Brand Choice
Hypotheses 6, 8, 9, and 11 can be tested using individual consumer-level data on
brand choices. Hypothesis 6 states that major brands use discounts for pay-to-stay,
and therefore discounts should positively affect current, but not future, brand
choice. Hypothesis 8 states that minor brands use discounts for pay-to-switch, and
therefore discounts should positively affect both current and future brand choice.
Hypothesis 9 states that younger consumers should be more likely to switch brands,
so that discounts should have a greater effect on this group. Finally, hypothesis 11
states that minor brands should primarily use coupons for pay-to-switch.
    To investigate whether and how discounts affect the brand an individual
chooses, we estimate a conditional logit model. We use data on the brand an
individual currently smokes, the brand’s price, and the number of discounts the
firm offers for each brand. We specify the basic brand–choice model as:
      P r(Brandijt ) = F (β0 + β1 P ricejt + β2 Discountjt + β3 Discountj,t−1     (3)
                       + β4 Xijt + νi + ψj + τt + εijt )

                                         16
    where subscripts i refers to the individual, j refers to the market, and t refers to
the quarter. Brandijt equals 1 when consumer i chooses brand j in period t and 0
otherwise, P ricejt is the price of the brand in market j in period t, and Xijt is a
vector of demographic characteristics. The vector Discountjt includes all three
types of discounts, and interactions between these types of discounts and two
indicators that identify brands in the minor and generic brand categories. These
interaction terms allow the effect of discounts to vary across brand categories. The
individual effect νi is conditioned out, leaving the conventional conditional logit
framework. We also include brand fixed effects and time trends for each type of
brand.10
    One of our hypotheses is that brand-switching will diminish with age. We
therefore estimate some of our models separately for different age groups.
    We also examine smoking participation to test whether firms offer discounts to
expand the market by either encouraging new smokers or retaining older smokers.
We focus separately on individuals between the ages of 18 and 25 and on
individuals older than 25, since almost all smokers start before the age of 26. To
investigate whether discounts affect this decision, we estimate whether the sum of
discounts of each type (across all major brands) affect the probability that an
individual chooses to smoke.
    The smoking participation model is given by:

         P r(Smokeijt ) = F (γ0 + γ1 P ricejt + γ2 Discountjt + γ3 Discountj,t−1    (4)
                          + γ4 Xijt + νi + ψj + τt + εijt )

    where P ricejt is the simple average of the price of the three major brands. The
vectors Discountjt and Discountj,t−1 include three discount measures for current
and past periods respectively. The three variables in each vector are the sum of
discounts of a particular type across all three brands in the major brand category.


5       Aggregate results
Table 6 presents results from the aggregate sales models of major brands (column
1), minor brands (column 2) and generic brands (column 3). All models include
brand-market and time-period fixed effects. We estimate separate models for each
brand type. 11
 10
      When we include brand-specific time trends, the model does not converge.
 11
      Full results are available on request.



                                                17
    The aggregate model provides only limited evidence for most of the hypotheses.
For major brands, both current and lagged free pack discounts are negatively
associated with per capita sales. This could indicate that firms offer more discounts
when sales drop for other reasons, but does not provide support for any of the
hypotheses. A similar pattern holds for free pack offers in the generic brand model.
Cents-off discounts for major brands, however, do appear to have a positive and
significant association with sales, suggesting that they may serve a price
discrimination or pay-to-stay purpose. However, this result does not rule out
inventory management as an explanation.
    In the model of sales of minor brands, the quantity sold varies positively with
the number of coupons issued and the number of free pack discounts in both the
current and past quarter, and with the number of free pack offers in the current
quarter. This suggests that both could serve a dynamic function such as
pay-to-switch.
    Finally, for generic cigarettes, no discount aside from free packs is significantly
associated with per capita sales in the current period.
    – Table 6 about here –
    These results provide some evidence for pay-to-switch for minor brand
discounts, and no evidence in support of static price discrimination or pay-to-stay
for any of the brands. However, the aggregate brand-level data may not capture
substitution between brands, and will not reflect non-supermarket purchases. Thus,
the individual data may be a better indicator of discounting effects.


6       Individual analyses
Table 7 presents results from the individual brand choice model.12 The model uses
discounts on major brands as the reference category and allows discounts to
differentially affect the probability a smoker chooses a minor or generic cigarette
brand.
    – Table 7 about here –
    Because the interaction terms make it difficult to focus on the effect of
discounts of a particular type, we use the results from Table 7 to compute the total
direct effect of each discount type. In Figure 1 we plot the correlation between each
type of discount and the probability a person smokes a cigarette brand in the
major, minor, or generic brand categories (running left to right respectively for
each type of discount).
 12
      We discuss only the results on discount variables. Full results are available on request.


                                                  18
     The results are consistent with several of our hypotheses. Consistent with
hypothesis 6, current free pack discounts are associated with a higher probability of
choosing a brand for the major brands, but past free pack discounts are not. As we
noted in the conceptual framework, free pack discounts would be better suited for
pay-to-stay than other types because the consumer has additional product on hand
as a result of the purchase.
     Consistent with hypothesis 8, free pack and coupon discounts for minor brands
fit the pattern for pay-to-switch–both current and past discounts are positively
associated with a higher probability of choosing the brand. However, only the
coupon results provide evidence for 11; we expected that coupons would be more
suitable than free packs for pay-to-switch because the consumer may prefer a more
straightforward discount in case the brand is not a good match.
     – Figure 1 about here –
     A person is more likely to smoke a major brand of cigarettes when firms offer
more cents-off discounts for major cigarette brands in the current period. Past
cents-off discounts on major brands do not affect the probability an individual
smokes a major brand. This pattern is consistent with price discrimination or
pay-to-stay strategies. The probability a smoker chooses a minor or generic brand
is uncorrelated with either current or past cents-off discounts on those brands.
     Our last analysis explores whether discounting in current and past periods
differentially affects the probability of smoking participation of smokers by age.
Table 8 presents selected coefficient estimates on current and past period discounts
of each type from the model of smoking participation. The first column presents
results from the sample of people age 18 to 25 years old. The second column
presents results for the sample that is 26 and older.
     – Table 8 about here –
     The results in Table 8 generally suggest that discounts do not serve a
pay-to-switch strategy that is targeted at younger smokers.13 In the younger
sample, we find marginally significant and positive associations only for past period
free pack discounts for generic brands and coupon discounts for minor brands. We
note again that new smokers rarely choose to smoke generic or minor brands.
Consequently, it is unclear what behavior these associations reflect. Further,
though point estimates on some of the coefficients from the younger sample are
larger than the point estimtes in the older sample, the standard errors are also
large. One cannot reject the hypothesis of equality in the coefficients across the two
samples. The results provide no evidence of age patterns in the participation model
and thus no evidence that firms selectively discount to youth.
 13
      If such a strategy targeted non–smoking youth, it might be a pay-to-start strategy.


                                                 19
    The relatively few statistically significant associations on discounts from the
sample of older respondents are mixed. Respondents older than 26 are more likely
to smoke in markets and periods when firms offer more free-pack discounts for
major brands in the current period and more coupons for major brands in the past
period. But they are less likely to smoke when firms offer more free-pack discounts
for minor brands in the current period and more coupons for generic brands in the
previous period. The first set of associations could arise if those discounts convince
smokers to not quit. It is unclear what might explain the second set of results.
    The results overall suggest that minor brands use free pack discounts and
coupons to encourage switching, and that the largest effect is in the 25-34 year old
age group. These results are consistent with our life cycle model of consumer
behavior, since this age group has some experience but may not have settled on a
brand. Major brands appear to use free pack discounts to encourage consumers to
stay, and in particular may use these discounts to encourage older smokers not to
quit. It is less clear what purpose cents-off discounts serve, though they may
function as a mechanism for inventory management. Additionally, it is not clear
what purpose discounts serve for generic brands.


7    Conclusion
In the consumption of experience goods, consumers may follow life-cycle patterns in
which they start with a popular brand, experiment with niche brands, and finally
settle on a single brand or drop out of the market. Firms selling each of these
brands could take this life cycle of consumption into account when setting prices or
targeting price promotions. This paper investigated the use of three types of
discounts in cigarette markets–in-store free pack giveaways (buy-one-get-one-free),
in-store cents-off discounts, and coupons–to determine whether empirical patterns
suggested that firms target discounts to reflect the consumer’s life cycle.
    Our analysis focused on the cigarette market. We examined patterns in data on
the number of discounts offered of each type, aggregate sales, individual brand
choice, and individual smoking participation. We explored whether those patterns
were consistent with the hypothesis that firms use these promotions to price
discriminate, to keep existing consumers (pay-to-stay) or to attract new consumers
from other brands (pay-to-switch). Although we were not able to determine the
strategies behind several types of discounts, we were able to identify evidence
consistent with each of the strategies. Further, the empirical evidence suggested
that each of these strategies affected consumers at the expected point in their life
cycle: older consumers appear to be affected more by pay-to-stay strategies, while

                                          20
younger, but somewhat experienced, consumers appear to be affected more by
pay-to-switch strategies. Also in keeping with our hypotheses, the larger brand
discounts were a better fit for pay-to-stay, while the smaller (minor) brand
discounts were more consistent with pay-to-switch.
    More broadly, we find evidence consistent with the hypothesis that firms use
price promotions for pay-to-stay and pay-to-switch strategies, as suggested by
Shaffer & Zhang (2000). We found that dominant brands were more likely to
pursue pay-to-stay strategies, while fringe brands tended to use pay-to-switch
strategies. The brands pursuing pay-to-switch strategies were those that compete
on product characteristics, rather than price. For minor brands, firms must
convince consumers to try their brand in the first place, in the hopes of finding a
better match than their current brand. We found no evidence that per capita sales
or individual brand choices changed when firms issued any type of discount (past or
present) for generic brands of cigarettes. The absence of a pattern was surprising
because firms developed generic brands to specifically appeal to price sensitive
consumers. But we find no pattern to suggest that firms discount generic brands of
cigarettes as a price discrimination strategy.
    In terms of the type of discount, we found some expected patterns and some
unexpected patterns. Coupons appear to serve a pay-to-switch role for minor
brands–an expected result, since it should be easier to target a coupon than other
types of discount. However, free packs also appear to serve this purpose, an
unexpected result since the consumer would be left with extra product if the brand
does not match the consumer’s preferences. Free packs for major brands appear to
serve a pay-to-stay function, and may serve the purpose of retaining older
consumers in the market. This is intuitively appealing, since a consumer who is
trying to quit may have more difficulty if the firm is able to give that consumer
more of the product.
    Of course firms may use discounts to pursue other strategies in multiple
combinations. When selling a dominant brand, a firm may be in a position to
pursue a simple price discrimination strategy in conjunction with a pay-to-stay
strategy. More generally, some firms sell both major and minor brands. For those
firms it will likely be optimal to pursue multiple strategies. While certain
consumers will seek out other brands that may better match their preferences,
others may simply choose to exit the market entirely when the cost is too high. By
targeting specific types of discounts at this group of consumers, a firm may entice
them to continue to smoke.
    Overall it is clear that firms use discounts of different types with different
brands to pursue a complex and nuanced set of strategies, and that these strategies


                                        21
appear to target consumers at different points in their life cycles. While our data
do not allow us to test whether firms use the discounts to attract new smokers, it
seems plausible that they might. Alternatively, they may attract new smokers by
maintaining a critical mass in their largest (major) brand. The interplay between
moving consumers to niche brands, where they may be more loyal, and keeping a
critical mass in the major brand, to capture new consumers, may be an important
topic for future research.


References
 Agrawal, D. 1996. “Effect of brand loyalty on advertising and trade promotions:
    A game theoretic analysis with empirical evidence.” Marketing Science 15 (1):
    86–108.
 Aguirregabiria, Victor. 1999. “The Dynamics of Markups and Inventories in
   Retailing Firms.” The Review of Economic Studies 66 (2): 275–308.
 Allender, WJ, and TJ Richards. 2012. “Brand loyalty and price promotion
    strategies: An empirical analysis.” Journal of Retailing 88 (3): 323–342.
 Anderson, ET, and I Song. 2004. “Coordinating price reductions and coupon
   events.” Journal of Marketing Research 41 (4): 411–422.
 Ault, RW, TR Beard, DN Laband, and RP Saba. 2000. “Rebates, inventories, and
    intertemporal price discrimination.” Economic Inquiry 38 (4): 570–578.
 Banerjee, AV. 1992. “A simple model of herd behavior.” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 107 (3): 797–817.
 Bayus, B. 1985. “Word of mouth: The indirect effects of marketing efforts.”
    Journal of Advertising Research 25 (3): 31–40.
 Becker, Gary S, Michael Grossman, and Kevin M Murphy. 1994. “An Empirical
    Analysis of Cigarette Addiction.” American Economic Review 84 (3): 396–418.
 Bergemann, D, and J Välimäki. 2006. “Dynamic pricing of new experience
    goods.” Journal of Political Economy 114 (4): 713–743.
 Blattberg, RC, R Briesch, and EJ Fox. 1995. “How promotions work.” Marketing
    Science 14 (3): G122–G132.
 Busse, M, J Silva-Risso, and F Zettelmeyer. 2006. “$1,000 cash back: The
    pass-through of auto manufacturer promotions.” American Economic Review
    96 (4): 1253–1270.


                                        22
CDC. 2009. “Cigarette Brand Preference Among Middle and High School
  Students Who Are Established Smokers—United States, 2004 and 2006.”
  Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 58 (5): 112–115.
Corts, Kenneth S. 1998. “Third-Degree Price Discrimination in Oligopoly:
   All-Out Competition and Strategic Commitment.” The RAND Journal of
   Economics 29 (2): 306–323.
DelVecchio, D, and DH Henard. 2006. “The effect of sales promotion on
   post-promotion brand preference: A meta-analysis.” Journal of Retailing 82
   (3): 203–213.
Dick, AS, and K Basu. 1994. “Customer loyalty: Toward an integrated conceptual
   framework.” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 22 (2): 99–113.
Keeler, Theodore, Teh-Wei Hu, Paul Barnett, and Hai-Yen Sung. 1996. “Do
   cigarette producers price discriminate by state? An empirical analysis of local
   cigarette pricing and taxation.” Journal of Health Economics 15 (4): 499–512.
Keller, E, and B Fay. 2009. “The role of advertising in word of mouth.” Journal
   of Advertising Research 49 (2): 154–158.
Kopstein, A. 2001. Tobacco Use in America: Findings from the 1999 National
  Household Survey on Drug Abuse. Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and
  Mental Health Administration.
Maxwell, JC. 2011. The Maxwell Report: Year End & Fourth Quarter 2010 Sales
  Estimates for the Cigarette Industry. Richmond: John C Maxwell, jr.
Nelson, P. 1970. “Information and consumer behavior.” Journal of Political
   Economy 78 (2): 311–329.
Nevo, Aviv, and Catherine Wolfram. 2002. “Why Do Manufacturers Issue
   Coupons? An Empirical Analysis of Breakfast Cereals.” The RAND Journal
   of Economics 33 (2): 319–339.
Orzechowski and Walker. 2008. The Tax Burden on Tobacco. Orzechowski and
   Walker.
Shaffer, Greg, and Z John Zhang. 2000. “Pay to Switch or Pay to Stay:
   Preference-Based Price Discrimination in Markets with Switching Costs.”
   Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 9 (3): 397–424.
Sullivan, D. 1985. “Testing hypotheses about firm behavior in the cigarette
   industry.” Journal of Political Economy 93 (3): 586–598.



                                       23
Sumner, Daniel. 1981. “Measurement of monopoly behavior: an application to the
  cigarette industry.” Journal of Political Economy 89 (5): 1010–1019.
Villas-Boas, JM. 2004. “Consumer learning, brand loyalty, and competition.”
    Marketing Science 23 (1): 134–145.
Warner, EJ, and RB Barsky. 1995. “The timing and magnitude of retail store
  markdowns: Evidence from weekends and holidays.” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 110 (2): 321–352.




                                      24
           Table 1: Brands in Major, Minor, and Generic Categories
                       Major           Minor           Generic
                      Marlboro          Kool            Doral
                      Newport         Pall Mall         Basic
                       Camel          Winston           GPC
                                        Salem
                                        Merit
                                     Parliament
                                   Virginia Slims
                                  Benson & Hedges
                                       Carlton




Table 2: Expected Pattern of Association between Discounts and Outcomes Under
Four Hypotheses, by timing of promotion

 Strategy                        Aggregate per capita sales      Individual brand choice
 Static price discrimination
 Current discounts                          positive                    positive
 Past discounts                              zero                        zero
 Pay-to-stay
 Current discounts                          positive                    positive
 Past discounts                              zero                        zero
 Pay-to-switch
 Current discounts                          positive                    positive
 Past discounts                             positive                    positive




                                       25
            Table 3: Summary Statistics–Brand-level Data
                            Major brands      Minor brands   Generic brands
Price                           2.98              2.85            2.39
                               (1.03)            (1.06)           0.88
Number of Discounts
Free packs                       4.38             0.78             0.85
                                (5.07)           (2.19)           (1.84)
Cents-off                        0.33             0.14             0.56
                                (1.43)           (0.82)           (2.35)
Coupons                          0.11             0.02             0.04
                                (0.77)           (0.17)           (0.29)
Any new coupon                   0.03             0.01             0.03
                                (0.18)           (0.12)           (0.17)
 Notes: Data measured per calendar year quarter. Price in 2008 dollars.




            Table 4: Summary Statistics–Individual Data
                                      Mean     Std. Dev    Min     Max
    Current smoker                    0.195      0.396      0       1
    Cigarettes per day                16.57      10.43     2.5      40
    Black                             0.071      0.256      0        1
    Hispanic                          0.177      0.381      0        1
    Female                            0.549      0.498      0        1
    Age                               46.45      16.25     18       77
    Less than high school             0.126      0.331      0        1
    High school grad                  0.267      0.442      0        1
    Some college                      0.262      0.440      0        1
    College grad                      0.328      0.470      0        1
    Married                           0.649      0.477      0        1
    Divorced                          0.092      0.289      0        1
    Widowed                           0.063      0.243      0       1
    Separated                         0.020      0.140      0       1
    Real household income/10000       8.309      6.156    0.224   30.898
            Notes: N=192,541 individuals overall (36,174 smokers).




                                     26
                                                      Table 5: Number of discounts issued


                                             Coupons                                      Free packs                                      Cents-off
     Variable                  Major          Minor          Generic         Major          Minor           Generic         Major           Minor         Generic
     Price                    0.123***      -0.009           0.020***      -2.112***      -0.762***        -0.168*         0.002           0.073***       0.384***
                             (0.032)        (0.008)         (0.008)        (0.117)        (0.037)          (0.094)        (0.054)         (0.020)        (0.107)
     Current tax             -0.115         -0.008          -0.018          2.333***       0.375***         0.124          0.630***       -0.220***      -0.322
                             (0.077)        (0.021)         (0.018)        (0.282)        (0.099)          (0.222)        (0.128)         (0.053)        (0.252)
     Future tax               0.019         -0.009           0.010         -0.724***       0.082            0.036          0.243**         0.071         -0.186
                             (0.069)        (0.019)         (0.017)        (0.254)        (0.090)          (0.199)        (0.115)         (0.048)        (0.226)
     Own brand
     Coupons                     —               —              —          -0.093**         0.002           0.192          0.007          -0.036**        0.432***
                                                                           (0.042)         (0.031)         (0.136)        (0.019)         (0.016)        (0.155)
     Free packs              -0.007**        0.000           0.001             —               —               —          -0.022***        0.002         -0.156***




27
                             (0.003)        (0.001)         (0.001)                                                       (0.005)         (0.003)        (0.013)
     Cents-off                0.002         -0.006**         0.002***      -0.106***        0.006          -0.120***          —               —              —
                             (0.007)        (0.003)         (0.001)        (0.025)         (0.012)         (0.010)
     Other brands
     Coupons                 -0.014***       0.010***        0.007***      -0.011           0.008*         -0.000         -0.002           0.001         -0.010
                             (0.003)        (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.012)         (0.004)         (0.009)        (0.005)         (0.002)        (0.010)
     Free packs               0.001          0.000          -0.000         -0.018***       -0.020***       -0.027***       0.008***        0.002***       0.011***
                             (0.001)        (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.005)         (0.002)         (0.003)        (0.002)         (0.001)        (0.004)
     Cents-off                0.001          0.000          -0.001*         0.011**        -0.004**         0.035***      -0.007***        0.005***      -0.010**
                             (0.001)        (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.005)         (0.002)         (0.004)        (0.002)         (0.001)        (0.005)
     R2                       0.24           0.10            0.24           0.44            0.13            0.24           0.11            0.03           0.13
     N                          8010          24030            8010           8010           24030            8010           8010           24030           8010
     Notes: standard errors in parentheses. All models include a constant, market and time fixed effects. Price and tax are adjusted for inflation to 2008
                         dollars. Coefficients that differ statistically from zero denoted by * (p < 0.10), ** (p < 0.05), *** (p < 0.01)
                   Table 6: Per Capita Cigarette Sales, by brand category

           Variable                             Major brands        Minor brands       Generic brands
           Price                                    -0.015             -0.006                0.002
                                                  (0.007)*           (0.000)**             (0.003)
           # of free pack offers                    -0.006              0.004               -0.002
                                                 (0.001)**           (0.000)**            (0.001)*
           # of cents-off offers                    0.008              -0.001                0.001
                                                  (0.004)*            (0.001)              (0.001)
           # of new coupon offers                   0.002               0.012               -0.006
                                                   (0.004)           (0.001)**             (0.006)
           Lag # of free pack offers                -0.009             0.002                 0.000
                                                 (0.001)**           (0.000)**             (0.001)
           Lag # of cents-off offers                0.005              0.005                -0.002
                                                   (0.004)           (0.001)**            (0.001)*
           Lag # of new coupon offers               0.001               0.011               -0.009
                                                   (0.004)           (0.001)**             (0.006)
           N                                         7854              23562                 7854
  Notes: standard errors in parentheses. All models include a constant, corresponding discount offers for other
  brands in each category, price and the lagged and lead value of total per capita sales of all cigarettes in each
market. Sales measured per 1,000 population. Price is adjusted for inflation to 2008 dollars. Coefficients that differ
                  statistically from zero denoted by * (p < 0.10), ** (p < 0.05), *** (p < 0.01)




                                                         28
Table 7: Conditional logit coefficients on probability of brand choice (smokers only)
                                                All ages        Ages 18-24   Ages 25-34   Ages ¿34
                 Current period offers
                 Free packs                        0.010            0.015       0.009        0.011
                                               (0.002)**        (0.005)**     (0.004)*    (0.002)**
                 Free packs X minor                0.005           -0.021        0.045        0.001
                                                 (0.006)          (0.021)    (0.017)**      (0.007)
                 Free packs X generic             -0.008           -0.044       -0.010       -0.007
                                                 (0.005)          (0.027)      (0.015)      (0.006)
                 Cents-off                         0.044            0.057        0.040        0.039
                                               (0.006)**        (0.014)**    (0.013)**    (0.008)**
                 Cents-off X minor                -0.026           -0.028       -0.042       -0.020
                                               (0.009)**          (0.035)      (0.026)      (0.011)
                 Cents-off X generic              -0.047           -0.099       -0.075       -0.035
                                               (0.015)**          (0.077)      (0.039)     (0.017)*
                 Coupons                          -0.023           -0.042       -0.009       -0.011
                                                (0.011)*          (0.026)      (0.025)      (0.015)
                 Coupons X minor                   0.088            0.166        0.144        0.061
                                               (0.019)**         (0.073)*    (0.051)**    (0.023)**
                 Coupons X generic                 0.076            0.176       0.088         0.062
                                                 (0.058)          (0.238)      (0.160)      (0.066)
                 Previous period offers
                 Lag free packs                    0.015           0.013        0.019         0.015
                                               (0.002)**        (0.005)**    (0.004)**    (0.002)**
                 Lag free packs X minor            0.014           0.033        0.024         0.009
                                                (0.006)*         (0.020)      (0.018)       (0.007)
                 Lag free packs X generic         -0.009           0.016       -0.005        -0.011
                                                 (0.005)         (0.025)      (0.015)       (0.006)
                 Lag cents-off                    -0.005          -0.011        0.012        -0.002
                                                 (0.007)         (0.016)      (0.015)       (0.009)
                 Lag cents-off X minor            0.005           -0.037        0.010        0.002
                                                 (0.009)         (0.037)      (0.026)       (0.011)
                 Lag cents-off X generic          -0.010          0.050         0.014        -0.024
                                                 (0.017)         (0.067)      (0.041)       (0.020)
                 Lag coupons                       0.007           0.023        0.024        -0.008
                                                 (0.011)         (0.024)      (0.023)       (0.016)
                 Lag coupons X minor               0.060          -0.027       0.118          0.067
                                               (0.023)**         (0.096)      (0.060)      (0.027)*
                 Lag coupons X generic            -0.018          -0.412        0.142        0.006
                                                 (0.071)         (0.402)      (0.189)       (0.079)
                 N                             1,514,345         156,359      298,067     1,059,919
Notes: standard errors in parentheses. All models include brand fixed effects. Coefficients that differ statistically
                 from zero denoted by * (p < 0.10), ** (p < 0.05), *** (p < 0.01) respectively.




                                                           29
Figure 1: Estimated Correlation between Discounts and the Probability a Smoker
Chose a Major, Minor, or Generic Cigarette Brand, by discount type




                                     30
Table 8: Selected Coefficients from Probit Model of Smoking Participation, by age
group

                        Variable                               Age 18 to 25         Age 26+
                        Current period discounts
                        Cents-off major                         0.0068              0.0010
                                                               (0.0063)            (0.0022)
                        Cents-off minor                         0.0011             -0.0013
                                                               (0.0043)            (0.0013)
                        Cents-off generic                       0.0084             -0.0001
                                                               (0.0062)            (0.0021)
                        Free packs major                        0.0027              0.0035***
                                                               (0.0032)            (0.0011)
                        Free packs minor                       -0.0065**           -0.0025***
                                                               (0.0027)            (0.0009)
                        Free packs generic                      0.0016             -0.0002
                                                               (0.0046)            (0.0015)
                        Coupons major                           0.0002             -0.0023
                                                               (0.0127)            (0.0043)
                        Coupons minor                          -0.0030              0.0001
                                                               (0.0046)            (0.0016)
                        Coupons generic                        -0.0327              0.0123
                                                               (0.0488)            (0.0162)
                        Past period discounts
                        Cents-off major                        -0.0065             -0.0025
                                                               (0.0067)            (0.0024)
                        Cents-off minor                         0.0040              0.0010
                                                               (0.0049)            (0.0015)
                        Cents-off generic                      -0.0087             -0.0026
                                                               (0.0071)            (0.0024)
                        Free packs major                        0.0006             -0.0016
                                                               (0.0030)            (0.0010)
                        Free packs minor                        0.0019              0.0015
                                                               (0.0028)            (0.0009)
                        Free packs generic                      0.0086*             0.0012
                                                               (0.0047)            (0.0016)
                        Coupons major                           0.0117              0.0078**
                                                               (0.0104)            (0.0035)
                        Coupons minor                           0.0083**            0.0019
                                                               (0.0042)            (0.0014)
                        Coupons generic                        -0.0448             -0.0308**
                                                               (0.0454)            (0.0155)
                        N                                          8996               86765
                        P seudoR2                               0.060               0.080
    Notes: standard errors in parentheses. All models include a constant, the average price of major, minor, and
    generic brands of cigarettes, race, sex, employment status, educational attainment, marital status, household
 income, age, age squared, whether the respondent is the head of household, the age of the household head, market
fixed effects, and a linear time trend. Prices and income31 are adjusted for inflation to 2008 dollars. Coefficients that
                  differ statistically from zero denoted by * (p < 0.10), ** (p < 0.05), *** (p < 0.01)
