                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       EFFICIENT CONTRACTS
                     WITH COSTLY ADJUSTMENT:
                SHORT-RUN EMPLOYMENT DETERMINATION
                      FOR AIRLINE MECHANICS




                            David Card




                      Working Paper No. 1931




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                              May 1986




I am grateful to Robert LaLonde for his assistance in gathering the
data in this paper, and to Orley Ashenfelter, Jim Brown, John
Pencavel, John Taylor, and an anonymous referee for comments on
earlier drafts. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research,
                                                Working Paper #1931
                                                May 1986




                 Efficient Contracts with Costly Adjustment:
           Short-Run Employment Determination for Airline Mechanics




                                   ABSTRACT




     This paper presents an empirical analysis of firm—specific

employment and wage outcomes for mechanics in the domestic airline

industry. A dynamic contracting model is presented that incorporates

both costly employment adjustment and potential gaps between contract

wage rates and the opportunity value of workers' time. The model gives

a useful description of the employment-output linkage in the data, but

is less successful in capturing the dynamic relation between employment,

contract wage rates, and wage rates outside the airline industry.




                                       David Card
                                       Department of Economics
                                       Princeton University
                                       Princeton, NJ 08544
                                       609—452—4045
     The search for a credible interpretation of observed employment

patterns has lead to widespread interest in the notion of efficient

labor contracts)-" In contrast to traditional auction models of the

labor market, which relate fluctuations in employment directly to changes

in wage rates, contracting models permit a more flexible link between

wage payments and employment determination. According to the simplest

version of the efficient contracting hypothesis, in fact, the level of

employment maximizes the joint income of workers and the firm, while the

level of wages represents a pure transfer between them.   If this "strong

form" efficiency hypothesis is correct, then it calls into question a

wide variety of policy conclusions based on the assumed distortionary

effects of union wage differentials and short-term wage rigidities.V

     A simple test of the efficient contracting hypothesis is provided

by a firm—level employment equation that includes both the wage rate at

the firm and some measure of the alternative wage available to

workers..! According to the strong form efficiency hypothesis, the

joint income of workers and the firm is maximized when the marginal

value product of labor equals its outside opportunity wage. If this

hypothesis is correct, employment is independent of firm—specific wage

rates and depends only on the alternative wage rate.   In the traditional

labor demand model, by comparison, the firm's profits are maximized when

the marginal value product of labor equals the firm—specific wage. If

this model is correct, then employment is independent of alternative

wage rates and depends only on the firm's wage rate. Finally, in a

general contracting model, labor is allocated between outside oppor-

tunities and contract employment on the basis of a shadow value that

varies with both firm—specific and alternative wage rates.
                                 —2—




     In a dynamic setting, however, tests of even simple efficient

contract models are complicated by the fact that alternative wage rates

may help to predict future contract wage rates. Suppose for example

that employment adjusts toward a target level that depends on a weighted

average of future contract wage rates. In this case, even if desired

employment is independent of alternative wages, current and lagged

alternative wages rates may enter the employment equation as predictors

of future contract wages.

     In a dynamic model it is therefore necessary to sort out two

competing routes for the alternative wage to influence the level of

contract employment: (I) directly, through the appropriate

expression for the shadow value of labor; and (ii) indirectly, through

the statistical link between current alternative wage rates and expected

future contract wage rates.

     This paper presents an empirical analysis of the potential links

between wage rates and employment for mechanics in the domestic airline

industry. The data consist of quarterly observations on employment,

output and wages for seven major airlines, drawn from the period prior

to deregulation of the industry. Wage rate information is taken from

union contracts covering mechanics at each of the seven airlines, while

employment and output data are taken from Civil Aeronautics Board

records.

     The first section of the paper presents a preliminary analysis of

the data using unrestricted vector-autoregressions. The analysis

reveals a striking similarity between the serial correlation properties
                                  —3—




of these micro—level data, and the properties of more familiar aggregate

data. The analysis also shows that aggregate manufacturing wage rates

are an important determinant of both employment levels and wage rates

for airline mechanics. On the assumption that the manufacturing wage

rate represents the alternative wage rate for airline mechanics, the

observed link between mechanics' employment and manufacturing wages can

be attributed either to efficient contracting considerations, or to the

fact that manufacturing wages help predict future contract wage rates,

or both.

     The second section of the paper presents a simple intertemporal

contracting model in which it is possible to disentangle these two

effects. The model assumes that employment and wages are selected to

minimize the cost of aircraft maintenance, subject to a utility

constraint for mechanics. Adjustment costs are introduced on the firm's

side to generate an employment function with serial persistence and gra-

dual adjustment to output shocks. Two specifications of workers' pre-

ferences are presented that yield alternative expressions for the shadow

value of labor in an optimal contract. The traditional labor demand

model and the strong form efficient contracting model are obtained as

special cases of the general model.

     The model yields a partial-adjustment employment equation that

expresses current employment in terms of lagged employment, lagged

departures and lagged wage rates. The model generates testible restric-

tions across the employment equation and the forecasting equations for

output and wages, and summarizes the employment effect of alternative
                                     —4—




wage rates in terms of two components: a direct effect on the desired

level of employment; and on indirect effect on forecasts of future

contract wages.

     The third section of the paper presents the results of fitting the

model to data on departures, wages, and employment for the seven airline

firms. The empirical analysis is generally unsupportive of either the

strong form efficient contracting model or the labor demand model. Both

models are rejected in favor of a more general contracting model in

which the opportunity cost of employment is a weighted average of the

contract wage and the alternative wage. The parameter estimates for all

three models are poorly determined, however, and the implied reduced

forms fail to reconcile all the dynamic linkages between contract wages,

alternative wages, and employment.


I.   Preliminary Data Analysis

      The data in this paper consist of quarterly observations on

employment and wages for aircraft mechanics employed in the domestic

operations of seven airlines: American, Braniff, Continental, Eastern,

Trans World, United, and Western.-'' Employment, earnings, and flight

data were collected from various Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB) sources

for the period 1969—I to l976—IV." Wage rates were collected from

union contracts summarized in Current Wage Developments and the Bureau

of National Affairs' Daily Labor Report.

      Mechanics at these airlines are represented by three unions:

the Transport Workers Union (TWU) at American; the Teamsters (181) at
                                  —5—



Western; and the Machinists (IAN) at the other five airlines. Although

the LAM bargained individually with these five airlines during the

sample period, contract terms and expiration dates differed little bet—

ween them. Differences among the lAM contracts were due mainly to

delays in signing new contracts at the individual airlines.1''

     Table 1 presents annual data on nominal and real wage rates for

airline mechanics at the various firms between 1969 and l976. There

were only small and unsystematic differences between wage rates nego-

tiated by the three unions. Compared to other workers, however, airline

mechanics earned relatively high wage rates during this period: 50 to

60 percent higher than average straight-time hourly earnings in manufac-

turing, for example, and about 25 percent higher than average hourly

earnings reported by maintenance mechanics in manufacturing. Airline

mechanics also earned a small premium (5 to 15 percent) over unionized

mechanics at the major aircraft companies.

     Airline mechanics' nominal wage rates are established in two or

three year contracts that typically include both noncontingent deferred

increases and cost—of—living allowance clauses. During the sample

period new agreements were negotiated in 1969 (from March to December,

depending on airline), 1971-72 (from May 1971 to December 1972), 1973—74

(from November 1973 to August 1974), and 1975—76 (from December 1975 to

September 1976). Because of deferred increases and cost-of—living

adjustments, however, the relation between contract negotiations and

real wage rates is indirect. Real wage rates increased over the term of

the 1969 contracts, for example, but were more or less constant between
                                  -6-



1973 and 1976.

    The behavior of real contract wage rates is analyzed more formally

in Table 2. Column (1) presents a simple second—order autoregression

(AR(2)) fit jointly to the logarithms of contract wage rates for all

seven airlines, with unrestricted constants, trends and seasonal dummy

variables for each air1ine.-" As is apparently true for aggregate real

wage rates, the contract wage for airline mechanics is approximately a

first—order autoregressive process, with something less than a unit

autoregressive coefficient.—" For purposes of comparison with the

results from a longer sample period, column (6) of the Table presents

the same representation of contract wage rates fit to an extended sample

period (1964 to 1978). The addition of seven extra years of data has no

appreciable impact on the estimated coefficients, however.

     The second, third and fourth columns of Table 2 contain estimates

of real wage regressions that include lagged values of manufacturing

wages and consumer prices. Each of these two aggregate series has

strong causual links to contract wages. The point estimates in column

(2) show that a permanent one percent increase in manufacturing wages

leads to an eventual increase in contract wages on the order of one per-

cent, while the estimates in column (3) suggest that a permanent

increase in prices leads to a permanent decrease in contract wages.     In

column (4) of Table 2, both prices and manufacturing wages are entered

in the regression for contract wages. Although the statistical signifi-

cance of the individual coefficients is mixed, a test that lagged con-

sumer prices improve the forecast of contract wages, given lagged
                                  —7—




manufacturing wages, is marginally significant, while a test for lagged

manufacturing wages, given lagged prices, is not quite significant at

conventional levels. Parallel results for the longer sample period (in

columns (7), (8), and (9)) lead to very similar conclusions.

     Finally, column (5) of Table 2 reports the coefficients of lagged

employment in forecasting contract wages. The point estimate suggest

that increases in employment lead to small increases in real contract

wages, although a test of the hypothesis that employment fails to

Granger-cause wages is not significant at conventional levels.11''

     The general pattern of employment for airline mechanics is illus-

trated in Figure 1, which gives a time—series plot of departures and

employment at American Airlines. In addition to mechanics' employment,

the figure shows quarterly employment levels for pilots and flight

attendants. One of the most interesting features of the data is the

extent to which employment of these three groups of workers is smoothed

vis-a—vis departures. At one extreme, the number of employed pilots is

very stable and shows little relation to output. At the other, the

number of flight attendants is quite variable over time. Mechanics fall

somewhere between these two groups. Fluctuations in departures

translate into dampened fluctuations in the number of employed

mechanics.

     Data on flying operations and mechanics' employment are summarized

by airline in Table 3. The airlines fall naturally into two groups:

the four largest firms——American, Eastern, Trans World and United, and the

three smaller firms. Interestingly, the number of mechanics per unit of
                                  —8—



output is quite different between the larger and smaller airlines.

Relative to the employment levels at the smaller airlines, the larger

airlines have 60 to 70 percent more maintenance employees per departure

(or per available seat mile). To some extent this may reflect a greater

reliance on outside contractors to perform specialized maintenance

operations at the smaller airlines. Smoothing of employment relative to

departures is indicated by the smaller coefficient of variation of

employment for all the airlines except Continental and United. A

similar conclusion emerges from a comparison between detrended and

deseasonalized employment and departures. With the exception of United

Airlines, the standard deviation of the logarithm of employment is about

two-thirds as large as the standard deviation of the logarithm of depar-

tures, when both series have been fitted to a linear trend and quarterly

dummy variables.

     Table 4 presents a more formal analysis of employment variability

and its relation to departures and wages. The first column of the Table

presents a simple AR(2) specification of employment, fit jointly to the

seven airlines with firm—specific trends, constants, and seasonals.

Employment of airline mechanics displays the hump—shaped moving average

representation that characterizes many aggregate employment time

series.i_?1 The response to a unit innovation in employment persists

for roughly 10 quarters. As one might expect from Table 3, there is

some heterogeneity across the airlines in the autoregressive represen-

tation of employment, particularly between United and the other six

carriers. An F—test that the coefficients are the same across the seven
                                   —9—



airlines yields a probability value of just under .001.

     Column (2) of Table 4 presents the coefficients of two lagged

values of departures in explaining maintenance employment at the seven

airlines. The coefficients are individually significant at conventional

levels, although their joint contribution, summarized by the probability

value in row 9c of the Table, is only marginally significant. The third

and fourth columns of Table 4 examine the role of lagged contract wages

and lagged manufacturing wages in predicting employment. The evidence

that contract wages Influence employment Is relatively weak, although

the evidence for manufacturing wages is stronger. Finally, the fifth

column of the Table includes both wage measures together.   In. this

equation increases In contract wages have a significantly negative

effect on employment, whereas increases in manufacturing wages lead to

an eventual increase in emp1oyment.-

     The results in column (5) are apparently robust to several alter-

native definitions of the opportunity wage for airline mechanics. In

particular, if the manufacturing wage is replaced by the average wage of

maintenance mechanics in manufacturing (interpolated from annual BLS

Area Wage Survey data) or the wage rate for licensed mechanics at Boeing

(available from the BLS wage chronology series) the coefficients are

very similar in size and magnitude to those in Table 4, although less

precisely estimated.   I also constructed airline—specific measures of

the opportunity wage based on earnings of maintenance mechanics and

unemployment rates in cities where each airline has its major main-

tenance base)" These alternative wage measures give the same pattern
                                  -10—




of results as the manufacturing wage rate, although each can be rejected

as a significant determinant of maintenance employment after controlling

for the manufacturing wage rate. In this paper I therefore use the

manufacturing wage as the alternative wage rate for airline mechanics.

     Table 5 examines the contribution of several additional explanatory

variables for maintenance employment. In each case, the employment

equation contains two lagged values of the explanatory variable listed

in the column heading, together with lagged values of employment, depar-

tures, contract wages, and manufacturing wages. The first four columns

present employment equations that include alternative aggregate

variables: consumer prices, real national income, an index of

CAB-regulated passenger fares, a jet fuel price index, and an index of

parts prices. None of these variables significantly improves the predi-

cition of employment, maintaining lagged departures and wage rates. The

next five columns of the Table report employment regressions that

include additional airline—specific measures of output: available seat

miles, revenue—passenger miles, domestic flight hours, and total flight

hours (including domestic and international flight hours). Apart from

available seat miles, however, none of these output measures is an

important determinant of employment, once the level of departures is

taken into account. Departures and available seat miles are highly

colinear, and the sums of the coefficients on departures and seat miles

are very nearly equal to the corresponding coefficients of departures

when seat miles are excluded from the regression. Since the coef-

ficients of the other variables are not much affected by the presence or
                                  —11—



absence of seat miles in the employment equation, I use departures as

the sole measure of airline output in the remainder of the paper.

Finally, while the results are not recorded in the table, I have also

computed employment regressions that include airline-specific fleet com-

position variables.1' Although these measures of firm—specific capital

stock are marginally significant determinants of employment, their

inclusion has no effect on the nature of the results in Table 4 or 5.

     The analysis of employment in Tables 4 and 5 is restricted to the

number of mechanics on airline payrolls in each quarter. A more

complete description of labor inputs, however, requires information on

hours per employed worker. Although CAB records do not include any

measure of hours per worker, a noisy indicator of hours is available

from data on average payroll cost per worker. Specifically, the ratio

of payroll cost per worker to the contract wage rate represents the sum

of straight time hours per worker, average overtime hours per worker

(weighted by the overtime wage premium) and fringe benefit costs per

worker (expressed as a fraction of the straight time wage rate).- A

regression of this hours index on contemporaneous employment and depar-

tures reveals no significant correlation with either variab1e)V This

absence of correlation suggests that measured hours variation can be

safely ignored in the study of employment and output.

     The interpretation of employment equations that include lagged out-

put variables, such as those in Tables 4 and 5, depends critically on

the time—series representation of output. Table 6 presents several

alternative representations of the level of departures activity at the
                                  —12—



seven airline firms. In each case the logarithm of departures is

regressed on two lagged values of departures and two lagged values of

the explanatory variable listed in the column heading. The coefficient

estimates of a univariate forecasting equation (in the first column of

the Table) show that departures have a monotonically declining moving-

average representation, rather than the hump—shaped representation that

characterizes employment. The second column presents the coefficients

of lagged employment in a forecasting equation for departures, as well

as the probability value of the associated exclusion test. The hypothe-

sis that departures are exogenous to maintenance employment is not

rejected at conventional significance levels. The remaining columns of

Table 6 present the coefficients of three alternative aggregate

variables in the departures equations: real output, manufacturing

wages, and consumer prices. None of these is significantly related to

departures activity, however, controlling for lagged departures.

     To conclude this preliminary data analysis, the main conclusions

may be summarized as follows:

     (1) the serial correlation properties of firm—specific employment
          and wage data for airline mechanics are very similar to the
          properties of aggregate data. Airline mechanics' real wage
          rates follow a first-order autoregressive process, while their
          employment levels follow a second—order process.

     (2)   in the period under study wage rates of airline mechanics were
           very similar across firms and uncorrelated with firm—specific
           employment levels. Real wage rates were significantly corre-
           lated with lagged manufacturing wage rates and lagged consumer
           prices.

     (3) Employment of airline mechanics is correlated with lagged
          values of contract wage rates and lagged values of wage rates
          outside the airline sector. The separate effects of these two
          wage rates are well—determined and in opposite directions.
          The employment effect of outside wage rates is apparently
                                     —13—



          robust to alternative definitions of the outside wage,
          although average hourly earnings in manufacturing has the
          strongest correlation with employment of airline mechanics.

Building on these conclusions, the next section presents an intertem—

poral contracting model that provides a framework for testing between

alternative models of the link between wage rates and employment.


II. Contractual Employment with Costly Adjustment

     This section presents a simple extention of the static efficient

contracting model to an intertemporal setting. Adjustment costs are

introduced on the firm's side in order to generate an employment func-

tion with serial persistence and cumulative rather than instantaneous

responses to changes In output or wages. The resulting function

expresses optimal employment in terms of lagged values of employment,

output, and wages, and provides a convenient framework for testing

alternative models of employment determination. Both the labor demand

model of employment determination, in which the employer takes contract

wages as given, and the strong—form efficiency model, in which the

marginal product of labor is equated to the alternative wage rate, are

obtained as special cases of the model.     In contrast to tests of the

efficient contract hypothesis based on a static employment function, the

time series correlations of employment and wages are modelled explicitly,

and used to disentangle the forecasting role of alternative wages from

any efficient contracting effects.

     For simplicity, the dynamic relationship between output, wages, and

employment is assumed to arise solely from the demand side of the
                                   —14—



contract. Workers are modelled as having separable preferences over

time, with no interaction between lagged values of wages or employment

and the ranking of current wage—employment pairs. While this assumption

simplifies the analysis and interpretation of the dynamic employment

function, it restricts the role of lagged wages and employment in

generating current employment, and represents an obvious channel for

further research.'

    The first step in specifying the contractual employment function

for airline mechanics is to specify the link between flight activity,

maintenance activity, and employment. Airline mechanics service and

inspect aircraft between departures ('line service") and also rebuild

and overhaul aircraft components at major service intervals.1' In

either case a variety of substitutes is available for in-house mecha-

nics' services, including outside subcontractors and purchases of new

parts and equipment. In addition', airlines can substitute mechanics'

services over time by adding to or running down the stock of airworthy

equipment. For simplicity, however, I assume that a given level of

flight activity in the tth quarter, Ft ,    requires   a proportional

input of maintenance activities.   I also assume that that maintenance is

produced by a combination of in-house employment Nt and other inputs

Mt according to a Cobb—Douglas production function

                   12
          Ft=ANtMt

where      and       are positive constants and A is a constant

depending on aircraft type and route structure. The direct cost of

maintaining a level of flight activity Ft with a labor force of Nt
                                           —15—



mechanics is therefore


     (1) wtNt +       r   (Nt ,   Ft)

where Wt is the contract wage for mechanics,                is the price of


                                                       1           1


other maintenance inputs, and r(Nt ,
                                                     2 2 12
                                                    A Nt               is the input
                                              Ft)             Ft
requirement function for nonlabor inputs, given labor inputs Nt and

output Ft
     In addition to these direct costs, I assume that the firm bears an

adjustment cost J(Nt. Nt_i) in period t that depends on the level of

employment in t and t—l                 This adjustment cost captures both hiring

and firing costs, and the cost of rearranging flight schedu]es as the

number of employees available for line service at each airport is

adjusted over time.

     The final ingredient of the employment contract is the specifica-

tion of worker& preferences. I assume that preferences in each period

are represented by a function of contract wages, employment, outside or

alternative wages at , and a random preference shock

     U(N, w, at,          .   Two functional forms are considered for U

In the first case, assume that N0 workers are attached to the firm,

and that workers are allocated randomly in each period between contract

employment and alternative employment with probabilities Nt/NO and

1—Nt/N0 respectively. If v(x, v) is a von-Neumann—Morgenstern
utility function defined on the level of earnings x ,          then preferences
of a representative worker are summarized by:
                                          -16—




                                     N                             N
      (2) U(Nt, w,     a, )              v(w, v)      .+- (1   —
                                                                   1)v(a,   v
In   the second case, following Pencavel (1984), assume that workers' pre-

ferences can be summarized by a Cobb-Douglas function of employment and

the gap between contract and alternative wages:

                                          01
                             =
       (3) U(Nt, Wt,   at)       k(vt)   Nt (wt_at)

Both of these specification contain as a special case the 'excess

earnings' objective Nt(wt—at) associated with an income—maximizing
     20/
union.—

      Under the assumption that current and future flight actiyity are

exogenous to maintenance employment, an optimal contract minimizes the

expected present value of employers costs, subject to an expected uti-

lity requirement for workers. Assuming that employers and workers have

a constant discount rate           (<1) , the level of employment and wages in

period t solves



       (4) mm      E
                                 [w÷           +
                                                      r(Nt÷                 + J(+
           wt,Nt

subject to:


            E
                       U(Nt.,                      t+j U0
In these expressions expectations (denoted by E) are taken over the joint

distribution of the entire sequence of future flight activity, input

prices, alternative wages, and preferences shocks. The solution to this

constrained optimization problem can be obtained as the solution to the
                                     —17—




Lagrangean expression



     (5)   miii       B   &   w.    N÷ ÷       r(Nt÷j   Ft±) +
           t'     t

                              J(Nt.Y Nt÷i) -   zU(Nt÷

for some positive constant p

     In contrast to the efficient contracting model, which views

employment and wages as jointly determined, the traditional labor demand

model treats employment as determined unilaterally by the firm, taking

contract wages as given. In this case observed employment solves the

employer's cost minimization problem


     (6) miii B .L        & [w.    Nt÷ +    r(N+ Ft÷) ÷ J(Nt+J. Nt+_i)]

directly, subject to the forecasting equations for flight activity,

input prices, and contract wages. A comparison of equations (5) and (6)

reveals two important differences between the efficient contract and

labor demand models. First, the efficient contract model treats wages

and employment as jointly endogenous. Second, while alternative wages

enter the contracting model directly through workers' preferences, in

the labor demand model the only role of alternative wages is in the

forecasting equation for future contract wages.

     Before deriving the employment functions associated with the

contracting and labor demand models it is useful to characterize the

wage function implied by the efficient contracting model. In par-

ticular, it is interesting to ask if a contracting model which considers
                                       -18—



wages and employment as jointly determined can even lead to the predic-

tion that wage outcomes are independent of previous employment levels.

The empirical analysis in the first section of this paper suggests that

this is an important characteristic of contract wage rates for airline

mechanics.

     The first—order condition for wages in period t*j for the

contracting model (5) is:


     (7) Nt+j —     i U(Nt+            at+ t+j =

From this equation it is evident that the choice of contract wages in

t+j is independent of employment if workers' preferences are linear in

employment: say


             U(N, w, a, ') =   Nf(w, a, v)

In that case the first—order condition (7) has the simple form


                                        1
               w"t-+-j at÷ vt÷) =

with the implication that contract wages are determined in each period

independent of employment or wage choices in any other period. Since

the evidence in the previous section suggests that contract wages are

unrelated to past employment, the assumption that workers' preferences

are linear in employment is plausible as well as convenient, and will be

adopted here. The expected—utility preference specification (3) imposes

linearity a prlori.-" For the Cobb—Douglas specification (4),

linearity implies a within—period objective of the form Nt(wt—at)8
                                                    -19—




where e = 82 > 0           may be either greater than or less than unity.

        Specializing the first—order condition (7) to these two preference

specifications leads to


        (8a) .i
                  v(wt+         vt4) =       1




in case of expected utility preferences, and

                                                   8-1 =   1
        (8b) k(vt+) J2e(w+ —             at÷)
in case of Cobb—Douglas preferences. The expected utility specification

implies that real contract wages are constant over time, apart from

changes in the preference shock U or random measurement errors. The

Cobb—Douglas specification,on the other hand, suggests that contract

wages maintain a constant (absolute) differential over alternative

wages. For example, if k(ut) =                                 and
                                                                     V.
                                                                          is first—order
autoregressive, then equation (8b) implies



                  =                      —
                      61   w_1 + at              61 at_i +


where     oi is the first—order autocorrelation coefficient of                             and

   =       —               is   serially uncorrelated. Comparison of this equation

with the fitted regressions in the first section of this paper suggests

that the first—order condition (8b) may provide a useful model of the

contract wage determination process for airline mechanics.

        The assuptlon that worker's preferences over employment and wage

outcomes are linear in employment simplifies the analysis of contractual

employment setting. Let w÷ represent the solution to equation (8a)
                                     —20--




or (8b). Since contract wages are unrelated to past employment deci—

sions, the optimal level of contract employment in t solves



     (9) mm    E jO      {w. Nt+ +                  r(Nt+ Ft+) +      Nt+_i)

                          —
                              g
                                             :t÷i
                                  U(N.,             at+.

subject to the forecasting equations for flight activity, alternative

wages, preference shocks, and optimized contract wages.-" If

employment fails to Granger—cause wages, the contract employment

function can be obtained by taking the contract wage as exogenous. In

this case the labor demand model of employment determination (6) is a

special case of the contracting model (9) with JAO

     In order to derive the contract employment function when there

are costs of changing employment from period to period it is convenient to

procede in two steps. The first step is to derive the optimal

employment level in the absence of adjustment costs. The second step is

to derive the actual employment decision by comparing the costs of

changing employment over time with the cost of sub— or super—optimal

employment in each period." For simplicity these two cost components

are expressed as quadratic functions of the logarithm of employment,

yielding an employment function that is linear in the logarithms of

employment, output, and wages.

     The optimal employment choice in the absence of adjustment cost can

be obtained from the first-order condition for the contracting problem

(9), setting the adjustment cost component to zero:
                                            —21-



                 +                                                              = 0.
     (10)                  rN(Nt+. Ft÷) —          M
                                                       UN(Nt+J


For the expected utility specification of workers preferences, this

first—order condition implies


                                                                 —
                 rN(Nt+ Ft÷) w+ — i.(v(wt+)
where for simplicity I have suppressed the dependence of v on the pre-

ference shock          .   The term on the left-hand side of this equation

represents the marginal value product of labor, measured by the savings

in noniabor input costs as employment is increased by one unit. The

marginal value product of labor is equated to the current contract wage,

minus a premium that depends on the gap between contract and alternative

wages. Using the properties of the optimal contract wage (equation

(8a)), the appropriate shadow value of mechanics' labor is


                           —                —             =
                                                                     v(wt+)—v(at+)
            S÷                 (v(wt+)          v(at÷))       wt÷(l— wt+j v(w)

If the expected utility function v is linear in earnings, then the

expression for the shadow value of labor reduces to a÷3 — the alter-

native wage rate. More generally, using a second—order expansion for

v(at+) around w÷ ,             the shadow value of labor in the absence of
adjustment costs is approximately


    (ha)                          —   air
                     at÷(l÷â1r)
where 5 is the coefficient of relative risk aversion of the uti1ity

function v (5        0) and ir        represents the average markup of the opti—
                                   —22—



mal contract wage over the alternative wage.- If workers' preferences

have the expected utlitly form, the shadow value of labor in an optimal

contract is decreasing in the contract wage. As noted by McDonald and

Solow (1981), this specification of worker preferences implies that

efficient combinations of employment and wages are positively correlated

across otherwise identical contracts.

     For the case of Cobb—Douglas preferences the first-order condition

for employment in the absence of adjustment costs is


          —
                 r(NJ     Ft+) =   w÷
                                             —
                                                 k(Vt+)(wt+
                                                              —




Again, the shadow value of labor in the optimal contract is lower than
the contract wage. Using the first—order condition (8b) for the optimal

contract wage in period t+j , the shadow value of labor is:



         (lib)      =
                        at+
                              +
                                  w.   (1—


For values of 8 less than unity, this expression is identical to

(ha). For values of 8 in excess of unity, however, the Cobb—Douglas

specification implies that St is increasing in both the contract and

the alternative wage.

     In view of the similarity of (Ha) and (lJ.b) it i.s straightforward

to derive the optimal level of employment in period t         for either sped-

fication of workers' preferences. Assuming that arithmetic and

geometric averages of contract and alternative wages are equal, the

logarithm of the appropriate shadow value of labor is:
                                                        —23—




           (12) log St =         a        log w. + (1—a) log at


where a = 1—1/8    in the Cobb—Douglas specification of worker prefer-

ences, and a = — ito         in the expected utility specification. In a strong—

form efficient contract where workers' objectives are summarized by the

value of "excess earnings" Nt(wt—at), a=O .                                 In    the labor demand

model, on the other hand, the relevant opportunity cost of labor is the

contract wage and a=l .               Substituting             equation (12) into the first—order

condition for employment in the absence of adjustment cost and taking

logarithms yields the optimal employment level


           (13) log              =    constant          + b1 log            ÷


                                     b2 log Wt + b3 log at + b4 log

where b1 =                                 =       — a72/(71÷y2)                 = — (1—a)
             l/(y1÷y2)       ,
                                     b2                                ,
                                                                           b3                2"(1÷y2)
and b4 =                 .           In    effect,              is the level of employment

observed on the firm's labor demand curve when output is Ft and the

wage rate is a weighted average of the alternative wage at and the
                             25/
contractual wage w
    The cost of maintaining a level of flight activity Ft with a

labor force Nt 4   N         can be obtained from a second-order expansion of

the appropriate cost function. Let


                                               +                   —
                c(Nt) =          wtNt                  r(Nt,Ft)            U(Nt, wt, at)


denote the cost (net of the contribution to workers' utility) of

maintenance activities in quarter t ,                          excluding          adjustment costs.

Using the fact that c'(N) = 0
                                     —24—




               c(Nt)   c(Nt) + (Nt—Nt) c'(Nt) +       • (Nt_Nt)2 c'(N)
                          *                              *
                       c(N) ÷    c1(log Nt — log Nt)



where c1 represents a second—order expansion coefficient when

deviations of Nt from Nt are taken in proportionate terms.-" I

assume that this approximation continues to hold when              is replaced

by its sample average value c1

     The optimal employment choice in period t can be obtained by com-

bining the preceding expression with the adjustment cost terms

                   For convenience I assume that the costs ofchanging
J(Nt÷J Nt÷1) .
the labor force are related to the proportional change in employment by:



               J(Nt÷ Nt÷i) =             c   (log Nt÷ — log   N+_i)2

The assumption of equal adjustment costs for equiproportional increases

and decreases in employment is particularly restrictive, but is required

for empirical tractibility.

     With this setup, it is straightforward to derive the dynamic

employment equation for airline mechanics. The choice of current

employment minimizes the following quadratic expression:


         (14) EZ       [c(N.) ÷          c1(log Nt+ -   log N÷)2

                                     1                              2
                                 +
                                         C2(log Nt+ —   log Nt+i)

The solution to this class of problems is well—known and can be sum—

marized by the partial adjustment equation
                                   —25—




           (15) log Nt = A log Nt_i +   (l-A)(l-A)i         (A)3 Et log


where A is a root to the quadratic equation



               A2 -( l+÷c1/c2

lying between 0 and 1        According to equation (15), observed

employment represents a weighted average of last period's employment and

the discounted average of expected future values of N .           The adjust-

ment parameter A reflects the relative size of the coefficients c1

and c2 .   The larger is c2 ,   the   most costly is labor force adjust-

ment, and the larger is A

     The solution for Nt can be obtained by substituting from equation

(13) for log N into (15). The resulting expression translates

log Nt into a function of log Nt_i , and discounted averages of

expected future values of log Ft ,      log w , log   at , and    log

These expressions can in turn be written as functions of current and

past values of wages and departures, and current and past values of all

variables useful in predicting wages or departures.

     The presence of unobserved error components in the static employ-

ment function (13) introduces an additional consideration into the

formulation of the dynamic employment function. Suppose that equation

(13) contains a stochastic productivity effect          .     Then, excluding

constants, the dynamic employment function is:


           (16) log Nt = A log Nt_i
                       +   (l-X)(lA)Z      (A) Et[bi log Ft÷ + b2 log
                                        -26-



                         +
                             b3   log at+ + b4 log     + t*j1
An empirically useful hypothesis is that the error component ct s

first—order autoregressive. In particular let


                  =               +
                         Ct_i

where      is serially uncorrelated, and strictly exogenous to flight

activity, employment or wages. Then


                                      E £t4j = l—A$p

which introduces a first—order autoregressive error into the dynamic

employment function (16), and generates a second—order autoregressive

representation of employment.

     The terms on the right—hand side of equation (16) depend on the

definitions and forecasting equations for alternative wages, flight

activity, nonlabor input prices, and contract wages. On the basis of

the evidence reported in Section 1, I assume that the alternative wage

for airline mechanics is represented by the average hourly wage rate in

manufacturing (apart from trend and seasonal factors). As a measure of

flight activity I use the level of domestic departures. Finally, for

lack of suitable data, I assume that nonlabor input prices ()     are
captured by trend and seasonal factors. This assumption is especially

problematic if the main substitute for in—house employment is contract

maintenance, and if the price of contract maintenance is correlated with

mechanics' wage rates.
                                          —27—



    Building on the results in Section 1 I adopt the following second—

order autoregressive forecasting system for detrended and deseasonalized

departures, manufacturing wages, contract wages, and consumer prices:


        (17a) log Ft =        l    log Ft_i +    2    log Ft_2 +   u1

        (llb) log at = a1 log at_i + a2 log at2 + a3 log

                             a4 log t—2 +        u2

        (17c) log w =        5     log w_1 + 82 log w_2 +          l log    at_i
                         +
                             2 log at_2 + i3 log nt—i ÷ t4 log t-2 +
        (17d)   log      =         log Pti + it2 log t—2 + it3
                             IT1                                        log at._i

                         +
                             it4 log a_2 ÷ u4.

where the vector of residuals (uit, 112t' u3, u4t) is assumed to be

serially uncorrelated.       In this forecasting system aggregate prices and

manufacturing wages depend on their own lagged values and lagged values

of each other, while departures are forecast by a univariate second-

order autoregression. Contract wages depend on their own lagged values

as well as lagged values of manufacturing wages and consumer prices.

The forecasting equation for contract wages can be interpreted as a log—

linear approximation to the first—order condition (7) for optimal

contract wages, although I do not restrict the coefficients of the

equation in any way. The evidence that alternative wages help forecast

contract wages is more consistent with the Cobb—Douglas preference spe-

cification than the expected utility specification, although neither
                                     -28-



model provides a ready interpretation of the role of prices in fore-

casting contract wage    rates.'
    The system of second—order forecasting equations (17) generate the

following expressions:


        (iSa) (l-X$) I(A)3 Et log Ft+ =               B11   log Ft + B12 log Ft_i




        (18b) (l—x)                Et log at+ = B21 log a + B22 log at_i
                                              ÷                   +
                                                      B23 log         B24 log nt—i


        (lSc) (1—A) jO (X)3 E log                 -
                                                       31    log w + B32 log w_1
                                                  +
                                                       B33 log at + B34 log at_i
                                                  +
                                                       B35 log Pt + B36 log

where the B are known functions of the coefficients in equations

(17a)-(17d). Substituting these equations into (16), performing a

transformation to eliminate serial correlation in the productivity shock

     and using (17a)—(17d) to substitute for current values of depar-

tures, prices and wages in terms of lagged values and innovations in

these variables yields the reduced form employment equation implied by

the model. This reduced form contains two lagged values of employment,

and each of the exogenous variables (including contract wages), as well

as a residual that is a combination of the unanticipated productivity

shock      and the current forecast errors u1, u2, u3, and u4                    The

coefficients of the reduced form equation depend on the coefficients of

equations (16) and (18), the adjustment parameter A , and the serial

correlation coefficient p of the unobserved productivity shock.2"
                                     -29-



The dynamic properties of employment, however, depend solely on A and

p .   The first—order autoregressive coefficient of employment is the sum

of A and p ,   while   the second—order autoregressive coefficient is the

negative of their product.

      To illustrate the implications of the model for the reduced form

employment equation, it is useful to consider the two polar models of

employment determination: the labor demand model in which the relevant

opportunity cost of contract labor is the contract wage; and the strong—

form efficient contract model in which the relevant opportunity cost is

the alternative wage rate. In the labor demand model b3 = 0       in


equation (16) and the alternative wage effects employment only through

the forecasting equation for contract wages. If future contract wages

depend positively on manufacturing wages, for example, then employment

should depend negatively on manufacturing wages, at least in the long

run. The evidence in Tables 2 and 4, however, shows that manufacturing

wages have a positive long—run impact on contract wages, and a positive

long—run effect on employment. In the strong—form efficient contract,

on the other hand,         is independent of contract wages and depends

only on the level of alternative wages. This model is also rejected by

the unrestricted employment regressions in Table 4, which show a nega—

tive impact of contract wages on employment, holding constant manufac-

turing wages. More formal tests between these two polar models, and

tests of the overidentifying restrictions implied by the general

contracting model, are presented in the next section.


III. Empirical Analysis of the Dynamic Contracting Model

      The model of employment determination developed in the last section
                                  -30—




consists of the prediction equations for contract wages, alternative

wages and departures (equations (17a)—(17d)), together with the reduced

form employment equation implied by (16). This section presents estima-

tion results based on fitting this five equation system to aggregate

quarterly data on manufacturing wages and consumer prices as well as

firm—specific data on contract wages, employment, and departures for the

seven airline firms. For simplicity, the firm—specific data are

deseasonalized and detrended prior to estimation. This permits

unrestricted airline—specific constants, trends, and seasonals to be

fitted outside of the main estimation step, at the cost of some poten-

tial bias in the estimated standard errors.

     In addition, rather than estimate equations for the airline—

specific data and the aggregate data simultaneously, I have estimated

the manufacturing wage and consumer price equations separately over a

longer sample period (1964 111—1978 IV), and then used the estimated

parameters as known constants in the calculation of the restricted

employment equation. The model is therefore treated as a three—equation

system for employment, wages, and departures, with known forecasting

equations for aggregate wages and prices.

     The employment, wage, and departures equations for each of the seven

airline firms (21 equations in all) are fitted to detrended and deseaso—

nalized data by a two—step nonlinear generalized least-squares proce-

dure.?" The age estimates minimize the weighted residuals of the 21

equation system, using as weights the inverse covariance matrix formed

by the unrestricted least—squares residuals. Following Gallant and
                                     -31—



Jorgenson (1979), a goodness-of-fit test is constructed by comparing the

weighted sum of squares of the restricted model to the weighted sum of

squares of the unrestricted model.

     Unrestricted vector—autoregressive representations of airline—

specific departures, wages, and employment are presented in the first

two columns of Table 71" The first column contains estimates of the

three—equation system when lagged prices are excluded from the wage and

employment equations, while the second column contains estimates of the

system when lagged prices are included in these two equations. The

coefficient estimates are very similar to the corresponding estimates in

Tables 2, 4, and 6 obtained by fitting the system equation-by-equation

to unadjusted data.

     The next two columns of Table 7 contain the restricted reduced form

parameter estimates associated with the labor demand version of equation

(16). The corresponding structural parameter estimates are presented in

the first two columns of Table 8.     In this version of the contracting

model, the appropriate opportunity cost of labor is the contract wage

rate, and manufacturing wages enter the employment equation for airline

mechanics only in so far as they help to predict future contract wages.

The model is therefore an application of Sargents' (1978) dynamic

employment demand model to firm-specific data, with output taken as exo-

genous. The two alternative specfications of the labor-demand model

differ by whether or not lagged prices are used to forecast future

contract wages and future alternative wages."

     The estimated wage elasticities (the parameter b2) for the labor
                                 -32—




demand model are small and positive, and insignificantly different from

zero. A comparison of the restricted reduced forms in columns (3) and

(4) with the unrestricted reduced forms in columns (1) and (2) suggests

several difficulties with the restricted fit. First, the labor demand

model cannot explain the opposite signs of contract and manufacturing

wages in the reduced form employment equation, given that future

contract wages are positively correlated with manufacturing wages.

Second, in the specification of the model that includes prices in the

forecasting equation for contract wages, the relatively small effects of

prices on employment are difficult to reconcile with the relatively

large effects of prices on expected future contract wages. The

goodness—of—fit statistics in the last row of Table 8 suggest that the

labor demand interpretation of the employment-wage—output system is

strongly rejected by the data.

     In contrast to the poor performance of the model in summarizing the

effects of wages on employment, the linkage between departures and

employment is more successfully explained. The estimated (long—run)

output elasticity of employment is between .60 and .80 and is not signi-

ficantly different from unity. The AR(2) structure of employment is

also apparently well-captured by th combination of adjustment costs and

first—order serial correlation in demand: a comparison of the

restricted and unrestricted reduced form autoregressive parameters

reveals only small differences between them.

     Parameter estimates for the strong form efficient contract model,

which takes the alternative wage rate as the opportunity cost of labor
                                  —33—



and excludes contract wage rates from the employment equation, are pre-

sented in columns (3) and (4) of Table 8. The associated reduced forms

are contained in the fifth and sixth columns of Table 7. Again, a com-

parison of the unrestricted and restricted reduced forms shows that the

model has trouble explaining the effects of manufacturing wages on

employment. When prices are not used to forecast future manufacturing

wage rates, the implied estimate of the elasticity of demand is .29.

When prices are included in the wage forecasting equation, on the other

hand, the estimated elasticity of demand is —.05. As Is the case for

the labor demand model of employment determination, the dynamic link

between wages and employment is not well explained by the strong form

efficient contract model, although the departures—employment rela-

tionship is reasonably well explained by either model.

     Finally, estimates of a general contracting model that permits the

shadow value of labor to depend on a weighted average of contract and

alternative wages are presented in the last columns of Table 7 and Table

8.   In this general model, prices are included in the forecasting

equations for contract wages and manufacturing wages. A version of the

model that excluded prices from the wage equations proved to be

unidentified.V Although the general contracting model fits better

than either polar model, the estimated wage elasticities of employment

are poorly determined and not significantly different from zero. Again,

the implied reduced—form coefficients of contract and manufacturing

wages in the employment equation are different from the unrestricted

coefficients, and the goodness—of-fit test against the unrestricted
                                         -34—


model is highly significant.

      The point estimates imply that mechanics' employment responds nega—

tively to increases in their alternative wage rate, as measured by the

manufacturing wage rate, and positively to increases in their contrac-

tual wage rate. The latter effect, which may be taken as weak evidence

for a positive correlation between contract wages and employment, is

consistent with either the expected utility preference specification (2)

and some degree of risk aversion, or the Cobb—Douglas specification (3)

with 8 <   1   .       From equation (13), the elasticity of employment with

respect to the contract wage is b2 =            ai and   the elasticity of contract

employment with respect to the alternative wage is b3 =                  (l-a)ii   ,   where

  =
      2(1      +
                   y2)     is the constant—output employment elasticity asso-

ciated with the Cobb—Douglas maintenance technology, and a is the

relative weight of contract wages in the expression for the shadow value

of labor. The point estimates in column (5) of Tab1e 8 imply a = - .59

and i = .—64       ,   although the estimates are extremely imprecise and
insignificantly different from zero. For the expected utility specifi-

cation of workers' preferences, the coefficient -a represents the pro-

duct of the relative risk aversion coefficient (5) and the average

markup of contract wages over alternative wages (IT)            .   If    the latter is

about .25, the implied estimate of the relative risk aversion coef-

ficient is about 2.4. For the Cobb—Douglas preference specification

the coefficient a is an estimate of              (1- )   .   The implied value of 0

is .63. These estimates are not unreasonable, although their imprecision is

disturbing, as is the failure of the reduced form of the model to

reproduce the unrestricted reduced form of the data.
                                 —35—



    Overall, none of the models considered in this paper gives a par-

ticularly good fit to the data, particularly with respect to the coef-

ficients of contract or manufacturing wages. In addition, the fact that

real contract wage rates and real manufacturing wage rates are both

heavily influenced by lagged consumer prices is not easi1y reconciled

with the absence of price effects on employment." A more flexible

model of the interactions between contract and alternative wage rates,

on one hand, and employment, on the other, is apparently needed to

describe the data.


IV. Conclusions

    This paper presents an analysis of firm-specific employment and

wage outcomes for airline mechanics at seven firms during the period

1969-1976.   The data possess many of the familiar properties of aggre-

gate wage and employment data, including second-order serial correlation

in employment and first—order serial correlation in real wages. Airline

mechanics' employment levels are found to be correlated with both their

own wage rates, and with average wage rates outside the airline

industry.

     A theoretical model is presented that describes the evolution of

wages and employment in several alternative settings, including the tra—

ditional labor demand setting, where firms take contract wages as exoge-

nous, and an efficient contract setting, where wages and employment are

jointly determined to minimize employer costs, subject to a utility

requirement for workers. The model incorporates costly adjustment of
                                  -36--




employment over time and emphasizes that workers' alternative wages can

have two effects on employment outcomes: a direct effect on the shadow

value of worker's time, and an indirect effect on forecasts of future

wage outcomes.

     The model gives a straightforward and relatively successful

interpretation of the empirical link between airline departures and

mechanics employment. None of the alternative versions of the model.,

however, successfully captures the links between wages and employment.

Both the labor demand model and the simplest efficient contracting

model, which equates the marginal product of workers to their alter-

native wage rate, are rejected in favor of a more general model that

includes contract and alternative wages in the employment equation. The

parameter estimates for this model, however, are extremely imprecise,

and the implied reduced-form employment equation fits poorly relative to

an unrestricted autoregression. In spite of the promise that simple

contracting models might provide a credible interpretation of observed

movements in employment and wages, the covariation of employment and

wages in this data remains largely unexplained.
                                   —37—



                                Footnotes



     "The theoretical literature on efficient contracting is volumi-

nous: see in particular Leontief (1946), Azariadis (1975), Bully

(1974), Gordon (1974), Hall and Lilien (1979), McDonald and Solow (1981),

and the recent surveys by Hart (1983) and Rosen (1985). Svejnar (1986)

presents an empirical study of efficient wage and employment outcomes.

Brown and Ashenfelter (1986), MaCurdy and Pencavel (1986), and

Martinello (1985) attempt to test between efficient contracting models

and conventional employment—setting models.


     'This point was made forcefully by Barro (1977) in a comment on

models of nominal wage contracting.


     "This is essentially the test procedure adopted by Brown and

Ashenfelter (1986). MaCurdy and Pencavel (1986) estimate a capital—

labor ratio equation that includes both contract and alternative wage

rates.


             are also available for three other domestic trunk airlines -

Delta,   National, and Northwest — as well as for PanAm. Because of the

high level of strike activity at National and Northwest, these airlines

were excluded from the present study. PanAm differs from the domestic

trunks in that a large share of its business is international. For this

reason, domestic employment data for PanAm may be misleading, and I chose

to exclude It. Deltats mechanics are nonunionized, and as a result no

direct measure of contract wage rates is available.
                                    —38—



     'Detailed quarterly employment data is unavailable after 1976.

Employment and payroll information pertain to maintenance and related

workers, as defined by the CAB. This group includes aircraft inspectors

and mechanics, as well as cleaners, janitors, and stock clerks.

According to CAB records, there were 37,036 maintenance workers in the

domestic trunk airlines in the third quarter of 1975. A Bureau of Labor

Statistics Industry Wage Survey during August-November 1975 counted

29,518 inspectors and mechanics and 8,588 cleaners, janitors and stock

clerks at the domestic trunks, for a total of 38,106 maintenance and

related workers. On this basis, approximately 80 percent of maintenance

workers are actually airline mechanics or inspectors.


     -"Wage rates for mechanics at Western Airlines were obtained from

copies of the contracts generously made available to me by the IBT

Airline Division.


     VDuring this period the delay between expiration of old contracts

and renegotiation of new contracts was typically six to twelve months.


     "Wage rates in Table 1 are for certified mechanics, excluding pre-

miums for line service work (.10 to .25 per hour during this period) and

FAA licenses (.10 to .20 per hour per license). Wage rates for mecha-

nics represented by the IAN are summarized by the wage rates at United

Airlines.


            simple F—test that the AR(2) coefficients in the wage equation

are the same across all seven airlines yields a probability value of
                                  -39-



.04. The major difference in coefficients is between American and the

other airlines.


            for example Ashenfelter and Card (1982). A similar specifi-

cation fit to real straight-time average hourly earnings in manufac-

turing over this sample period yields a first—order coefficient of 1.09

(with a standard error of .20) and a second—order coefficient of —.26

(with a standard error of .20).


     11"The probability value of the test statistic is 0.12.


     —
     12/
         See Sargent (1978) for example.


          comparable regression of employment on contemporaneous depar-

tures, contract wages, and manufacturing wages yields a coefficient for

contract wages of — .034 (with a standard error of .045) and a coef-

ficient for manufacturing wages of .061 (with a standard error of .138).


           the appropriate opportunity wage is the wage on an alter-

native job multiplied by the probability of being offered that job, then

an observable proxy for the opportunity wage is (1-U)a , where   U is the

relevant state unemployment rate and a is the wage rate of maintenance

mechanics in the relevant city. The wage index was suggested by Brown

and Ashenfelter (1986).


     "Air1ine—specific fleet composition data is available on a annual

basis from the Federal Aviation Administration Statistical Handbook of

Aviation. For purposes of the employment regressions, I interpolated
                                                -40-



the number of aircraft of each type of airline by quarter, and grouped

aircraft into five types.


             E represent payroll cost per worker, let w represent the

union wage scale, let h1 and h2 represent average straight—time and

overtime hours per worker, respectively, and let g represent average

fringe benefit costs per worker. then

               E =
                     wh1
                            +
                                    w(l÷w)h2 + g
where w represents the average overtime wage premium. The ratio of

payroll cost to the contract wage rate is therefore

               E/w =
                       h1
                                +
                                     (l-€w)h2
                                                +   g/w

     11"The coefficient on the logarithm of employment is .06 (with a

standard error of .06) and the coefficient on the logarithm of depar-

tures is .02 (with a standard error of .05).


           workers bear mobility costs of moving between contract and

alternative employment than presumably these costs should be inter-

nalized in an optimal employment contract. Carruth and Oswald (1985)

discuss the formulation of worker's objectives in an intertemporal

contracting model.


     12Each of the seven airlines in this study maintains a major

maintenance depot where airframes and engines can be dismantled and

rebuilt. In the industry as a whole, mechanics are more-or—less evenly

split between line serve and major maintenance activities.
                                                   —41—




    'For the expected utility specification, set v(x                              ,   )=
For the Cobb—Douglas specification, set k(ut) =                      1       and 81 =      = 1.
Income maximization is an appropriate objective for workers as a group

if there are no constraints on the internal distribution of earnings or

employment opportunities among the group.


     -1''The expected utility preference specification is linear in

employment under the assumption that the probability of employment is

proportional to the actual level of employment.


     "Since w is a function of at and V. , say w =                                          Vt)

rational forecasts for                          satisfy E        =       E



     Kennan (1978) provides a useful discussion of this two—step
procedure.


     -Dropping time subscripts, expand v(a) = v(w) + (a—w) v'(w) +

(a-w)2 v"(w), and write

                  S =   w(l   —
                                      v(w)_v(a))
                                       WV' (w)

                                      w-a
                    =   w(l   -
                                       w
                                            -
                                                Ô(W)2)
                                                2w
where a = wv"(w)/v'(w)            .     Next, linearize ()2 around ir ,                 where     it




is the average markup of w over a

                  (W)2 21r(!_) - It2

Subsituting this expression into the expression for S and assuming

that it2     is neglible yields

                  S =   a(l   + öir) —          wâit
                                      —42--




     -'Equation (13) can also be written in terms of alternative wages

and the preference shock variable V           using   the first—order condition

for contract wages. For purposes of forming forecasts of future values

of        ,   however, it is convenient to express the employment equation

in terms of w , since the forecasting equation for w is directly

observable.


               the Cobb—Douglas case c1 is proportional to the value of

nonlabor inputs at the optimal level of labor inputs.


                adjustment parameter A is related to the ratio of C1 to

C2   by   —=       —) -Xe)
          c2

      ?i"Sargent (1978) suggests this hypothesis as a means of generating

a second—order autoregressive model for employment from a cost—of-

adjustment model.


     "The theoretical model assumes that contract wage rates are

adjusted every period, whereas mechanics wage rates are set in two or

three year nominal contracts. This suggests that there may be a cost of

adjusting contract wage rates that is missing from the model.


               detailed derivation of the reduced form employment equation is

presented in the Appendix.


               an alternative to this estimation procedure, the model can

also be estimated by applying instrumental variables techniques to the

first—order condition for contract employment. The instrumental
                                               —43—



variables procedure has the advantage that closed—form solutions for

•the optimal employment choice are not required. The explicit solution

procedure adopted here, on the other hand, has the advantage of offering

a direct interpretation of the reduced—form system for departures,

wages, and employment.


     "These unrestricted representations incorporate a variety of

exclusion restrictions (for example, lagged employment is not included

in the departures equation). Conditional on these exclusion restric-

tions, however, the estimates are unrestricted.


     'To estimate the reduced form employment equation I.set the quar-

terly discount rate $        to   .99. When prices are included in the fore-

casting equations for wages, I use the following forecasting equations

for aggregate manufacturing wages (at) and consumer prices (Pt):


      log   a=     .70   log a_1 +       .02    log a_2 —   .52    log t-l +       .47    log t—2
      log Pt = 1.79 log              —    .78   log t-2 —    .11   log a_1     +    .02   log a..2

When prices are excluded from the wage forecasting equation, I use the

following forecasting equation for manufacturing wages:


     log a = 1.09 log a_1 — .26 log a_2

     li"When prices were excluded from the forecasting equation for

contract wages, the sum-of—squares function contained a very flat ridge

in the b2 -          plane. The fit of the model was essentially unchanged
              l3
with b2 large and negative and b3 large and positive, so long as

their ratio was approximately — .60.
                                  -44-



    "Brown and Ashenfelter (1986) report similar findings in their

investigation of wage and employment outcomes for typographers.
                                  -45—



                               References



Ashenfelter, Orley and David Card. "Time Series Representations of

    Economic Variables and Alternative Models of the Labor Market."

     Review of Economic Studies 49 (Special Issue 1982): 761—82.


Azariadis, Costas. "Implicit Contracts and Underemployment Equilibria."

     Journal of Political Economy 83 (December 1975): 1183—1202.


Rally, Martin N. "Wages and Employment Under Uncertain Demand." Review

     of Economic Studies 41 (January 1974): 37—50.


Barro, Robert. "Long Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary

     Policy." Journal of Monetary Economics 3 (July 1977): 306—16.


Brown, James N. and Orley Ashenfelter. "Testing the Efficiency of

     Employment Contracts." Journal of Political Economy 94 (June

     1986): S40—S87.


Carruth, Alan A. and Andrew Oswald. "Miners Wages in Post-War Britain:

     An Application of a Model of Trade Union Behavior." Economic

     Journal 95 (December 1985): 1003—1020.


Gallant, A. Ronald and D. W. Jorgenson. "Statistical Inference for a

     System of Simultaneous, Non—linear, Implicit Equations in the

     Context of Instrumental Variables Estimation." Journal of

     Econometrics 11 (October/December 1979): 275—302.
                                 -46-




Hall, Robert E. and David Li]len. "Efficient Wage Bargains Under

     Uncertain Supply and Demand." American Economic Review 65

     (December 1979): 868—79.


Hart, Oliver. "Optimal Labor Contracts Under Asymmetric Information:

    An Introduction." Review of Economic Studies 50 (January 1983):

     3—35.



Kennan, John. "The Estimation of Partial Adjustment Models with

     Rational Expectations." Econometrica 47 (November 1979): 1441-56.


Leontief, Wassily. "The Pure Theory of the Guaranteed Annual Wage

     Contract." Journal of Policy Economy 54 (February 1946): 76-79.


MaCurdy, Thomas and John Pencave].. "Testing Between Competing Models of

     Wage and Employment Determination in Unionized Labor Markets."

     Journal of Political Economy 94 (June 1986): 53—539.


Martinello, F. "Wage and Employment Determination in a Unionized

     Industry: The IWA in the B.C. Wood Products Industry." Carleton

     University Economics Paper 84—90, March 1984.


McDonald, I.M. and Robert Solow. "Wage Bargaining and Employment.

     American Economic Review 71 (December 1981): 896-908.


Pencavel, John H. "The Trade—off Between Wages and Employment in Trade

     Union Objectives." Quarterly Journal of Economics 99 (1984):

     215—232.
                                  —47—




Rosen, Sherwin. "Implicit Contracts——A Survey." Journal of Economic

     Literature 23 (September 1985): 1144—1175.


Sargent, Thomas J.   "Estimation of Dynamic Labor Demand Schedule Under

     Rational Expectations." Journal of Political Economy 86 (December

     1978): 1009—44.


Svejnar, Jan. "Bargaining Power, Fear of Disagreement and Wage

     Settlements: Theory and Evidence from U.S. Industry."

     Econometrica, forthcoming 1986.
                                                —48—




                                            Appendix

                Derivation of the Reduced Form Employment Equation



       Let y = (log        Ft. log Ft_i. log w, log wt_i, log at, log at_i,

log         log t—i represent the vector of current and once—lagged

values of departures, contract wages, manufacturing wages, and prices.

Equation (8) can be written as                   =
                                                     Ayt_1
                                                                 +
                                                                     u    ,   where

u. =    (uit,   0, u2, 0, u3, 0, u4, 0)                ,       and   A is a suitably defined

matrix of coefficients. Let e1 = (1,                       0          0)      .   Then


                (l—x) jO (X)3 Et log Ft+ e'(1—X) j0

with    similar expressions for the forward-moving averages of contract

wages and manufacturing wages. Provided that the characteristic roots

of A are smaller than (X) in modulus, the infinite sum                                                (AM)3
                                                                                             j   =0
converges. Assuming this to be true, let


                (i-An)         (AA) =
                         j=O

According to equation (7),


        (A.1)          log Nt = A log Nt_i


                               +                                      ÷                  +
                                   (i_A)b1ejA*             b2e3A*         b3eA*1

where            is first—order autoregressive with autoregressive parameter
p.

                a* =           +            +
                       b1eA*       b2e3A*       b3e5A*

Performing a transformation of (A.l) to eliminate the serial correlation
        *
in     £t yields
                                               -49-




        (A.2)       log Mt = (Ai-p) log Nt_i — Ap log Nti

                          *                —
                               (l_A)a*yt       p(l_A)a*yt_i

where            is serially uncorrelated. Finafly, substituting for

into (A.2) yields


        (A.3)       log Nt = (A+p) log Nt_i - Ap log Nt_i

                                           -
                           -
                               [(l_A)a*A        p(l_A)a*]y_1

where           =   ÷ (l_A)a*ut     is serially uncorrelated. In this paper

I compute the matrix A* numerically and use the resulting estimates to

compute the coefficients in (A.3) for each value of A           p   b1, b2, h3,
and the forecasting coefficients in A
                                        Figure 1

                EMPLOYMENT AND DEPARTURES
                                   ME9ICN     RI9LINES
o E F —R

 9.3


 9.2




  9   0



  8 9




  8   7



  8   6




  8 4




  8 2




  8,0

          963    1370     1971      1972     1973      197L4    975    975      377
                                             TER
                . DEPARTURES     A FLIGHT ATTENDANTS       4ECHANICS   PILOTS
                                                                   Table   1

                               Wage Rates for Airline Mechanics and Comparison Groups:              1969-1976


                                                                                WAGE GROUP
                                                                              Maintenance        Production               Licensed
                                                                               Mechanics           Workers                Mechanics
          American_TWUa'            United-IAM'      Western-IBT'          lnManufacturingth' in Manufacturing'           Boeing_IAMt'1'
         Nominal    Real       Nominal     Real     Nominal       Real      Nominal    Real    Nominal    Real          Nominal    Real

1969      4.60      4.60        4.40       4.40      4.47         4.47         3.77       3.77        3.07      3.07      4.46     4.46


1970      5.10      4.81        5.20       4.91      5.27         4.98         3.98       3.76        3.24      3.06      4.65     4.39

1971      5.60      5.07        5.60       5.07      5.68         5.14         4.24       3.84        3.44      3.11      4.90     4.44


1972      6.20      5.43        5.95       5.21      5.98          5.24        4.56       4.00        3.65      3.20      5.38      4.71


1973      6.40      5.28        6.60       5.44      6.45         5.32         4.84       3.99        3.90      3.22      5.78     4.77

1974      6.85      5.09         7.10      5.28      6.85          5.09        5.22       3.88        4.23      3.14      6.16      4.58

1975      7.50      5.10        7.70       5.24      7.70         5,24         5.97       4.07        4.65      3.17      7.03     4.79

1976      8.10      5.22         8.45      5.44      7.90          5.09        6.54       4.22'       5.00      3.22      7.53      4.85

                                                                                     = 100.
Notes:   Real wage rates represent nominal rates divided by the CPI, all items, 1969

                               in    effect for mechanics   in   collective agreement between American Airlines and Transport Workers
         "Average base rate
           Union.

         Average   base rate In effect for mechanics in collective agreement between United Airlines and Machinists Union.
           Wages for mechanics at Braniff, Continental, Eastern, TWA and United are similar.

         Average base      rate In effect for mechanics In collective          agreement between Western Airlines and Teamsters Union.

         4'Average hourly earnings of maintenance mechanics In manufacturing, from'the BLS Area Wage Survey.

         'Average straight-time hourly earnings of production workers              in   manufacturing, from Citibase.

         -"Average base rate In effect for licensed aircraft mechanics             in   collective agreement between BoeIng and Machinists
           Union from the BLS Wage Chronology.
                                                               Table 2

                                    Autoregressive    Representations of      Reag
                                                 (standard errors in     parentheses)



                                     Contract Real Wage: 1969111—19761V                 Contract Real       1964111-19781V
                              (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)
 1.     Contract Wage         .71          .61           .63        .60          .61        .69    .66      .66       .66
         (t-1)               (.08)        (.07)        (.08)       (.07)        (.07)   (.05)     (.05)    (.05)     (.05)

 2.     Contract Wage        —.04         -.04         —.12       —.09          -.12    -   .02   —.01     -.03      —.01
         (t—2)               (.07)        (.07)        (.07)      (.07)         (.07)   (.05)     (.05)    (.05)     (.05)

 3.     Manufacturing                     2.04          .47         .74          .86              1.48                .70
        Wage (t-l)                        (.39)         ——                                  -—
                                                                  (.57)         (.52)             (.36)              (.47)

 4.                          —-          —1.37
        ManufacturIng                                            -1.08         —1.19              -.95              -.62
        Wage (t—2)           ——                                                         ——
                                          (.40)                   (.52)         (.47)             (.36)              (.44)

 5.     Price Index                        --                                                      ——
                                                      —1.86      —1.72        —1.56                       —1.62    —1.14
          t—1)                                         (.42)      (.64)        (.59)               --      (.40)    (.54)

 6.     Price Index                                    1.45       1.13           .94               --      1,40       .96
         (t—2)                                         (.49)      (.53)         (.50)              ——      (.39)    (.51)

 7.     Employment                                                             - .07
         (t—i)                                                                  (.06)

 8.     Employment                                                 --            .12
         (t—2)               ——
                                                                               (.06)
 9.     Probability Value
        for Exclusion of     --            .00          --         .15           .06               .00               .15
        Manufacturing Wage

10.     Probability Value
        for Exclusion of     --                          .00       .04           .03                        .00      .05
        Consumer Prices


Note:    Regressions include constants, linear trends, and quarterly dummy variables. Coefficients (except
         constants, trends, and seasonals) are restricted to be equal across airlines. Contract wages and
         manufacturing wages are deflated by the Consumer Price Index. Regressions contain airline—specific
         dummy variables for strike and immediate post-strike observations.
                                                    Table 3

                  Means and Standard Deviations: Domestic Airline Data 1969—I —        1976—IV


                                                                    Airline:
                                 American Braniff Continental Eastern           TWA       United   Western

1. Average Quarterly              92980     41230        35250       119570    70210      140000    37380
     Departures

2. Standard Deviation              9740      2870         2370          820     4420       14720     1860
    of Departures

3. Average Quarterly               6255      1072         1109         6209     6358       9170      1336
     Maintenance Employment

4. Standard Deviation              440         57              95       189      223       1002        47
     of Employment

5. Average Number of               132        116             129       107      126        134       121
     Seats per Flight

6. Average Flight                  713        446             552       476      786        681       549
     Length

7.   CoeffiCient of                .105      .070         .067         .049     .063       .105      .050
     Variation
     of Departures

8.   Coefficient of                .070      .053         .086         .030     .035       .109      .035
     Variation
     of Employment

9. Ratio of Coefficients           .67       .76         1.28          .62      .56       1.04       .70
    of Variation-
    Employment/Departures

10. Standard Error of .            .052      .065         .066         .052     .042       .058      .040
     Detrended—Deseasonal ized
     Log Departures

11. Standard Error of.             .035      .036         .041         .031     .036       .081      .031
     Detrended—Deseasonal Ized
     Log Employment

12. Ratio of Standard Errors— .67            .55          .62          .60      .86       1.40       .78
     Employment/Departures


Note: Data pertain to domestic operations. Data from quarters with strike activity are
       removed. The following airlines had strikes during the sample period: American
       (1969-I), Continental (1976-IV), TWA (1973—tv), United (1975—tV) and Western
       (1969—111). All data are from Civil Aeronautics Board published and unpublished
       sources.
                                       Table 4

                    Autoregressive Representations of Employment

                           (standard errors in parentheses)



                           Dependent Variable:    Logarithm of Maintenance Employment
                              (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)

1. Employment (t—1)           1.16        1.09          1.09        1.09       1.08
                              (.06)       (.06)         (.06)       (.06)      (.06)

2. Employment (t-2)           —.42        —.34          -   .34     —   .36    -   .36
                              (.07)       (.07)         (.06)       (.06)      (.06)

3. Departures (t—l)                        .12           .13         .14           .13
                                          (.04)         (.04)       (.04)      (04)

4. Departures (t—2)                       —.10          —.09        -.11       -.09
                                          (.04)         (.04)       (.04)      (.04)

5. Contract Wages              --                           .02                -   .01
       (t—l)                                            (.04)                  (.04)

6. Contract Wages                                       -   .06                -   .10
       (t—2)                                            (.04)                  (.04)

7. Manufacturing               -—                                   —28        —   .24
    Wage (t—1)                                                      (.16)      (   .16)
8. Manufacturing                                                     .46           .53
   Wage (t—2)                                                       (.16)      (.16)

9. Probability Value
   of Exclusion Test for:
    (a) Departures                         .05              04          .04        .04
    (b) Contract Wages                     ——               .27         —-         .01
    (c) Manufacturing Wages                -—               --          .03        .02



Note: All regressions include constants, trends, and quarterly dummy variables.
       Coefficients (except constants, trends, and seasoiials) are restricted
       to be equal aross airlines. Wage rates are deflated by the CPI. The
       probability values in rows (9a)—(9c) refer to an F-test for the joint
       significance of two lagged values of the indicated variable.
                                                                                                Table 5


                                                                    Aitianal ktoreresiive Ibdels at E..loysent


                                                                              (stanSd        errors in parenthesis)



                                                       .
                                                                           Additional Explanatory Variable Included In E.ployeent Regression

                               Cansuoer                          Output               Fuel                Parts             Available         Revenue             Ooaestic             Total
                                               Real SlIP
                               Prices                        Price Indexi'      Price Ondexkl Price Indexc/                 Seat Mi        Passenger Mi leg!'   Flight Hours!'   Fl   ight Hours&
                                 (1)             (2)                (3)                (4)                 (5)                 16)               (7)                 (8)                 (9)

 1. Esployeent It—I)             1.03            (.06               1.09               1.07                1.09                 .30              1.07                1.04               1.08

                                 (.06)           (.06)              (.06)              (.36)               1.07)               (.07)             (.06)               1.06)              (.06)



 2.Ewloyeent lt—2)               -.31            —.33               -.36              -.35                 -.34                -.31             -.34                 -.31               -.35
                                 (.06)           (.06)              (.06)              (.06)               (.07)               1.06)             (.36)               (.07)              1.061


                                  .15             .13                .13                .11                 .09                  .25              .14                 .21                .18
 3. Departures Ct-I)
                                 (.04)           (.04)              (.03)              (.04)               (.04)               (.06)             (.04)               1.08)              (.06)



 4.Oepartures(t—2)               —II             -.09               —.07               -.08                -.07                -.05              —.11                -.11               -.09
                                 (.04)           (.04)              (.03)              (.04)               (.04)               (.06)             (.04)               (.071              1.061


 S. Contract Wages                .02            -.01                .01               -.03                 .01                  .03             -.02                 .31                 .00

                                 (.04)           (.04)              (.03)              (.04)               (.04)               (.04)             (.04)               (.04)               (.03)
       It—I)


 6. ContractWages          .      .10            —.10               —.11               —.07                 .ii                —.10              -08                 -.10                -.08

                                 (.03)           (.04)              (.03)              (.04)               (.041               (.04)             1.04)               (.04)               (.06)
       (t—2)


                                 -.53            —.26               -.34               -.14                -.39                —.41              -.26                -.22                -.24
 7.. Manufacturing
                                 (.23)           (.17)              (.15)              (.20)               (.18)                1.18)            (.16)               (.19)               1.)?)
    Wage It—i)


 8. Manufacturing                 .74              .76               .48                .64                 .73                  .58               .59                 .58                .53
    Wage (t—2)                   (.21)           (.20)              (.14)              (.20)               (.20)                (.(8             (.17)               (.19)               (.17)

 9.AddedVariable                 -.33            —.08                 .07               .01                  .15                -.12             -.03                -.10                -.06

     It—I)                       (.26)           (.11)              (.07)              1.03)               (.08)                (.04)            (.02)               1.07)               (.06)



                                  .27            —.04                 .01                .02               -.10                 -.04               .02                 .00               -.01
 ID. Added Variable
                                                 (.10)              (.071              (.03).              (.08)                (.04)            (.02)               (.07)               1.06)
     (t—2)                       (.21)


 II. Probability Value            .55              .34                .50                .34                 .17                 .01               .57                 .22                .46

    hr Exclusion of
    Added Variable




* ' See        natn to Table 4.


                   index at dosestic passenger tore rates set by the Civil Aeronautics Board (constructed by the author).


        k/Price index for jet fuel (constructed by the author)


        !IPrIce    index tar comsedity group       (4'     siscelloneous parts end sachinery.


        41Avai able seat oil., an scheduled dosestic passenger routes

                      passenger miles on scheduled do,estic passenger routes.


        11Aircratt revenue hours in dosestic service, including non—scheduled, treight, and scheduled passenger service.


        'Aircraft revenue hours in doeestic and international service.




                                        eno 3I on ole a.       ne   estisates   in   cornea ui correspond          to tne   structurel   esti.ates in caluw iDI on
                                            Table 6

                          Autoregressive Representations of Departures

                               (standard errors in parentheses)


                                            Additional Explanatory Variable
                                           Included in Departures Regression:
                               None                   Real GNP Manufacturing    Consuser
                                        Euploysent
                                                                    Wage        Prices
                               (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)

 1.   Departures (t—1)        1.07         1.03         .91         1.00         1.00
                              (.07)        (.06)       (.06)        (.07)        (.07)

 2.   Departures (t—1)       —.24          —.26        —.22        —.23          —.24
                              (.07)        (.06)       (.06)        (.07)        (.06)

 3.   Added Variable            -—          .00         .24          .20        -.49
         (t—l)                             (.06)       (.16)        (.32)        (.33)

      Added Variable            ——
4.                                         —.05       —.22         —.08           .49
          (t—2)                            (.06)       (.17)        (.32)        (.33)

5.    Probability Value
      for Exclusion of         —-           .35         .38          .69          .38
      Added Variable


Notes: See notes to Table 4.
                                                                    Table 7


                                    Reduced Fore Perimeter Estimates (pp Departures, Ideves,

                                    Eployment' Seven Domestic           Airlines       l%9001 — l9M1V1'

                                                 Cstaadard     errors in      parentheses)



                                     Ijnrestr icted Roduced     ores                       9estrcted Reduced Form2'
                                                                                                               Strang 'ore           jeneral
                                                                              Labor Demand Model        Efficient Contract Model      Model
                                        II)               (2)                   (3)           (4)            (5)         (6)           (7)


Departures Equation'
 I.   Departures It—i)                  .08               .06                   .09           1.10           .09         1,10          .13
                                       (.16)             (.14)                 (.15)          1.14)         (.151        (.13)         .12


2. Departures lt-2)                    —.27              -.26                  —.30          —.28          —.30          —.29         —.33
                                       (.13)             (.13)                 (.11)          (.141         (.11)        (.09)        (.09)


Wages Equation'
3. Contract Wages It—Il                 .62               .62                   .62            .64           .62             .64       .68
                                       (.17)             (.16)                 (.17)          (.13)         (.17)        (.121        (.15)


4. Contract Wages It—?)                —.08               .12                  -.07          -.14           —.08         —.14         -.19
                                       1.16)             (.15)                 (.161          (.11)         (.16)        (.10)        1.121


5,    Manufacturing Wages (tHI         1.43               .70                  1.39            .59          1.37             .58       .65
                                       (.77)             (.99)                 (.76)          (.63)         (.73)        (.59)        1.71)


 6. ManufacturingWages It—?)           -.59               .85                   ,62          mBO            m57              .85       .S0
                                       (.77)             (.96)                 (.70)          1.61)         (.66)        (.55)        (.69)

                                                                                -——
 7, Consueer Prices It—I)                               -1.21                                -1.22           ———
                                                                                                                        —1.25         1.01
                                                        (1.121                                (.68)                      (.82)        (.90)

                                                                                —-—
                                                                                               .63           ———             .63
 8. Consumer Prices It-?)                                 .62                                                                          .56
                                                         (.96)                                (.60)                      (.71)        (.78)

Eep I oyeent EquatIon:
 9. Employment It—I)                   1.01              1.01                  1.04           1.05          1.03         1,05         1.07
                                       (.13)             1.141


 0. Employment (t-2(                   -.29              -.30                  -.26          -.27           -.26         -.27         —.28
                                       (.11)             1.12)

11. Departures It—I)                     .15              .14                   .15            .13           .14             .13       .15
                                        (.07)            (.07)


12.   Departures It—?)                 —.10              —.10                  —.09           —.08          —.09         —.08         -.09
                                        (.06)            (.07)

13. Contract Wages       It—I)           .05              .05                  —.01           3.3           0.0          0.3          0.0
                                        1.07)            (.08)


14. ContractWagen lt—2(                —.15              —.16                  0.0            —.01          0.0          3.3          —.02
                                        (.07)            (.07)


15. Manufacturing 4ages (t-I(          -.35              -.30                   .02           0.3            .04         0.0            .01
                                        (.27)            (.401


14. ManufactuHng Wages (t—2)                                  .70              —.01           —.01          -.02         0.0          —.06
                                        (.29)            (.36)


                                                          .37                                 —.02           ———             .01
17, Consumer rces )t—1)                                                                                                                 .01
                                                         (sO)

                                         ———             —.03                   ———            .31           ———             .01      —.07
18. Consumer Prices (t—2)
                                                         (.37)


Log Likehhood                         -209.85          —194.03                -225.09        —208.08       -225.32       -206.09      —204.26




          1'Estiaated on detrended     end deseasonalioed data. Observations from              strike   and immediate post    strike periods are
            deleted.     Estimates are tram the second stage of a tea-step general             ned least squares procedure.


          VRmstricted  reduced (ores are conditional on parameter estimates for consumer price end manufacturing sage
            equations.  The estimates in columns (3) and (4.) correspond to the structural estimates in columns (I) and
            (2) of Table 8. The estimates in columns (5) and (6) correspond to the structural estimates in columns (3)
            and (4) of Table 8. The estimates in column (7) correspond to the structural estimates in column (5) of
            Table 8.
                                             Table 8

                        Parameter Estimates for Partial Adjustment

                        Employment Equation: Seven Domestic Airlines

                                        1969111 —   l976IV"'
                              (standard errors in parentheses)



                                                               Strong Porm             General
                                Labor Demand Model       Efficient Contract Model       Model

                               Prices         Prices        Prices         Prices      Prices
                              Excluded       Included      Excluded       Included    Included
                                 (1)            (2)              (3)         (4)         (5)


1. Partial Adjustment            .44            .44              .44         .44         .49
     Parameter (A)              (.22)          (.21)            (.22)       (.21)       (.24)

2.   Serial Correlation          .60            .61              .60         .60         .57
     Parameter (p)              (.23)          (.22)            (.23)       (.22)       (.26)

3.   Output Elasticity           .77            .66              .70         .67         .76
     (b1)                       (.41)          (.30)            (.37)       (.29)       (.30)

4. Contract Wage                 .03            .03             0.0        0.0           .38
                                (.05)          (.03)            ———        ———
     Elasticity (b2)                                                                    (.91)

5.   Alternative Wage           0.0           0.0                .29        -.05       -1.02
                                ———           ———              (1.34)       (.95)
     Elasticity (b3)                                                                   (2.44)

6. Log Likelihood            -225.09       -208.08        —225.32        -206.09     —204.26

7.   Goodness—of--fit          30.48         28.10             30.94      24.12        20.46
     against Unrestricted       (.000)         (.000)           (.000)      (.000)      (.001)
     ModelV



Notes: "See notes to Table 7. Estimates in columns (1) and (3) are based on
          a forecasting equation for contract wages that excludes consumer
          prices. Estimates in columns (2), (4). and (5) are based on a
          forecasting equation for contract wages that includes manufacturing
         wages and consumer prices. Estimates are conditional on parameter
          estimates for consumer price and manufacturing wage equations.

            "Probabil1ty value in parentheses. The models in columns (1) and (3)
              have 4 degrees of freedom. The models in columns (2) and (4) have 6
              degrees of freedom. The model in column (5) has 5 degrees of freedom.
