                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       SHELTER FROM THE STORM:
       UPGRADING HOUSING INFRASTRUCTURE IN LATIN AMERICAN SLUMS

                                        Sebastian Galiani
                                          Paul Gertler
                                          Ryan Cooper
                                       Sebastian Martinez
                                          Adam Ross
                                      Raimundo Undurraga

                                       Working Paper 19322
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19322


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2013




We are grateful to Andrés Drenik, Fernando Callorda, María Lucía Yanguas and Iván Torre for their
skillful research assistance. We are also thankful for the very useful comments received at various
seminars and conferences. Financial support was provided by 3ie, ESRC, IADB and the World Bank.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Sebastian Galiani, Paul Gertler, Ryan Cooper, Sebastian Martinez, Adam Ross, and Raimundo
Undurraga. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Shelter from the Storm: Upgrading Housing Infrastructure in Latin American Slums
Sebastian Galiani, Paul Gertler, Ryan Cooper, Sebastian Martinez, Adam Ross, and Raimundo
Undurraga
NBER Working Paper No. 19322
August 2013, Revised June 2014
JEL No. C93,D63,O0

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper provides empirical evidence on the causal effects that upgrading slum dwellings has on
the living conditions of the extremely poor. In particular, we study the impact of providing better houses
in situ to slum dwellers in El Salvador, Mexico and Uruguay. We experimentally evaluate the impact
of a housing project run by the NGO TECHO which provides basic pre-fabricated houses to members
of extremely poor population groups in Latin America. The main objective of the program is to improve
household well-being. Our findings show that better houses have a positive effect on overall housing
conditions and general well-being: treated households are happier with their quality of life. In two
countries, we also document improvements in children’s health; in El Salvador, slum dwellers also
feel that they are safer. We do not find this result, however, in the other two experimental samples.
There are no other noticeable robust effects on the possession of durable goods or in terms of labor
outcomes. Our results are robust in terms of both internal and external validity because they are derived
from similar experiments in three different Latin American countries.


Sebastian Galiani                                   Sebastian Martinez
Department of Economics                             Inter American Development Bank
University of Maryland                              smartinez@iadb.org
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742                              Adam Ross
and NBER                                            Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
galiani@econ.umd.edu                                adam.ross@gatesfoundation.org

Paul Gertler                                        Raimundo Undurraga
Haas School of Business                             Wagner School of Public Service
University of California, Berkeley                  New York University
Berkeley, CA 94720                                  rau214@nyu.edu
and NBER
gertler@haas.berkeley.edu

Ryan Cooper
J-PAL
rcooper@povertyactionlab.org
1. Introduction

The 1948 United Nation Universal Declaration of Human Rights identified housing, along with
food and clothing, as a basic requirement for achieving an adequate standard of living. 1 Despite
this, almost one billion people, primarily in the developing world, live in urban slums and lack
proper housing (United Nations, 2003).2 Most slum dwellers live in houses with dirt floors,
poor-quality roofs, and walls constructed out of waste materials such as cardboard, tin and
plastic. These houses do not provide proper protection against inclement weather, are not
secure and are not pleasant to live in. Many have insufficient access to services such as clean
water, sanitation and electricity (UN-Habitat, 2003 and Marx et al., 2013).

Housing is one of the largest expenditures that a family makes and it a superior good, inasmuch
as the share of income spent on housing typically increases disproportionately as income rises.
Adequate housing provides a number of benefits. First, families live and spend a large amount
of time in their houses. Houses are one of the few places that families can use for rest and
relaxation. As such, housing quality contributes substantially to well-being, quality of life and
mental health. A proper house can induce a sense of dignity and pride (Sen, 1999). In fact,
Cattaneo et al. (2009) and Devoto et al. (2011) have shown how specific housing improvements
such as better floors and access to water have resulted in increased satisfaction with quality of
life and better mental health. Second, adequate housing can promote physical health by
providing protection against the ravages of the environment. Roofs and walls shelter one from
rain and from the cold. Water, sanitation and non-dirt floors protect against parasitic
infestations and infections. Finally, housing may provide security and serve as a defense against
crime, a major problem in slums (United Nations, 2003). Thus, proper housing may allow
households to accumulate assets, as well as free up time for use in more productive activities
that would otherwise be devoted to protecting assets.




1
    United Nations, Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Article 25 (1948).
2
 In line with previous work, we define a slum as an overcrowded settlement which has poor-quality
housing, inadequate access to safe water and sanitation, and insecurity of tenure (UN-Habitat, 2003).

                                                      2
This paper provides some of the first experimental evidence regarding the causal effects of
upgrading dwellings on the living conditions of extremely poor persons in slums. We examine
the impact of inexpensive but sturdy houses constructed by TECHO, an NGO that provides basic
pre-fabricated houses to extremely poor populations in Latin America. TECHO targets the
poorest informal settlements and, within these settlements, the families who live in extremely
substandard housing. TECHO houses are a significant improvement over existing housing units
in terms of their flooring, roofs and walls. While the TECHO houses are substantial
improvement over the pre-existing dwellings, they do not have indoor sanitation facilities,
running water or kitchens.

In this paper, we use experimentally generated variation to assess the effects of upgraded
housing on living conditions in three Latin American countries: El Salvador, Mexico and
Uruguay. Our findings show that the better structures have a positive effect on overall housing
conditions and general well-being: treated households are happier and more satisfied with the
quality of their lives. This is a dimension of social policy that is often overlooked but is crucial to
the “life experience” of poor people and, thus, should be taken into account whenever
evaluating housing programs like TECHO. In two countries, El Salvador and Mexico, we also
document improvements in children’s health, while, in El Salvador, slum dwellers’ perception of
their safety and security also improves. There are, however, no robust noticeable effects on the
possession of durable goods or in terms of employment outcomes.

Any causal study must overcome both internal and external threats to its validity (see Campbell,
1957, and Cook and Campbell, 1979). Most research is focused on addressing threats to
internal validity; i.e., on ensuring that the estimated effects are “causal” within the context of
the study population. External validity, in contrast, refers to the extent to which the estimated
effects can be applied to other populations in different settings and at different times.
Ultimately, external validity is established by replication in multiple data sets drawn from a
variety of settings (Angrist, 2004).3 Our results are unusually robust in terms of both internal
and external validity because they are derived from experiments in three different Latin
3
  See Cruces and Galiani (2007) for an application of this idea in the context of a quasi-experiment on
the effect of fertility on maternal labor supply.

                                                  3
American countries and we are therefore able to identify casual results that are robust across
countries.4

Despite the importance of housing, however, very little evidence exists on the causal effects of
housing programs. Our findings constitute a contribution to the small body of literature on this
subject.5 To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first randomized experiment
undertaken to assess the impact of upgrading housing infrastructure in slums in the developing
world.6 Previous contributions include Katz et al. (2001), who analyzed the results of a program
that randomly offered vouchers to poor slum dwellers in the U.S. that allowed them to relocate
to areas with lower poverty rates. Voucher recipients experienced improvements in some
indicators of well-being, including safety, health and the prevalence of behavioral problems
among boys. Kling et al. (2004) exploited the same experiment and found a reduction in arrests
of young people for violent crimes and of young females for property crimes, but also found
increased behavioral problems and property crime in the case of young males. Cattaneo et al.
(2009) exploited a natural experiment that showed that replacing dirt floors with cement floors
in urban areas of Mexico has a positive impact on child health, maternal mental health, and
satisfaction with quality of life. Finally, Devoto et al. (2011) studied the effects of randomly
offering credit to finance household connections to the water distribution system in urban
Morocco. While they do not find significant health effects, they do find a significant
improvement in self-reported well-being.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the intervention. Section
3 presents the experimental design. In Section 4 we introduce the econometric methods used


4
 While external validity is evaluated in terms of the direction and statistical significance of the effects of
the intervention, the size of the effects could well be different across settings because the
counterfactuals might also differ across settings.
5
 See Marx et al. (2013) for a survey on the economics of slums, Jaitman (2012) for a literature review
on slum upgrading programs, and Duflo et al. (2012a) on urban services.
6
  There are also a large number of cross-sectional observational studies that point to the existence of
strong associations between poor housing and indicators of poor health (see Thomson et al., 2001, for a
review).



                                                      4
in this study, while in section 5 we present our empirical results. In section 6 we discuss who
lives in slums and offer some insights on the formation of slums. Finally, section 7 concludes.




2. Upgrading Housing Infrastructure

TECHO provides basic pre-fabricated houses to extremely poor families living informal
settlements (slums) in Latin America with the objective of improving well-being. It started up
seventeen years ago in Chile and now works in 19 Latin American countries. The NGO has built
almost 100,000 houses with the help of an army of volunteers. Every year more than 20,000
youth throughout Latin America volunteer to work with TECHO.7

The locations of the settlements in El Salvador are somewhat different than in the other 2
countries. In El Salvador TECHO works in poor areas scattered throughout the country, but
excludes the primary urban center of San Salvador. In contrast, the TECHO intervention sites
are concentrated closer to largest urban centers in the other two countries. In Mexico, this
includes slums in Estado de Mexico located adjacent to Mexico City, and in Uruguay, slums
located in and around Montevideo and Canelones.

TECHO targets the poorest informal settlements and the households within these settlements
that live in very substandard dwellings. TECHO serves “irregular settlements,” defined as
communities comprised of families that inhabit plots of land that they do not own. Settlements
are plagued by a host of problems such as insufficient access to basic services (water, electricity
and sanitation), significant levels of soil and water contamination, and overcrowding. The
typical housing units in these informal settlements are no better than their surroundings, as



7
  While the work primarily involves building homes, over 3,500 regular volunteers also commit at least
one day a week to community organization and participating in social inclusion programs. This second
phase of the intervention aims at developing skills through the implementation of these inclusive
programs. Our study focuses on evaluating the impact of the first phase of the program: the
construction of transitional housing. We limit the evaluation sample frame to settlements that did not
receive the services provided during the second phase of the intervention so that no intervention other
than the construction of housing took place in the settlements studied during the period of analysis.

                                                  5
they are rudimentary units constructed from discarded materials such as cardboard, tin and
plastic, have dirt floors and lack connections to basic services such as water and sewer systems.

The TECHO housing units are 18 squared meters (6m by 3m) in size. The walls are made of pre-
fabricated, insulated pinewood panels or aluminum and the roofs are made of tin to keep
occupants warm and protect them from humidity, insects, and rain.8 Floors are built on top of
15 stacks that raise it up to between 30 and 80 centimeters off the ground in order to reduce
dampness and protect occupants from floods and infestations. Although these houses are a
major improvement over the recipients’ previous housing situation, the facilities they offer are
limited, as they do not include a bathroom or kitchen or amenities such as plumbing, drinking
water hook-ups, or gas connections.

The houses are designed to be low cost and easy to construct. Units are modular and portable,
are constructed with simple tools, and are set up by volunteers working in squads of 4-8
members. The cost of a Techo house is less than $1,000, of which the beneficiary family
contributes 10%. In El Salvador, this is approximately equivalent to 3 months’ earnings, while in
Mexico and Uruguay, it is roughly equivalent to 1.4 months. The following images show
examples of the TECHO houses built in El Salvador, Mexico and Uruguay.




                  El Salvador                                  Mexico and Uruguay




8
 In El Salvador, floors are made of cement, and walls and roofs are made of aluminum. In Mexico and
Uruguay, floors and walls are made of wood, while roofs are made of aluminum.

                                                6
The houses are also easy to disassemble and move to a new location. It is important for the
houses to be movable because most of the families in these makeshift settlements do not have
formal title to the land that they live on. TECHO managers were concerned that upgrading the
value of the land by building permanent housing might induce both public and private owners
to try to force residents to move in order to reclaim the improved land. However, by making
the housing mobile, there is no such incentive.9




3. Experimental Design

TECHO budget and personnel constraints limit the number of housing units that can be built at
any one time.10 Under these constraints, TECHO opted to select beneficiaries through a lottery
system giving all eligible households in a pre-determined geographical neighborhood an equal
opportunity to receive the housing upgrade in a given year. We exploit this experimental
variability to assess the impact of improved housing living conditions.

TECHO first selected a set of eligible settlements and then conducted a census to identify
eligible households (i.e., those poor enough to be given priority). The eligible households were
then randomly assigned to treatment and control groups. Since TECHO did not have the
capacity to work in all settlements at once, the program was rolled out in each country in two
phases.11 Random assignment was performed within each settlement on a rolling basis.12, 13




9
  A more comprehensive slum upgrading program would likely be preceded by a land titling program
(see, among others, Field, 2005, and Galiani and Schargrodsky, 2010).
10
     This also constrained the size of the sample used in our study in each country.
11
  See Supplemental Appendix Table A1 for the dates of each phase and follow-up survey in each
country.
12
  In El Salvador and Uruguay, some settlements were randomly assigned a higher intensity-of-treatment
level. However, due to the small number of clusters, mostly, we do not exploit this feature in our
analysis.
13
  Within each settlement every household had the same probability of being chosen for inclusion in the
intention-to-treat group, but this was not necessarily the case across settlements.

                                                       7
Baseline surveys were conducted approximately one month before the start of each phase, and
the follow-up surveys were between 19 and 29 months after construction (See Supplemental
Appendix Table A1). In order to obtain truthful information from households and to avoid
creating any desirability bias in the treatment group, the data collection was separated from
the implementation of the intervention by contracting a highly respected survey firm in each
country. The enumerators identified themselves as collecting data for a study on living
conditions and did not make any reference to TECHO verbally or in written form. All surveys
included modules on socioeconomic characteristics, the labor market, assets, security, health
and self-reported measures of satisfaction. (Supplemental Appendix tables A2a, A2b, and A2c
provide details on the variables in the analyses).

Our sample includes 23 settlements in El Salvador, 39 settlements in Mexico and 12 in Uruguay.
The total number of eligible households in these settlements was 2,373 split approximately
evenly across the 3 countries. Treatment was offered to 60% of the households in El Salvador,
51% in Mexico and 61% in Uruguay (See Supplemental Appendix Table A3).14 In all, over 85% of
the households in the intention-to-treat groups complied with the treatment assignment, while
the compliance rates for the non-intention-to-treat groups were practically perfect. Finally, we
attempted to track all of households that migrated out of the study settlements, but could find
and interview only a fraction of them. Attrition rates from the sample are between 5.5% and
7% of households in the intention-to-treat group and 6.3% to 8.7% of those in the non-
intention-to-treat group. Though the attrition rates are about one percentage point higher in
the non-intention-to-treat group in all three countries, the differences are not statistically
significant at conventional levels.




14
   Note, however, that the number of individuals, as measured in the follow-up survey, increased in
almost all groups and samples. Among the households interviewed in the follow up survey, a large
fraction of the new members are children below 2 years old. The rest is mainly account by other children
of the head of the household not present at the house at the time we collected the respective baseline
survey.

                                                   8
3.1.    Experimental Group Balance

Under randomization, the outcomes of the intention- and non-intention-to-treat groups should
be equal, on average, prior to treatment. In Supplemental Appendix Tables A4a and A4b, we
present summary statistics separately for the intention- and non-intention-to-treat groups on a
large set of pre-treatment variables grouped as socioeconomic characteristics, housing
characteristics, assets, satisfaction with quality of housing and life, security, education and
health. We also report robust standard errors and test for the null hypothesis of no difference
between the mean values of each variable for each experimental group. Given that the
randomization of units between experimental groups occurred within each settlement, we
expect them to be well-balanced once we control for settlement fixed effects. Thus, when
testing the null hypothesis of no differences between the two groups, we control by settlement
fixed effects.

The analysis indicates that the design is well balanced, since, in Mexico and El Salvador, only 2
out of 44 variables are unbalanced at the 10% significance level, while, in Uruguay, six variables
appear to be unbalanced at conventional levels. Finally, in the combined three experiments,
only 4 out of 44 variables are statistically different between groups at conventional levels. This
is about what would be expected by chance. 15,16

3.2.    Baseline Cross-Country Housing Differences

A major strength of this study is that it provides an evaluation of the same intervention in three
different populations and environments. Mexico and Uruguay are much richer than El Salvador.
The PPP Gross National Income (GNI) per capita in 2007 was USD 12,580 in Mexico, USD 11,020

15
   The analysis remains almost unchanged if we instead cluster the standard errors at the settlement
level while still including settlement fixed effects. We find only three variables unbalanced in El Salvador,
four in Mexico and Uruguay, and only three variables in the combined three experimental samples.
These results are available upon request.
16
  Without controlling for settlement fixed effects, we find that, in Uruguay, only two variables appear to
be statistically unbalanced; in Mexico, six variables are unbalanced, but in El Salvador as many as eight
variables are unbalanced at the 10% level of statistical significance. Overall, in the combined three
samples, six variables are unbalanced at conventional levels of statistical significance. These results are
available upon request.

                                                     9
in Uruguay compared to USD 5,640 in El Salvador. These differences are reflected in housing
and as such influence the estimated impacts of dwelling upgrades on outcomes. Therefore, a
comparison of the baseline housing characteristics is an important input for the interpretation
of our results as these provide the counterfactuals estimates for the treatment effects.

In Table A5, we highlight a set of 11 housing characteristics measured at baseline in all of the
countries and test the null hypothesis of no difference between the mean values of each
variable by country. Baseline housing was, as is to be expected, substantially better in Mexico
and Uruguay than in El Salvador. For example, in Mexico 64.9% of households had high-quality
floors, while in Uruguay the corresponding figure was 37.2% and in El Salvador it was only
14.4%. In Uruguay and Mexico, a large percentage of households had electricity (95.9% and
83.8%, respectively) and some form of water connection (91.3% and 51.0%, respectively),
while, in El Salvador, only 39.1% of households had electricity and 21.5% of them had some sort
of water hook-up on the property.


4. Methods

We report estimates of the average intention-to-treat effect for the outcomes of interest. Given
the high compliance rate, these parameters are very close to average treatment effects.
Operationally, we estimate the following regression model:



              Yij     Intention to Treat ij   X ij   j   ij                 (1)



where i indexes households or individuals, j indexes settlements, Yij is any of the outcomes
under study, and  is the parameter of interest (i.e., the coefficient associated to a dummy
variable that equals 1 for the households or individuals that were experimentally allocated to
treatment, and 0 otherwise) on the outcome under consideration,17 Xij is a vector of pre-


17
  Some of the variables under study are limited dependent variables (LDVs). The problem posed by
causal inference with LDVs is not fundamentally different from the problem of causal inference with

                                                    10
treatment characteristics measured at baseline, μj is a settlement fixed effect, and ij is the
error term. The settlement fixed effects capture the average unobservable differences across
settlements that may exist given that randomization was conducted within each settlement.
Controlling for settlement fixed effects, we assume that the error terms are independent and
report only robust standard errors throughout the empirical section of the analysis.18

In studies with multiple outcomes, statistically significant effects may emerge simply by chance.
The larger the number of tests, the higher is the likelihood of incurring in a type I error. We
correct for this possibility by using Bonferroni Family-Wise Error Rates (FWER) to adjust the p-
values of the individual tests as a function of the number of outcome variables. We compute
Bonferroni FWER corrections at the 10 percent level of statistical significance by dividing the
desired size of the test by the number of outcome variables in conceptually similar blocks of
outcomes grouped by table and country experiment.

We also follow Kling et al. (2007) to construct summary indexes by family group. We first
impute missing values using the mean of the settlement by intention-to-treat status. Then, we
standardize each outcome variable by subtracting the mean value of the control group and by
dividing by its standard deviation. Finally, the summary index is computed as the sum of
standardized outcome variables in the group with the sign of each measure oriented so that
more beneficial outcomes have higher scores divided by the number of outcome variables.
These summary indexes, aggregating information across related outcomes, are not only useful
summary statistics but might also improve the statistical power to detect effects of the




continuous outcomes. If there are no covariates or the covariates are sparse and discrete, linear models
are no less appropriate for LDVs than for other types of dependent variables. This is certainly the case in
a randomized control trial where controls are included only in order to improve efficiency, but their
omission would not bias the estimates of the parameters of interest.
18
   The statistical inference of the results reported in the next section are robust to clustering the
standard errors at the settlement level in that rejection decisions of the null hypothesis of no effect
remain the same at conventional levels of statistical significance. This result renders credibility to our
assumption that the settlement fixed effect captures the systematic unobserved differences across
slums. These results are available upon request.


                                                    11
intervention that are consistent across groups of outcomes when they have idiosyncratic
variation.

Finally, standard statistical corrections to attempt to control the type-I error rate of a test, such
as the Bonferroni correction, are more important in the context of an experiment where there
is little other information used in the analysis than the one about the randomization of
treatment status. Our study departs from that paradigm in that it reports effects of three
independent samples and hence, we can rely on the information of these independent samples
to reassure ourselves of the validity of our inference. In that sense, in the next section, we will
tend to emphasize more the sets of results that we obtain in all three samples.




5. Results

In this section we report the estimated effects of TECHO houses on several outcome variables
of interest, including dwelling quality, satisfaction with the house and quality of life, security,
assets, labor supply and child health. We report the results of estimating equation (1) for two
different specifications –one with and one without a set of control variables that are listed in
the notes to the tables. In each table, we first present the results for Models 1 and 2 for each
country separately and then present the estimates for the parameter of interest in these two
models for a pooled sample that includes the three experiments. These estimates provide an
informative “average” summary of the results across all 3 countries and also are likely to be
more precisely estimated. At the bottom of each table we report the effect on the aggregated
summary index for all indicators. Finally, we still report conventional significance levels in the
traditional manner in the tables and the corresponding Bonferroni FWER adjusted p-value for
each group in the table notes.

       5.1 Housing

We begin by first demonstrating that the provision of a TECHO house had an impact on the
quality of housing. This is a necessary condition in order for this intervention to have any
impact on the other outcomes. In addition, we test whether families invested further in their


                                                 12
house. Better houses may also provide incentives to invest in further housing improvements,
since such investments may be associated with other complementarities (see, among others,
Banerjee and Duflo, 2011). Generally, we find that TECHO has had a large positive effect on the
quality of housing but no more than that.

In Table 1a we present the results for the effects of the program on housing quality. As
expected, the program resulted in substantial improvements in the quality of floors, walls and
roofs, as well as in the percentage of rooms with windows. TECHO substantially improved
overall housing as reflected in the program effect on the housing quality summary index. Since
baseline housing conditions were worse in El Salvador than in Uruguay and Mexico, the
program’s absolute effects are consistently larger in the first case than in the others. Still, in all
cases the effects are large both in absolute and in relative terms. All the estimated effects but
those for number of rooms remain significant after adjusting the p-values for multiple
outcomes. Nevertheless, the increase in the number of rooms remains statistically significant in
the case of Mexico and also in the combined analysis across the three experiments.

In Table 1b we investigate whether the improvement in the house as a result of the
intervention triggered further investments by the beneficiary families. We find that the
program did not induce positive significant complementary investments among beneficiaries. In
particular, there are no positive effects on access to water, electricity or sanitation. If anything,
we find that two out of the five outcomes studied are negatively affected in the case Mexico at
conventional levels of statistical significance. In one case, significance is lost when contrasted
with the Bonferroni adjusted p-values. These results are consistent with households not holding
land titles and hence lacking incentives to invest.

       5.2 Satisfaction with house and quality of life

Table 2 presents the program’s effects on ordinal self-reported measures of satisfaction with
the housing unit as well as with an overall self-reported measure of quality of life. In all
countries, all measures substantially increased. Families are happier with their houses and with




                                                 13
their lives.19 The gains are substantially larger in El Salvador20 than in Mexico and Uruguay,
which is consistent with the fact that the improvement in housing conditions is greater in the
first case than in the other two.21 The index that measures satisfaction with the quality of
floors, for example, is over 200% higher in households in the treatment group with respect to
the control group in El Salvador, while in Mexico the index is around 20% higher in the
intention-to-treat households than in the control-group households, and in Uruguay the
differential is around 39%. Similarly, satisfaction with quality of life is 41% higher in the
intention-to-treat households in El Salvador, while in Mexico the figure is around 28% and in
Uruguay it is around 21%.

        5.3 Security and safety

Security is one of the most important concerns of urban slum dwellers. Information from our
baseline survey shows that overall 38% of the heads of household often or always felt unsafe
and 54% felt unsafe when leaving their homes alone. In this sense, it could be argued that
providing a better house could potentially make people feel safer.

In Table 3 we present the results of the program in terms of several measures of security
related to housing. We report the effect of the program on the perception of security: whether
people feel safe inside the house, whether they feel that it is safe to leave the house alone,
whether it seems safe to leave children alone in the house and whether the house has been
burglarized. All the questions refer to the preceding year. Our estimations show that, in El
Salvador, all self-reported measures of security improve substantially. The increase in the index
19
   In order to interpret better these results, it is important to note that for all variables considered in this
section and all experimental samples, the average outcome for the control group never decreased
between the baseline and treatment measures.
20
    Due to a problem with data collection in the follow-up survey in El Salvador, non-response to this
question was differentially larger for the control group. Thus, to be on the safe side, we impute a value
equal to 1 ("satisfied with quality of life") to 84 missing values in control group observations, which
reduces the non-response rate for this variable from 43% to 7%, the same as in the intention-to-treat
group. Without performing this imputation, the coefficient is 0.479 for Model 1 and 0.480 for Model 2.
21
  Qualitatively, the results of this section are robust to the estimation of an ordered Probit model. The
probability of being in the highest (or second highest) satisfaction category always increases with
treatment and the marginal effect is always statistically significant at conventional levels. These results
are available upon request.


                                                      14
for security inside the house is around 27% and the improvement is about 57% in the index that
measures whether it is safe to leave children alone, but no such effect is detected in Uruguay or
Mexico. We do not find that the program has any effect on crime, however, as there are no
statistically significant reported changes in the frequency of burglaries during the past year in
any of the three countries; it is also true, however, that, in El Salvador and Mexico, burglary
rates in the settlements in our sample were very low and hence the exercise is not very
informative.

        5.4 Possession of durable goods

There are different ways in which housing conditions can influence the possession of durable
goods. On the one hand, if a better house provides security to those who live in it, then it will
also provide more security for the assets inside it. Thus, dwellers can invest more in buying
durable goods. On the other hand, having an improved house can also increase the valuation of
some durable goods and, thus, stimulate their acquisition.

Table 4 depicts the performance of different variables corresponding to the possession of
assets. We estimate the effect of the program on the possession of TV sets, fans, gas stoves,
refrigerators and bicycles. The results show, however, that the program has had no effect on
the possession of any of these assets. In other words, at least during the period studied, we do
not find that the treated households have responded to the investment in their houses by
increasing their own investments in supplementary durable goods.

        5.5 Household Structure and Labor Outcomes

In this subsection we present the results of our analysis with respect to household structure
and labor outcomes. We first estimate whether the improved housing has had any effect on the
number of members residing in each house and find no statistically significant effects on this
front. We also investigate whether, in this limited period of time, there has been any effect on
fertility by estimating whether the treatment has influenced the number of newborns in the
housing units, but, here again, we do not identify any significant effects (see Table 5a).22

22
   In Uruguay, and only for model 2, the number of newborns in the last two years is statistically
significant at conventional levels but the significance disappears once the test is contrasted against the

                                                   15
We then estimate whether the improved housing, either directly or indirectly, stimulates labor
supply and earnings (in particular, the income per capita of the household and whether either
the head of household or the spouse works more). As can be seen from the tables, we do not
detect significant effects on any of these outcomes. We can conclude that better housing, at
least in the way that it is provided by the TECHO program, has no effect on the labor outcomes
of the treated households (see Table 5b).23

       5.6 Child Health

The reasons why better housing can lead to an improvement in the health of the persons living
in those houses are clear. For instance, dirt floors generally pose a serious threat to children’s
health. In the study carried out by Cattaneo et al. (2009) concerning the replacement of dirt
floors with cement floors, the authors found a statistically significant reduction in the incidence
of parasitic infections, diarrhea and the prevalence of anemia. Another way in which housing
improvements can support health is the reduction in indoor air pollution. Duflo et al. (2012b)
have shown that improper ventilation of houses and the use of substandard kitchen stoves can
have significantly negative effects on respiratory –and even general- health. The houses
provided by the TECHO program provide better ventilation than most of the slum dwellings do
and may therefore have a positive effect on overall health as well.

In Table 6 we test whether the upgraded houses result in an improvement in child health; the
indicators used for this purpose are the prevalence of diarrhea and of respiratory disease. The
estimated coefficients are mainly negative in both El Salvador and Mexico, suggesting that
there may have been a decrease in the prevalence of those illnesses due to the intervention,

adjusted p-value for multiple comparisons. We also tested whether treatment affected the age structure
of the household, given that we have detected some changes in household size, by estimating Models 1
and 2 for the four age categories reported in Appendix Table A4b. We did not find any significant effect
at conventional levels. These results are available upon request.
23
   We also explored whether treatment affected education attainment, measured by the maximum
years of schooling completed as reported in Appendix Table A4b for children 6 to 12 (primary school)
and 13 to 18 years old (secondary school). Overall, we did not find any significant effect. We only
detected a small negative effect in Mexico for children 13 to 18 years old but this variable was
unbalanced at baseline for this group in this sample in the same direction and magnitude that the
detected effect. Instead, in Uruguay, for the same age group, we did find a positive and statistically
significant small effect. These results are also available upon request.

                                                  16
but this is not the case in Uruguay. However, given our sample sizes, the estimated coefficients
are imprecisely estimated and hence are not statistically significant at conventional levels. The
point estimates, though, show a large decrease in diarrhea both in Mexico and in El Salvador.24
As a result, the overall effect, pooling across countries, is still large (a decrease of approximately
18% with a p-value equal to 0.17).25 If we assume that the effect is not present in Uruguay
because, there, the experiment took place in a better, more urbanized environment where
people have greater access to services, then the pooled effect in the other two countries,
reported in the two last columns of the table, point to an even larger effect, of approximately
27%, which is statistically significant at the 10% level. In contrast, we do not find significant
evidence that would allow us to conclude that there is a large effect in terms of the reduction
of the prevalence of respiratory diseases. Nevertheless, the health summary index is also
statistically significant at the 5% level for those two countries together.26



6. Who Lives in Slums

The most robust result so far appears to be that upgrading dwelling infrastructural has large
impacts on quality of life measured by satisfaction. This is despite conventional explanations
that attribute the emergence of slums to the fact that the poor are willing to live in substandard
housing in polluted or floodable areas or on slopes, ridges and other inhospitable geographical
environments if they also could be close to employment opportunities in the city center (see,




24
  In both cases, the percentage changes are larger than the one estimated by Cattaneo et al. (2008)
though the treatments nor the compliance rates are comparable between studies.
25
  We also interacted the intention-to-treat dummy variable with a dummy indicating whether, in the
samples of El Salvador and Uruguay, the settlement was randomized to a high intensity treatment level.
The interaction was never found statistically significant at conventional levels whether the standard
errors were clustered or not at the settlement level. These results are also available upon request.
26
  Since this analysis is based on a set of assumptions, we do not contrast these results with the adjusted
p-values, though the effect on the summary index would remain significant under this more stringent
contrast.


                                                   17
for example, Glaeser, 2011).27 Slum dwellers may have a strong preference for being close to
the labor market –so strong that it may offset any kind of disadvantage that living in an
irregular settlement may entail.

In this section, we provide some evidence to support the hypothesis that slum and non-slum
dwellers have different preferences for income and housing. In Tables 7a to 7f, we compare a
large number of outcomes of interest in regard to the slum population using information from
the national household surveys of El Salvador, Mexico and Uruguay on the poor and non-poor
populations in the same geographical areas as our TECHO samples.28 The first column of each
table shows the mean of the variable of interest for the poor population and the second for the
slum dwellers targeted by TECHO. The third column shows the differential between the
outcomes for the poor and the slum dwellers. For El Salvador and Mexico, we also show in the
fourth column what the differential is once we control for a dummy that indicates whether the
household is in a rural or urban area. In those cases, our preferred estimate of the differentials
is the one shown in this last column of each table.

The first salient aspect of the comparison is that, in all three countries, slum dwellers are in
general even worse-off in terms of assets than other poor populations. For instance, the share
of rooms with good-quality floors is 14% among slum inhabitants compared to 61% for the poor
population of El Salvador overall. In Mexico and Uruguay, the share of rooms with good-quality
floors among the non-slum poor is 20 percentage points greater than it is for slum dwellers.
Rates for water connections, access to toilets and sewerage systems, and possession of


27
   In fact, for example, one of the reasons mentioned by Banerjee et al. (2008) for the rise of
unemployment in South Africa after the end of apartheid in 1994 is the high cost of job searches for the
black population, since the country’s persistent geographical racial segregation has confined blacks to
areas far away from the city center, which is also hard to reach due to the unavailability of good public
transportation. The end of apartheid thus resulted in an increase in the labor supply among the black
population that, in light of high job-search costs, could not find a match in labor demand.
28
  In the case of Uruguay, the national survey enables us to distinguish between poor slum dwellers and
poor groups not living in slum conditions. This is rather unique, since in general, household surveys have
very low coverage of slums settlements, if any (see, among others, Marx et al., 2013), and hence, we use
that national survey for the analysis in this section though restricting it to the geographical areas
covered in our study. Instead, in El Salvador and Mexico, the information for slum dwellers comes
exclusively from our baseline survey.

                                                   18
refrigerators and TV sets are all significantly higher for the average poor household of El
Salvador and Mexico than for slum dwellers in the same country. In Uruguay, the differences
are smaller –in part because the average rates are much higher among this highly urban
population.

In Uruguay and Mexico, however, the incomes of slum dwellers are higher than the incomes of
poor non-slum dwellers. In Mexico, the slum dwellers included in our baseline survey earn, on
average, USD 108 per month per capita, while the average income for the poor population is
USD 86 – a difference of 25%. In Uruguay, slum dwellers earn an impressive 71% more than
poor non-slum dwellers, and the difference between men’s and women’s incomes is also
significant in both countries. Consequently, the question that naturally arises is how we can
explain why slum dwellers earn more but live in much worse housing units. Not only are
monthly incomes higher, but also the wage incomes of slum dwellers are significantly higher
than those of the rest of the poor population. The difference amounts to approximately 40% in
Uruguay and 30% in Mexico when we average the wage differentials for both men and women.

El Salvador is different that than Mexico and Uruguay. In economic terms, the TECHO
households in El Salvador are much more disadvantaged in all respects. In this case, the labor
market outcomes of slum dwellers are worse than those of the poor not living in slums.
However, educational attainment of heads households and school enrollment rates of their
children are also worse in slums. This may have to do with the fact that many moved to slums in
El Salvador to escape violent civil conflict as opposed to seeing economic opportunity. As such,
this type of person who moved to a slum would be different in El Salvador compared to Mexico
and Uruguay where the main motive was economic opportunity.

The results seem to be consistent with the existence of poor groups with different preferences.
We find that, while slum dwellers have clearly worse housing infrastructure than the rest of the
poor population, they earn significantly more than poor people living in non-slum areas even
though they have the same levels of human capital. There appears to be an intrinsic “selection”
among the poor: those who prefer to have good access to the labor market in cities tend to
gather in slums, while those who are less willing to do so live in better environments, although
at a significant cost in terms of income. Moving forward, an understanding of these differences
                                              19
will be crucial in improving the design of policies for upgrading the living conditions of the
urban poor.



7. Conclusion

This paper provides an analysis of the impact of providing better houses in situ to slum dwellers
in El Salvador, Mexico and Uruguay. As expected, the quality of housing greatly improves after
the intervention. Subsequently, satisfaction with housing and with the quality of life increases
drastically. This is a very significant result since it suggests that limited in situ improvements in
the housing of poor families has a large effect on their overall well-being. This finding is
consistent with those of Cattaneo et. al (2009) and Devoto et. al (2011) and highlights the
importance of using subjective indicators to evaluate interventions such as housing
improvement programs, where the main objective is to facilitate the quality of family and social
interactions. Thus, we conclude that the type house is an important input in a household’s
utility function irrespective of whether they affect other material outcomes. Our results show
that, as in the case of the interventions analyzed by Cattaneo et al. (2009) and Devoto et al.
(2011), improvements in housing conditions have a clearly positive effect on the satisfaction
and well-being of poor slum dwellers.

Additionally, also in line with Cattaneo et al. (2009), we find that the improved housing
conditions lead to large reductions in the incidence of diarrhea, at least in two of the three
experiments. The one case in which these improvements do not seem to have health effects is
the one in which the experiment took place in a better, more urbanized environment in which
services are more accessible.

The provision of better housing has virtually no other statistically significant effects.
Perceptions of security and safety change for the better only in El Salvador, while there is no
change in the other two countries. In all three countries, better housing has little or no effect
on further housing investments to supplement the upgrading intervention, the possession of
durable goods, household structure or labor outcomes.



                                                 20
In this study we also compare slum dwellers to the rest of the poor population in the areas
analyzed. When we consider the slum dwellers’ situation within their national contexts, it
becomes possible to shed some light on their housing decisions and the dynamics of slum
formation. We find that slum dwellers have clearly worse housing infrastructure than poor non-
slum dwellers. However, in the more urban areas, the slum dwellers earn significantly more
than other poor households and have comparable levels of educational attainment and labor-
market participation outcomes. These findings are consistent with the plausible explanation for
slum formation as a consequence of some poor groups being more willing to trade off living
conditions for better access to the labor market. These poor households choose to live in
substandard dwellings in slum areas because they tend to be closer to production activities
than other parts of urban conglomerates. At the same time, other poor people are less willing
to do so and therefore live in better environments but at a significant cost in terms of their
income. The existence of these two types of poor households with different preferences should
be taken into account when designing housing policies.



These findings contribute inputs for the debate about slum upgrading initiatives. What emerges
from our analysis is that the provision of the kind of in situ housing upgrade that we studied in
this paper has some significant effects on the living conditions of slum dwellers but that those
effects are perhaps not as large as society might wish or expect. At first glance, the conclusion
to be drawn from this finding might be that in situ upgrading should be ruled out and priority
should be given to geographic relocation policies. This conclusion could, however, be in error.
First of all, the in situ intervention is fairly inexpensive and substantially increases life
satisfaction. What is more, in the two countries where we detect a reduction in the incidence of
diarrhea, the effects are quite large. Additionally, Cattaneo et al. (2006) analyzed the
performance of the Mexican “Iniciamos Tu Casa” program, which provided new houses to poor
inhabitants. These houses were located far from the city center. A year after the program had
started, the authors found that a large proportion of the participants had abandoned the
houses; moreover, those who remained in them mentioned that, although housing conditions
were better, the new neighborhoods provided them with poor access to public goods and

                                               21
general infrastructure. In situ upgrading therefore appears to remain a valid policy choice. This
is also consistent with the evidence presented in Takeuchi et al. (2008) for Mumbai. These
authors use a residential location model to assess the welfare of an in situ slum upgrade
program and a slum relocation program and conclude that, at least for those households
relocated to more remote locations, the disadvantages of changes in commute distance wipe
out the housing benefits of the program and that the treated households would have been
better off if they had been given access to the more limited housing improvements provided by
the in situ intervention. This is also consistent with the evidence that we present in Section 4,
where we show that, as noted above, at least in urban areas, poor households are willing to
trade off housing conditions for better access to labor markets and, hence, higher earnings.




                                               22
References

Angrist, J. (2004): “Treatment Effect Heterogeneity in Theory and Practice”, The Economic
Journal, 114 (494), pp. C52-C83.
Banerjee, A., S. Galiani, J. Levinson, Z. MacLaren and I. Wooolard (2008): “Why Has
Unemployment Risen in New South Africa?”, Economics of Transition, 16, pp. 715-740.

Banerjee, A., and E. Duflo (2011): Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to Fight
Global Poverty, Public Affairs.

Barr, N. (2003): Economics of the Welfare State, Fourth Edition, Oxford University Press.

Campbell, D. T. (1957): “Factors Relevant for the Validity of Experiments in Social Settings”,
Psychological Bulletin, vol. 54, pp. 297-312.

Cruces, G. and S. Galiani (2007): “Fertility and female labor supply in Latin America: New causal
evidence”, Labour Economics, pages 565-73.

Cook, T., and D. T. Campbell (1979): Quasi-Experimentation: Design and Analysis Issues for Field
Settings, Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Cattaneo, M., S. Galiani, P. Gertler, S. Martinez and R. Titiunik (2006): “Evaluación de resultados
de impacto del programa de ahorro, subsidio y crédito para la vivienda progresiva ‘Tu Casa’.
Modalidad ‘Iniciamos Tu Casa’, Mimeo.

Cattaneo, M., S. Galiani, P. Gertler, S. Martinez and R. Titiunik (2009): “Housing, Health and
Happiness”, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1, pp. 75-105.

Devoto, F., E. Duflo, P. Dupas, W. Pariente and V. Pons (2011): “Happiness on Tap: Piped Water
Adoption in Urban Morocco”, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.

Duflo, E., S. Galiani and M. Mobarak (2012a): "J-PAL Urban Services Review Paper", Cambridge,
MA: Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab.

Duflo, E., M. Greenstone and R. Hanna (2012b): “Up in Smoke: The Influence of Household
Behavior on the Long-Run Impact of Improved Cooking Stoves", MIT Department of Economics
Working Paper No. 12-10. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2039004

Field, Erica (2005): “Property Rights and Investment in Urban Slums”, Journal of the European
Economic Association, 3 (2-3), pp. 279-290.

Galiani, S., and E. Schargrodsky (2010): “Property Rights for the Poor: Effects of Land Titling”,
Journal of Public Economics, 94, pp. 700-729.

                                                23
Gasparini, L., and S. Pinto (2006): “Equality of Opportunity and Optimal Cash and In-Kind
Policies”, Journal of Public Economics, Elsevier, vol. 90 (1-2), pp. 143-169, January.

Gertler, P., J. Heckman, R. Pinto, A. Zanolini, C. Vermeersch, S. Walker and S. Grantham-
McGregor (2013): “Labor Market Returns to Early Childhood Stimulation: A 20-Year Follow Up
to an Experimental Intervention in Jamaica”, NBER WP N 19185.

Glaeser, E. (2011): Triumph of the City: How Our Greatest Invention Makes us Richer, Smarter,
Greener, Healthier and Happier, The Penguin Press.

Jaitman, L. (2012): "Evaluation of Slum Upgrading Programs: A Literature Review", Mimeo IADB.

Katz, L., J. Kling and J. Liebman (2001): “Moving to Opportunity in Boston: Early Results of a
Randomized Mobility Experiment”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, pp. 607-654.

Kling, J., J. Ludwig and L. Katz (2004): “Neighborhood Effect on Crime for Female and Male
Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Mobility Experiment”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 120, pp. 87-130.

Kling, J., L. Jeffrey and L. Katz (2007): “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects”,
Econometrica, 75, pp. 83-119.

Marx, B., T. Stoker and T. Suri (2013): “The Economics of Slums in the Developing World”,
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27, pp. 187-210.

Olsen, Edgar O. (2003): “Housing Programs for Low-Income Households” in Means-Tested
Transfer Programs in the United States, ed. Robert A. Moffitt, pp. 365-442, Chicago, IL:
The University of Chicago Press.

Sen, A. (1999): Commodities and capabilities, Oxford University Press.

Takeuchi, A., M. Crooper and A. Bento (2008): "Measuring the Welfare Effects of Slum
Improvement Programs: The Case of Mumbai", Journal of Urban Economics, Elsevier, vol. 64(1),
pp. 65-84, July.

Thomson, H., M. Petticrew and D. Morrison (2001): “Health Effects on Housing Improvement:
Systematic Review of the Evidence”, British Medical Journal.

United Nations (2003): The Challenge of Slums: Global Report on Human Settlements, United
Nations Human Settlement Programme, United Nations.

UN-Habitat (2003): “Slums of the World: The Face of Urban Poverty in the New Millennium?”,
working paper, Nairobi.



                                                24
                                                                                              Tables:

                                                                                     Table 1a. Regressions of housing quality on Program Dummy. a
                                               El Salvador                                  Uruguay                                 Mexico                                      All
                                    Follow Up                                  Follow Up                               Follow Up                               Follow Up
     Dependent Variable
                                   Control Mean    Model 1      Model 2      Control Mean Model 1 Model 2            Control Mean Model 1        Model 2      Control Mean     Model 1      Model 2
                                    (Std. Dev.)                                (Std. Dev.)                            (Std. Dev.)                              (Std. Dev.)
Number of Rooms                                       0.233        0.234                        0.100      0.081                        0.234      0.220                          0.188        0.179
                                                    [0.117]**    [0.116]**                     [0.132]    [0.132]                    [0.088]*** [0.086]**                      [0.064]***   [0.064]***
                                                     [0.047]      [0.045]                      [0.453]    [0.544]                      [0.008]    [0.011]                        [0.004]      [0.006]
                                  2.690 (1.330)       8.672        8.717     3.486 (1.636) 2.865           2.315    3.067 (1.285) 7.623            7.168      3.088 (1.440)       6.101        5.789
Share of Rooms with Good                              0.284        0.288                        0.197      0.198                        0.111      0.110                          0.182        0.183
Quality Floors                                     [0.027]***   [0.026]***                   [0.033]*** [0.033]***                   [0.022]*** [0.022]***                     [0.016]***   [0.016]***
                                                     [0.000]      [0.000]                      [0.000]    [0.000]                      [0.000]    [0.000]                        [0.000]      [0.000]
                                   0.165 (0.274)    172.631      174.942     0.317 (0.415) 62.214        62.433      0.706 (0.355) 15.712         15.525      0.442 (0.426)      41.309       41.370
Share of Rooms with Good                              0.255        0.255                        0.136      0.137                        0.167      0.163                          0.178        0.176
Quality Walls                                      [0.026]***   [0.026]***                   [0.035]*** [0.035]***                   [0.024]*** [0.024]***                     [0.017]***   [0.017]***
                                                     [0.000]      [0.000]                      [0.000]    [0.000]                      [0.000]    [0.000]                        [0.000]      [0.000]
                                   0.104 (0.223)    245.382      245.580     0.483 (0.471) 28.071        28.373      0.420 (0.388) 39.665         38.783      0.352 (0.410)      50.422       50.094
Share of Rooms with Good                              0.231        0.235                        0.188      0.189                        0.099      0.096                          0.161        0.160
Quality Roofs                                      [0.030]***   [0.030]***                   [0.033]*** [0.033]***                   [0.022]*** [0.022]***                     [0.016]***   [0.016]***
                                                     [0.000]      [0.000]                      [0.000]    [0.000]                      [0.000]    [0.000]                        [0.000]      [0.000]
                                   0.283 (0.385)     81.636       83.148     0.312 (0.414) 60.036        60.439      0.599 (0.374) 16.527         16.011      0.427 (0.416)      37.760       37.565
Share of Rooms with Window                            0.233        0.235                        0.111      0.115                        0.183      0.179                          0.171        0.171
                                                   [0.024]***   [0.024]***                   [0.025]*** [0.025]***                   [0.021]*** [0.021]***                     [0.013]***   [0.013]***
                                                     [0.000]      [0.000]                      [0.000]    [0.000]                      [0.000]    [0.000]                        [0.000]      [0.000]
                                   0.192 (0.274)    121.692      122.649     0.607 (0.336) 18.352        18.945      0.303 (0.329) 60.473         58.983      0.364 (0.358)      46.998       46.986
Housing Quality Summary                                 0.760       0.767                      0.322       0.324                     0.348       0.339                           0.439         0.437
Index (z-score)                                      [0.634]*** [0.063]***                   [0.040]*** [0.040]***                [0.036]*** [0.036]***                        [0.026]*** [0.026]***
                                     0.000 (0.651) [0.000]         [0.000]     0.000 (0.520) [0.000]      [0.000]  0.000 (0.586) [0.000]        [0.000]       0.000 (0.586) [0.000]           [0.000]
a
  Responses regarding construction materials used in rooms were included only for those households that reported information for all rooms. All the reggresions have a dummy by caserio.
Model 1: No Controls; Model 2: Control for HH's Years of Schooling, HH's Gender, HH's Age, Assets - Value Per Capita (USD), Monthly Income Per Capita (USD), all measured during the
baseline round. Following the standard procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we impute a value equal to 0 and add a dummy variable equal to 1 for that observation, which
indicates that the control variable was missed. The Housing Quality Summary Index (z-score) is defined is defined as the average of the z-scores of all the variables in the table, with the sign of
each measure oriented so that the more beneficial outcomes have higher scores. Bonferroni corrected p-value=0.02 for a significance level of 0.1. Reported results: estimated coefficient, robust
standard error, p-value and 100*coefficient/follow-up control mean, in that order.
*Significant at 10% level. **Significant at 5% level. ***Significant at 1% level.




                                                                                                 25
                                                                                Table 1b. Regressions of housing investment on Program Dummy. a
                                              El Salvador                                Uruguay                                Mexico                                         All
     Dependent Variable             Follow Up                                Follow Up                              Follow Up                                  Follow Up
                                                  Model 1      Model 2                     Model 1 Model 2                         Model 1   Model 2                           Model 1     Model 2
                                  Control Mean                             Control Mean                           Control Mean                                Control Mean
Sink on Room where food is                         -0.008       -0.006                     -0.014     -0.009                         -0.008    -0.010                            -0.010     -0.010
prepared                                           [0.010]      [0.010]                    [0.037]    [0.037]                       [0.010]   [0.010]                           [0.013]    [0.013]
                                                   [0.418]      [0.558]                    [0.706]    [0.809]                       [0.421]   [0.361]                           [0.453]    [0.488]
                                  0.016 (0.123) -52.691        -39.219     0.335 (0.472) -4.249       -2.707      0.020 (0.140) -42.203      -49.262          0.112 (0.315)      -9.258     -8.533
Water in Terrain                                   -0.062       -0.059                      0.008      0.002                         -0.010    -0.012                            -0.017     -0.018
                                                  [0.034]*     [0.034]*                    [0.022]    [0.022]                       [0.032]   [0.032]                           [0.017]    [0.017]
                                                   [0.072]      [0.089]                    [0.742]    [0.936]                       [0.744]   [0.713]                           [0.336]    [0.293]
                                  0.252 (0.434) -24.626        -23.411     0.897 (0.304)    0.840      0.205      0.551 (0.498) -1.901         -2.157         0.573 (0.494)      -2.944     -3.217
Electricity Connection inside                      -0.046       -0.038                      0.024      0.024                         -0.044    -0.048                            -0.021     -0.022
the House                                          [0.042]      [0.042]                    [0.018]    [0.018]                      [0.022]* [0.023]**                           [0.015]    [0.015]
                                                   [0.279]      [0.370]                    [0.191]    [0.193]                       [0.058]   [0.039]                           [0.166]    [0.153]
                                  0.496 (0.500) -9.347          -7.687     0.933 (0.251)    2.548      2.558      0.903 (0.297) -4.831         -5.289         0.800 (0.400)      -2.664     -2.755
Use Gas Stove or Kerosene                           0.016        0.022                     -0.014     -0.023                         -0.051    -0.054                            -0.022     -0.024
to Cook                                            [0.032]      [0.032]                    [0.039]    [0.038]                     [0.023]** [0.022]**                           [0.018]    [0.018]
                                                   [0.626]      [0.507]                    [0.724]    [0.560]                       [0.029]   [0.018]                           [0.233]    [0.195]
                                  0.167 (0.373) 9.640           13.014     0.521 (0.500) -2.654       -4.337      0.252 (0.434) -20.071      -21.606          0.309 (0.462)      -7.071     -7.623
House with Own Toilet                              -0.069       -0.063                     -0.011     -0.015                         0.012     0.008                             -0.016     -0.019
                                                   [0.042]      [0.042]                    [0.035]    [0.035]                       [0.034]   [0.034]                           [0.021]    [0.021]
                                                   [0.103]      [0.133]                    [0.748]    [0.663]                       [0.727]   [0.826]                           [0.459]    [0.377]
                                  0.516 (0.500) -13.436        -12.315     0.730 (0.444) -1.547       -2.107      0.392 (0.488)      3.039     1.920          0.527 (0.499)      -2.981     -3.548
Housing Investment                                     -0.066      -0.055                     0.006    0.000                        -0.054        -0.061                         -0.036       -0.039
Summary Index (z-score)                               [0.033]*     [0.036]                   [0.034]  [0.034]                      [0.027]* [0.027]**                           [0.018]* [0.018]**
                                     0.000 (0.467) [0.070]         [0.131]     0.000 (0.456) [0.866]  [0.995]     0.000 (0.426) [0.051]          [0.028]     0.000 (0.446) [0.052]           [0.036]
a
  Responses regarding construction materials used in rooms were included only for those households that reported information for all rooms. All the reggresions have a dummy by caserio.
Model 1: No Controls; Model 2: Control for HH's Years of Schooling, HH's Gender, HH's Age, Assets - Value Per Capita (USD), Monthly Income Per Capita (USD), all measured during the
baseline round. Following the standard procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we impute a value equal to 0 and add a dummy variable equal to 1 for that observation, which
indicates that the control variable was missed. The Housing Investment Summary Index (z-score) is defined as the average of the z-scores of all the variables in the table, with the sign of each
measure oriented so that the more beneficial outcomes have higher scores. Bonferroni corrected p-value=0.02 for a significance level of 0.1. Reported results: estimated coefficient, robust
standard error, p-value and 100*coefficient/follow-up control mean, in that order.
*Significant at 10% level. **Significant at 5% level. ***Significant at 1% level.




                                                                                                26
                                                                                                                                                  a
                                                                                   Table 2. Regressions of Satisfaction on Program Dummy.
                                              El Salvador                               Uruguay                                  Mexico                                         All
                                  Follow Up                                  Follow Up                                Follow Up                                 Follow Up
    Dependent Variable
                                 Control Mean     Model 1     Model 2       Control Mean   Model 1      Model 2      Control Mean    Model 1      Model 2      Control Mean    Model 1      Model 2
                                  (Std. Dev.)                                (Std. Dev.)                              (Std. Dev.)                               (Std. Dev.)
Satisfaction with Floor                             0.387        0.389                        0.121        0.122                        0.108        0.107                        0.180        0.181
Quality                                          [0.039]***   [0.040]***                   [0.038]***   [0.038]***                   [0.034]***   [0.034]***                   [0.022]***   [0.021]***
                                                   [0.000]      [0.000]                      [0.002]      [0.002]                      [0.002]      [0.002]                      [0.000]      [0.000]
                                0.163 (0.369)     237.502      239.017     0.314 (0.464)     38.669       38.779     0.551 (0.498)     19.556       19.490     0.374 (0.484)     48.254       48.313
Satisfaction with Wall                              0.477        0.479                        0.142        0.141                        0.149        0.148                        0.226        0.226
Quality                                          [0.039]***   [0.040]***                   [0.037]***   [0.037]***                   [0.035]***   [0.035]***                   [0.022]***   [0.021]***
                                                   [0.000]      [0.000]                      [0.000]      [0.000]                      [0.000]      [0.000]                      [0.000]      [0.000]
                                0.132 (0.338)     361.860      363.502     0.267 (0.443)     52.998       52.789     0.439 (0.496)     33.878       33.732     0.303 (0.459)     74.603       74.413
Satisfaction with Roof                              0.476        0.477                        0.179        0.176                        0.153        0.156                        0.241        0.241
Quality                                          [0.038]***   [0.039]***                   [0.037]***   [0.038]***                   [0.034]***   [0.035]***                   [0.021]***   [0.021]***
                                                   [0.000]      [0.000]                      [0.000]      [0.000]                      [0.000]      [0.000]                      [0.000]      [0.000]
                                0.159 (0.366)     299.531      300.417     0.339 (0.474)     52.784       51.817     0.404 (0.491)     37.937       38.514     0.317 (0.465)     75.867       76.034
Satisfaction with House                             0.426        0.427                        0.166        0.160                        0.094        0.096                        0.199        0.199
Protection against Water                         [0.038]***   [0.039]***                   [0.038]***   [0.038]***                   [0.034]***   [0.035]***                   [0.021]***   [0.022]***
when it rains                                      [0.000]      [0.000]                      [0.000]      [0.000]                      [0.007]      [0.006]                      [0.000]      [0.000]
                                0.167 (0.373)     255.350      256.348     0.325 (0.469)     51.073       49.101     0.347 (0.476)     27.234       27.718     0.291 (0.454)     68.601       68.494
Satisfaction with Quality of                        0.207        0.211                        0.096        0.097                        0.165        0.165                        0.151        0.151
Life                                             [0.045]***   [0.046]***                    [0.039]**    [0.039]**                   [0.032]***   [0.032]***                   [0.022]***   [0.022]***
                                                   [0.000]      [0.000]                      [0.015]      [0.015]                      [0.000]      [0.000]                      [0.000]      [0.000]
                                0.506 (0.501)     40.915       41.685      0.449 (0.498)     21.379       21.635     0.593 (0.491)     27.791       27.931     0.527 (0.499)     28.691       28.693
Satisfaction Summary                                 1.055       1.061                        0.299       0.295                        0.272      0.274                     0.471         0.472
Index (z-score)                                    [0.086]*** [0.088]***                    [0.059]*** [0.060]***                   [0.050]*** [0.050]***                 [0.037]*** [0.037]***
                                 0.000 (0.781) [0.000]          [0.000]    0.000 (0.734) [0.000]         [0.000]    0.000 (0.751) [0.000]        [0.000]   0.000 (0.753) [0.000]         [0.000]
a
  All the reggresions have a dummy by caserio. Model 1: No Controls; Model 2: Control for HH's Years of Schooling, HH's Gender, HH's Age, Assets - Value Per Capita (USD), Monthly
Income Per Capita (USD), all measured during the baseline round. Following the standard procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we impute a value equal to 0 and add a
dummy variable equal to 1 for that observation, which indicates that the control variable was missed. The Satisfaction Summary Index (z-score) is defined is defined as the average of the z-
scores of all the variables in the table, with the sign of each measure oriented so that the more beneficial outcomes have higher scores. Bonferroni corrected p-value=0.02 for a significance
level of 0.1. Reported results: estimated coefficient, robust standard error, p-value and 100*coefficient/follow-up control mean, in that order.
*Significant at 10% level. **Significant at 5% level. ***Significant at 1% level




                                                                                                 27
                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                   Table 3. Regressions of Perception of Security on Program Dummy.
                                                       El Salvador                               Uruguay                               Mexico                                   All
                                         Follow Up                                   Follow Up                              Follow Up                            Follow Up
        Dependent Variable
                                        Control Mean      Model 1      Model 2      Control Mean Model 1        Model 2    Control Mean Model 1 Model 2         Control Mean    Model 1    Model 2
                                         (Std. Dev.)                                 (Std. Dev.)                            (Std. Dev.)                          (Std. Dev.)
Safe inside the house during the                            0.175        0.178                         0.029      0.025                     0.001     0.003                       0.053    0.052
last 12 months                                           [0.040]***   [0.041]***                      [0.038]    [0.038]                   [0.031]   [0.031]                   [0.021]** [0.021]**
                                                           [0.000]      [0.000]                       [0.455]    [0.507]                   [0.969]   [0.936]                     [0.013]  [0.013]
                                       0.643 (0.479)       27.121      27.676       0.621 (0.486)      4.597      4.088    0.718 (0.450)    0.172     0.356    0.668 (0.471)      7.870    7.807
Safe leaving the house alone                                0.155        0.159                        -0.066     -0.069                     0.014     0.018                       0.021    0.022
during the last 12 months                                [0.043]***   [0.043]***                     [0.037]*   [0.037]*                   [0.035]   [0.035]                     [0.022]  [0.022]
                                                           [0.000]      [0.000]                       [0.078]    [0.068]                   [0.686]   [0.614]                     [0.348]  [0.321]
                                       0.601 (0.490)       25.743      26.447       0.376 (0.485)    -17.683    -18.381    0.551 (0.498)    2.583     3.218    0.512 (0.500)      4.069    4.292
Safe leaving the kids alone in the                          0.141        0.144                         0.001     -0.002                    -0.007    -0.006                       0.032    0.030
house during the last 12 months                          [0.043]***   [0.043]***                      [0.029]    [0.029]                   [0.026]   [0.026]                    [0.018]*  [0.018]
                                                           [0.001]      [0.001]                       [0.986]    [0.936]                   [0.806]   [0.823]                     [0.085]  [0.101]
                                       0.248 (0.432)       56.923      57.872       0.170 (0.376)      0.308     -1.420    0.162 (0.368)   -4.053    -3.699    0.188 (0.390)     16.870   16.030
The house had been robbed in the                            0.023        0.023                         0.013      0.013                     0.002     0.002                       0.011    0.011
last 12 months                                             [0.019]      [0.019]                       [0.035]    [0.035]                   [0.017]   [0.017]                     [0.014]  [0.014]
                                                           [0.229]      [0.228]                       [0.705]    [0.710]                   [0.931]   [0.912]                     [0.466]  [0.471]
                                       0.031 (0.173)       74.207      74.494       0.268 (0.443)      4.949      4.898    0.065 (0.246)    2.336     2.963    0.116 (0.319)      9.283    9.201
Perception of Security Summary                                 0.218         0.223                     -0.026     -0.031                     0.001    0.004                        0.045      0.044
Index (z-score)                                             [0.062]***    [0.062]***                   [0.050]    [0.050]                   [0.044] [0.044]                       [0.029]    [0.029]
                                           0.000 (0.681)      [0.001]       [0.000]    0.000 (0.645) [0.602]      [0.538]     0.000 (0.634) [0.975] [0.930]     0.000 (0.650) [0.132]        [0.141]
a
  All the reggresions have a dummy by caserio. Model 1: No Controls; Model 2: Control for HH's Years of Schooling, HH's Gender, HH's Age, Assets - Value Per Capita (USD), Monthly Income
Per Capita (USD), all measured during the baseline round. Following the standard procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we impute a value equal to 0 and add a dummy variable
equal to 1 for that observation, which indicates that the control variable was missed. The Perception of Security Summary Index (z-score) is definedis defined as the average of the z-scores of all
the variables in the table, with the sign of each measure oriented so that the more beneficial outcomes have higher scores. Bonferroni corrected p-value=0.025 for a significance level of 0.1.
Reported results: estimated coefficient, robust standard error, p-value and 100*coefficient/follow-up control mean, in that order.
*Significant at 10% level. **Significant at 5% level. ***Significant at 1% level.




                                                                                                28
                                                                                                                                    a
                                                                    Table 4. Regressions of Durable Goods on Program Dummy.
                                       El Salvador                            Uruguay                           Mexico                                      All
                            Follow Up                              Follow Up                            Follow Up                            Follow Up
 Dependent Variable
                           Control Mean     Model 1    Model 2    Control Mean Model 1 Model 2         Control Mean Model 1 Model 2         Control Mean Model 1 Model 2
                            (Std. Dev.)                            (Std. Dev.)                          (Std. Dev.)                          (Std. Dev.)
T.V                                           -0.013    -0.001                      0.005     0.011                     -0.034    -0.033                     -0.016    -0.013
                                             [0.047]    [0.047]                    [0.022]   [0.021]                    [0.030]   [0.030]                    [0.018]   [0.018]
                                             [0.786]    [0.988]                    [0.821]   [0.599]                    [0.272]   [0.274]                    [0.397]   [0.465]
                           0.434 (0.496)      -3.004    -0.162    0.926 (0.261)     0.538     1.240    0.728 (0.445)    -4.616    -4.560    0.711 (0.453)    -2.222    -1.898
Fan                                           0.015      0.019                      0.018     0.017                      0.001     0.000                      0.010     0.009
                                             [0.020]    [0.020]                    [0.040]   [0.040]                    [0.010]   [0.010]                    [0.015]   [0.015]
                                             [0.458]    [0.348]                    [0.656]   [0.676]                    [0.934]   [1.000]                    [0.516]   [0.545]
                           0.034 (0.181)     44.316    56.566     0.535 (0.499)     3.363     3.190    0.018 (0.131)     4.942     0.011    0.177 (0.381)     5.627     5.258
Kitchen or Gas Stove                          0.000      0.008                     -0.008    -0.006                     -0.035    -0.039                     -0.018    -0.019
                                             [0.044]    [0.043]                    [0.034]   [0.035]                    [0.030]   [0.031]                    [0.020]   [0.020]
                                             [0.997]    [0.853]                    [0.809]   [0.868]                    [0.262]   [0.210]                    [0.383]   [0.367]
                           0.404 (0.491)      -0.037     1.994    0.768 (0.423)    -1.098    -0.764    0.451 (0.498)    -7.684    -8.641    0.534 (0.499)    -3.351    -3.469
Refrigerator                                  -0.028    -0.016                     -0.017    -0.016                     -0.005    -0.009                     -0.014    -0.015
                                             [0.032]    [0.031]                    [0.037]   [0.037]                    [0.026]   [0.026]                    [0.018]   [0.018]
                                             [0.385]    [0.604]                    [0.661]   [0.676]                    [0.861]   [0.732]                    [0.454]   [0.435]
                           0.123 (0.329)    -22.833    -13.208    0.683 (0.466)    -2.439    -2.322    0.207 (0.405)    -2.259    -4.434    0.327 (0.469)    -4.308    -4.477
Bicycle                                       0.037      0.043                      0.014     0.019                     -0.029    -0.027                      0.001     0.003
                                             [0.043]    [0.043]                    [0.040]   [0.040]                    [0.030]   [0.030]                    [0.021]   [0.021]
                                             [0.400]    [0.325]                    [0.726]   [0.632]                    [0.347]   [0.371]                    [0.967]   [0.890]
                           0.323 (0.468)     11.368    13.352     0.546 (0.498)     2.596     3.530    0.279 (0.449)   -10.209    -9.635    0.370 (0.483)     0.240     0.797
Assets Summary                                 0.015      0.030                        0.004    0.011                     -0.043 -0.047                        -0.013 -0.012
Index (z-score)                               [0.050] [0.048]                         [0.046] [0.045]                     [0.036] [0.036]                      [0.024] [0.024]
                            0.000 (0.544) [0.769] [0.528]             0.000 (0.561) [0.929] [0.808] 0.000 (0.598) [0.241] [0.194] 0.000 (0.572) [0.608] [0.615]
a
  All the reggresions have a dummy by caserio. Model 1: No Controls; Model 2: Control for HH's Years of Schooling, HH's Gender, HH's Age, Assets - Value Per Capita
(USD), Monthly Income Per Capita (USD), all measured during the baseline round. Following the standard procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we
impute a value equal to 0 and add a dummy variable equal to 1 for that observation, which indicates that the control variable was missed. The Assets Summary Index (z-
score) is defined is defined as the average of the z-scores of all the variables in the table, with the sign of each measure oriented so that the more beneficial outcomes
have higher scores. Bonferroni corrected p-value=0.02 for a significance level of 0.1. Reported results: estimated coefficient, robust standard error, p-value and
100*coefficient/follow-up control mean, in that order.
*Significant at 10% level. **Significant at 5% level. ***Significant at 1% level.




                                                                                     29
                                                                         Table 5a. Regressions of Demographics Variables on Program Dummy. a
                                          El Salvador                                Uruguay                                Mexico                                      All
                                Follow Up                                                                       Follow Up                               Follow Up
  Dependent Variable                                                    Follow Up Control
                              Control Mean     Model 1      Model 2                       Model 1 Model 2     Control Mean Model 1 Model 2             Control Mean      Model 1   Model 2
                                                                        Mean (Std. Dev.)
                                (Std. Dev.)                                                                     (Std. Dev.)                             (Std. Dev.)
HH Size                                         -0.031       -0.098                         0.253    0.286                      0.002  -0.019                             0.079      0.097
                                                [0.273]      [0.264]                       [0.220] [0.216]                     [0.175] [0.172]                           [0.124]    [0.122]
                                                [0.909]      [0.710]                       [0.252] [0.188]                     [0.991] [0.912]                           [0.522]    [0.428]
                             5.453 (2.513) -0.574            -1.806     4.954 (2.657)       5.110    5.764   5.264 (2.595) 0.037       -0.363         5.223   (2.596)     1.521      1.855
Newborns (<1)                                    0.011        0.010                        -0.009   -0.007                      0.028   0.027                             0.011      0.013
                                                [0.031]      [0.032]                       [0.028] [0.028]                     [0.025] [0.025]                           [0.016]    [0.016]
                                                [0.732]      [0.748]                       [0.748] [0.817]                     [0.263] [0.293]                           [0.485]    [0.418]
                             0.116 (0.321)       9.361        8.914     0.124 (0.351)      -7.290   -5.280   0.110 (0.320) 25.660 24.278              0.116   (0.330)     9.745     11.287
Newborns (<2)                                   -0.018       -0.022                         0.053    0.068                      0.023   0.022                             0.023      0.028
                                                [0.041]      [0.041]                       [0.041] [0.040]*                    [0.036] [0.035]                           [0.022]    [0.022]
                                                [0.668]      [0.591]                       [0.205] [0.096]                     [0.526] [0.530]                           [0.314]    [0.213]
                             0.229 (0.429) -7.789            -9.733     0.262 (0.515) 20.023 25.770 0.239 (0.477) 9.548                 9.375         0.243   (0.476)     9.490     11.545
Demographic                                         -0.007     -0.020                          0.057    0.073                         0.045     0.041                      0.037      0.044
Summary Index (z-                                   [0.079]    [0.078]                        [0.064] [0.064]                        [0.056] [0.056]                      [0.037]    [0.037]
score)                        0.000 (0.742) [0.933]            [0.805]   0.000 (0.789) [0.377] [0.252] 0.000 (0.761) [0.421] [0.470] 0.000 (0.763) [0.327]                           [0.234]
a
  All the reggresions have a dummy by caserio. Model 1: No Controls; Model 2: Control for HH's Years of Schooling, HH's Gender, HH's Age, Assets - Value Per Capita (USD), Monthly
Income Per Capita (USD), all measured during the baseline round. Following the standard procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we impute a value equal to 0 and add a
dummy variable equal to 1 for that observation, which indicates that the control variable was missed. The Demographic Summary Index (z-score) is defined is defined as the average of the
z-scores of all the variables in the table, with the sign of each measure oriented so that the more beneficial outcomes have higher scores. Bonferroni corrected p-value=0.033 for a
significance level of 0.1. Reported results: estimated coefficient, robust standard error, p-value and 100*coefficient/follow-up control mean, in that order.

*Significant at 10% level. **Significant at 5% level. ***Significant at 1% level




                                                                                             30
                                                                            Table 5b. Regressions of Labor and Income Variables on Program Dummy. a
                                                El Salvador                                Uruguay                                  Mexico                                   All
                                    Follow Up                                                                           Follow Up                                Follow Up
     Dependent Variable                                                     Follow Up Control
                                   Control Mean       Model 1 Model 2                           Model 1 Model 2        Control Mean Model 1 Model 2            Control Mean   Model 1 Model 2
                                                                            Mean (Std. Dev.)
                                    (Std. Dev.)                                                                         (Std. Dev.)                              (Std. Dev.)
Monthly Income Per                                      0.704      1.373                         -3.371    -3.788                       -0.422      0.245                      -1.835    -2.297
Capita (USD)                                           [3.098]    [2.923]                       [13.443] [13.399]                       [3.759] [3.814]                       [3.905]    [3.867]
                                                       [0.820]    [0.639]                        [0.802] [0.777]                        [0.911] [0.949]                       [0.638]    [0.553]
                                 31.618 (29.224) 2.226             4.342    94.862 (156.792) -3.554        -3.993 55.422 (54.912) -0.762            0.442     59.572 (81.054) -3.081     -3.856
Hours worked last week by                               1.738      1.000                          0.025     0.563                        0.824      0.668                       0.704     0.825
Head of HH                                             [2.072]    [2.073]                        [1.821] [1.829]                        [1.616] [1.573]                       [1.055]    [1.039]
                                                       [0.402]    [0.630]                        [0.989] [0.758]                        [0.610] [0.671]                       [0.505]    [0.428]
                                 38.033 (17.351) 4.570             2.630    39.081 (19.877)       0.064     1.440 41.086 (19.498) 2.006             1.625     39.711 (19.154) 1.773       2.077
Hours worked last week by                               4.974      4.654                         -0.047    -0.116                       -3.052     -1.696                      -0.693    -0.619
Spouse                                                 [5.418]    [5.817]                        [2.661] [2.678]                        [3.026] [3.129]                       [1.883]    [1.887]
                                                       [0.361]    [0.426]                        [0.986] [0.966]                        [0.315] [0.588]                       [0.713]    [0.743]
                                 35.500 (25.995) 14.012           13.111    39.353 (19.561)      -0.120    -0.294 28.250 (18.867) -10.805 -6.005 34.194 (20.903) -2.027                  -1.810
Economic Summary                                        0.054      0.056                         -0.010    -0.004                       -0.009     -0.008                       0.006     0.008
Index (z-score)                                        [0.042]    [0.041]                        [0.039] [0.040]                        [0.032] [0.032]                       [0.021]    [0.021]
                                  0.000 (0.459)        [0.202]    [0.174]    0.000 (0.506)       [0.809] [0.913]      0.000 (0.490)     [0.781] [0.818]        0.000 (0.486)  [0.781]    [0.710]
a
  In the case of monetary variables, observations over the 99th percentile were excluded. With regard to the number of hours worked, cases in which more than 84 hours were reported were
not considered. All the reggresions have a dummy by caserio. Model 1: No Controls; Model 2: Control for HH's Years of Schooling, HH's Gender, HH's Age, Assets - Value Per Capita
(USD), Monthly Income Per Capita (USD), all measured during the baseline round. Following the standard procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we impute a value equal to
0 and add a dummy variable equal to 1 for that observation, which indicates that the control variable was missed. The Economic Summary Index (z-score) is defined is defined as the average
of the z-scores of all the variables in the table, with the sign of each measure oriented so that the more beneficial outcomes have higher scores. Bonferroni corrected p-value=0.033 for a
significance level of 0.1. Reported results: estimated coefficient, robust standard error, p-value and 100*coefficient/follow-up control mean, in that order.

*Significant at 10% level. **Significant at 5% level. ***Significant at 1% level




                                                                                              31
                                                                              Table 6. Regressions of Health Variables of Children on Program Dummy. a
                                   El Salvador                             Uruguay                             Mexico                               All                          El Salvador and Mexico
                          Follow Up                             Follow Up                           Follow Up                           Follow Up                             Follow Up
Dependent Variable
                        Control Mean Model 1      Model 2     Control Mean Model 1 Model 2 Control Mean Model 1 Model 2 Control Mean Model 1                     Model 2     Control Mean Model 1 Model 2
                          (Std. Dev.)                           (Std. Dev.)                        (Std. Dev.)                          (Std. Dev.)                           (Std. Dev.)
Respiratory                              -0.041     -0.045                     -0.002 0.002                        -0.047 -0.043                      -0.029       -0.028                    -0.047   -0.045
Disease during last                     [0.060]    [0.062]                    [0.034] [0.034]                     [0.043] [0.043]                    [0.025]      [0.025]                    [0.035] [0.035]
4 weeks                                 [0.498]    [0.466]                    [0.963] [0.948]                     [0.283] [0.333]                    [0.249]      [0.267]                    [0.182] [0.204]
                        0.690 (0.463) -5.950        -6.558    0.175 (0.381) -0.934 1.290         0.417 (0.494) -11.314 -10.213 0.403 (0.490) -7.225                -6.987   0.519 (0.500)    -9.055   -8.662
Diarrhea during last                     -0.050     -0.054                     -0.011 -0.003                       -0.035 -0.033                      -0.027       -0.024                    -0.040   -0.038
4 weeks                                 [0.042]    [0.044]                    [0.034] [0.034]                     [0.028] [0.028]                    [0.019]      [0.019]                   [0.023]* [0.023]
                                        [0.243]    [0.224]                    [0.737] [0.930]                     [0.224] [0.246]                    [0.172]      [0.219]                    [0.095] [0.108]
                        0.168 (0.374) -29.924     -32.004     0.158 (0.365) -7.261 -1.885        0.135 (0.342) -25.534 -24.600 0.151 (0.358) -17.801             -16.038    0.147 (0.354) -26.822 -26.102
Health Summary                              0.114     0.122                       0.016    0.002                     0.092   0.087                       0.064    0.059                         0.100     0.097
Index (z-score)                            [0.092] [0.094]                       [0.066] [0.067]                    [0.061] [0.061]                     [0.040] [0.040]                       [0.050]** [0.051]*
                           0.000 (0.743) [0.219] [0.196]          0.000 (0.725) [0.812] [0.977] 0.000 (0.755) [0.131] [0.161] 0.000 (0.741) [0.111] [0.143] 0.000 (0.750) [0.048] [0.059]
a
  All the regressions have a dummy by caserio. Model 1: Control for Age, Age Squared, Gender, and a dummy equal to 1 if the mother lives in the household at the time of the follow-up round; Model 2: Control
for Age, Age Squared, Gender, a dummy equal to 1 if the mother lives in the household at the time of the follow-up round and also for HH's Years of Schooling, HH's Gender, HH's Age, Assets - Value Per
Capita (USD), and Monthly Income Per Capita (USD) at the time of the baseline round. Following the standard procedure, when a control variable has a missing value, we impute a value equal to 0 and add a
dummy variable equal to 1 for that observation, which indicates that the control variable was missed. The Health Summary Index (z-score) is defined is defined as the average of the z-scores of all the
variables in the table, with the sign of each measure oriented so that the more beneficial outcomes have higher scores. Bonferroni corrected p-value=0.05 for a significance level of 0.1. Reported results:
estimated coefficient, robust standard error, p-value and 100*coefficient/follow-up control mean, in that order.
*Significant at 10% level. **Significant at 5% level. ***Significant at 1% level




                                                                                                      32
                                                 Table 7a. Differences of Means between Poors, Non Poors and Slum
                                                                                                 a
                                                                         Dwellers. El Salvador
                                                                        (2) Mean of
                                                    (1) Mean of
                                                   Observations        Observations                          Difference
                                                                                            Difference
                   Variable                                             Settlements                                   d
                                                   National Poor                             (1) - (2)        (1) - (2)
                                                                 b    (UTPMP 2007-
                                                  (EHPM 2008)
                                                                            08)
Income Indicator (HH)
                                       c
Monthly Income Per Capita (USD)                       37.293              30.146              7.147            2.844
                                                      (0.622)             (1.777)           (1.896)***        (2.173)
Employment Indicators (IND)
Employment rate 16-64                                 0.540                0.510               0.030            0.019
                                                     (0.006)              (0.018)             (0.019)          (0.019)
Employment rate Males 16-64                           0.352                0.368               -0.015           0.000
                                                     (0.006)              (0.014)             (0.016)          (0.018)
Employment rate Females 16-64                         0.188                0.143               0.046            0.018
                                                     (0.006)              (0.014)           (0.016)***         (0.016)
Wage employment rate 16-64                            0.328                0.195               0.134            0.122
                                                     (0.007)              (0.016)           (0.018)***       (0.017)***
Wage employment rate Males 16-64                      0.234                0.172               0.061            0.065
                                                     (0.006)              (0.014)           (0.015)***       (0.015)***
Wage employment rate Females 16-64                    0.095                0.022               0.073            0.058
                                                     (0.003)              (0.005)           (0.007)***       (0.006)***
Self employment rate 16-64                            0.212                0.313              -0.100           -0.101
                                                     (0.006)              (0.020)           (0.021)***       (0.021)***
Self employment rate Males 16-64                      0.119                0.192               -0.074           -0.061
                                                     (0.005)              (0.022)           (0.023)***        (0.024)**
Self employment rate Females 16-64                    0.094                0.121              -0.027           -0.040
                                                     (0.004)              (0.010)            (0.012)**       (0.012)***
Average Wage Males 16-64 c                           132.607              87.041              45.565           35.581
                                                     (2.206)              (5.850)           (6.167)***       (5.356)***
                                  c
Average Wage Females 16-64                           111.619              84.060              27.560           18.781
                                                     (2.216)              (5.105)           (5.514)***       (6.059)***
a
  Figures computed at household and individual levels in El Salvador using the 2008 multi-purpose household survey
for all provinces (known as "departments") in which there are UTPMP households (excludes San Salvador Department)
and UTPMP impact evaluation baseline data sources. Standard errors are clustered at the primary sample unit level
shown in parentheses.
b
  The term "national poor "refers to households whose members were living on less than USD 89.4 per capita per
month in urban zones and less than USD 58.2 per capita per month in rural zones in 2008; these figures are equivalent
to two basic baskets for urban and rural areas, which represent the national poverty line and basic needs in El Salvador
as of 2008.
c
    In the case of monetary variables, observations over the 99th percentile were excluded.
d
 Since price levels in urban and rural zones in El Salvador33  differ, in this column we test the hypothesis of equal means
by controlling for a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the household is located in a rural zone.
*Significant at 10% level. **Significant at 5% level. ***Significant at 1% level
                                                Table 7b. Differences of Means between Poors, Non
                                                       Poors and Slum Dweller. El Salvadora
                                               (1) Mean of       (2) Mean of
                                              Observations      Observations
                                                                               Difference Difference
                Variable                      National Poor      Settlements                         c
                                                                                (1) - (2)   (1) - (2)
                                                            b (UTPMP 2007-
                                             (EHPM 2008)             08)
Demographics
HH Size                                           4.669             4.977           -0.308        -0.181
                                                 (0.052)           (0.129)         (0.132)**      (0.138)
Female Head                                       0.288             0.213            0.075         0.047
                                                 (0.009)           (0.015)        (0.018)***    (0.020)**
Head of HH's Age                                 46.904            44.717            2.187         1.783
                                                 (0.383)           (0.927)         (1.019)**     (0.989)*
Head of HH's Years of Schooling                   3.693             2.438            1.255         0.825
                                                 (0.086)           (0.184)        (0.198)***   (0.161)***
Children 5-12 enrolled in school                  0.827             0.931           -0.104        -0.120
                                                 (0.009)           (0.013)        (0.016)***   (0.017)***
Children 13-18 enrolled in school                 0.622             0.578            0.044         0.010
                                                 (0.015)           (0.037)          (0.041)       (0.040)
Housing and Assets
Dorms Per Capita                                  0.507             0.126           0.381        0.343
                                                 (0.009)           (0.012)        (0.015)***   (0.019)***
Share of Rooms with Good Quality                  0.606             0.144           0.462        0.385
Floors                                           (0.014)           (0.014)        (0.019)***   (0.029)***
Water in Terrain                                  0.553             0.215           0.339        0.249
                                                 (0.017)           (0.051)        (0.051)***   (0.042)***
House with Own Toilet                             0.781             0.483           0.298        0.279
                                                 (0.010)           (0.041)        (0.042)***   (0.040)***
Connected to Sewage Service                       0.534             0.009           0.525        0.382
                                                 (0.034)           (0.004)        (0.033)***   (0.064)***
Electricity Connection inside the                 0.805             0.391           0.414        0.352
House                                            (0.011)           (0.058)        (0.060)***   (0.051)***
Refrigerator                                      0.331             0.075           0.256        0.199
                                                 (0.012)           (0.019)        (0.023)***   (0.032)***
T.V.                                              0.666             0.436           0.230        0.168
                                                 (0.014)           (0.037)        (0.039)***   (0.030)***
a
 Figures computed at household and individual levels in El Salvador using the 2008 multi-purpose
household survey (EHPM) for all provinces (known as "departments") in which there are UTPMP
households (excludes San Salvador Department) and UTPMP impact evaluation baseline data
sources. Standard errors are clustered at the primary sample unit level shown in parentheses.
b
  The term "national poor "refers to households whose members were living on less than USD 89.4 per
capita per month in urban zones and less than USD 58.2 per capita per month in rural zones in 2008;
these figures are equivalent to two basic baskets for urban and rural areas, which represent the national
poverty line and basic needs in El Salvador in 2008.
c
                                                     34
  Since price levels in urban and rural zones in El Salvador   differ, in this column we test the hypothesis
of equal means by controlling for a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the household is located in a
rural zone.
*Significant at 10% level. **Significant at 5% level. ***Significant at 1% level
                                                  Table 7c. Differences of Means between Poors,
                                                      Non Poors and Slum Dwellers. Uruguay
                                                    (Montevideo and Canelones Departments)a
                                                    (1) Mean of
                                                                    (2) Mean of
                                                   Obervations
                                                                  Observations   Difference
                  Variable                          Poor Out of
                                                                   Settlements      (1)-(2)
                                                   Slums (ECH
                                                            b      (ECH 2008)
                                                      2008)
Income Indicators (HH)
                                      c
Monthly Income Per Capita (USD)                       77.561            132.936      -55.376
                                                      (0.627)           (3.475)     (3.364)***
Employment Indicators (IND)
Employment rate 16-64                               0.584             0.647           -0.063
                                                   (0.004)           (0.007)       (0.007)***
Employment rate Males 16-64                         0.337             0.388           -0.051
                                                   (0.009)           (0.006)       (0.010)***
Employment rate Females 16-64                       0.247             0.260           -0.012
                                                   (0.011)           (0.006)         (0.011)
Wage employment rate 16-64                          0.404             0.467           -0.063
                                                   (0.005)           (0.008)       (0.009)***
Wage employment rate Males 16-64                    0.225             0.271           -0.046
                                                   (0.008)           (0.007)       (0.009)***
Wage employment rate Females 16-64                  0.178             0.196           -0.017
                                                   (0.010)           (0.006)         (0.012)
Self employment rate 16-64                          0.181             0.180           0.000
                                                   (0.003)           (0.007)         (0.008)
Self employment rate Males 16-64                    0.112             0.116           -0.005
                                                   (0.003)           (0.004)         (0.005)
Self employment rate Females 16-64                  0.069             0.064           0.005
                                                   (0.002)           (0.004)         (0.005)
Average Wage Males 16-64 c                        187.336           260.234          -72.899
                                                   (6.969)           (5.858)       (9.489)***
Average Wage Females 16-64 c                       74.283           108.738          -34.455
                                                   (2.086)           (4.156)       (3.657)***
a
  Figures computed at household and individual levels in Montevideo and Canelones provinces
(known as "departments") in Uruguay using the 2008 continuous household survey (ECH).
Standard errors are clustered at the primary sample unit level shown in parentheses.

b
  The term "national poor" refers to households whose members are below the national poverty
line in urban zones in Uruguay. This line is calculated monthly; in 2008, it ranged between USD
213 and USD 234 per capita per month. The poverty line represents a basic basket of "staple
food needs" plus a basic basket of "non-food needs", both calculated using 2006 as the base
year.
c
                                             35monetary variables, observations over the 99th
 In US dollars of December 2008. In the case of
percentile were excluded.
*Significant at 10% level. **Significant at 5% level. ***Significant at 1% level
                                                    Table 7d. Differences of Means between Poors,
                                                        Non Poors and Slum Dwellers. Uruguay
                                                                                                a
                                                      (Montevideo and Canelones Departments)
                                                       (1) Mean of         (2) Mean of
                                                   Obervations Poor      Observations Difference
                   Variable                        Out of Slums (ECH      Settlements    (1) - (2)
                                                               b
                                                         2008)            (ECH 2008)
Demographics
HH Size                                                    4.274                3.691       0.584
                                                          (0.091)              (0.053)   (0.118)***
Female Head                                                0.378                0.372       0.005
                                                          (0.038)              (0.013)     (0.039)
Head of HH's Age                                          45.311               45.423      -0.112
                                                          (0.213)              (0.352)     (0.395)
Head of HH's Years of Schooling                            6.351                6.169       0.182
                                                          (0.190)              (0.099)     (0.140)
Children 5-12 enrolled in school                           0.980                0.978       0.002
                                                          (0.002)              (0.003)     (0.004)
Children 13-18 enrolled in school                          0.707                0.661       0.046
                                                          (0.011)              (0.019)    (0.024)*
Housing and Assets
Rooms Per Capita                                           0.836                0.977      -0.141
                                                          (0.024)              (0.020)   (0.039)***
Share of Rooms with Good Quality Floors                    0.758                0.596       0.162
                                                          (0.010)              (0.017)   (0.016)***
Water in Terrain                                           0.864                0.989      -0.125
                                                          (0.061)              (0.004)    (0.057)**
House with Own Toilet                                      0.922                0.895       0.027
                                                          (0.006)              (0.009)    (0.012)**
Connected to Sewage Service                                0.543                0.604      -0.061
                                                          (0.033)              (0.023)    (0.025)**
Electricity Connection inside the House                    0.988                0.996      -0.008
                                                          (0.003)              (0.001)    (0.003)**
Refrigerator                                               0.886                0.860       0.027
                                                          (0.006)              (0.011)    (0.011)**
T.V.                                                       0.939                0.919       0.020
                                                          (0.007)              (0.008)    (0.009)**
a
  Figures computed at household and individual levels in Montevideo and Canelones provinces
(known as "departments") in Uruguay using the 2008 continuous household survey (ECH).
Standard errors are clustered at the primary sample unit level shown in parentheses.
b
  The term "national poor" refers to households whose members are below the national poverty line
in urban zones in Uruguay. This line is calculated monthly; in 2008, it ranged between USD 213 and
USD 234 per capita per month. The poverty line represents a basic basket of "staple food needs"
plus a basic basket of "non-food needs", both calculated using 2006 as the base year.
                                                   36
*Significant at 10% level. **Significant at 5% level. ***Significant at 1% level
                                                  Table 7e. Differences of Means between Poors, Non Poors and
                                                            Slum Dwellers. Mexico (Estado de Mexico)a
                                                  (1) Mean Poor (2) Mean All Slums Difference Difference
                  Variable
                                                  (ENIGH 2010) b (UTPMP 2010 - 11)       (1) - (2)   (1) - (2)d
Income Indicators (HH)
Monthly Income Per Capita (USD) c                     86.274               107.674        -21.399       -34.770
                                                      (1.629)              (6.073)       (6.218)***    (9.504)***
Employment Indicators (IND)
Employment rate 16-64                              0.877               0.563              0.315        0.278
                                                  (0.010)             (0.009)         (0.014)*** (0.017)***
Employment rate Males 16-64                        0.529               0.406              0.124        0.104
                                                  (0.015)             (0.007)         (0.017)***    (0.026)**
Employment rate Females 16-64                      0.348               0.157              0.191        0.174
                                                  (0.013)             (0.008)         (0.016)*** (0.022)***
Wage employment rate 16-64                         0.621               0.509              0.113        0.064
                                                  (0.020)             (0.011)         (0.023)***     (0.037)*
Wage employment rate Males 16-64                   0.387               0.378              0.009       -0.012
                                                  (0.014)             (0.010)            (0.017)      (0.023)
Wage employment rate Females 16-64                 0.234               0.130              0.104        0.075
                                                  (0.013)             (0.007)         (0.015)*** (0.021)***
Self employment rate 16-64                         0.252               0.049              0.203        0.214
                                                  (0.016)             (0.008)         (0.018)*** (0.028)***
Self employment rate Males 16-64                   0.140               0.024              0.116        0.116
                                                  (0.010)             (0.005)         (0.011)*** (0.013)***
Self employment rate Females 16-64                 0.112               0.025              0.087        0.098
                                                  (0.015)             (0.004)         (0.015)*** (0.031)***
Average Wage Males 16-64 c                        237.071            252.964            -15.893      -30.158
                                                  (4.699)             (7.439)           (8.725)*   (8.264)***
Average Wage Females 16-64 c                      152.216            253.512           -101.295     -110.316
                                                  (4.922)            (20.365)        (20.726)*** (36.068)***
a
  Figures computed at household and individual levels in Estado de Mexico, Mexico, using the 2010 national
household income and expenditure survey (ENIGH) and UTPMP impact evaluation baseline data sources
(including non-eligible UTPMP households). Standard errors are clustered at the primary sample unit level
shown in parentheses.
b
  The term "national poor" refers to households whose members were living on less than USD 167.67 per
capita per month in urban zones and less than USD 107.29 in rural zones between August and November 2010;
these figures are equivalent to two basic baskets, which represent the national poverty line and basic needs in
Mexico as of 2010.
c
  In the case of monetary variables, observations over the 99th percentile were excluded.
d
 Since price levels in urban and rural zones in Mexico differ, in this column we test the hypothesis of equal
means by controlling for a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the household is located in a rural zone.

                                                          37
*Significant at 10% level. **Significant at 5% level. ***Significant at 1% level
                                                   Table 7f. Differences of Means between Poors, Non Poors and Slum
                                                                   Dwellers. Mexico (Estado de Mexico)a
                                                  (1) Mean Poor       (2) Mean All Slums    Difference   Difference
                   Variable
                                                  (ENIGH 2010) b (UTPMP 2010 - 11)           (1) - (2)    (1) - (2)c
Demographics
HH Size                                                4.658                4.721              -0.063           0.013
                                                      (0.074)              (0.148)            (0.164)          (0.182)
Female Head                                            0.208                0.201              0.006            0.017
                                                      (0.012)              (0.014)            (0.018)          (0.023)
Head of HH's Age                                      46.130               43.537              2.592            2.580
                                                      (0.512)              (0.711)           (0.870)***       (1.159)**
Head of HH's Years of Schooling                        6.897                5.214              1.682            1.134
                                                      (0.165)              (0.227)           (0.279)***      (0.431)***
Children 5-12 enrolled in school                       0.980                0.966              0.015            0.005
                                                      (0.006)              (0.007)            (0.009)          (0.014)
Children 13-18 enrolled in school                      0.632                0.430              0.202            0.148
                                                      (0.025)              (0.030)           (0.039)***       (0.061)**
Housing and Assets
Rooms Per Capita                                      0.921              0.854                0.067          0.034
                                                     (0.022)            (0.023)             (0.032)**       (0.045)
Share of Rooms with Good Quality Floors               0.959              0.738                0.220          0.227
                                                     (0.006)            (0.019)            (0.020)***     (0.034)***
Water in Terrain                                      0.926              0.574                0.353          0.331
                                                     (0.014)            (0.050)            (0.051)***     (0.098)***
House with Own Toilet                                 0.835              0.481                0.354          0.310
                                                     (0.012)            (0.032)            (0.034)***     (0.044)***
Connected to Sewage Service                           0.903              0.311                0.592          0.450
                                                     (0.018)            (0.048)            (0.051)***     (0.057)***
Electricity Connection inside the House               0.988              0.885                0.103          0.071
                                                     (0.003)            (0.022)            (0.022)***     (0.023)***
Refrigerator                                          0.700              0.195                0.504          0.296
                                                     (0.024)            (0.034)            (0.041)***     (0.070)***
T.V.                                                  0.953              0.640                0.313          0.223
                                                     (0.010)            (0.039)            (0.040)***     (0.048)***
a
  Figures computed at household and individual levels in Estado de Mexico, Mexico, using the 2010 national household
income and expenditure survey (ENIGH) and UTPMP impact evaluation baseline data sources (including non-eligible
UTPMP households). Standard errors are clustered at the primary sample unit level shown in parentheses.

b
 The term "national poor" refers to households whose members were living on less than USD 167.67 per capita per
month in urban zones and less than USD 107.29 in rural zones between August and November 2010; these figures are
equivalent to two basic baskets, which represent the national poverty line and basic needs in Mexico as of 2010.

c
 Since price levels in urban and rural zones in Mexico differ, in this column we test the hypothesis of equal means by
controlling for a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the household is located in a rural zone.
*Significant at 10% level. **Significant at 5% level. ***Significant at 1% level
                                                           38
                   Supplemental Appendix Tables:
                          Table A1. Timeline of Intervention and Surveys

                          El Salvador       Mexico           Uruguay

                          September,       May - July,     November,
                            2008 -           2010            2007 -
Phase 1 - Construction
                         January, 2010                    January, 2008


                            April -        October,         August -
                          September,     2010 January,    October, 2008
Phase 2 - Construction
                            2008            2011


                          September -     February -       January -
Follow-Up Survey           October,       April, 2012     March, 2010
                             2009




                                  39
                                                                 Table A2a: Description of Variables and Sample Sizes. Intention to Treat Groups. Follow Up Survey
                                                                                                    El Salvador                Uruguay                   Mexico                  All
Variable                          Description                                                    Obs.         Obs.         Obs.        Obs.         Obs.        Obs.    Obs.          Obs.
                                                                                                Control    Treatment     Control Treatment         Control Treatment   Control     Treatment
Monthly Income Per Capita         Monthly Income per capita in US dollars of July 2007. It is    200          324          258          386          339        360     797          1,070
(USD)                             calculated as the sum of the monthly earnings of each
                                  household's member divided by the household size.

Assets Value Per Capita (USD)     Total Asset Value per capita reported by the household.          258      398          282        446          401         425        941            1,269
Newborns (<1)                     Number of individuals below 1 year old by household.             258      398          282        446          401         425        941            1,269
Newborns (<2)                     Number of individuals below 2 year old by household.             258      398          282        446          401         425        941            1,269
Age                               Age in years for all the individual.                             1,402    2,215       1,393      2,320        2,082       2,231      4,877           6,766
Age in Months                     Age in months for children below 5 years old.                     156      235         215        391          265         293        636             919
Head of HH's Age                  Age of head of household in years.                                257      397         281        443          392         412        930            1,252
Spouse's Age                      Age of the spouse or partner of head of household in              180      292         174        250          291         314        645             856
                                  years.
Gender                            Indicator equal to one if the individual is a man.               1,407    2,217       1,397      2,342        2,111       2,273      4,915           6,832
Head of HH's Gender               Indicator equal to one if the head of household is a man.         258      397         282        446          401         425        941            1,268
Years of Schooling (6-12 years    Years of schooling if individual is between 6 and 12 years        214      366         286        472          367         430        867            1,268
old)                              old.
Years of Schooling (13-18 years   Years of schooling if individual is between 13 and 18 years      226      337          176        315          273         327        675            979
old)                              old.
Head of HH's Years of Schooling   Years of Schooling of head of household equivalent to the        254      387          272        435          396         421        922            1,243
                                  higher level of education reached.
Spouse's Years of Schooling       Years of Schooling of the spouse or partner of head of           178      287          168        242          293         321        639            850
                                  household equivalent to the higher level of education
                                  reached.
Hours worked last week by Head    Number of hours worked by the head of household at main          160      265          240        388          299         320        699            973
of HH                             and secondary job during the last week, conditional on
                                  having worked during the last week.
Hours worked last week by         Number of hours worked by the spouse or partner of head              35    80          117        169           98         120        250            369
Spouse                            of household at main and secondary job during the last
                                  week, conditioned on having worked during the last week.

HH Size                           Number of individuals living in the house.                       258      398          282        446          401         425        941            1,269
Members per Household (<5)        Number of individuals below 5 years old living in the house.     258      398          282        446          401         425        941            1,269

Members per Household (6-12)      Number of individuals between 6 and 12 years old living in       258      398          282        446          401         425        941            1,269
                                  the house.
Members per Household (13-18)     Number of individuals between 13 and 18 years old living         258      398          282        446          401         425        941            1,269
                                  in the house.
Members per Household (>18)       Number of individuals over 18 years old living in the house.     258      398          282        446          401         425        941            1,269

Number of Rooms                   Number of rooms in the terrain (observed by the                  258      398          278        444          401         424        937            1,266
                                  enumerator).
Share of Rooms with Good          Proportion of rooms with floors made of good quality             258      398          278        444          401         424        937            1,266
Quality Floors                    materials like cement, brick, or wood (observed by the
                                  enumerator).
Share of Rooms with Good          Proportion of rooms with walls made of good quality              258      398          282        446          397         424        937            1,268
Quality Walls                     materials like wood, cement, brick or zinc metal (observed
                                  by the enumerator).
Share of Rooms with Good          Proportion of rooms with roofs made of good quality              258      398          279        444          401         424        938            1,266
Quality Roofs                     materials like cement, brick, tile and zinc metal (observed
                                  by the enumerator).
Share of Rooms with Window        Proportion of rooms with at least 1 window (observed by          258      398          282        446          400         424        940            1,268
                                  the enumerator).
Water in Terrain                  Indicator equal to one if there is access to drinkable or not    258      398          282        446          401         425        941            1,269
                                  drinkable water in the terrain where the house is located
                                  (observed by the enumerator).
House with Own Toilet             Indicator equal to one if there is a toilet inside or outside    258      398          282        446          401         425        941            1,269
                                  the house, but inside the terrain (observed by the              40
                                  enumerator).
                                                             Table A2b: Description of Variables and Sample Sizes. Intention to Treat Groups. Follow Up Survey
                                                                                               El Salvador               Uruguay                   Mexico                  All
Variable                       Description                                                  Obs.        Obs.        Obs.         Obs.         Obs.       Obs.     Obs.         Obs.
                                                                                           Control Treatment      Control Treatment          Control Treatment   Control    Treatment
Electricity Connection         Indicator equal to one if there is a formal or informal      258         398          282          446          400        425     940         1,269
inside the House               connection to the electricity system inside the house
                               (observed by the enumerator).
Sink on Room where food        Indicator equal to one if there is a sink inside the         258         398          275          442          398        423     931            1,263
is prepared                    room where food is prepared (observed by the
                               enumerator).
Use Gas Stove or               Indicator equal to one if the household reports the use      258         398          282          446          401        425     941            1,269
Kerosene to Cook               of gas stove or kerosene to cook.
Refrigerator                   Indicator equal to one if the enumerator observes and        235         352          271          432          401        425     907            1,209
                               the household reports having a refrigerator.
T.V.                           Indicator equal to one if the enumerator observes and        235         352          271          432          401        425     907            1,209
                               the household reports having a television.
Fan                            Indicator equal to one if the enumerator observes and        235         352          271          432          400        425     906            1,209
                               the household reports having a fan.
Kitchen or Gas Stove           Indicator equal to one if the enumerator observes and        235         352          271          432          401        425     907            1,209
                               the household reports having a kitchen or gas stove.

Bicycle                        Indicator equal to one if the enumerator observes and       235       352          271         432          401         425        907            1,209
                               the household reports having a bicycle.
Satisfaction with Floor        Indicator equal to one if the respondent reports being      258       398          277         441          401         424        936            1,263
Quality                        satisfied or very satisfied with the quality of floors,
                               measured by a Likert scale of 4 categories that goes
                               from "unsitisfied" to "very satisfied".
Satisfaction with Wall         Indicator equal to one if the respondent reports being      258       398          277         441          401         425        936            1,264
Quality                        satisfied or very satisfied with the quality of walls,
                               measured by a Likert scale of 4 categories that goes
                               from "unsitisfied" to "very satisfied".
Satisfaction with Roof         Indicator equal to one if the respondent reports being      258       398          277         441          401         425        936            1,264
Quality                        satisfied or very satisfied with the quality of roofs,
                               measured by a Likert scale of 4 categories that goes
                               from "unsitisfied" to "very satisfied".
Satisfaction with House        Indicator equal to one if respondent reports being          258       398          277         441          401         425        936            1,264
Protection against Water       satisfied or very satisfied with the protection against
when it rains                  water when it rains, measured by a Likert scale of 4
                               categories that goes from "unsitisfied" to "very
                               satisfied".
Satisfaction with Quality of   Indicator equal to one if respondent reports being          154       367          276         439          400         422        830            1,228
Life                           satisfied or very satisfied with the quality of life,
                               measured by a Likert scale of 4 categories that goes
                               from "unsitisfied" to "very satisfied".
Safe inside the house          Indicator equal to one if respondent has never or           258       398          282         446          401         425        941            1,269
during the last 12 months      rarely felt unsafe inside the house during the last 12
                               months, measured by a Likert scale of 5 categories
                               that goes from "never unsafe" to "always unsafe".

Safe leaving the house         Indicator equal to one if respondent has never or           258       398          282         446          401         425        941            1,269
alone during the last 12       rarely felt unsafe leaving the house alone during the
months                         last 12 months.
Safe leaving the kids alone    Indicator equal to one if respondent feels safe or very     258       398          282         446          401         425        941            1,269
in the house during the last   safe leaving the kids alone in the house during the
12 months                      last 12 months, , measured by a Likert scale of 5
                               categories that goes from "never unsafe" to "always
                               unsafe".
The house had been             Indicator equal to one if respondent reports the house      258       398          276         441          400         425        934            1,264
robbed in the last 12          has been robbed during the last 12 months.
months
Respiratory Disease during     Indicator equal to one if the mother reports that a child   155       229          211         374          259         283        625            886
last 4 weeks                   below 5 years old had a respiratory disease in the          41
                               last four weeks.
Diarrhea during last 4         Indicator equal to one if the mother reports that a         155       229          209         374          259         277        623            880
weeks                          child below 5 years old had diarrhea in the last four
                               weeks.
                                                           Table A2c: Description of Variables and Sample Sizes. Intention to Treat Groups. Follow Up Survey
                                                                                             El Salvador               Uruguay                   Mexico                  All
Variable                     Description                                                  Obs.        Obs.        Obs.         Obs.         Obs.       Obs.     Obs.         Obs.
                                                                                         Control Treatment      Control Treatment          Control Treatment   Control    Treatment
Housing Quality Summary      Equally weighted average of z-scores of Number of            258         398          282          446          401        425     941         1,269
Index (z-score)              Rooms, Share of Rooms with Good Quality Floors,
                             Share of Rooms with Good Quality Walls, Share of
                             Rooms with Good Quality Roofs, and Share of
                             Rooms with Window.
Housing Investment           Equally weighted average of z-scores of Sink on              258         398          274          446          401        425     933            1,269
Summary Index (z-score)      Room where food is prepared, Room where food is
                             prepared is also used as Bedroom, Water in Terrain,
                             Electricity Connection inside the House, Use Gas
                             Stove or Kerosene to Cook, and House with Own
                             Toilet.
Satisfaction Summary Index   Equally weighted average of z-scores of Satisfaction         258         398          282          446          401        425     941            1,269
(z-score)                    with Floor Quality, Satisfaction with Wall Quality,
                             Satisfaction with Roof Quality, Satisfaction with
                             House Protection against Water when it rains, and
                             Satisfaction of Quality of Life.
Perception of Security       Equally weighted average of z-scores of Safe inside          258         398          276          446          401        425     935            1,269
Summary Index (z-score)      the house during the last 12 months, Safe leaving the
                             house alone during the last 12 months, Safe leaving
                             the kids alone in the house during the last 12 months,
                             and The house had been robbed in the last 12
                             months.
Assets Summary Index (z-     Equally weighted average of z-scores of Television,          258         398          282          446          401        425     941            1,269
score)                       Fun, Kitchen or Gas Stove, Refrigerator, and Bicycle.

Economic Summary Index       Equally weighted average of z-scores of Monthly           258         398          282         446          401         425        941            1,269
(z-score)                    Income Per Capita (USD), Hours worked last week
                             by Head of HH, and Hours worked last week by
                             Spouse.
Demographic Summary          Equally weighted average of z-scores of HHSize,           258         398          282         446          401         425        941            1,269
Index (z-score)              Newborns(<1), and Newborns(<2).
Health Summary Index (z-     Equally weighted average of z-scores of Respiratory       155         229          208         374          259         283        622            886
score)                       Disease during last 4 weeks and Diarrhea during last
                             4 weeks.




                                                                                        42
                                                                               Table A3. General Information. Intention to Treat Groups a
                                       El Salvador                              Uruguay                                        Mexico                                        All
                          Observations Observations    Mean       Observations Observations    Mean         Observations Observations        Mean          Observations   Observations       Mean
                           Treatment      Control   Differences    Treatment     Control    Differences       Treatment          Control  Differences       Treatment       Control       Differences
General Information
N° Households                 421          277                         478            301                          457             439                        1,356           1,017
                            60.32%       39.68%                      61.36%         38.64%                       51.00%          49.00%                      57.14%          42.86%
N° Individuals               2,111        1,363                       2,067          1,259                        2,239           2,152                       6,417           4,774
                            60.77%       39.23%                      62.15%         37.85%                       50.99%          49.01%                      57.34%          42.66%
Attriters: N°
                              23            19                          32             19                           32             38                           87              76
Households
Attrition Rate               0.055         0.069       -0.014         0.067          0.063         0.004           0.070          0.087        -0.017          0.064           0.075        -0.011
                            (0.011)       (0.015)      (0.018)       (0.011)        (0.014)       (0.018)         (0.011)        (0.013)       (0.017)        (0.006)         (0.008)       (0.010)
N° Households -
                              398          258                         446            282                          425            401                         1,269            941
Follow Up Sample
                Phase I       221          67                          224            129                          166            120                          611             316
               Phase II       177          191                         222            153                          259            281                          658             625
N° Individuals - Follow
                             2,217        1,407                       2,342          1,397                        2,273           2,111                       6,832           4,915
Up Sample
Compliers: N°
                              349          257                         383            280                          368            401                         1,100            938
Households
                            87.7%         99.6%                       85.9%          99.3%                        86.6%          100.0%                       86.7%           99.7%
Non Compliance Rate          0.123        0.004         0.119         0.141          0.007         0.134          0.134           0.000        0.134          0.133           0.003         0.130
                             (0.016)         (0.003)        (0.016)***       (0.016)  (0.005)        (0.017)***    (0.016)         (0.000)      (0.016)***     (0.009)         (0.001)     (0.009)***
Moversa                         20              16                              36       25                           22              22                          78              63
                             4.75%            5.78%                          7.53%     8.31%                       4.81%           5.01%                        5.75%           6.19%
Movers Rate                   0.048           0.058           -0.010          0.075    0.083           -0.008       0.048           0.050         -0.002        0.058           0.062        -0.004
                             (0.010)         (0.014)         (0.017)         (0.012)  (0.015)         (0.019)      (0.010)         (0.010)       (0.014)       (0.006)         (0.007)      (0.009)
a
  The term "movers" refers to households whose members moved out of the original slum between the times that the baseline and the follow-up surveys were conducted. Some of these people were located
and responded to the follow-up survey; those who were not located have been classified as attriters.
*Significant at 10% level. **Significant at 5% level. ***Significant at 1% level.




                                                                                                 43
                                                                        Table A4a. Differences in Pre-Treatment Means. Intention to Treat Groups. Baseline Survey. a
                                                   El Salvador                              Uruguay                                    Mexico                                           All
                                                                  Mean                                    Mean                                                                                     Mean
                                       Mean           Mean                     Mean         Mean                       Mean           Mean          Mean           Mean             Mean
            Variables                                          Differences                             Differences                                                                              Differences
                                     Treatment       Control                 Treatment     Control                  Treatment        Control     Differences    Treatment          Control
Income and Assets
Assets Value Per Capita (USD)          45.397        53.578         6.059        45.369       47.694         -1.599        48.772       50.265          1.048         45.177       48.745           -0.311
                                       (5.539)       (8.126)      (11.900)       (3.558)      (4.677)       (6.452)        (4.527)      (4.111)        (6.104)        (2.365)      (2.764)         (3.911)
Monthly Income Per Capita              29.940        30.463         -1.713       64.899       77.871       -15.626         56.281       67.969         -6.209         51.210       59.118           -6.453
(USD)                                  (1.413)       (1.893)       (2.855)       (4.179)      (6.834)      (9.275)*        (2.965)      (3.664)        (4.744)        (1.826)      (2.425)        (3.521)*
T.V.                                    0.453         0.412         -0.028        0.844        0.825         0.019          0.604        0.677         -0.039          0.643        0.651           -0.017
                                       (0.025)       (0.030)       (0.044)       (0.016)      (0.022)       (0.029)        (0.022)      (0.022)        (0.031)        (0.013)      (0.015)         (0.019)
Fan                                     0.043         0.050         0.004         0.291        0.264         0.037          0.033        0.023          0.005          0.127        0.101           0.016
                                       (0.010)       (0.013)       (0.022)       (0.021)      (0.025)       (0.034)        (0.008)      (0.007)        (0.010)        (0.009)      (0.009)         (0.013)
Kitchen or Gas Stove                    0.455         0.527         -0.030        0.651        0.664         0.022          0.418        0.474         -0.027          0.511        0.544           -0.012
                                       (0.025)       (0.030)       (0.044)       (0.022)      (0.027)       (0.036)        (0.023)      (0.023)        (0.029)        (0.013)      (0.015)         (0.020)
Refrigerator                            0.059         0.099         -0.018        0.495        0.510         0.011          0.204        0.187          0.014          0.263        0.259           0.006
                                       (0.011)       (0.018)       (0.026)       (0.023)      (0.029)       (0.039)        (0.018)      (0.018)        (0.024)        (0.012)      (0.013)         (0.018)
Bicycle                                 0.335         0.359         -0.014        0.453        0.462         -0.011         0.269        0.269          0.010          0.354        0.349           -0.003
                                       (0.023)       (0.029)       (0.041)       (0.023)      (0.029)       (0.039)        (0.020)      (0.021)        (0.029)        (0.013)      (0.015)          0.020)
Characteristics of the House
Number of Rooms                            2.488          2.354           -0.146  2.912      2.837          0.105        2.803           2.825         -0.023          2.743        2.700           -0.010
                                          (0.056)        (0.069)         (0.095) (0.068)    (0.087)        (0.117)      (0.061)         (0.059)        (0.085)        (0.036)      (0.041)         (0.058)
Share of Rooms with Good                   0.145          0.142           -0.038  0.371      0.374          -0.020       0.661           0.636          0.012          0.398        0.423           -0.011
Quality Floors                            (0.011)        (0.014)        (0.021)* (0.020)    (0.025)        (0.033)      (0.017)         (0.018)        (0.024)        (0.011)      (0.013)         (0.016)
Share of Rooms with Good                   0.110          0.107           -0.021  0.248      0.217          0.022        0.259           0.237          0.022          0.204        0.193           0.010
Quality Walls                             (0.010)        (0.012)         (0.018) (0.021)    (0.026)        (0.035)      (0.017)         (0.016)        (0.021)        (0.009)      (0.010)         (0.014)
Share of Rooms with Good                   0.101          0.149           -0.016  0.348      0.353          -0.023       0.502           0.468         -0.013          0.322        0.347           -0.017
Quality Roofs                             (0.012)        (0.019)         (0.023) (0.019)    (0.025)        (0.033)      (0.019)         (0.019)        (0.027)        (0.011)      (0.013)         (0.016)
Share of Rooms with Window                 0.154          0.184           0.002   0.561      0.586          -0.026       0.294           0.253          0.015          0.345        0.333           -0.002
                                          (0.012)        (0.018)         (0.024) (0.017)    (0.022)        (0.029)      (0.016)         (0.015)        (0.022)        (0.010)      (0.011)         (0.014)
Water in Terrain                           0.228          0.195           -0.033  0.916      0.907          0.016        0.501           0.519          0.015          0.563        0.546           0.004
                                          (0.020)        (0.023)         (0.030) (0.012)    (0.016)        (0.021)      (0.023)         (0.023)        (0.028)        (0.013)      (0.015)         (0.015)
Sink on Room where food is                 0.014          0.007           0.002   0.269      0.231          0.047        0.013           0.025         -0.011          0.103        0.081           0.012
prepared                                  (0.005)        (0.005)         (0.010) (0.020)    (0.024)        (0.033)      (0.005)         (0.007)        (0.009)        (0.008)      (0.008)         (0.012)
Electricity Connection inside the          0.394          0.386           -0.063  0.962      0.953          0.008        0.807           0.870         -0.041          0.734        0.763           -0.030
House                                     (0.023)        (0.029)         (0.038) (0.008)    (0.012)        (0.016)      (0.018)         (0.016)       (0.023)*        (0.012)      (0.013)        (0.014)**
Use Gas Stove or Kerosene to               0.195          0.141           0.010   0.439      0.475          -0.017       0.276           0.280         -0.008          0.308        0.300           -0.007
Cook                                      (0.019)        (0.020)         (0.030) (0.022)    (0.028)        (0.037)      (0.020)         (0.021)        (0.023)        (0.012)      (0.014)         (0.017)
House with Own Toilet                      0.506          0.448           -0.056  0.657      0.598          0.062        0.403           0.392         -0.011          0.524        0.468           0.003
                                          (0.024)        (0.029)         (0.042) (0.021)    (0.028)       (0.036)*      (0.022)         (0.023)        (0.031)        (0.013)      (0.015)         (0.020)
a
  Responses regarding construction materials used in rooms were included only for those households that reported information for all rooms. In the case of monetary variables, observations over the 99th
percentile were excluded. Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis.
*Significant at 10% level. **Significant at 5% level. ***Significant at 1% level




                                                                                                     44
                                                                                                                                                                                a
                                                                                        Table A4b. Differences in Pre-Treatment Means. Intention to Treat Groups. Baseline Survey.
                                                                El Salvador                                  Uruguay                                      Mexico                                  All
                                                                                 Mean                                       Mean                                       Mean                                 Mean
                                                    Mean          Mean                          Mean                                       Mean          Mean                        Mean       Mean
                 Variables                                                    Differences                 Mean Control Differences                                  Differences                          Differences
                                                  Treatment      Control                      Treatment                                 Treatment       Control                    Treatment   Control
Satisfaction with Quality of House and
Satisfaction with Floor Quality                     0.133         0.116             0.018       0.164       0.196         -0.020          0.375        0.377         0.036           0.225      0.252       0.013
                                                   (0.016)       (0.019)           (0.027)     (0.016)     (0.022)        (0.030)        (0.022)      (0.023)       (0.030)         (0.011)    (0.013)     (0.017)
Satisfaction with Wall Quality                      0.095         0.083             0.004       0.117       0.130         -0.012          0.255        0.249         0.030           0.157      0.169       0.010
                                                   (0.014)       (0.016)           (0.025)     (0.014)     (0.019)        (0.026)        (0.020)      (0.020)       (0.029)         (0.009)    (0.011)     (0.016)
Satisfaction with Roof Quality                      0.117         0.091             0.008       0.176       0.157          0.000          0.212        0.229         0.002           0.163      0.176       0.003
                                                   (0.015)       (0.017)           (0.026)     (0.021)     (0.016)        (0.028)        (0.019)      (0.020)       (0.028)         (0.010)    (0.011)     (0.016)
Satisfaction with House Protection                  0.103         0.090            -0.005       0.159       0.180         -0.006          0.190        0.176         0.038           0.152      0.154       0.013
against Water when it rains                        (0.014)       (0.017)           (0.025)     (0.016)     (0.022)        (0.029)        (0.018)      (0.018)       (0.025)         (0.009)    (0.011)     (0.016)
Satisfaction with Quality of Life                   0.266         0.181             0.025       0.219       0.229         -0.020          0.354        0.339         0.036           0.279      0.263       0.015
                                                   (0.021)       (0.023)           (0.033)     (0.019)     (0.024)        (0.032)        (0.022)      (0.022)       (0.032)         (0.012)    (0.013)     (0.019)
Perception of Security
Safe inside the house during the last 12            0.527         0.538             -0.045      0.615       0.595          0.029          0.713        0.708         0.013           0.621      0.628       0.004
months                                             (0.024)       (0.030)            (0.043)    (0.022)     (0.028)        (0.037)        (0.021)      (0.021)       (0.031)         (0.013)    (0.015)     (0.020)
Safe leaving the house alone during the             0.435         0.419             -0.011      0.328       0.272          0.061          0.615        0.597         0.031           0.458      0.452       0.031
last 12 months                                     (0.024)       (0.029)            (0.043)    (0.021)     (0.025)       (0.035)*        (0.022)      (0.023)       (0.032)         (0.013)    (0.015)     (0.020)
Safe leaving the kids alone in the house            0.147         0.166             -0.049      0.144       0.126          0.011          0.166        0.191         -0.034          0.153      0.165       -0.023
during the last 12 months                          (0.017)       (0.022)            (0.032)    (0.016)     (0.019)        (0.025)        (0.017)      (0.018)       (0.026)         (0.009)    (0.011)     (0.016)
House robbed in the last 12 months                  0.079         0.036              0.053      0.273       0.283         -0.030          0.059        0.055         0.008           0.141      0.117       0.006
                                                   (0.013)       (0.011)           (0.020)**   (0.020)     (0.026)        (0.033)        (0.011)      (0.010)       (0.015)         (0.009)    (0.010)     (0.013)
Sociodemographic Characteristics
HH Size                                             5.014         4.921             -0.040      4.324       4.183          0.109          4.899        4.902         -0.099          4.732      4.694        -0.015
                                                   (0.124)       (0.140)           (0.233)     (0.113)     (0.134)       (0.189)         (0.113)      (0.117)       (0.159)         (0.068)    (0.075)      (0.108)
Newborns (<1)                                       0.114         0.123             -0.013      0.178       0.150          0.010          0.118        0.153        -0.040           0.138      0.144       -0.017
                                                   (0.016)       (0.021)           (0.030)     (0.018)     (0.021)       (0.029)         (0.015)      (0.017)       (0.024)         (0.009)    (0.011)      (0.016)
Newborns (<2)                                       0.214         0.220             -0.025      0.343       0.312          0.007          0.284        0.276        -0.008           0.283      0.271       -0.007
                                                   (0.021)       (0.026)           (0.037)     (0.025)     (0.030)       (0.041)         (0.022)      (0.024)       (0.034)         (0.013)    (0.015)      (0.022)
Members per Household (<5)                          0.622         0.606              0.016      0.828       0.794         -0.007          0.622        0.606         -0.086          0.769      0.782        -0.035
                                                   (0.036)       (0.046)           (0.068)     (0.044)     (0.055)        (0.074)        (0.036)      (0.046)       (0.063)         (0.024)    (0.028)      (0.040)
Members per Household (6-12)                        1.043         0.993             -0.059      0.831       0.731          0.137          1.043        0.993         0.026           0.965      0.905        0.043
                                                   (0.054)       (0.064)           (0.096)     (0.048)     (0.055)       (0.077)*        (0.054)      (0.064)       (0.074)         (0.030)    (0.033)      (0.047)
Members per Household (13-18)                       0.660         0.675             -0.023      0.542       0.455          0.093          0.660        0.675         -0.013          0.650      0.636        0.020
                                                   (0.044)       (0.051)           (0.080)     (0.038)     (0.046)        (0.064)        (0.044)      (0.051)       (0.065)         (0.024)    (0.028)      (0.040)
Members per Household (>18)                         2.437         2.350              0.076      1.856       1.947         -0.114          2.437        2.350         -0.029          2.172      2.213        -0.032
                                                   (0.057)       (0.065)           (0.111)     (0.037)     (0.050)       (0.068)*        (0.057)      (0.065)       (0.075)         (0.029)    (0.032)      (0.047)
Head of HH's Age                                   45.038        44.227              0.129     38.723      37.270          1.827         41.518       41.379         0.426          41.627     40.935        0.824
                                                   (0.819)       (1.013)           (1.555)     (0.649)     (0.806)       (1.089)*        (0.747)      (0.697)       (0.999)         (0.430)    (0.479)      (0.673)
Head of HH's Gender                                 0.798         0.769              0.028      0.498       0.545         -0.046          0.788        0.770         0.018           0.689      0.703        -0.001
                                                   (0.019)       (0.025)           (0.036)     (0.022)     (0.028)        (0.038)        (0.019)      (0.020)       (0.028)         (0.012)    (0.014)      (0.019)
Head of HH's Years of Schooling                     2.514         2.326             -0.053      5.828       5.877          0.121          4.144        3.850         0.305           4.091      3.741        0.281
                                                   (0.147)       (0.170)           (0.245)     (0.135)     (0.183)        (0.237)        (0.151)      (0.151)       (0.203)         (0.099)    (0.105)    (0.140)**
Spouse's Age                                       38.909        37.900              0.274     33.623      33.036          0.595         37.110       37.731         0.065          36.727     36.514        0.270
                                                   (0.852)       (1.047)           (1.609)     (0.754)     (0.927)        (1.263)        (0.744)      (0.757)       (1.045)         (0.460)    (0.519)      (0.725)
Spouse's Years of Schooling                         2.210         1.921              0.127      6.023       6.229         -0.185          4.120        4.274         -0.320          3.889      3.867        -0.081
                                                   (0.166)       (0.180)           (0.265)     (0.179)     (0.225)        (0.304)        (0.178)      (0.177)       (0.237)         (0.123)    (0.133)      (0.168)
Hours worked last week by Head of HH               41.278        40.963              1.373     38.610      40.258         -1.744         40.924       40.785         0.606          40.182     40.662        -0.046
                                                   (1.230)       (1.461)           (2.306)     (1.113)     (1.437)        (1.910)        (1.150)      (1.140)       (1.623)         (0.671)    (0.764)      (1.092)
Hours worked last week by Spouse                   34.261        26.340              4.137     37.159      37.438          0.267         28.122       28.113         -2.283         33.370     31.377        -0.250
                                                   (2.872)       (3.035)           (4.392)     (1.845)     (1.775)        (2.759)        (1.864)      (1.865)       (2.699)         (1.225)    (1.225)      (1.786)
Years of Schooling (6-12 years old)                 1.594         1.601             -0.090      1.900       2.012         -0.044          2.494        2.401         0.055           1.999      2.053        -0.013
                                                   (0.076)       (0.096)           (0.145)     (0.077)     (0.104)        (0.140)        (0.087)      (0.090)       (1.678)         (0.047)    (0.057)      (0.080)
Years of Schooling (13-18 years old)                5.248         5.049             -0.134      5.373       5.535         -0.101          6.627        7.038         -0.366          5.795      6.088        -0.228
                                                   (0.145)       (0.183)           (0.268)     (0.113)     (0.152)        (0.197)        (0.116)      (0.122)      (0.171)**        (0.076)    (0.093)     (0.118)*
Health (<5 years old)
Respiratory Disease during last 4 weeks          0.669            0.635             0.042       0.351       0.352         -0.018          0.376        0.401         -0.022          0.444      0.439       -0.007
                                                (0.029)          (0.037)           (0.056)     (0.024)     (0.031)        (0.042)        (0.027)      (0.027)       (0.040)         (0.016)    (0.018)     (0.025)
Diarrhea during last 4 weeks                     0.249
                                                (0.027)
                                                                  0.144
                                                                 (0.027)
                                                                                    0.043
                                                                                   (0.042)
                                                                                                0.087
                                                                                               (0.014)
                                                                                                            45
                                                                                                            0.089
                                                                                                           (0.018)
                                                                                                                          -0.018
                                                                                                                          (0.024)
                                                                                                                                          0.131
                                                                                                                                         (0.018)
                                                                                                                                                       0.138
                                                                                                                                                      (0.019)
                                                                                                                                                                     -0.011
                                                                                                                                                                    (0.028)
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.145
                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.011)
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.123
                                                                                                                                                                                               (0.012)
                                                                                                                                                                                                            -0.002
                                                                                                                                                                                                           (0.017)
a
  Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis.
*Significant at 10% level. **Significant at 5% level. ***Significant at 1% level
                                     Table A5. Differences in Pre-Treatment Means between countries. Housing
                                                         Characteristics. Baseline Surveya
                                    Mean         Mean          Mean         Mean            Mean            Mean
          Variables              El Salvador    Uruguay        Mexico    Differences     Differences     Differences
                                     (1)          (2)           (3)        (1) - (2)       (1) - (3)       (2) - (3)
Characteristics of the House
Number of Rooms                        2.435          2.883        2.814          -0.448      -0.379         0.069
                                      (0.087)       (0.079)       (0.065)       (0.116)***  (0.108)***      (0.101)
Share of Rooms with Good               0.144          0.372        0.649          -0.228      -0.505        -0.276
Quality Floors                        (0.014)       (0.030)       (0.027)       (0.033)***  (0.031)***    (0.040)***
Share of Rooms with Good               0.109          0.236        0.248          -0.127      -0.140        -0.012
Quality Walls                         (0.013)       (0.033)       (0.031)       (0.035)***  (0.034)***      (0.045)
Share of Rooms with Good               0.120          0.350        0.485          -0.230      -0.365        -0.135
Quality Roofs                         (0.034)       (0.024)       (0.031)       (0.041)***  (0.046)***    (0.039)***
Share of Rooms with Window             0.166          0.571        0.273          -0.405      -0.107         0.298
                                      (0.017)       (0.016)       (0.025)       (0.023)***  (0.030)***    (0.029)***
Water in Terrain                       0.215          0.913        0.510          -0.700      -0.295         0.403
                                      (0.051)       (0.014)       (0.052)       (0.053)***  (0.072)***    (0.054)***
Sink on Room where food is             0.012          0.254        0.019          -0.242      -0.008         0.235
prepared                              (0.005)       (0.025)       (0.004)       (0.024)***   (0.007)      (0.024)***
Room where food is prepared            0.313          0.432        0.229          -0.119       0.084         0.203
is also used as Bedroom               (0.047)       (0.025)       (0.025)        (0.053)**   (0.053)      (0.035)***
Electricity Connection inside          0.391          0.959        0.838          -0.568      -0.447         0.121
the House                             (0.058)       (0.006)       (0.031)       (0.058)***  (0.065)***    (0.031)***
Use Gas Stove or Kerosene              0.173          0.453        0.278          -0.280      -0.105         0.175
to Cook                               (0.034)       (0.052)       (0.057)       (0.061)***   (0.066)       (0.076)**
House with Own Bathroom                0.483          0.634        0.397          -0.151       0.085         0.237
                                      (0.041)       (0.024)       (0.035)       (0.047)***   (0.054)      (0.042)***
a
  Responses regarding construction materials used in rooms were included only for those households that reported
information for all rooms. Standard errors clustered at cluster level shown in parentheses.
*Significant at 10% level. **Significant at 5% level. ***Significant at 1% level




                                                          46
