                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                                                CARRY

                                           Ralph S.J. Koijen
                                          Tobias J. Moskowitz
                                          Lasse Heje Pedersen
                                            Evert B. Vrugt

                                         Working Paper 19325
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19325


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2013

We are grateful for helpful comments from Cliff Asness, Jules van Binsbergen, John Cochrane, Pierre
Collin-Dufresne (discussant), Kent Daniel (discussant), Lars Hansen, John Heaton, Antti Ilmanen,
Ronen Israel, Andrea Frazzini, Owen Lamont (discussant), John Liew, Francis Longstaff, Hanno Lustig
(discussant), Yao Hua Ooi, Lubos Pastor, Anna Pavlova, Maik Schmeling (discussant), Stijn Van
Nieuwerburgh, Dimitri Vayanos, Moto Yogo, as well as from seminar participants at AQR Capital
Management, the 2012 American Finance Association Conference meetings (Chicago), Chicago Booth,
the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the University of Exeter, NOVA (Portugal), State Street Global
Markets, the 2012 NBER Asset Pricing Summer Institute, the 1st Foreign Exchange Markets Conference
- Imperial College, the 2012 Red Rock Finance Conference, and the fifth annual Paul Woolley Centre
conference. We thank numerous people at AQR Capital Management for insights on markets, institutions,
and data including Cliff Asness, John Liew, Ari Levine, Lars Nielsen, and Ashwin Thapar. Further,
we thank Tarek Hassan, Rui Mano, and Adrien Verdelhan for their help with the currency data and
Rui Cui, Laszlo Jakab, and Minsoo Kim for excellent research assistance. Moskowitz and Pedersen
are affiliated with AQR Capital Management, a global asset management firm that may apply some
of the principles discussed in this research in some of its investment products. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19325.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Ralph S.J. Koijen, Tobias J. Moskowitz, Lasse Heje Pedersen, and Evert B. Vrugt. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Carry
Ralph S.J. Koijen, Tobias J. Moskowitz, Lasse Heje Pedersen, and Evert B. Vrugt
NBER Working Paper No. 19325
August 2013
JEL No. F3,G1

                                               ABSTRACT

A security’s expected return can be decomposed into its “carry” and its expected price appreciation,
where carry can be measured in advance without an asset pricing model. We find that carry predicts
returns both in the cross section and time series for a variety of different asset classes that include
global equities, global bonds, currencies, commodities, US Treasuries, credit, and equity index options.
This predictability underlies the strong returns to “carry trades” that go long high-carry and short low-carry
securities, applied almost exclusively to currencies, but shown here to be a robust feature of many
assets. We decompose carry returns into static and dynamic components and analyze the economic
exposures. Despite unconditionally low correlations across asset classes, we find times when carry
strategies across all asset classes do poorly, and show that these episodes coincide with global recessions.


Ralph S.J. Koijen                                     Lasse Heje Pedersen
London Business School                                Copenhagen Business School
Regent's Park                                         Solbjerg Plads 3, A5
London NW1 4SA                                        DK-2000 Frederiksberg
United Kingdom                                        DENMARK
rkoijen@london.edu                                    and NYU
                                                      and also NBER
Tobias J. Moskowitz                                   lpederse@stern.nyu.edu
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago                                 Evert B. Vrugt
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave.                                 De Boelelaan 1105
Chicago, IL 60637                                     1081 HV Amsterdam
and NBER                                              The Netherlands
tobias.moskowitz@chicagobooth.edu                     evert.vrugt@gmail.com
We define an asset’s “carry” as its expected return assuming that its price does not change.
Based on this simple definition, any security’s return can be decomposed into its carry
and its expected and unexpected price appreciation:

             return = carry + E(price appreciation) +unexpected price shock.                     (1)
                      |            {z             }
                             expected return

Hence, an asset’s expected return is its carry plus its expected price appreciation. Carry
is directly observable ex ante and is model-free. Thus, carry represents a component of
expected returns we can measure in advance that is common to any asset pricing model
(whereas the part of the expected return coming from expected price appreciation must
be estimated from a model).
    The concept of “carry” has been studied in the literature almost exclusively for
currencies, where it represents the interest rate differential between two countries. While
much theoretical and empirical research has focused exclusively on carry strategies in
currencies,1 equation (1) is a general relation that can be applied to any asset. Using this
broader concept of carry, we unify and extend the set of predictors of returns across a
variety of assets that include global equities, bonds, commodities, currencies, Treasuries,
credit, and index options.
    Equation (1) shows that the link between carry and expected returns depends on
the relation between carry and expected price appreciation, where the latter could be
positive, zero, or negative. The uncovered interest rate parity in currencies, and the
expectations hypothesis more generally, predict that the expected price appreciation
offsets any variation in the carry so that the expected return is constant. In contrast,
carry predicts returns in many models with time-varying expected returns. Empirically,
we find that carry is a strong positive predictor of returns in each of the major asset
classes we study. Since carry varies over time and across assets, this result implies that
expected returns also vary through time and across assets and are predicted by carry,
rejecting the expectations hypothesis.
    Carry provides a unified framework for understanding well-known predictors of returns
in these asset classes. For instance, we show how bond carry is closely related to the
slope of the yield curve studied in the bond literature, commodity carry is related to
the convenience yield, and equity carry is a forward-looking measure related to dividend
yields.2 These literatures have traditionally been treated independently, where various
   1
    This literature goes back at least to Meese and Rogoff (1983). Surveys are presented by Froot and
Thaler (1990), Lewis (1995), and Engel (1996).
  2
    See Cochrane (2011) and Ilmanen (2011) and references therein.


                                                 1
predictors in different asset classes are modeled as separate phenomena, and never (to
our knowledge) studied jointly. Our simple concept of carry unifies these measures and
allows us to investigate return predictability jointly across these asset classes. Moreover,
while carry is related to these known predictors, it is also different from these measures
and it can be applied more broadly. We find that the predictability of carry is often
stronger than that of these traditional predictors, indicating that carry not only provides
a unified conceptual framework for these predictors, but may also improve upon return
predictability within each asset class.
   Further, because carry is a general concept, we also apply it to other asset markets that
have not been extensively studied for return predictability. We examine the cross-section
of US Treasuries across maturities, US credit portfolios, and US equity index options
across moneyness, and find equally strong return predictability from our carry measure in
each of these markets. These out-of-sample tests highlight the generality and robustness
of carry as a predictor of returns.
    We examine how much of the returns to carry strategies can be explained by other
global return factors such as value, momentum, and time-series momentum (following
Asness, Moskowitz, and Pedersen (2012) and Moskowitz, Ooi, and Pedersen (2012)) within
each asset class as well as across all asset classes. The relation between carry and these
other known predictors of returns varies across asset classes. Carry is positively related
to value in equities, is related to momentum in fixed income and commodities, and is
unrelated to both in Treasuries, currencies, credit, or index options. However, we find
that none of these other factors can explain the returns to carry and that carry represents
a unique return predictor in each asset class above and beyond these factors.
    This joint approach of studying carry and its return predictability simultaneously
across different asset classes provides new insights that challenges existing asset pricing
theory. First, we find that a zero-cost carry trade portfolio, which goes long high carry
securities and short low ones within each asset class earns an annualized Sharpe ratio
of 0.7 on average, indicating a strong cross-sectional link between carry and expected
returns in each asset class. Forming a portfolio of carry strategies diversified across all
asset classes earns a Sharpe ratio of 1.1, suggesting significant diversification benefits from
applying carry more broadly across different asset classes. This large Sharpe ratio presents
a significantly greater challenge for asset pricing models that already struggle to explain
the equity premium, the currency carry strategy, and a number of stock market strategies
that have significantly smaller Sharpe ratios (see Hansen and Jagannathan (1997)).
    Second, by studying multiple asset classes at the same time, we provide out-of-sample
tests of existing theories and new insights on return predictability to guide new theories.


                                               2
For example, the large literature on carry trades in currencies seeks to explain the high
Sharpe ratios of carry strategies based on the crash risk commonly documented for
currency carry trades. While we find high positive Sharpe ratios across carry strategies in
all asset classes, the negative skewness of currency carry trades is not present in all asset
classes. Moreover, the diversified carry portfolio across all asset classes has a skewness
close to zero and smaller tails than a diversified passive exposure to all asset classes (e.g.,
the global market portfolios), presenting a puzzle for models seeking to explain the high
average carry returns based on crash risk. 3
   To gain further insight into the source of the carry return premium, we decompose the
returns to carry in each asset class into a passive and a dynamic component. The passive
component comes from being on average long (short) securities that experience high (low)
average returns. The dynamic component captures how well variation in carry (around its
average) predicts future returns. We find that the dynamic component of carry strategies
contributes to most of the returns to the equity, fixed income, and options carry strategies,
and about half of the returns to the US Treasury, currency, credit, and commodity carry
strategies. The substantial dynamic component in every asset class indicates that carry
fluctuates over time and across assets, and that these fluctuations are associated with
variation in expected returns.
    Using a set of predictive regressions of future returns of each asset on its carry, we
also find strong evidence of time-varying risk premia, where carry predicts future returns
with a positive coefficient in every asset class. However, the magnitude of the predictive
coefficient differs across asset classes, identifying whether carry is positively or negatively
related to future price appreciation (as identified by equation (1)). For most asset classes,
the predictive coefficient is (not significantly different from) one, indicating that carry does
not predict future price changes, or that a carry investor earns the full carry—nothing
more or less—on average. In several cases, the point estimate is greater than one, implying
that an investor earns more than the carry as price changes further add to returns. For
commodities and options, however, the coefficient is less than one, where carry predicts
negative future price changes.
   Although the cross-sectional return predictability underlies our basic carry strategies
(where we go long high carry securities and short low carry ones), we also find significant
    3
      Brunnermeier, Nagel, and Pedersen (2008) show that the currency carry trade is exposed to liquidity
risk, which is enhanced by occasional crashes that could lead to limited arbitrage and slow price
adjustments. Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2010) present a related explanation based on infrequent
revisions of investor portfolio decisions. Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) suggest that the currency carry
trade is exposed to consumption growth risk from the perspective of a U.S. investor, Farhi and Gabaix
(2008) develop a theory of consumption crash risk (see also Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2010),
and Burnside, Eichenbaum, Kleshchelski, and Rebelo (2011) consider peso problems.


                                                   3
time-series predictability from carry as well, where carry is useful in timing a given
security—going long the security when carry is positive (or above its long-run mean)
and short when carry is negative (or below its long-run mean). We find that the timing
strategies’ profitability coincides with the strength of the dynamic component of carry
across asset classes.
    Despite the high Sharpe ratios of our carry strategies, they are far from riskless and
exhibit sizeable declines that are concentrated in time across asset classes. Carry returns
tend to be low during global recessions, and this feature appears to hold uniformly across
markets.
   Flipping the analysis around, we also identify the worst and best carry return
episodes for the diversified carry strategy applied across all asset classes. We term these
episodes carry “drawdowns” and “expansions.” We find that the three biggest global carry
drawdowns (August 1972 to September 1975, March 1980 to June 1982, and August 2008
to February 2009) coincide with major global business cycle and macroeconomic events.
Reexamining each individual carry strategy within each asset class, we find that during
carry drawdowns all carry strategies in every asset class do poorly, and, moreover, perform
significantly worse than passive exposures to these markets during these times. Hence,
part of the return premium earned on average for going long carry may be compensation
for exposure that generates large losses during extreme times of global recessions. Whether
these extreme times are related to macroeconomic risks and heightened risk aversion or
are times of limited capital and arbitrage activity and funding squeezes remains an open
question. Both may be true during these times and may be contributing to the returns
associated with carry trades across markets.
    While the carry trade clearly has risk, its large returns across a variety of diverse asset
classes are nevertheless difficult to explain entirely by macroeconomic risk and challenge
many macroeconomic models (Lucas (1978), Campbell and Cochrane (1999), Bansal and
Yaron (2004)). Alternatively, carry trade returns could be driven by limited arbitrage
(Shleifer and Vishny (1997)), transaction costs and funding liquidity risk from margin
requirements or other funding issues (Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), Gârleanu and
Pedersen (2011)).
   Our work relates to the extensive literature on the currency carry trade and the
associated failure of uncovered interest rate parity. However, our study offers a much
broader concept of carry that not only captures the currency carry trades focused on in
the literature, but also an array of assets from many different asset classes. We show that
a carry return premium is present in all nine of the asset classes we study and highlight
the characteristics that are unique and common across these asset classes that may help


                                               4
identify explanations for the carry return premium in general.
   Our study also relates to the literature on return predictability that seems to be
segregated by asset class. In addition to the currency literature, the literature on bonds
has its own set of predictors, as do commodities, and equities. 4 All of these studies
focus on a single asset class or market at a time and ignore how different asset classes
or markets behave simultaneously. We show that many of these seemingly different and
unrelated variables can in fact be tied together through the concept of carry. Moreover,
using this unifying framework of carry, we also identify similar return patterns in markets
not previously explored such as US Treasuries, US credit, and US equity index options.
These additional asset classes are also shown to be linked to international equities, bonds,
currencies, and commodities through carry.
    Finally, our paper contributes to a growing literature on global asset pricing that
analyzes multiple markets jointly. Asness, Moskowitz, and Pedersen (2012) study cross-
sectional value and momentum strategies within and across individual equity markets,
country equity indices, government bonds, currencies, and commodities simultaneously.
Moskowitz, Ooi, and Pedersen (2012) also document time-series momentum in equity
index, currency, commodity, and bond futures that is distinct from cross-sectional
momentum. Fama and French (2011) study the relation between size, value, and
momentum in global equity markets across four major regions (North America, Europe,
Japan, and Asia Pacific). By jointly studying different markets simultaneously, we seek
to help identify and rule out various explanations for the existence of return premia
globally across markets. Macro-finance theory seeking to explain carry return premia
should confront the ubiquitous presence of carry returns across vastly different asset classes
and their commonality.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I. defines carry and shows
how it relates to expected returns for each asset class. Section II. considers the returns
of carry strategies globally across asset classes, relating carry to other known predictors
of returns and applying carry to assets not previously studied. Section III. decomposes
carry returns into the dynamic and static components of a carry trade and examines the
relation between carry and expected price appreciation both in the time-series and cross-
section of asset returns. Section IV. investigates the risk of carry strategies generally and
   4
    Studies focusing on international equity returns include Chan, Hamao, and Lakonishok (1991), Griffin
(2002), Griffin, Ji, and Martin (2003), Hou, Karolyi, and Kho (2010), Rouwenhorst (1998), Fama and
French (1998), and further references in Koijen and Van Nieuwerburgh (2011). Studies focusing on
government bonds across countries include Ilmanen (1995) and Barr and Priestley (2004). Studies focusing
on commodities returns include Fama and French (1987), Bailey and Chan (1993), Bessembinder (1992),
Casassus and Collin-Dufresne (2005), Erb and Harvey (2006), Acharya, Lochstoer, and Ramadorai (2010),
Gorton, Hayashi, and Rouwenhorst (2007), Tang and Xiong (2010), and Hong and Yogo (2010).


                                                   5
how carry relates to global business cycle and liquidity risks. Section V. concludes.


I.    Understanding Carry: A Characteristic of Any Asset

We decompose the return to any security into two components: carry and price
appreciation. The carry return can be thought of as the return to a security assuming
its price stays constant. Hence, carry can be observed in advance. We detail below the
decomposition of different securities’ returns into carry versus price appreciation across
nine diverse asset classes: currencies, equities, global bonds, commodities, US Treasuries,
credit, and call and put index options.
    We first consider estimating carry from futures contracts, which can be applied
generally to many of our asset classes. Consider a futures contract that expires in period
t + 1 with a current futures price Ft and spot price of the underlying security St . We
first define the return of the futures. Assume an investor allocates Xt dollars today of
capital to finance each futures contract (where Xt must be at least as large as the margin
requirement). Next period, the value of the margin capital and the futures contract is
equal to Xt (1 + rtf ) + Ft+1 − Ft , where rtf is the risk-free interest rate today that is earned
on the margin capital. Hence, the return per allocated capital over one period is

                                  Xt (1 + rtf ) + Ft+1 − Ft − Xt   Ft+1 − Ft
                 total return
                rt+1            =                                =           + rtf            (2)
                                                 Xt                   Xt

Therefore, the return in excess of the risk-free rate is

                                                   Ft+1 − Ft
                                          rt+1 =             .                                (3)
                                                      Xt

    The carry Ct of the futures contract is then computed as the futures excess return under
the assumption of a constant spot price from t to t + 1. (The carry can alternatively be
defined as the total return under this assumption.) Given that the futures price expires at
the future spot price (Ft+1 = St+1 ) and the assumption of constant spot prices (St+1 = St ),
we have that Ft+1 = St . Therefore, the carry is defined as

                                                   St − Ft
                                            Ct =           .                                  (4)
                                                     Xt

For most of our analysis, we compute returns and carry based on a “fully-collateralized”
position, meaning that the amount of capital allocated to the position is equal to the




                                                    6
futures price, Xt = Ft .5 The carry of a fully-collateralized position is therefore

                                                    St − Ft
                                             Ct =           .                                         (5)
                                                       Ft

We can explicitly decompose the (fully-collateralized) return into its expected return plus
an unexpected price shock to gain insight into how carry relates to expected returns.
Using the definition of carry, we can decompose the excess return on the futures as
                                                          
                                                     ΔSt+1
                                  rt+1   = Ct + Et           +ut+1 ,                                  (6)
                                                      Ft
                                           |       {z      }
                                                 Et (rt+1 )


where ΔSt+1 = St+1 − St and ut+1 = (St+1 − Et (St+1 ))/Ft is the unexpected price shock.
    Equation (6) shows how carry, Ct , is related to the expected return Et (rt+1 ), but the
two are not necessarily the same. The expected return on an asset is comprised of both
the carry on the asset and the expected price appreciation of the asset, which depends on
the specific asset pricing model used to form expectations and its risk premia. The carry
component of a futures contract’s expected return, however, can be measured in advance
in a straightforward “mechanical” way without the need to specify a pricing model or
stochastic discount factor. Put differently, carry is a simple observable characteristic, that
is a component of the expected return on an asset. Furthermore, carry may be relevant
for predicting expected price changes which also contribute to the expected return on
an asset. That is, Ct may also provide information for predicting Et (ΔSt+1 /Ft ), which
we investigate empirically in this paper. Equation (6) provides a unifying framework for
carry and its link to risk premia across a variety of asset classes. The rest of the paper
explores this relationship empirically across the nine asset classes we study.
   We apply this carry definition to currency forwards, equity futures, and commodity
futures and discuss in more detail how to interpret the carry for each asset class. Further,
we also broaden our definition of carry to other asset classes, such as options and corporate
bonds or other assets where futures contracts are not available. Examining these other
asset classes provides robustness on both our methodology for computing carry as well as
additional test assets.
   In general, we define carry as the return if market conditions stay the same. We show
precisely how we operationalize this definition for each asset class. In most cases, it is
clear how to apply this definition; for instance, one can create a synthetic futures price
   5
     However, when considering, for instance, yield curve positions with fundamentally different levels of
risk, we can choose the position sizes Xt to equalize risk across positions.



                                                     7
of an asset and apply equation (5). In some cases, our general definition has more than
one interpretation, however, as one must decide which market conditions are assumed
constant. For instance, for bonds the carry could be the return assuming that the bond
price or the entire yield curve stays constant. As another example, one can compute
carry as the return if the nominal or real (i.e., inflation-adjusted) price stays constant. In
currencies, for example, defining carry as the return if the real exchange rate stays the
same implies that carry is the real interest rate. Appendix A also shows that the same
carry measures can be used for foreign-denominated futures contracts. As detailed below,
we try to use the simplest possible measures of carry for each asset class, namely the
nominal measure consistent with equation (5).


A.     Currency Carry
We begin with the classic carry trade studied in the literature—the currency carry trade—
which is a trade that goes long high carry currencies and short low carry currencies. For
a currency, the carry is simply the local interest rate in the corresponding country—
investing in a currency by literally putting cash into a country’s money market earns the
interest rate if the exchange rate (the “price of the currency”) does not change.
    Most speculators get foreign exchange exposure through a currency forward and our
data on currencies comes from 1-month currency forward contracts (detailed in the next
section). To derive the carry of a currency from forward rates, recall that the no-arbitrage
price of a currency forward contract with spot exchange rate St (measured in number of
local currency per unit of foreign currency), local interest rate rf , and foreign interest
rate rf ∗ is Ft = St (1 + rtf )/(1 + rtf ∗ ). Therefore, the carry of the currency is

                                     St − Ft  f ∗   f
                                                        1
                                Ct =        = r t − rt          .                                      (7)
                                        Ft              1 + rtf

The carry of investing in a forward in the foreign currency is the interest-rate spread,
rf ∗ − rf , adjusted for a scaling factor close to one, (1 + rtf )−1 . The carry is the foreign
interest rate in excess of the local risk-free rate rf because the forward contract is a
zero-cost instrument whose return is an excess return. 6
   There is an extensive literature studying the carry trade in currencies. The historical
positive return to currency carry trades is a well known violation of the so-called uncovered
   6
    The scaling factor simply reflects that a currency exposure using a futures contract corresponds to
buying 1 unit of foreign currency in the future, which corresponds to buying (1 + rtf )−1 units of currency
today. The scaling factor could be eliminated if we changed the assumed position size, that is, changed
Xt in equation 4.



                                                    8
interest-rate parity (UIP). The UIP is based on the simple assumption that all currencies
should have the same expected return, but many economic settings would imply differences
in expected returns across countries. For instance, differences in expected currency returns
could arise from differences in consumption risk (Lustig and Verdelhan (2007)), crash risk
(Brunnermeier, Nagel, and Pedersen (2008), Burnside, Eichenbaum, Kleshchelski, and
Rebelo (2011)), liquidity risk (Brunnermeier, Nagel, and Pedersen (2008)), and country
size (Hassan (2011)), where a country with more exposure to consumption or liquidity
risk could have both a high interest rate and a cheaper exchange rate.
    While we investigate the currency carry trade and its link to macroeconomic and
liquidity risks, the goal of our study is to investigate the role of carry more broadly across
asset classes and identify the characteristics of carry returns that are common and unique
to each asset class. As we show in the next section, some of the results in the literature
pertaining to currency carry trades, such as crashes, are not evident in all other asset
classes, while other characteristics, such as high Sharpe ratios and exposure to global
business cycles, are more common to carry trades in general across all asset classes.


B.     Global Equity Carry
If market conditions do not change for equities, which in this case corresponds to stock
prices and dividends, then the return on equities comes solely from dividends—hence,
carry is the dividend yield today.
     We implement a global equity carry strategy via futures, which leads to another
measure of carry. While we do not always have an equity futures contract with exactly one
month to expiration, we interpolate between the two nearest-to-maturity futures prices
to compute a consistent series of synthetic one-month equity futures prices. 7
     The no-arbitrage price of a futures contract is Ft = St (1 + rtf ) − EtQ (Dt+1 ), where
the expected dividend payment D is computed under the risk-neutral measure Q, and
rtf is the risk-free rate at time t in the country of the equity index. 8 Substituting this
expression back into equation (5), the carry for an equity future can be rewritten as
                                                                         !
                                    S t − Ft         EtQ (Dt+1 )             St
                               Ct =          =                   − rtf          .                         (8)
                                        Ft                St                 Ft
   7
     We only interpolate the futures prices to compute the equity carry. We use the most actively traded
equities contract to compute the return series, see Appendix B for details on the data construction.
   8
     Binsbergen, Brandt, and Koijen (2012) and Binsbergen, Hueskes, Koijen, and Vrugt (2013) study
the asset pricing properties of dividend futures prices, EtQ (Dt+n ), n = 1, 2, . . . , in the US, Europe, and
Japan.



                                                      9
The carry of an equity futures contract is simply the expected dividend yield minus the
local risk-free rate, multiplied by a scaling factor which is close to one, St /Ft .
    To further understand the relationship between carry and expected returns, consider
Gordon’s growth model for the price St of a stock with (constant) dividend growth g
and expected return E(R), St = D/(E(R) − g). This standard equity pricing equation
implies that the expected return is the dividend yield plus the expected dividend growth,
E(R) = D/S + g. Or, the expected return is the carry, D/S, plus the expected price
appreciation arising from the expected dividend growth, g. If the dividend yield varies
independently of g, then the dividend yield is clearly a signal of expected returns. If, on
the other hand, dividend growth is high when the dividend yield is low, then the dividend
yield would not necessarily predict expected returns, as the two components of E(R)
would offset each other. In this case, market prices would on average take back part of
the carry.
    If expected returns do vary, then it is natural to expect carry to be positively related
to expected returns: If a stock’s expected return increases while dividends stay the same,
then its price drops and its dividend yield increases (Campbell and Shiller (1988)). Hence,
a high expected return leads to a high carry. Indeed, this discount-rate mechanism
is consistent with standard macro-finance models, such as Bansal and Yaron (2004),
Campbell and Cochrane (1999), Gabaix (2009), Wachter (2010), and models of time-
varying liquidity risk premia (Acharya and Pedersen (2005)). We investigate in the next
section the relation between carry and expected returns for equities as well as the other
asset classes and test whether these relations are consistent with theory.
    As the above equations indicate, carry for equities is related to the dividend yield,
which has been extensively studied as a predictor of returns, starting with Campbell
and Shiller (1988) and Fama and French (1988). Our carry measure for equities and the
standard dividend yield used in the literature are related, but they are not the same.
Carry provides a forward-looking measure of dividends derived from futures prices, while
the standard dividend yield used in the prediction literature is backward looking. We show
below and in Appendix D that dividend yield strategies for equities are indeed different
from our equity carry strategy.


C.   Commodity Carry
If you make a cash investment in a commodity by literally buying and holding the physical
commodity itself, then the carry is the convenience yield or net benefits of use of the
commodity in excess of storage costs. While the actual convenience yield is hard to


                                            10
measure (and may depend on the specific investor), the carry of a commodity futures
or forward can be easily computed and represents the expected convenience yield of the
commodity. Similar to the dividend yield on equities, where the actual dividend yield may
be hard to measure since future dividends are unknown in advance, the expected dividend
yield can be backed out from futures prices. Hence, one of the reasons we employ futures
contracts is to easily and consistently compute the carry across asset classes. The no-
arbitrage price of a commodity futures contract is Ft = St (1 + rtf − δ t ), where δ t is the
convenience yield in excess of storage costs. Hence, the carry for a commodity futures
contract is,
                                      St − Ft                  1
                               Ct =           = δ t − rf                 ,                             (9)
                                         Ft                1 + rtf − δ t
where the commodity carry is the expected convenience yield of the commodity in excess
of the risk free rate (adjusted for a scaling factor that is close to one).
    To compute the carry from equation (9), we need data on the current futures price Ft
and current spot price St . However, commodity spot markets are often highly illiquid and
clean spot price data on commodities are often unavailable. To combat this data issue,
instead of examining the “slope” between the spot and futures prices, we consider the
slope between two futures prices of different maturity. Specifically, we consider the price
of the nearest-to-maturity commodity futures contract with the price of the next-nearest
available futures contract on the same commodity. Suppose that the nearest to maturity
futures price is Ft1 with T1 months to maturity and the second futures price is Ft2 with
T2 months to maturity, where T2 > T1 . In general, the no-arbitrage futures price can be
written as FtTi = St (1 + (rf − δ t )Ti ). Thus, the carry of holding the second contract can
be computed by assuming that its price will converge to Ft1 after T2 − T1 months, that is,
assuming that the price of a T1 -month futures stays constant:

                                         Ft1 − Ft2                 S
                                                                 f     t
                                Ct =     2
                                                     =   δ t − r t       ,                            (10)
                                       Ft (T2 − T1 )                 Ft2

where we divide by T2 −T1 to compute the carry on a per-month basis. Following Equation
(10), we can simply use data from the futures markets—specifically, the slope of the futures
curve—to get a measure of carry that captures the convenience yield. 9
   9
    Another interpretation of Equation (10) is as follows: Derive synthetic spot and 1-month futures
prices by linearly interpolating the two available futures prices, F 1 and F 2 , and then compute the 1-
month carry as before using these synthetic prices. It is easy to see that this yields the same expression
for carry as equation (10). In principal, we could also compute carry in other asset classes using this
method based on two points on the futures curve (i.e., not rely on spot prices). However, since spot price
data is readily available in the other asset classes, this is unnecessary. Moreover, we find that the carry
calculated from the futures curve in the other asset classes is nearly identical to the carry computed from



                                                    11
   As seen from the above equations, carry provides an interpretation of some of the
predictors of commodity returns examined in the literature (Gorton, Hayashi, and
Rouwenhorst (2007), Hong and Yogo (2010), Yang (2011)) and is linked to the convenience
yield on commodities.


D.    Global Bond Carry
Calculating carry for bonds is perhaps the most ambiguous since there are several
reasonable ways to define carry for fixed income instruments. For example, consider
a bond with T -months to maturity, coupon payments of D, par value Pˉ , price PtT , and
yield to maturity ytT . There are several different ways to define the carry of this bond.
Assuming that its price stays constant, the carry of the bond would be the current yield,
D/PtT , if there is a coupon payment over the next time period, otherwise it is zero.
However, since a bond’s maturity changes as time passes, it is not natural to define carry
based on the assumption that the bond price stays constant (especially for zero-coupon
bonds).
    A more useful definition of carry arises under the assumption that the bond’s yield
to maturity stays the same over the next time period. The carry could then be defined
as the yield to maturity (regardless of whether there is a coupon payment). To see this,
note that the price today of the bond is,
                                  X
                    PtT =                        D(1 + ytT )−(i−t) + Pˉ (1 + ytT )−(T −t) ,            (11)
                            i∈{coupon dates>t}


and if we assume that the yield to maturity stays the same, then the same corresponding
                                                     T −1
formula holds for the bond next period as well, Pt+1      . Thus, the value of the bond
including coupon payments next period is,
                                                 X
   T −1
 Pt+1   +D∙1[t+1∈{coupon dates}] =                          D(1+ytT )−(i−t−1) + Pˉ (1+ytT )−(T −t−1) . (12)
                                       i∈{coupon dates>t}


Hence, the carry is
                                  T −1
                                Pt+1   + D ∙ 1[t+1∈{coupon dates}] − PtT
                         Ct =                                            = ytT .                       (13)
                                                  PtT

The carry in excess of the short-term risk-free rate (i.e., the carry of a position financed
spot and futures prices in those asset classes. Hence, using the futures curve to calculate carry appears to
be equivalent to using spot-futures price differences, justifying our computation for carry in commodities.



                                                       12
by borrowing) is then the term spread:

                                             Ct = ytT − rtf .                                        (14)

    Perhaps the most compelling definition of carry is the return on the bond if the entire
                                                          τ
term structure of interest rates stays constant, i.e., yt+1  = ytτ for all maturities τ . In this
case, the carry is the bond return assuming that the yield to maturity changes from ytT
to ytT −1 . In this case, the carry (in terms of excess returns) is

                                 T −1 T −1
                              Pt+1   (yt ) + D ∙ 1[t+1∈coupon dates] − PtT
                     Ct =                            T
                                                                           − rtf
                                                   Pt
                                            T −1 T −1       T −1 T
                                          P     (y ) − Pt+1     (yt )
                          =   ytT − rtf + t+1 t          T
                                                                                                     (15)
                                                       Pt
                                                           
                          ∼
                          =     T     f
                              yt − rt −D   mod    T −1
                                                 yt − ytT
                              | {z } |           {z        }
                                 slope          roll down


where the latter approximation involving the modified duration, Dmod , yields a simple way
to think of carry. Intuitively, equation (15) shows that if the term structure of interest
rates is constant, then the carry is the bond yield plus the “roll down,” which captures the
price increase due to the fact that the bond rolls down the yield curve. As the bond rolls
down the (assumed constant) yield curve, the yield changes from ytT to ytT −1 , resulting in
a return which is minus the yield change times the modified duration.
    To be consistent with the other asset classes, we would like to compute the bond carry
using futures data. Unfortunately, liquid bond futures contracts are only traded in a
few countries and, when they exist, there are often very few contracts (often only one).
Further complicating matters is the fact that different bonds have different coupon rates
and the futures price is subject to cheapest-to-deliver options. To simplify matters and
create a broader global cross-section, we derive synthetic futures prices based on data on
zero-coupon rates as follows. 10
     We compute the carry of a synthetic one-month futures. Consider a futures contract
that gives the obligation to buy a 9-year-and-11-months zero-coupon bond in one month
from now. The current price of this one-month futures is Ft = (1 + rtf )/(1 + yt10Y )10 , where
yt10Y is the current yield on a 10-year zero-coupon bond. (This expression for the futures
price follows from the fact that the futures payoff can be replicated by buying a 10-year
bond.) The current “spot price” is naturally the current price of a 9-year-and-11-month
  10
    For countries with actual, valid bond futures data, the correlation between actual futures returns and
our synthetic futures returns exceeds 0.95.



                                                    13
zero-coupon bond, St = 1/(1 + yt9Y 11M )9+11/12 . Hence, the carry as defined in equation
(5) is given by
                          S t − Ft     1/(1 + yt9Y 11M )9+11/12
                     Ct =           =                            − 1.                (16)
                              Ft       (1 + rtf )/(1 + yt10Y )10
While we compute the carry using this exact formula, we can get an intuitive expression
using the same approximation as before

                         Ct ' yt10Y − rtf − Dmod (yt10Y − yt9Y 11M ).                   (17)

Hence, the futures-based carry calculation corresponds to the assumption that the entire
term structure of interest rates stays constant.
    Again, the above equations highlight how carry captures standard predictors for bond
returns. For example, a standard predictor of bond returns in the time series is the yield
spread (Fama and Bliss (1987) and Campbell and Shiller (1991)), where our measure of
carry equals the yield spread plus a roll-down component. To understand the importance
of the roll-down component, we can compare our carry measure to the yield spread
between long-term (10-year) and short-term (3-month) bond yields. In our sample, the
average (across countries) time-series correlation between the yield spread and the carry
signal is 0.90, and if we use the yield spread, instead of the carry, as a signal for form
portfolios, the returns generated are 0.91 correlated.


E.   Carry of the Slope of Global Yield Curves
In addition to the synthetic global bond futures described above, we also examine tests
assets in each country that capture the slope of the yield curve. Specifically, we consider
in each country a long position in the 10-year bond and a short position in the 2-year
bond. Naturally, the carry of this slope-of-the-yield-curve position in country i is

                                 Ctslope,i = Ct10Y,i − Ct2Y,i .                         (18)

This provides another measure of carry for fixed income securities in each market that, in
this case, seeks to predict the returns associated with the slope of the yield curve in each
market rather than its level (as above).


F.   Carry Across Treasuries of Different Maturities
We also examine carry for US Treasuries from 1 to 10 years of maturity. These bonds
naturally have very different risks and are therefore not directly comparable. For instance,

                                              14
a portfolio that invests long $1 of 10-year bonds and shorts $1 of 1-year bonds is dominated
by the 10-year bonds, which are far more volatile. To put the bonds on a common scale, we
consider duration-adjusted bond returns. Specifically, we consider portfolios of duration-
adjusted bonds where each bond i is scaled by the inverse of its duration, Dti . Naturally,
our measure of carry must correspond to the position size. Hence, a position of 1 /Dti
bonds with a carry of Cti (defined in Section D) is:

                                                                  Cti
                                        Ctduration-adjusted,i =       .                               (19)
                                                                  Dti
This corresponds to duration-adjusting the position size Xt in equations 3 and 4.


G.     Credit Market Carry
We also look at the carry of US credit portfolios sorted by maturity and credit quality.
We compute the carry for duration-adjusted bonds in the same way as we do for global
bonds using equations (17) and (19). Clearly, this definition of carry is the credit spread
(the yield over the risk free rate) plus the roll down on the credit curve.


H.     Equity Index Option Carry
Finally, we apply the concept of carry to U.S. equity index options. We define the price
of a call option at time t with maturity T , strike K, implied volatility σ T , and underlying
Sit as FtCall (Sit , K, T, σ T ). The equivalent put price is denoted by FtP ut (Sit , K, T, σ T ) .
We apply the same concept of carry as before, that is, the return on a security if market
conditions do not change.
   In the context of options, this implies for the definition of carry (j = Call, P ut):

                                              Ftj (Sit , K, T − 1, σ T −1 )
                        Citj (K, T, σ T )   =                               − 1,                      (20)
                                                   Ftj (Sit , K, T, σ T )

which depends on the maturity, the strike, and the type of option traded. We could
subtract the risk-free rate from this expression, but all options are traded in US markets
and hence this will not change the rank of the signals in our cross-sectional strategies. 11
   To get some intuition, we can approximate the carry in terms of the derivative of the
option price with respect to time (i.e., its theta θ) and implied volatility (vega ν) as the
  11
    Our equity strategies are a special case of the call options carry strategy, where lim K → 0 and T = 1.
In this case, limK→0 F C = limK→0 E(M (S − K)+ ) = E(M S), which is the forward price of equities.




                                                      15
stock price (Sit ) is constant in the carry calculation:

      Ftj (Sit , K, T − 1, σ T −1 ) ' Ftj (Sit , K, T, σ T )                                                         (21)
                                           −θjt (Sit , K, T, σ T )   −   ν jt (Sit , K, T, σ T )(σ T   − σ T −1 ).

This allows us to write the option carry as:

                                 −θjt (Sit , K, T, σ T ) − ν jt (Sit , K, T, σ T )(σ T − σ T −1 )
           Citj (K, T, σ T ) '                                                                    .                  (22)
                                                      Ftj (Sit , K, T, σ T )

The size of the carry is therefore driven by the time decay (via θ) and the roll down on
the implied volatility curve (via ν). The option contracts that we consider differ in terms
of their moneyness, maturity, and put/call characteristic as we describe further below. 12


II.      Carry Trade Returns Across Asset Classes
We construct our carry trade portfolio returns for each asset class as well as across all the
asset classes we examine. First, we briefly describe our sample of securities in each asset
class and how we construct our return series, then we consider the carry trade portfolio
returns within and across the asset classes and examine their performance over time.
Appendix B details the data sources.


A.    Data and Summary Statistics
Table I presents summary statistics for the returns and the carry of each of the instruments
we use, including the starting date for each of the series. There are 13 country equity
index futures: the U.S. (S&P 500), Canada (S&P TSE 60), the UK (FTSE 100), France
(CAC), Germany (DAX), Spain (IBEX), Italy (FTSE MIB), The Netherlands (EOE
AEX), Norway (OMX), Switzerland (SMI), Japan (Nikkei), Hong Kong (Hang Seng),
and Australia (S&P ASX 200).
  12
     Starting in 2004, the CBOE introduced futures on the VIX index, where the payoff of these futures
contracts equals the VIX index. Following our definition of carry, the carry of these contracts equals the
current level of the VIX relative to the futures price or the risk-neutral expectation of the change in the
VIX. On average, the carry is negative for these securities, but it turns positive during bad economic
periods when the VIX typically spikes upward and the volatility term structure inverts. Our preliminary
evidence suggests that the carry predicts the VIX futures returns in the time-series, consistent with what
we find for index options. Recently, various exchanges across the world introduced volatility futures on
different indices. The history is too short and the contracts too illiquid to implement a cross-sectional
strategy, but this may be interesting to explore at a future date when longer and more reliable data
becomes available.


                                                        16
       We consider 20 foreign exchange forward contracts covering the period November 1983
to September 2012 (with some currencies starting as late as February 1997 and the Euro
beginning in February 1999). We also include the U.S. as one of the countries for which
the carry and currency return are, by definition, equal to zero.
   The commodities sample covers 24 commodities futures dating as far back as January
1980 (through September 2012). Not surprisingly, commodities exhibit the largest cross-
sectional variation in mean and standard deviation of returns since they contain the most
diverse assets, covering commodities in metals, energy, and agriculture/livestock.
    The global fixed income sample covers 10 government bonds starting as far back as
November 1983 through September 2012. Bonds exhibit the least cross-sectional variation
across markets, but there is still substantial variation in average returns and volatility
across the markets. These same bond markets are used to compute the 10-year minus
2-year slope returns in each of the 10 markets.
    For US Treasuries, we use standard CRSP bond portfolios with maturities equal to 1
to 12, 13 to 24, 25 to 36, 37 to 48, 49 to 60, and 61 to 120 months. The sample period
is August 1971 to September 2012. To compute the carry, we use the bond yields of
Gurkaynak, Sack, and Wright. 13
    For credit, we use the Barclays’ corporate bond indices for “Intermediate” (average
duration about 5 years) and “Long-term” (average duration about 10 years) maturities.
In addition, we have information on the average maturity within a given portfolio and
the average bond yield. In terms of credit quality, we consider AAA, AA, A, and BAA.
The sample period is January 1973 to September 2012.
    Finally, for index options we use data from OptionMetrics starting in January 1996
through December 2011. We use the following indices: Dow Jones Industrial Average
(DJX), NASDAQ 100 Index (NDX), CBOE Mini-NDX Index (MNX), AMEX Major
Market Index (XMI), S&P500 Index (SPX), S&P100 Index (OEX), S&P Midcap 400
Index (MID), S&P Smallcap 600 Index (SML), Russell 2000 Index (RUT), and PSE
Wilshire Smallcap Index (WSX).
   We take positions in options between 30 and 60 days to maturity at the last trading
day of each month. We exclude options with non-standard expiration dates. We hold the
positions for one month. 14
       We then construct two delta groups for calls and puts, respectively: 15
  13
     See http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/researchdata.htm.
  14
     The screens largely follow from Frazzini and Pedersen (2011), but the contracts included in the
strategy are less liquid.
  15
     Results are stronger if we include all five delta groups as defined in Frazzini and Pedersen (2011).



                                                   17
     1. Out of the money: Δ call ∈ [0.2, 0.4) or Δput ∈ [−0.4, −0.2)

     2. At the money: Δcall ∈ [0.4, 0.6) or Δput ∈ [−0.6, −0.4)

We implement the carry strategies separately for call and put options. We select one
option per delta group for each index. If multiple options are available, we first select the
contract with the highest volume. If there are still multiple contracts available, we select
the contracts with the highest open interest. In some rare cases, we still have multiple
matches, and we then choose the option with the highest price, that is, the option that is
most in the money (in a given moneyness group). Furthermore, we do not take positions
in options for which the volume or open interest are zero for the contracts that are required
to compute the carry.
    Further details on all of our data and their sources are provided in Appendix B.


B.     Defining a Carry Trade Portfolio
A carry trade is a trading strategy that goes long high-carry securities and shorts low-carry
securities. There are various ways of choosing the exact carry-trade portfolio weights, but
our main results are robust across a number of portfolio weighting schemes. One way to
construct the carry trade is to rank assets by their carry and go long the top 20, 25, or
30% of securities and short the bottom 20, 25, or 30%, with equal weights applied to all
securities within the two groups, and ignore (e.g., place zero weight on) the securities in
between these two extremes. Another method, which we use, is a carry trade specification
that takes a position in all securities weighted by their carry ranking. Specifically, the
weight on each security i at time t is given by
                                                                        
                                                                Nt + 1
                                wti   = zt       rank(Cti )   −              ,           (23)
                                                                  2

where the scalar zt ensures that the sum of the long and short positions equals 1 and −1,
respectively. This weighting scheme is similar to that used by Asness, Moskowitz, and
Pedersen (2012) and Moskowitz, Ooi, and Pedersen (2012), who show that the resulting
portfolios are highly correlated with other zero-cost portfolios that use different weights.
   By construction, the carry trade portfolio always has a positive carry itself. We
compute the carry of a portfolio of securities as follows. Consider a set of securities
indexed by i = 1, ..., Nt , where Nt is the number of available securities at time t. Security
i has a carry of Cti computed at the end of month t and that is related to the return
 i
rt+1 over the following month t + 1. Letting the portfolio weight of security i be wti ,
the return of the portfolio is naturally the weighted sum of the returns on the securities,

                                                      18
         P
rt+1 =     wti rt+1
             i
                i
                    . Similarly, since carry is also a return (under the assumption of no price
changes), the carry of the portfolio is simply computed as,
                                                            X
                                         Ctportf olio =          wti Cti .                            (24)
                                                            i


The carry of the carry trade portfolio is equal to the weighted-average carry of the high-
carry securities minus the average carry among the low-carry securities:
                                            X                    X
                         Ctcarry trade =             wti Cti −            |wti |Cti   > 0.            (25)
                                            wti >0               wti <0


Hence, the carry of the carry trade portfolio depends on the cross-sectional dispersion of
carry among the constituent securities.


C.     Carry Trade Portfolio Returns within an Asset Class
For each global asset class, we construct a carry strategy using portfolio weights following
equation (23) that invests in high-carry securities while short selling low-carry securities,
where each security is weighted by the rank of its carry and the portfolio is rebalanced
every month.
    We consider two measures of carry: (i) The “current carry”, which is measured at
the end of each month, and (ii) “carry1-12”, which is a moving average of the current
carry over the past 12 months (including the most recent one). Carry1-12 helps smooth
potential seasonal components that can arise in calculating carry for certain assets. 16 All
results in the paper pertain to the current carry, but we report results using carry1-12
in Appendix C, where the results are typically stronger, most likely due to the seasonal
issues mentioned.
    Table I reports the mean and standard deviation of the carry for each asset, which
ranges considerably within an asset class (especially commodities) and across asset classes.
Table II reports the annualized mean, standard deviation, skewness, excess kurtosis, and
Sharpe ratio of the carry strategies within each asset class. For comparison, the same
  16
    For instance, the equity carry over the next month depends on whether most companies are expected
to pay dividends in that specific month, and countries differ widely in their dividend calendar (e.g.,
Japan vs. US). Current carry will tend to go long an equity index if that country is in its dividend
season, whereas carry1-12 will go long an equity index that has a high overall dividend yield for that year
regardless of what month those dividends were paid. In addition, some commodity futures have strong
seasonal components that are also eliminated by using carry1-12. Fixed income (the way we compute it),
currencies, and US equity index options do not exhibit much seasonal carry pattern, but we also consider
strategies based on both their current carry and carry1-12 for completeness.



                                                       19
statistics are reported for the returns to a passive long investment in each asset class,
which is an equal weighted portfolio of all the securities in each asset class.
    Panel A of Table II indicates that all of the carry strategies in all nine asset classes
have significant positive returns. The average returns to carry range from 0.24% for US
credit to 179% for US equity index put options. However, these strategies face markedly
different volatilities, so looking at their Sharpe ratios is more informative. The Sharpe
ratios for the carry strategies range from 0.37 for call options to 1.80 for put options,
with the average being 0.74 across all asset classes. A carry strategy in every asset
class outperforms a passive exposure (equal-weighted investment) to the asset class itself,
except for the global bond level and slope strategies where the Sharpe ratios are basically
the same. A passive exposure to the asset classes only generates a 0.21 Sharpe ratio on
average, far lower than the 0.75 Sharpe ratio of the carry strategies on average. Further,
the long-short carry strategies are (close to) market neutral, making their high returns all
the more puzzling and, as we show below, all their alphas with respect to these passive
benchmarks are significantly positive.
    Panel B of Table II looks at carry trades in a coarser fashion by first grouping securities
by region or broader asset class and then generating a carry trade. For example, for
equities we group all index futures into one of five regions: North America, UK, continental
Europe, Asia, and New Zealand/Australia and compute the equal-weighted average carry
and equal-weighted average returns of these five regions. We then create a carry trade
portfolio using only these five regional portfolios. Conducting this coarser examination
of carry allows us to see whether carry trade profits are largely driven by across region
carry differences or within region carry differences when comparing the results to those
in Panel A of Table II. For equities, a carry trade across these five regions produces a
Sharpe ratio almost as large as that in Panel A of Table II.
    We repeat the same exercise for global bond levels and slopes—again, assigning country
bonds to the same five regions—and for currencies, too. For commodities, we assign all
futures contracts to one of three groups: agriculture/livestock, metals, or energy. Carry
strategies based on these coarser groupings of securities produce similar, but slightly
smaller, Sharpe ratios than carry strategies formed on the disaggregated individual
security level. This suggests that significant variation in carry comes from differences
across regions and that our results are robust to different weighting schemes. For this
regional/group level analysis we also exclude US Treasuries, credit, and index options.
Hence, our results are robust to these securities as well.
    The robust performance of carry strategies across asset classes indicates that carry is
an important component of expected returns. The previous literature focuses on currency


                                              20
carry trades, finding similar results to those in Table II. However, we find that a carry
strategy works at least as well in other asset classes, too, performing markedly better in
equities and put options than in currencies, and about as well as currencies in commodities,
global fixed income, and Treasuries. Hence, carry is a broader concept that can be applied
to many assets in general and is not unique to currencies. 17
    Examining the higher moments of the carry trade returns in each asset class, we
find the strong negative skewness associated with the currency carry trade documented
by Brunnermeier, Nagel, and Pedersen (2008). Likewise, commodity and fixed-income
carry strategies exhibit some negative skewness and the options carry strategies exhibit
very large negative skewness. However, carry strategies in equities, US Treasuries, and
credit have positive skewness. The carry strategies in all asset classes exhibit excess
kurtosis, which is typically larger than the kurtosis of the passive long strategy in
each asset class, indicating fat-tailed positive and negative returns. For instance, the
credit carry strategy exhibits positive skewness and large kurtosis as it suffers extreme
negative returns, particularly around recessions—something we investigate further in the
next section—which are then followed by even more extreme positive returns during the
recovery (resulting in positive skewness). Hence, while negative skewness may not be a
general characteristic of these carry strategies, the potential for large negative returns
appears pervasive.


D.     Diversified Carry Trade Portfolio
Table II also reports the performance of a diversified carry strategy across all asset classes,
which is constructed as the equal-volatility-weighted average of carry portfolio returns
across the asset classes. Specifically, we weight each asset classes’ carry portfolio by the
inverse of its sample volatility so that each carry strategy in each asset class contributes
roughly equally to the total volatility of the diversified portfolio. This procedure is
similar to that used by Asness, Moskowitz, and Pedersen (2012) and Moskowitz, Ooi,
and Pedersen (2012) to combine returns from different asset classes with very different
volatilities.18 We call this diversified across-asset-class portfolio the global carry factor,
GCF .
  17
     Several recent papers also study carry strategies for commodities in isolation, see for instance
Szymanowska, de Roon, Nijman, and van den Goorbergh (2011) and Yang (2011).
  18
     Since commodities have roughly ten times the volatility of Treasuries and options have 300 times the
volatility of Treasuries and 30 times the volatility of commodities or equities, a simple equal-weighted
average of carry returns across asset classes will have its variation dominated by option carry risk and
under-represented by fixed income carry risk. Volatility-weighting the asset classes into a diversified
portfolio gives each asset class more equal representation.



                                                   21
   As the bottom of Panel A of Table II reports, the diversified carry trade has a
remarkable Sharpe ratio of 1.10 per annum. A diversified passive long position in all
asset classes produces only a 0.47 Sharpe ratio. These numbers suggest carry is a strong
predictor of expected returns globally across asset classes. Moreover, the substantial
increase in Sharpe ratio for the diversified carry portfolio relative to the average individual
carry portfolio Sharpe ratios in each asset class (which is 0.74), indicates that the
correlations of the carry trades across asset classes are fairly low. Sizeable diversification
benefits are obtained by applying carry trades universally across asset classes.
   Panel A of Table III reports the correlations of carry trade returns across the nine
asset classes, and Panel B reports correlations across the regions/groups. Except for the
correlation between global bond level carry and the slope carry strategies, the correlations
are all close to zero. The low correlations among carry strategies in other asset classes
not only lowers the volatility of the diversified portfolio substantially, but also mutes the
negative skewness associated with currency carry trades and mitigates the excess kurtosis
associated with all carry trades. Table II shows that the negative skewness and excess
kurtosis of the diversified portfolio of carry trades are smaller than those of the passive long
position diversified across asset classes and are smaller than the average of the individual
skewness and kurtosis statistics for each asset class. (Interestingly, the diversified passive
position actually has more negative skewness and excess kurtosis than the average across
each individual asset class—the opposite of what a diversified carry portfolio achieves.)
Hence, the diversification benefits of applying carry across asset classes seem to be larger
than those obtained from investing passively long in the same asset classes.
   The magnitude of the Sharpe ratios of the diversified carry strategy presents a daunting
challenge for current asset pricing models that already struggle to explain the significantly
smaller Sharpe ratios typically examined within a single asset class (e.g., currencies). A
diversified carry portfolio across asset classes is also less prone to crashes, has less negative
skewness, and smaller kurtosis than the diversified passive strategy, making the carry
strategy’s large average return even more puzzling from a crash risk perspective. On the
other hand, the carry strategy faces larger transaction costs, greater funding issues, and
limits to arbitrage than a passive strategy.
    Figure 1 plots the cumulative monthly returns to the diversified carry strategy across
all asset classes. The plot is a lot smoother than that of the currency carry trade (also
plotted for reference), where crashes are more evident. The graph highlights the steady
positive returns to carry applied globally across all asset classes. These returns come from
two sources: the carry itself, plus any price appreciation that may be related to/predicted
by carry. In the next section, we investigate in more detail the relationship between carry,


                                               22
expected price changes, and total expected returns.


E.   Risk-Adjusted Performance and Exposure to Other Factors
Table IV reports regression results for each carry portfolio’s returns in each asset class
on a set of other portfolio returns or factors that have been shown to explain the cross-
section of global asset returns. Specifically, we regress the time series of carry returns
in each asset class on the corresponding passive long portfolio returns (equal-weighted
average of all securities), the value and momentum factors for each asset class, and time-
series momentum (TSMOM) factors for each asset class. The global value and momentum
factors are based on Asness, Moskowitz, and Pedersen (2012) and the TSMOM factors are
those of Moskowitz, Ooi, and Pedersen (2012). These factors are computed for each asset
class separately for equities, fixed income, commodities, and currencies. For fixed income
slope and Treasuries, we use the fixed income factors and for the credit and options
strategies we use the diversified value and momentum “everywhere” factors of Asness,
Moskowitz, and Pedersen (2012) (which includes individual equity strategies, too) and
the globally diversified TSMOM factor of Moskowitz, Ooi, and Pedersen (2012).
    Panel A of Table IV reports both the intercepts (or alphas) from these regressions
as well as factor exposures to these other known factors. The first column reports the
results from regressing the carry trade portfolio returns in each asset class on the equal-
weighted passive index for that asset class. The alphas for every carry strategy in every
asset class are positive and statistically significant (except for calls), indicating that, in
every asset class, a carry strategy provides abnormal returns above and beyond simple
passive exposure to that asset class. Put differently, carry trades offer excess returns
over the “local” market return in each asset class. Further, we see that the betas are
often not significantly different from zero. Hence, carry strategies provide sizeable return
premia without much market exposure to the asset class itself. The last two rows report
the R2 from the regression and the information ratio, IR, which is the alpha divided by
the residual volatility from the regression. The IRs are large, reflecting high risk-adjusted
returns to carry strategies even after accounting for its exposure to the local market index.
   Looking at the value and cross-sectional and time-series momentum factor exposures,
we find mixed evidence across the asset classes. For instance, in equities, we find
that carry strategies have a positive value exposure, but no momentum or time-series
momentum exposure. The positive exposure to value, however, does not reduce the alpha
or information ratio of the carry strategy much. For fixed income, carry loads positively
on cross-sectional and time-series momentum, though again the alphas and IRs remain


                                             23
significantly positive. In commodities, a carry strategy loads significantly negatively on
value and significantly positively on cross-sectional momentum, but exhibits little relation
to time-series momentum. The exposure to value and cross-sectional momentum captures
a significant fraction of the variation in commodity carry’s returns, as the R2 jumps from
less than 1% to 20% when the value and momentum factors are included in the regression.
However, because the carry trade’s loadings on value and momentum are of opposite sign,
the impact on the alpha of the commodity carry strategy is small since the exposures to
these two positive return factors offset each other. The alpha diminishes by 29 basis points
per month, but remains economically large at 64 basis points per month and statistically
significant. Currency carry strategies exhibit no reliable loading on value, momentum, or
time-series momentum and consequently the alpha of the currency carry portfolio remains
large and significant. Similarly, for credit, no reliable loadings on these other factors are
present and hence a significant carry alpha remains. For call options, the loadings of the
carry strategies on value, momentum, and TSMOM are all negative, making the alphas
even larger. Finally, for puts there are no reliable loadings on these other factors. The
last two columns of Panel A of Table IV report regression results for the diversified GCF
on the all-asset-class market, value, momentum, and TSMOM factors. The alphas and
IRs are large and significant and there are no reliable betas with respect to these factors.
    Panel B of Table IV reports results of the same regressions for the regional/group
carry strategies. Again, significant alphas remain for carry strategies in each of the asset
classes, indicating that carry is a unique characterstic that predicts returns and is not
captured by known predictors of returns in the same asset class such as general market
exposure, value, momentum, and TSMOM.
    The regression results in Table IV only highlight the average exposure of the carry
trade returns to these factors. However, these unconditional estimates may mask
significant dynamic exposures to these factors. There may be times when the carry trade
in every asset class has significant positive exposure to the market and other times when
it has significant negative market exposure. We further explore the dynamics of carry
trade positions in the next section.


F.   What Is New About Carry?
Our general concept of carry provides a unifying framework that synthesizes much of
the return predictability evidence found in global asset classes. Indeed, return predictors
across asset classes have mostly been treated disjointly by the literature. For example,
our carry measure in equities is related to the dividend yield and therefore equity carry


                                             24
returns naturally have a positive loading on value in Table IV. Carry in fixed income is
related to the yield spread, and in commodities carry is related to the convenience yield.
These predictors are typically treated as separate and unrelated phenomena in each asset
class. We normally don’t think about how the dividend yield in equities might be related
to the yield spread in bonds or the convenience yield in commodities or local interest rates
for currencies. Yet, the concept of carry provides a unifying framework that captures this
evidence, providing a common theme that links these predictors across all asset classes.
   However, carry is different from these standard predictors and adds to the
predictability literature. Table IV shows that carry is not spanned by other unifying
themes such as value and momentum. Moreover, we also show that carry provides
additional predictive content above asset-class-specific variables. For example, for global
equities the carry is the expected dividend yield derived from futures prices relative to the
local short term interest rate, which can be quite different from the standard historical
dividend yield used in the literature. Appendix D shows that a carry strategy based
on expected dividend yield is in fact quite different from a standard value strategy that
sorts on historical dividend yields. First, we show for the US equity market, using a
long time series, that the dynamics of carry are different from the standard dividend
yield. Second, sorting countries directly on historical dividend yield rather than carry
results in a portfolio less than 0.30 correlated to the carry strategy in equities. Running a
time-series regression of carry returns in equities on a dividend yield strategy in equities
produces betas close to zero (0.07) and significant alphas. Hence, carry contains important
independent information beyond the standard dividend yield studied in the literature.
    In addition to unifying and extending the set of standard predictor variables, we also
illustrate how the concept of carry provides useful predictor variables for other cross-
sections of assets not previously examined. Our inclusion of the cross-section of US
Treasuries, the cross-section of US credit portfolios, and the cross-section of US index
options provides several out of sample testing grounds for carry as a novel return predictor.
Moreover, applying a carry strategy to options on a single index results in shorting out-
of-the money put options and going long at-the-money options, which is known to be a
profitable strategy with occasionally large drawdowns. This illustrates once more that
the concept of carry can both connect and extend predictor variables and investment
strategies across many different asset classes. It may be interesting for future research
to explore alternative carry strategies for different cross-sections of assets using the same
concept we propose in this paper.




                                             25
III.      How Does Carry Relate to Expected Returns?
In this section we investigate further how carry relates to expected returns. We begin by
decomposing carry strategies into their static and dynamic components.


A.     Static and Dynamic Return Components
The average return of the carry trade depends on two sources of exposure: (i) a static
or “passive” return component due to the average carry trade portfolio being long
(short) securities that have high (low) unconditional returns, and (ii) a “dynamic” return
component that captures how strongly variation in carry predicts returns.
   The estimated expected return on a carry strategy can be written as:

                                                        T   N
                                                     1 XX ∗
                                    Ê (rp,t+1 ) =            w rn,t+1 ,                       (26)
                                                     T t=1 n=1 n,t

where N denotes the total number of contracts that are used at any point in the strategy
                                               ∗
(potentially at different points in time) and wn,t is the portfolio weight from equation (23)
                                                 ∗
when contract n is available and otherwise wn,t = 0. We rewrite the expression for the
expected return by defining Tn as the set of dates where security n is used and Tn as the
number of such dates:
                 N
                 X Tn
Ê (rp,t+1 ) =             Ê n (wn,t rn,t+1 )                                                        (27)
                 n=1
                       T

                                                 Tn n h                                      i
                 XN                            N
                                               X
                  Tn n            n                               n                   n
            =        Ê (wn,t ) Ê (rn,t+1 ) +     Ê    wn,t − Ê (wn,t ) rn,t+1 − Ê (rn,t+1 ) ,
              n=1 |
                   T        {z            } n=1 |T                      {z                       }
                             Static component                              Dynamic component

                                    P             
where we define Ê n (xn,t ) ≡ Tn−1    t∈Tn x n,t   as the time series average for any n and
time series xn,t .
    We see that the overall average return is the sum of a passive and a dynamic
component. Naturally, Ê n (wn,t ) is the portfolio’s “passive exposure” to asset n, while
the “dynamic exposure” wn,t − E(wn,t ) is zero on average over time, representing a timing
strategy in the asset that goes long and short according to the asset’s carry.
    Table V reports the results of this decomposition, where we estimate the static and
dynamic components of returns according to equation (27). For equities, the dynamic
component comprises the entirety of the carry trade’s returns. For global bond level
and slope carry trades, the dynamic component also captures nearly all of the carry


                                                       26
trade profits (86% and 99%, respectively). For Treasuries, a little less than half of the
carry returns come from the dynamic component, for commodities a little more than half
come from the dynamic component, and for the currency carry returns the split between
passive and dynamic components is approximately equal. For credit, only 30% of carry
profits come from the dynamic component, and for options all of the carry returns come
from dynamic exposure. Overall, carry trade returns appear to be due to both passive
exposures and dynamic rebalancing, with some variation across asset classes in terms of
the importance of these two components.


B.    Does the Market Take Back Part of the Carry?
The significant returns to the carry trade indicate that carry is indeed a signal of expected
returns. However, to better understand the relation between carry and expected returns
it is instructive to go back to equation (6), which decomposes expected returns into carry
and expected price appreciation. To estimate this relationship, we run the following panel
regression for each asset class:

                                  i
                                 rt+1 = ai + bt + cCti + εit+1 ,                           (28)

where ai is an asset-specific intercept (or fixed effect), bt are time fixed effects, Cti is the
carry on asset i at time t, and c is the coefficient of interest that measures how well carry
predicts returns.
   There are several interesting hypotheses to consider. First, c = 0 means that carry does
not predict returns, consistent with a generalized notion of the “expectations hypothesis.”
Second, c = 1 means that the expected return moves one-for-one with carry. While c = 0
means that the total return is unpredictable, c = 1 means that price changes (the return
excluding carry) are unpredictable by carry. Third, c ∈ (0, 1) means that a positive
carry is associated with a negative expected price appreciation such that the market
“takes back” part of the carry, but not all. Fourth, c > 1 means that a positive carry is
associated with a positive expected price appreciation so that an investor gets the carry
and price appreciation too—that is, carry predicts further price increases. Lastly, c < 0
would imply that carry predicts such a negative price change that it more than offsets the
direct effect of a positive carry.
    Table VI reports the results for each asset class with and without fixed effects. Without
asset and time fixed effects, c represents the total predictability of returns from carry
from both its passive and dynamic components. Including time fixed effects removes
the time-series predictable return component coming from general exposure to assets

                                               27
at a given point in time. Similarly, including asset-specific fixed effects removes the
predictable return component of carry coming from passive exposure to assets with
different unconditional average returns. By including both asset and time fixed effects,
the slope coefficient c in equation (28) represents the predictability of returns to carry
coming purely from variation in carry.
   The results in Table VI indicate that carry is a strong predictor of expected returns,
with consistently positive and statistically significant coefficients on carry, save for
the commodity strategy, which may be tainted by strong seasonal effects in carry for
commodities. The carry1-12 strategy in Appendix C, which mitigates seasonal effects, is
a ubiquitously positive and significant predictor of returns, even for commodities.
    Focusing on the magnitude of the predictive coefficient, Table VI shows that the point
estimate of c is greater than one for equities, global bond levels and slope, and credit,
and smaller than one for US Treasuries, commodities, and options, and around one for
currencies (depending on whether fixed effects are included). These results imply that for
equities, for instance, when the dividend yield is high, not only is an investor rewarded
by directly receiving large dividends (relative to the price), but also equity prices tend
to appreciate more than usual. Hence, expected stock returns appear to be comprised of
both high dividend yields and additionally high expected price appreciation. Similarly,
for fixed income securities buying a 10-year bond with a high carry provides returns from
the carry itself (i.e., from the yield spread over the short rate and from rolling down the
yield curve), and, further, yields tend to drop, leading to additional price appreciation.
This is surprising as the expectations hypothesis suggests that a high term spread implies
short and long rates are expected to increase, but this is not what we find. However, these
results must be interpreted with caution as the predictive coefficient is not statistically
significantly different from one in all but a few cases.
    For currencies, the predictive coefficient is close to one, which means that high-interest
currencies neither depreciate, nor appreciate, on average. Hence, the currency investor
earns the interest-rate differential on average. This finding goes back to Fama (1984),
who ran these regressions slightly differently. Fama (1984)’s well-known result is that
his predictive coefficient has the “wrong” sign relative to uncovered interest rate parity,
which corresponds to a coefficient larger than one in our regression.
    For commodities, the predictive coefficient is significantly less than one, so that when
a commodity has a high spot price relative to its futures price, implying a high carry, the
spot price tends to depreciate on average, thus lowering the realized return on average
below the carry. Similarly, we see the same thing for US Treasuries and options.
   We can also examine how the predictive coefficient changes across the different


                                             28
regression specifications with and without fixed effects to see how the predictability of
carry changes once the passive exposures are removed. For example, the coefficient on
carry for equities drops very little when including asset and time fixed effects, which
is consistent with the dynamic component to equity carry strategies dominating the
predictability of returns. We also see that currency carry predictability is cut roughly
in half when the fixed effects are included, implying that the dynamic component of the
currency carry strategy contributes to about half of the return predictability.


C.    Timing Strategies
Table VII reports results for pure timing strategies on each asset using carry and ignoring
any cross-sectional information from carry. Our previous results indicate that for all
carry strategies, the dynamic component is an important part of carry returns. Table VII
focuses exclusively on this dynamic component by using carry to time an investment in
each security. Specifically, for every security we go long if the carry is positive and short
if it is negative. We do this for every security within an asset class and then take the
equal-weighted average of these timing strategy returns based on carry across all securities
within an asset class. Panel A of Table VII reports the results for each asset class as well
as for the regional/group level portfolios. The returns and Sharpe ratios to these timing
strategies are all positive and significant in all asset classes, indicating that carry is highly
useful in timing a security as well as selecting securities.
     Comparing the results in Table VII to those in Table II, which used carry to select
securities cross-sectionally, the magnitude of the performance of the strategies is similar.
These results are consistent with the importance of the dynamic component to carry
trades found earlier. Panel B of Table VII repeats the timing exercise, but where we go
long (short) a security if its carry is above (below) its sample mean. The specification
eliminates any cross-sectional effects from carry and is equivalent to the panel regressions
of Table VI that include contract fixed effects. The performance of these timing strategies
is also strong and consistently positive, except for index call options. This is consistent
with the findings in Table VI where the estimate for c turns negative for call options when
only contract fixed effects are included.
    From a variety of perspectives and measures, we have shown that carry is a
ubiquitously useful and novel predictor of returns both in the cross-section and time-
series across all of the diverse asset classes we study. In the final section of the paper, we
explore what common risks, if any, carry strategies might be exposed to and whether the
return premium associated with carry might be compensation for those risks.


                                               29
IV.      How Risky Are Carry Strategies?
We next investigate further whether the high returns to carry strategies compensate
investors for aggregate risk. Previously, we showed that carry strategies are not very
sensitive to other known factors such as the market, value, momentum, and time-
series momentum. Here, we explore other factors suggested in the literature related to
macroeconomic and crash risks.


A.    Risk Exposure of Carry Strategies
The large and growing literature on the currency carry strategy considers whether carry
returns compensate investors for crash risk or business cycle risk. By studying multiple
asset classes at the same time, we provide out-of-sample evidence of existing theories,
as well as some guidance for new theories to be developed. We have found that all
carry strategies produce high Sharpe ratios and often have high kurtosis, but find mixed
results regarding skewness. Further, from Table III, we know that carry strategies across
these asset classes are not very correlated. However, the correlations in Table III are
unconditional, estimated over the full sample period, yet we know from the results
of the previous section that carry strategies contain a large and important dynamic
component. Hence, unconditional covariance estimates may miss important dynamic
common movements among the carry strategies across asset classes.
    To help identify the common risk in carry strategies, we focus on the global carry factor
in which we combine all carry strategies across all asset classes. Figure 1, which plots the
cumulative returns on the global carry factor shows that, despite its high Sharpe ratio, the
global carry strategy is far from riskless, exhibiting sizeable declines for extended periods
of time. We investigate the worst and best carry return episodes from this global carry
factor to shed light on potential common sources of risk across carry strategies.


B.    Drawdowns vs. Expansions
Specifically, we identify what we call carry “drawdowns” and “expansions.” We first
compute the maximum drawdown of the global carry strategy, which is defined as:

                                  t
                                  X                            u
                                                               X
                          Dt ≡           rs −        max             rs ,                (29)
                                                 u∈{1,...,t}
                                   s=1                         s=1


where rs denotes the excess return on the global carry factor. The drawdown dynamics
are presented in Figure 2. The three biggest carry drawdowns are: August 1972 to

                                                30
September 1975, March 1980 to June 1982, and August 2008 to February 2009. The two
largest drawdowns are also the longest lasting ones, and the third longest is from May
1997 to October 1998. These drawdowns coincide with plausibly bad aggregate states of
the global economy. For example, using a global recession indicator, which is a GDP-
weighted average of regional recession dummies (using NBER data methodology), these
periods are all during the height of global recessions, including the recent global financial
crisis, as highlighted in Figure 2.
    We next compute all drawdowns for the GCF , defined as periods over which Dt < 0
and define expansions as all other periods. During carry drawdowns, the average value of
the global recession indicator equals 0.33 versus 0.19 during carry expansions. To show
that these drawdowns are indeed shared among carry strategies in all nine asset classes,
Table VIII reports the mean and standard deviation of returns on the carry strategies in
each asset class separately over these expansion and drawdown periods. For all strategies
in all asset classes, the returns are consistently negative (positive) during carry drawdowns
(expansions). This implies that the extreme realizations, especially the negative ones, of
the global carry factor are not particular to a single asset class and that carry drawdowns
are bad periods for all carry strategies at the same time across all asset classes.
    Moreover, Table VIII also includes the performance of the long-only passive portfolio
in each asset class during expansions and drawdowns. Especially on the downside, carry
returns suffer a great deal more than passive exposures to the asset classes themselves.
Among carry drawdowns, only half of the passive portfolios in the asset classes suffer
negative returns, while all carry strategies experience sharp negative performance. The
most extreme example being equity index put options, which during these global recessions
payoff a handsome 132% per annum, but a carry strategy on those same put options would
have returned −22%. Even for the asset classes that also experience negative passive
returns at these times (e.g., equities, commodities, currencies, credit), the performance of
carry strategies in these same asset classes is even worse during these times.

B.1 .   Higher Frequency Movements within Drawdowns and Expansions

Table IX recomputes the monthly correlations of the carry strategies across all asset classes
during expansions and drawdowns separately. Consistent with the results in Table VIII
that the returns to carry seem to move together across all asset classes during drawdowns,
there is some evidence in Table IX that the correlations among carry strategies across asset
classes are stronger during these drawdown periods, particularly for the options, credit,
and currency strategies. However, the evidence is not overwhelming as many of the
correlations are close to zero and others not that different from expansions. However, the

                                             31
monthly correlations may be misleading due in part to the lower frequency comovement
of carry strategies with the business cycle and the fact that some asset classes respond
with different speeds to the business cycle.
    To investigate this, Panel A of Table X reports the mean and standard deviation
of returns for each carry strategy separately during the first half and second half of
the drawdown periods and Panel B does the same during the expansion periods. For
this analysis we only look at carry drawdown and expansion periods that last at least
four months and divide each drawdown and expansion into two halves. As Panel A of
Table X shows, equity and fixed income carry strategies do most of their damage during
the first half of drawdowns, and then begin to recover in the second half. Commodities,
currencies, and credit do equally poorly throughout both halves of the drawdowns. Option
carry strategies, however, do fine during the first half of drawdowns but do miserably
during the second half. Hence, although all of these carry strategies do poorly over
the entire drawdown period, different asset classes’ carry strategies manifest their poor
performance over different points during the drawdowns. In this case, equities and bonds
suffer immediately, but recover quickly; commodities, credit, and currencies underperform
consistently throughout; and options lag in their response to these drawdowns.
    This variation in response across asset classes is unique to drawdowns, however, as
Panel B of Table X, which examines performance of carry strategies over the first half
versus second half of expansions, does not yield a similar pattern. During expansions, we
see no differential response in terms of the signs of the carry strategy returns across
subperiods. Hence, an interesting avenue for further research is to understand why
drawdowns have this unique feature and why different asset classes respond with different
timing to the same negative global shocks.

B.2 .   Static and Dynamic Risk Exposure in Drawdowns and Expansions

Finally, since a large component of the carry trade returns across all asset classes comes
from dynamic exposure, Table XI decomposes the returns to carry during both drawdowns
and expansions into their static and dynamic components (where the static exposure
continues to be computed using the full sample). A useful comparison here are the static
and dynamic decomposition numbers from Table V which computed its statistics over
the full sample. Several interesting results emerge. First, the breakdown between static
versus dynamic carry profits during expansions matches the breakdown in Table V for
the whole sample: equities, global bonds, and options being dominated by the dynamic
component; Treasuries, commodities, and currencies being split roughly evenly between
static and dynamic profits; and credit being split between about 2/3 static and 1/3

                                           32
dynamic returns.
   For drawdowns, however, we get a different picture. Equities, for instance, which
during normal times or during expansions have most of their carry profits coming from
dynamic exposure, have only half of their negative drawdown returns coming from the
dynamic component. In other words, equity carry strategies receive all of their positive
returns from the dynamic component of carry strategies, but the negative realizations
and risk of these strategies is partly driven by static bets. This implies, for instance,
that half of the risk borne by equity carry strategies could potentially be hedged by
passive exposures. For global bond slopes and currencies we find a similar pattern, where
the dynamic component of these carry trades enjoys more of the updside returns and
contributes to less of the downside returns. However, for Treasuries and commodities
the opposite is true: the dynamic component of carry strategies in these asset classes
is exposed to more downside risk than upside. For global bond levels, credit, and the
options carry strategies there are no discernable differences in the breakdown between
static versus dynamic profits in drawdowns versus expansions.
    These different patterns of static and dynamic risk exposure during drawdowns and
expansions may help identify better ways to profit from carry trades in general and may
help identify the economic drivers of the carry premium that is present across all of these
asset classes.


V.      Conclusion: Caring about Carry
A security’s expected return can be decomposed into its “carry” and its expected price
appreciation, where carry can be measured in advance without an asset pricing model.
We find that carry predicts returns both in the cross section and time series for a host of
different asset classes that include global equities, global bonds, currencies, commodities,
US Treasuries, credit, and equity index options.
   This predictability underlies the strong returns to “carry trades” that go long
high-carry and short low-carry securities, which have been applied almost exclusively
to currencies. Decomposing carry returns into static and dynamic components, we
investigate the nature of this predictability across asset classes. We also identify times
when carry strategies across all asset classes do poorly simultaneously and show that these
episodes coincide with global recessions and liquidity crises.
   Our findings present a challenge to existing asset pricing theory. First, we show
that the concept of carry can be applied much more broadly to any asset class, not just
currencies, and that some aspects of currency carry trades that are prominent features of

                                            33
many models (e.g., negative skewness) are not present more generally across carry trades in
other asset classes. Second, carry can provide a unifying framework linking various return
predictors across asset classes that have been treated independently by the literature, thus
providing a connection between different asset classes not previously recognized. Hence,
theories seeking to explain return predictability in one asset class should be aware of
how those predictors might relate to other asset classes through carry. Third, we show
that carry is also a novel predictor of returns in these asset classes and in asset classes
not previously studied. Finally, we find that studying carry jointly across a variety of
asset classes raises the bar on carry’s performance (doubling its Sharpe ratio) as well as
identifies new common risks facing all carry strategies—which seem to coincide with global
economic downturns. Further investigating these links and how markets compensate these
risks across the asset classes we study is left for future research.




                                            34
Appendix


A      Foreign-Denominated Futures
We briefly explain how we compute the US-dollar return and carry of a futures contract
that is denominated in foreign currency. Suppose that the exchange rate is et (measured
in number of local currency per unit of foreign currency), the local interest rate is rf , the
foreign interest rate is rf ∗ , the spot price is St , and the futures price is Ft , where both St
and Ft are measured in foreign currency.
    Suppose that a U.S. investor allocates Xt dollars of capital to the position. This
capital is transferred into Xt /et in a foreign-denominated margin account. One time
period later, the investor’s foreign denominated capital is (1 + rf ∗ )Xt /et + Ft+1 − Ft so
                                                                 
that the dollar capital is et+1 (1 + rf ∗ )Xt /et + Ft+1 − Ft . Assuming that the investor
hedges the currency exposure of the margin capital and that covered interest-rate parity
holds, the dollar capital is in fact (1 + rf )Xt + et+1 (Ft+1 − Ft ). Hence, the hedged dollar
return in excess of the local risk-free rate is

                                             et+1 (Ft+1 − Ft )
                                    rt+1 =                     .                            (A.1)
                                                    Xt

For a fully-collateralized futures with Xt = et Ft , we have

                                  et+1 (Ft+1 − Ft )
                         rt+1 =
                                         et Ft
                                  (et+1 − et + et )(Ft+1 − Ft )
                                =
                                                et Ft
                                  Ft+1 − Ft et+1 − et Ft+1 − Ft
                                =              +                                            (A.2)
                                      Ft              et       Ft

We compute the futures return using this exact formula, but we note that it is very similar
to the simpler expression (Ft+1 − Ft )/Ft as this simpler version is off only by the last term
of (A.2) which is of second-order importance (as it is a product of returns).
    We compute the carry of a foreign denominated futures as the return if the spot price
stays the same such that Ft+1 = St and if the exchange rate stays the same, et+1 = et .




                                                35
Using this together with equation (A.2), we see that the carry is 19

                                                         St − Ft
                                              Ct =               .                                 (A.3)
                                                            Ft


B      Data Sources
We describe below the data sources we use to construct our return series. Table I provides
summary statistics on our data, including sample period start dates.

Equities We use equity index futures data from 13 countries: the U.S. (S&P 500),
Canada (S&P TSE 60), the UK (FTSE 100), France (CAC), Germany (DAX), Spain
(IBEX), Italy (FTSE MIB), The Netherlands (EOE AEX), Sweden (OMX), Switzerland
(SMI), Japan (Nikkei), Hong Kong (Hang Seng), and Australia (S&P ASX 200). The data
source is Bloomberg. We collect data on spot, nearest-, and second-nearest-to-expiration
contracts to calculate the carry. Bloomberg tickers are reported in the table below.

                   The table reports the Bloomberg tickers that we use for equities. First and
                   second generic futures prices can be retrieved from Bloomberg by substituting
                   1 and 2 with the ‘x’ in the futures ticker. For instance, SP1 Index and SP2
                   Index are the first and second generic futures contracts for the S&P 500.

                   Market      Spot ticker                      Futures ticker
                   US          SPX Index                        SPx Index
                   Canada      SPTSX60 Index                    PTx Index
                   UK          UKX Index                        Zx Index
                   France      CAC Index                        CFx Index
                   Germany     DAX Index                        GXx Index
                   Spain       IBEX Index                       IBx Index
                   Italy       FTSEMIB Index                    STx Index
                   Netherlands AEX Index                        EOx Index
                   Sweden      OMX Index                        QCx Index
                   Switzerland SMI Index                        SMx Index
                   Japan       NKY Index                        NKx Index
                   Hong Kong HSI Index                          HIx Index
                   Australia   AS51 Index                       XPx Index


    We calculate daily returns for the most active equity futures contract (which is the
front-month contract), rolled 3 days prior to expiration, and aggregate the daily returns
  19
    It is straightforward to compute the carry if the investor does not hedge the interest rate. In this
case, the carry is adjusted by a term rf∗ − rf , where rf∗ denotes the interest rate in the country of the
index and rf the US interest rate.




                                                        36
to monthly returns. This procedure ensures that we do not interpolate prices to compute
returns.
    We consider two additional robustness checks. First, we run all of our analyses
without the first trading day of the month to check for the impact of non-synchronous
settlement prices. Second, we omit the DAX index, which is a total return index, from
our calculations. Our results are robust to these changes.

Currencies The currency data consist of spot and one-month forward rates for 19
countries: Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, The Netherlands, Portugal
and Spain (replaced with the euro from January 1999), Australia, Canada, Denmark,
Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United
States. Our basic dataset is obtained from Barclays Bank International (BBI) prior to
1997:01 and WMR/Reuters thereafter and is similar to the data in Burnside, Eichenbaum,
Kleshchelski, and Rebelo (2011), Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011), and Menkhoff,
Sarno, Schmeling, and Schrimpf (2010). However, we verify and clean our quotes with
data obtained from HSBC, Thomson Reuters, and data from BBI and WMR/Reuters
sampled one day before and one day after the end of the month using the algorithm
described below.
    The table below summarizes the Datastream tickers for our spot and one-month
forward exchange rates, both from BBI and WMR/Reuters. In addition, the last two
columns show the Bloomberg and Global Financial Data tickers for the interbank offered
rates.
    At the start of our sample in 1983:10, there are 6 pairs available. All exchange rates
are available since 1997:01, and following the introduction of the euro there are 10 pairs
in the sample since 1999:01.
    There appear to be several data errors in the basic data set. We use the following
algorithm to remove such errors. Our results do not strongly depend on removing these
outliers. For each currency and each date in our sample, we back out the implied foreign
interest rate using the spot- and forward exchange rate and the US 1-month LIBOR. We
subsequently compare the implied foreign interest rate with the interbank offered rate
obtained from Global Financial Data and Bloomberg. If the absolute difference between
the currency-implied rate and the IBOR rate is greater than a specified threshold, which
we set at 2%, we further investigate the quotes using data from our alternative sources.




                                           37
 The table summarizes the Datastream tickers for our spot and one-month forward exchange rates, both from BBI and
 WMR/Reuters. In addition, the last two columns show the Bloomberg and Global Financial Data tickers for the interbank
 offered rates.
                   BBI-spot        BBI-frwd        WMR-spot        WMR-frwd        BB ibor                   GFD ibor
 Austria           -               -               AUSTSC$         USATS1F         VIBO1M Index              IBAUT1D
 Belgium           -               -               BELGLU$         USBEF1F         BIBOR1M Index             IBBEL1D
 France            BBFRFSP         BBFRF1F         FRENFR$         USFRF1F         PIBOFF1M Index            IBFRA1D
 Germany           BBDEMSP         BBDEM1F         DMARKE$         USDEM1F         DM0001M Index             IBDEU1D
 Ireland           -               -               IPUNTE$         USIEP1F         DIBO01M Index             IBIRL1D
 Italy             BBITLSP         BBITL1F         ITALIR$         USITL1F         RIBORM1M Index            IBITA1D
 Netherlands       BBNLGSP         BBNLG1F         GUILDE$         USNLG1F         AIBO1M Index              IBNLD1D
 Portugal          -               -               PORTES$         USPTE1F         LIS21M Index              IBPRT1D
 Spain             -               -               SPANPE$         USESP1F         MIBOR01M Index            IBESP1D
 Euro              BBEURSP         BBEUR1F         EUDOLLR         USEUR1F         EUR001M Index             IBEUR1D
 Australia         BBAUDSP         BBAUD1F         AUSTDO$         USAUD1F         AU0001M Index             IBAUS1D
 Canada            BBCADSP         BBCAD1F         CNDOLL$         USCAD1F         CD0001M Index             IBCAN1D
 Denmark           BBDKKSP         BBDKK1F         DANISH$         USDKK1F         CIBO01M Index             IBDNK1D
 Japan             BBJPYSP         BBJPY1F         JAPAYE$         USJPY1F         JY0001M Index             IBJPN1D
 New Zealand       BBNZDSP         BBNZD1F         NZDOLL$         USNZD1F         NZ0001M Index             IBNZL1D
 Norway            BBNOKSP         BBNOK1F         NORKRO$         USNOK1F         NIBOR1M Index             IBNOR1D
 Sweden            BBSEKSP         BBSEK1F         SWEKRO$         USSEK1F         STIB1M Index              IBSWE1D
 Switzerland       BBCHFSP         BBCHF1F         SWISSF$         USCHF1F         SF0001M Index             IBCHE1D
 UK                BBGBPSP         BBGBP1F         USDOLLR         USGBP1F         BP0001M Index             IBGBR1D
 US                -               -               -               -               US0001M Index             IBUSA1D


Our algorithm can be summarized as follows:

    • before (after) 1997:01, if data is available from WMR/Reuters (BBI) and the
      absolute difference of the implied rate is below the threshold, replace the default
      source BBI (WMR/Reuters) with WMR/Reuters (BBI)

          – if data is available from WMR/Reuters (BBI) and the absolute difference
            of the implied rate is also above the threshold, keep the default source BBI
            (WMR/Reuters)

    • else, if data is available from HSBC and the absolute difference of the implied rate
      is below the threshold, replace the default source with HSBC

          – if data is available from HSBC and the absolute difference of the implied rate
            is also above the threshold, keep the default source

    • else, if data is available from Thomson/Reuters and the absolute difference
      of the implied rate is below the threshold, replace the default source with
      Thomson/Reuters

          – if data is available from Thomson/Reuters and the absolute difference of the
            implied rate is also above the threshold, keep the default source

                                                         38
   If none of the other sources is available, we compare the end-of-month quotes with
quotes sampled one day before and one day after the end of the month and run the same
checks.
   In cases where the interbank offered rate has a shorter history than our currency data,
we include the default data if the currency-implied rate is within the tolerance of the
currency-implied rate from any of the sources described above.
    There are a few remaining cases, for example where the interbank offered rate is not
yet available, but the month-end quote is different from both the day immediately before
and after the end of the month. In these cases, we check whether the absolute difference
of the implied rates from these two observations is within the tolerance, and take the
observation one day before month-end if that is the case.
   The figure below for Sweden illustrates the effects of our procedure by plotting the
actual interbank offered rate (“Libor BB”) with the currency-implied rate from the
original data (“Libor implied”) and the currency-implied rate after our data cleaning
algorithm has been applied (“Libor implied NEW”). Sweden serves as an illustration
only, and the impact for other countries is similar.

                                                        SWEDEN
                     30
                                                                               Libor BB
                                                                               Libor implied
                                                                               Libor implied NEW
                     25



                     20



                     15



                     10



                      5



                      0

                      1985         1990          1995          2000         2005          2010




Libor rates for Sweden.              The figure shows the dynamics of three Libor rates: From Bloomberg (“Libor BB”),

the one implied by currency data (“Libor implied”), and the one implied by our corrected currency data (“Libor implied

NEW”).

    Some of the extreme quotes from the original source are removed (for instance, October
1993), whereas other extremes are kept (like the observations in 1992 during the banking

                                                         39
crisis).

Commodities Since there are no reliable spot prices for most commodities, we use the
nearest-, second-nearest, and third-nearest to expiration futures prices, downloaded from
Bloomberg.
   Our commodities dataset consists of 24 commodities: six in energy (brent crude oil,
gasoil, WTI crude, RBOB gasoline, heating oil, and natural gas), eight in agriculture
(cotton, coffee, cocoa, sugar, soybeans, Kansas wheat, corn, and wheat), three in livestock
(lean hogs, feeder cattle, and live cattle) and seven in metals (gold, silver, aluminum,
nickel, lead, zinc, and copper).
    Carry is calculated using nearest-, second-nearest, and third-nearest to expiration
contracts. We linearly interpolate the prices to a constant, one-month maturity. As
with equities, we only interpolate future prices to compute carry and not to compute the
returns on the actual strategies.
    Industrial metals (traded on the London Metals Exchange, LME) are different from
the other contracts, since futures contracts can have daily expiration dates up to 3 months
out. Following LME market practice, we collect cash- and 3-month (constant maturity)
futures prices and interpolate between both prices to obtain the one-month future price.
    We use the Goldman Sachs Commodity Index (GSCI) to calculate returns for all
commodities. Returns exclude the interest rate on the collateral (i.e., excess returns)
and the indices have exposure to nearby futures contracts, which are rolled to the next
contract month from the 5 th to the 9th business day of the month.
    The following table shows the tickers for the Goldman Sachs Excess Return indices,
generic futures contracts. LME spot and 3-month forward tickers are: LMAHDY and
LMAHDS03 (aluminum), LMNIDY and LMNIDS03 (nickel), LMPBDY and LMPBDS03
(lead), LMZSDY and LMZSDS03 (zinc) and LMCADY and LMCADS03 (copper).




                                            40
First-, second-, and third generic futures prices can be retrieved from
Bloomberg by substituting 1, 2 and 3 with the ‘z’ in the futures ticker. For
instance, CO1 Comdty, CO2 Comdty, and CO3 Comdty are the first-, second-,
and third-generic futures contracts for crude oil.

              GSCI ER                             Futures Ticker
Crude Oil     SPGCBRP Index                       COx Comdty
Gasoil        SPGCGOP Index                       QSx Comdty
WTI Crude     SPGCCLP Index                       CLx Comdty
Unl. Gasoline SPGCHUP Index                       XBx Comdty
Heating Oil   SPGCHOP Index                       HOx Comdty
Natural Gas   SPGCNGP Index                       NGx Comdty
Cotton        SPGCCTP Index                       CTx Comdty
Coffee        SPGCKCP Index                       KCx Comdty
Cocoa         SPGCCCP Index                       CCx Comdty
Sugar         SPGCSBP Index                       SBx Comdty
Soybeans      SPGCSOP Index                       Sx Comdty
Kansas Wheat SPGCKWP Index                        KWx Comdty
Corn          SPGCCNP Index                       Cx Comdty
Wheat         SPGCWHP Index                       Wx Comdty
Lean Hogs     SPGCLHP Index                       LHx Comdty
Feeder Cattle SPGCFCP Index                       FCx Comdty
Live Cattle   SPGCLCP Index                       LCx Comdty
Gold          SPGCGCP Index                       GCx Comdty
Silver        SPGCSIP Index                       SIx Comdty
Aluminum      SPGCIAP Index                       -
Nickel        SPGCIKP Index                       -
Lead          SPGCILP Index                       -
Zinc          SPGCIZP Index                       -
Copper        SPGCICP Index                       -




                                    41
Fixed income Bond futures are only available for a very limited number of countries
and for a relatively short sample period. We therefore create synthetic futures returns
for 10 countries: the US, Australia, Canada, Germany, the UK, Japan, New Zealand,
Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland.
   We collect constant maturity, zero coupon yields from two sources. For the period
up to and including May 2009 we use the zero coupon data available from the website of
Jonathan Wright, used initially in Wright (2011). 20 From June 2009 onwards we use zero
coupon data from Bloomberg. Each month, we calculate the price of a synthetic future on
the 10-year zero coupon bond and the price of a bond with a remaining maturity of nine
years and 11 months (by linear interpolation). For countries where (liquid) bond futures
exist (US, Australia, Canada, Germany, the UK, and Japan), the correlations between
actual futures returns and our synthetic futures returns are in excess of 0.95.
   The table below reports the Bloomberg tickers for the zero coupon yields and the
futures contracts (where available).

               First and second generic futures prices can be retrieved from Bloomberg by substituting
               1 and 2 with the ‘x’ in the futures ticker. For instance, TY1 Comdty and TY2 Comdty
               are the first and second generic futures contracts for the US 10-year bond.

                           10y ZC Ticker                   9y ZC Ticker            Futures Ticker
               US          F08210y Index                   F08209Y Index           TYx Comdty
               Australia   F12710y Index                   F12709Y Index           XMx Comdty
               Canada      F10110y Index                   F10109Y Index           CNx Comdty
               Germany     F91010y Index                   F91009Y Index           RXx Comdty
               UK          F11010y Index                   F11009Y Index           Gx Comdty
               Japan       F10510y Index                   F10509Y Index           JBx Comdty
               New Zealand F25010y Index                   F25009Y Index           -
               Norway      F26610y Index                   F26609Y Index           -
               Sweden      F25910y Index                   F25909Y Index           -
               Switzerland F25610y Index                   F25609Y Index           -



Index Options and U.S. Treasuries The data sources for index options, alongside
the screens we use, and for U.S. Treasury returns and yields are discussed in the main
text.


C        Results for Carry1-12
Reported below are results from Tables II and IV using the Carry1-12 measure, which
is a 12-month moving average of the carry of each security over the past t − 12 to t − 1
  20
       http://econ.jhu.edu/directory/jonathan-wright/.

                                                         42
months, to construct carry strategies in each asset class.

 Repeat of Table II using Carry1-12 instead of the current
 (last month’s) carry.

 Asset class         Mean            Stdev        Skewness             Kurtosis        Sharpe ratio

 Equities             5.45           10.31              0.16             3.91                0.53
 FI 10Y               3.11            6.81             -0.11             4.59                0.46
 FI 10Y−2Y            2.14            5.35             -0.27             4.66                0.40
 Treasuries           0.47            0.60              0.27             8.33                0.78
 Commodities         12.69           19.40             -0.82             5.70                0.65
 Currencies           4.25            7.71             -0.96             6.08                0.55
 Credit               0.27            0.58             -0.06            21.19                0.46
 Options calls       32.23          125.31             -1.68            11.82                0.26
 Options puts        40.48           80.50              0.49            12.00                0.50




 Repeat of Table IV using Carry1-12 instead of the current (last month’s)
 carry.

                 Equities global                   FI Level                    FI Slope                  Treasuries            Commodities

 α                0.44            0.32          0.27          0.26         0.21           0.19        0.03        0.02         1.06        0.78
                ( 2.51 )        ( 1.74   )   ( 2.42 )      ( 2.56 )     ( 2.52 )       ( 2.37 )     ( 4.10 )    ( 3.16 )    ( 3.76 )    ( 3.12 )
 Passive long     0.04            0.02         -0.02         -0.10        -0.09          -0.23        0.11        0.08        -0.04       -0.06
                ( 0.76 )        ( 0.51   )   ( -0.21 )     ( -1.18 )    ( -1.28 )      ( -3.02 )    ( 2.06 )    ( 2.29 )    ( -0.39 )   ( -0.66 )
 Value                            0.33                       -0.13                       -0.15                     0.00                    -0.26
                                ( 4.30   )                 ( -1.18 )                   ( -2.09 )                ( -0.39 )               ( -4.70 )
 Momentum                         0.10                        0.52                        0.29                     0.00                    0.37
                                ( 1.34   )                 ( 4.44 )                    ( 3.77 )                 ( -0.34 )                ( 5.64 )
 TSMOM                            0.01                        0.00                        0.03                     0.00                    -0.10
                                ( 0.33   )                 ( 0.24 )                    ( 1.88 )                 ( 0.21 )                ( -1.11 )
 R2              0.00             0.07         0.00           0.16          0.01          0.14        0.05        0.03        0.00         0.29
 IR              0.51             0.38         0.47           0.52          0.47          0.48        0.66        0.70        0.66         0.60

                           FX                         Credits                      Calls                     Puts                    GCF

 α                0.32            0.26          0.02         0.02          2.08           0.83         2.01        3.41
                ( 2.58 )        ( 1.99   )   ( 2.97 )      ( 1.75 )     ( 0.77 )       ( 0.26 )     ( 0.93 )    ( 1.51 )
 Passive long     0.16            0.20         -0.02         0.15         -0.10          -0.11        -0.05       -0.05
                ( 2.14 )        ( 2.96   )   ( -0.33 )     ( 1.98 )     ( -2.66 )      ( -2.70 )    ( -2.00 )   ( -1.99 )
 Value                            0.04                        0.01                        2.68                    -2.20
                                ( 0.30   )                 ( 0.88 )                    ( 0.71 )                 ( -1.05 )
 Momentum                         0.03                       0.00                        -1.44                    -0.47
                                ( 0.24   )                 ( -0.16 )                   ( -0.88 )                ( -0.31 )
 TSMOM                            0.00                       -0.01                        0.89                    -0.52
                                ( 0.07   )                 ( -1.48 )                   ( 1.02 )                 ( -0.82 )
 R2              0.03             0.04         0.00          0.07           0.06          0.10        0.04         0.06
 IR              0.50             0.40         0.47          0.40           0.20          0.08        0.30         0.52




                                                                       43
D      Equity Carry versus Dividend Yield
To construct the dividend yield for the US, we use the standard CRSP value-weighted
index that includes all stocks on AMEX, Nasdaq, and NYSE. We construct the dividend
yield as the sum of 12 months of dividends, divided by the current index level following
Fama and French (1988). 21 To construct a long time series of carry, we make the following
assumptions. First, we measure rtf by the 30-day T-bill rate. Second, we approximate
Dt+1 = EtQ (Dt+1 ). As most firms announce dividends one to three months in advance,
index level dividends are highly predictable one month ahead. This implies that we
measure Ct ' Dt+1 /St − rtf . The time series of the dividend yield and equity carry cover
the period January 1945 to December 2012.
   Comparing carry to the dividend yield, at least three aspects are worth mentioning.
First, the average short rate is about the same as the average dividend yield. This implies
that the average carry equals −7bp during our sample period, while the average dividend
yield equals 3.36%. Second, carry displays important seasonal variation as a result of
the payout behavior of firms that is concentrated in several months. The importance of
seasonalities declines substantially over time. Third, the variation in the interest rate
can contribute substantially to the variation in the equity carry. For instance, during
episodes of high interest rates, like for instance in the 1980s, these two series move in
opposite directions.
    The time series correlation between the dividend yield and the carry is only 0.30. This
low correlation arises for two reasons. First, we subtract (and average) the one-month
interest rate. Second, and more subtle, we average Dt+1 /Pt over 12 months. For the
dividend yield, by contrast, we sum 12 months of dividends and divide by the current
              P
price, DPt = 11 s=0 Dt−s /Pt . This implies that the carry signal smoothes both prices and
dividends, while in case of the dividend yield, only the dividends are smoothed.
    We then examine to what extent sorting on carry versus sorting on dividend yield
produces different portfolios. We collect cash returns from Bloomberg and construct the
dividend yield for the cross-section of countries we consider as described above. The
sample for which Bloomberg reports cash returns is smaller than the sample for which we
can compute the carry. To ensure comparability, we only look at contracts for which both
the carry and the dividend yield are available. The table below reports the results from
the various strategies, which includes the mean return, standard deviation, skewness, and
Sharpe ratio of the various strategies. While both carry and dividend yield strategies
   Binsbergen and Koijen (2010) show that dividend yield dynamics are very similar if instead of simply
  21

summing the monthly dividends, the dividends are invested at the 30-day T-bill rate.



                                                  44
produce positive Sharpe ratios, the correlation between the carry and the dividend yield
strategy is only 0.07 and between carry1-12 and dividend yield strategies is only 0.29. At
the bottom of the table we also report results from regressing each of the carry strategies
on the dividend yield strategy. The betas are low and the alphas remain large and
significant.

                Comparing the Equity Carry vs. the Dividend Yield. The
                top panel reports the summary statistics of three strategies using either the
                current carry, the carry1-12, or the dividend yield as the signal.



                                         Current carry      Carry1-12       Dividend yield
                Mean                              0.75           0.30                 0.46
                Stdev                             3.02           3.14                 3.17
                Skewness                          0.25          -0.35                 0.06
                SR                                0.87           0.33                 0.50

                Correlation matrix       Current carry      Carry1-12       Dividend yield
                Current carry                     1.00           0.41                 0.07
                Carry1-12                                        1.00                 0.29
                Dividend yield                                                        1.00

                                         Current carry      Carry1-12
                alpha                             8.70           2.03
                beta                              0.07           0.28
                IR                                0.83           0.19




                                                     45
References
Acharya, Viral, Lars Lochstoer, and Tarun Ramadorai, 2010, Limits to arbitrage and
  hedging: Evidence from commodity markets, Working paper.

Acharya, Viral V., and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2005, Asset pricing with liquidity risk,
  Journal of Financial Economics 77, 375–410.

Asness, Cliff, Tobias Moskowitz, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2012, Value and momentum
  everywhere, forthcoming, Journal of Finance.

Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop, 2010, Infrequent portfolio decisions: A
  solution to the forward discount puzzle, American Economic Review 100, 837–869.

Bailey, Warren, and K. C. Chan, 1993, Macroeconomic influences and the variability of
  the commodity futures basis, Journal of Finance 48, 555–573.

Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the long-run: A potential resolution of
  asset pricing puzzles, Journal of Finance 59, 1481–1509.

Barr, David G., and Richard Priestley, 2004, Expected returns, risk and the integration
  of international bond markets, Journal of International Money and Finance 23, 71–97.

Bessembinder, Hendrik, 1992, Msystematic risk, hedging pressure, and risk premiums in
  futures markets, Review of Financial Studies 4, 637–667.

Binsbergen, Jules H. van, and Ralph S.J. Koijen, 2010, Predictive regressions: A present-
  value approach, Journal of Finance 65, 1439–1471.

Binsbergen, Jules van, Michael W. Brandt, and Ralph S.J. Koijen, 2012, On the timing
  and pricing of dividends, American Economic Review 102(4), 1596–1618.

Binsbergen, Jules van, Wouter Hueskes, Ralph S.J. Koijen, and Evert B. Vrugt, 2013,
  Equity yields, Forthcoming.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., Stefan Nagel, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2008, Carry Trades and
  Currency Crashes, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 23, 313–348.

Brunnermeier, Markus .K., and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2009, Market Liquidity and Funding
  Liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 22, 2201–2238.




                                           46
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, Isaac Kleshchelski, and Sergio Rebelo, 2011, Do
  peso problems explain the returns to the carry trade?, Review of Financial Studies 24,
  853–891.

Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A consumption-
  based explanation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy
  107, 205–251.

Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, 1988, The dividend-price ratio and expectations
  of future dividends and discount factors, Review of Financial Studies 1, 195–227.

       , 1991, Yield spreads and interest rates: A bird’s eye view, Review of Economic
  Studies 58, 495–514.

Casassus, J., and P. Collin-Dufresne, 2005, Stochastic convenience yield implied from
  commodity futures and interest rates, The Journal of Finance 60, 2283–2331.

Chan, Louis K. C., Yasushi Hamao, and Josef Lakonishok, 1991, Fundamentals and stock
  returns in japan, Journal of Finance 46, 1739–1764.

Cochrane, John H., 2011, Discount rates, The Journal of Finance 66, 1047–1108.

Engel, Charles, 1996, The forward discount anomaly and the risk permium: A survey of
  recent evidence, Journal of Empirical Finance 3, 123–192.

Erb, C.B., and C.R. Harvey, 2006, The strategic and tactical value of commodity futures,
  Financial Analysts Journal pp. 69–97.

Fama, Eugene F., 1984, Forward and spot exchange rates, Journal of Monetary Economics
  14, 319–338.

        , and Robert H. Bliss, 1987, The information in long-maturity forward rates,
  American Economic Review 77, 680–692.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1987, Commodity futures prices: Some
  evidence on forecast power, premiums, and the theory of storage, Journal of Business
  60, 55–73.

       , 1988, Dividend yields and expected stock returns, Journal of Financial
  Economics 22, 3–27.

       , 1998, Value versus growth: The international evidence, Journal of Finance 53,
  1975–1999.

                                           47
       , 2011, Size, value, and momentum in international stock returns, Working Paper.

Farhi, Emmanuel, and Xavier Gabaix, 2008, Rare disasters and exchange rates, working
  paper.

Frazzini, Andrea, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2011, Embedded leverage, AQR Capital
  Management and New York University.

Froot, Kenneth A., and Richard H. Thaler, 1990, Anomalies: Foreign exchange, Journal
  of Economic Perspectives 4, 179–192.

Gabaix, Xavier, 2009, Variable rare disasters: An exactly solved framework for ten puzzles
  in macro-finance, Working paper, NYU.

Gârleanu, Nicolae, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2011, Margin-Based Asset Pricing and
  Deviations from the Law of One Price, Review of Financial Studies 24, 1980–2022.

Gorton, Gary, Fumio Hayashi, and Geert Rouwenhorst, 2007, The fundamentals of
  commodity futures returns, Working paper.

Griffin, John M., 2002, Are the fama and french factors global or country specific?, Review
  of Financial Studies 15, 783–803.

        , Xiuqing Ji, and J. Spencer Martin, 2003, Momentum investing and business
  cycle risk: Evidence from pole to pole, Journal of Finance 58, 2515–2547.

Hansen, Lars Peter, and Ravi Jagannathan, 1997, Assessing specific errors in stochastic
  discount factor models, Journal of Finance 52, 557–590.

Hong, Harrison, and Mothiro Yogo, 2010, What does futures market interest tell us about
  the macroeconomy and asset prices?, Working paper.

Hou, Kewei, G. Andrew Karolyi, and Bong Chan Kho, 2010, What factors drive global
  stock returns?, Working Paper.

Ilmanen, Antti, 1995, Time-varying expected returns in international bond markets,
   Journal of Finance 50, 481–506.

       , 2011, Expected Returns (John Wiley: United Kingdom).

Koijen, Ralph S.J., and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2011, Predictability of stock returns and
  cash flows, Annual Review of Financial Economics 3, 467–491.


                                            48
Lewis, K.K., 1995, Puzzles in international financial markets, in Gene M. Grossman, and
  Kenneth Rogoff, ed.: Handbook of International Economics vol. 3 (North Holland:
  Amsterdam) Chap. 37.

Lucas, Robert, 1978, Asset prices in an exchange economy, Econometrica 46, 1429–1446.

Lustig, Hanno, Nicholas Roussanov, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2010, Countercyclical
  currency risk premia, Working Paper.

Lustig, Hanno, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2007, The cross-section of foreign currency risk
  premia and us consumption growth risk, American Economic Review 97, 89–117.

Meese, R.A., and K. Rogoff, 1983, Empirical exchange rate models of the seventies:: Do
 they fit out of sample?, Journal of international economics 14, 3–24.

Moskowitz, Tobias J., Yao Hua Ooi, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2012, Time series
 momentum, Journal of Financial Economics 104, 228–250.

Rouwenhorst, K. Geert, 1998, International momentum strategies, Journal of Finance 53,
  267–284.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, The limits of arbitrage, Journal of Finance
  52, 35–55.

Szymanowska, Marta, Frans de Roon, Theo E. Nijman, and Rob van den Goorbergh, 2011,
  An anatomy of commodity futures risk premia, Working Paper: Erasmus University.

Tang, Ke, and Wei Xiong, 2010, Index investment and financialization of commodities,
  Working paper.

Wachter, Jessica A., 2010, Can time-varying risk of rare disasters explain aggregate stock
 market volatility?, Working Paper.

Wright, Jonathan H., 2011, Term premia and inflation uncertainty: Empirical evidence
  from an international panel dataset, American Economic Review 101, 1514–1534.

Yang, Fan, 2011, Investment shocks and the commodity basis spread, Working Paper:
  University of Minnesota.




                                           49
Tables

                                          Table I: Summary Statistics
This table lists all the instruments that we use in our analysis, and reports summary statistics on the beginning date for which
the returns and carry are available for each instrument, as well as the annualized mean and standard deviation of the return
and the carry for each instrument. Panel A contains the instruments for equities, commodities, currencies, and fixed income,
and Panel B contains fixed income slope (10-year − 2-year bonds), US Treasuries, US credit portfolios, and US equity index
options, separated by calls and puts and averaged across delta groups.



                          Panel A: Equities, Commodities, Currencies, and Fixed Income


Instrument         Begin         Return              Carry               Instrument           Begin          Return              Carry
                   sample      mean stdev         mean stdev                                  sample       mean stdev         mean stdev

Equities                                                                 Commodities
US                 Mar-88        6.0      14.9      -1.4        0.7      Crude Oil            Feb-99        21.1      32.0       0.8      5.4
SPTSX60            Oct-99        5.7      15.8      -0.7        0.8      Gasoil               Feb-99        20.7      32.9       2.7      5.3
UK                 Mar-88        3.6      15.1      -1.6        1.4      WTI Crude            Feb-87        11.6      33.5       1.5      7.0
France             Jan-89        3.4      19.6      -0.5        1.9      Unl. Gasoline        Nov-05        12.6      36.2      -2.1      9.8
Germany            Dec-90        6.3      21.5      -3.4        1.1      Heating Oil          Aug-86        12.2      32.8      -0.3      8.3
Spain              Aug-92        8.2      22.0       1.7        2.1      Natural Gas          Feb-94       -16.6      53.6     -26.6     21.3
Italy              Apr-04       -1.4      21.1       1.4        1.5      Cotton               Feb-80         0.4      25.2      -3.8      7.2
Netherlands        Feb-89        5.6      19.8       0.2        1.5      Coffee               Feb-81         2.5      37.7      -4.8      5.0
Sweden             Mar-05        8.5      19.0       1.3        2.2      Cocoa                Feb-84        -3.9      29.2      -6.5      3.4
Switzerland        Nov-91        3.3      16.0       0.2        1.2      Sugar                Feb-80         0.9      39.4      -2.8      6.1
Japan              Oct-88       -3.5      22.1      -0.4        1.6      Soybeans             Feb-80         2.8      23.7      -2.4      5.6
Hong Kong          May-92       10.8      27.8       1.4        2.2      Kansas Wheat         Feb-99         1.1      29.5      -8.7      3.2
Australia          Jun-00        3.7      13.2       0.9        1.0      Corn                 Feb-80        -3.3      25.8     -10.2      5.3
                                                                         Wheat                Feb-80        -5.0      25.2      -8.5      5.7
Currencies                                                               Lean Hogs            Jun-86        -3.2      24.5     -14.3     19.8
Australia          Jan-85         4.7     12.1       3.2        0.8      Feeder Cattle        Feb-02         2.2      15.5      -1.6      4.6
Austria            Feb-97        -2.6      8.7      -2.1        0.0      Live Cattle          Feb-80         2.2      14.1      -0.2      6.1
Belgium            Feb-97        -2.7      8.7      -2.1        0.1      Gold                 Feb-80        -0.8      17.6      -5.3      1.1
Canada             Jan-85         2.1      7.2       0.8        0.5      Silver               Feb-80        -0.8      31.3      -6.1      1.8
Denmark            Jan-85         3.9     11.1       0.9        0.9      Aluminum             Feb-91        -2.3      19.3      -5.0      1.5
Euro               Feb-99         1.2     10.8      -0.3        0.4      Nickel               Mar-93        11.6      35.6       0.4      2.5
France             Nov-83         4.6     11.2       1.6        0.9      Lead                 Mar-95        10.4      29.7      -0.7      2.7
Germany            Nov-83         2.8     11.7      -0.9        0.9      Zinc                 Mar-91         0.9      25.8      -4.7      2.0
Ireland            Feb-97        -2.5      8.9       0.5        0.2      Copper               May-86        15.3      28.1       4.3      3.4
Italy              Apr-84         5.1     11.1       4.3        0.8
Japan              Nov-83         1.7     11.4      -2.7        0.7      Fixed income
Netherlands        Nov-83         3.0     11.6      -0.7        0.9      Australia            Mar-87         5.6      11.2         0.8    0.6
New Zealand        Jan-85         7.0     12.6       4.3        1.2      Canada               Jun-90         6.6       8.8         2.3    0.5
Norway             Jan-85         4.3     11.1       2.3        0.9      Germany              Nov-83         4.7       7.5         2.1    0.5
Portugal           Feb-97        -2.3      8.4      -0.6        0.2      UK                   Nov-83         3.9      10.2         0.1    0.8
Spain              Feb-97        -1.5      8.5      -0.7        0.2      Japan                Feb-85         4.5       7.4         2.0    0.4
Sweden             Jan-85         3.3     11.5       1.7        0.9      New Zealand          Jul-03         3.3       8.6         0.7    0.8
Switzerland        Nov-83         1.9     12.1      -1.9        0.7      Norway               Feb-98         3.9       9.0         0.9    0.5
UK                 Nov-83         2.8     10.4       2.0        0.6      Sweden               Jan-93         6.1       9.3         1.7    0.4
US                 Nov-83         0.0      0.0       0.0        0.0      Switzerland          Feb-88         3.0       6.0         1.5    0.6
                                                                         US                   Nov-83         6.3      10.8         2.5    0.6


                                                           50
 Panel B: Fixed Income slope, US Treasuries, Credit, and Equity Index Options

Instrument                                   Begin      Return            Carry
                                             sample   mean     stdev   mean     stdev

Fixed income, 10y-2y slope
Australia                                    Mar-87      4.5     9.5      0.6     0.3
Canada                                       Jun-90      4.7     7.2      1.4     0.3
Germany                                      Nov-83      3.6     6.5      1.4     0.4
UK                                           Nov-83      3.4     8.5      0.3     0.5
Japan                                        Feb-85      3.8     6.4      1.7     0.3
New Zealand                                  Jul-03      3.1     7.8      0.9     0.4
Norway                                       Feb-98      3.5     6.9      1.0     0.3
Sweden                                       Jan-93      4.7     8.0      1.1     0.2
Switzerland                                  Feb-88      2.6     5.1      1.4     0.3
US                                           Nov-83      4.9     9.2      1.7     0.4
US Treasuries
10Y                                          Aug-71      1.2     1.6      1.2     0.4
7Y                                           Aug-71      0.8     1.5      0.7     0.2
5Y                                           Aug-71      0.7     1.4      0.6     0.2
3Y                                           Aug-71      0.6     1.2      0.5     0.1
2Y                                           Aug-71      0.5     1.1      0.4     0.1
1Y                                           Aug-71      0.4     0.9      0.3     0.1
Credits, US
A, Intermediate                              Feb-73      0.4     1.3      0.4     0.1
AA, Intermediate                             Feb-73      0.4     1.2      0.3     0.1
AAA, Intermediate                            Feb-73      0.4     1.3      0.3     0.1
BAA, Intermediate                            Feb-73      0.6     1.3      0.5     0.1
A, Long                                      Feb-73      0.3     1.0      0.3     0.1
AA, Long                                     Feb-73      0.3     1.0      0.2     0.1
AAA, Long                                    Feb-73      0.2     1.0      0.2     0.1
BAA, Long                                    Feb-73      0.4     1.1      0.3     0.1
Call options (average across delta groups)
DJ Industrial Average                        Oct-97   -138.5   332.7   -689.4    56.9
S&P Midcap 400                               Mar-97    -52.8   370.0   -774.0    57.0
Mini-NDX                                     Sep-00     11.3   391.3   -708.3    53.3
NASDAQ 100                                   Jan-96     51.4   422.2   -737.3    57.7
S&P 100                                      Jan-96   -138.2   326.2   -716.3    59.1
Russell 2000                                 Jan-96    -84.4   367.5   -701.2    56.7
S&P Smallcap 600                             May-05   -446.1   155.2   -746.2    63.6
S&P 500                                      Jan-96   -152.8   302.1   -713.8    58.2
AMEX Major Market                            Jan-96    119.3   452.1   -680.6    46.2
Put options (average across delta groups)
DJ Industrial Average                        Oct-97   -320.6   305.4   -593.0    45.7
S&P Midcap 400                               Jan-96   -828.7   117.9   -518.8    64.1
Mini-NDX                                     Aug-00   -218.8   362.2   -585.0    47.1
NASDAQ 100                                   Jan-96   -284.7   338.5   -592.1    50.7
S&P 100                                      Jan-96   -309.3   315.7   -598.8    47.4
Russell 2000                                 Feb-96   -283.4   318.6   -595.5    48.9
S&P Smallcap 600                             Feb-04   -807.9    59.5   -537.6    53.3
S&P 500                                      Jan-96   -323.1   300.9   -580.6    47.2
AMEX Major Market                            Jan-96   -572.2   158.8   -521.5    47.6



                                                 51
                            Table II: The Returns to Global Carry Strategies
Panel A reports for each asset class, the mean, standard deviation, skewness, kurtosis, and Sharpe ratio of the
long/short carry trades as well as passive equal-weighted (EW) exposures in each asset class. These statistics are also
reported for a diversified portfolio of all carry trades across all asset classes, which we call the “global carry factor,”
where each asset class is weighted by the inverse of its full sample volatility (standard deviation of returns) estimate.
An equal-weighted passive exposure to all asset classes is computed similarly by equal-weighting all securities within
an asset class and then weighting each asset class by the inverse of its volatility in the “all asset classes” row. Panel
B reports results for carry trades conducted at a much coarser level by first grouping securities by region or broader
asset class and then generating a carry trade. For equities, fixed income, and currencies we group all index futures
into one of five regions: North America, UK, continental Europe, Asia, and New Zealand/Australia and compute the
equal-weighted average carry and equal-weighted average returns of these five regions. For commodities we group
instruments into three categories: agriculture/livestock, metals, and energy. We then create carry trade portfolios
using only these regional/group portfolios. Credit, US Treasuries, and options are excluded from Panel B.



                     Panel A: Carry Trades by security within an Asset Class

Asset class                                      Strategy      Mean      Stdev     Skewness       Kurtosis      Sharpe ratio

Global equities                                   Carry        9.14      10.42        0.22           4.74            0.88
                                                   EW          5.00      15.72        -0.63          3.91            0.32

Fixed income 10Y global                           Carry        3.85       7.45        -0.43          6.66            0.52
                                                   EW          5.04       6.85        -0.11          3.70            0.74

Fixed income 10Y−2Y global                        Carry         3.77      5.72        -0.22          5.49            0.66
                                                   EW           4.04      5.73        -0.05          3.67            0.71

US Treasuries                                     Carry         0.46      0.67        0.47          10.46            0.68
                                                   EW           0.69      1.22        0.58          12.38            0.57

Commodities                                       Carry        11.22     18.78        -0.40          4.55            0.60
                                                   EW           1.05     13.45        -0.71          6.32            0.08

Currencies                                        Carry         5.29      7.80        -0.68          4.46            0.68
                                                   EW           2.88      8.10        -0.16          3.44            0.36

Credit                                            Carry         0.24      0.52        1.32          18.19            0.47
                                                   EW           0.37      1.09        -0.03          7.09            0.34

Options calls                                     Carry           64      172         -2.82         14.49            0.37
                                                   EW             -73     313          1.15          3.88            -0.23

Options puts                                      Carry        179        99          -1.75         10.12            1.80
                                                   EW          -299       296          1.94          7.11            -1.01

All asset classes (global carry factor)           Carry        6.75       6.12        -0.02          5.24            1.10
                                                   EW          3.46       7.34        -0.38          7.94            0.47




                                                             52
       Panel B: Carry Trades by Region/Group within an Asset Class

Asset Class                  Strategy     Mean      Stdev     Skewness        Kurtosis   Sharpe ratio

Global equities                Carry       5.93     10.93        0.45           4.29          0.54
                                EW         4.73     14.68        -0.65          3.93          0.32

Fixed income 10Y               Carry       3.74      8.51        -0.37          5.21          0.44
                                EW         5.10      6.92        -0.07          3.69          0.74

Fixed income 10Y−2Y            Carry       4.05      6.89        0.13           4.35          0.59
                                EW         4.12      5.80        -0.02          3.64          0.71

Commodities                    Carry       14.97    31.00        -0.04          4.93          0.48
                                EW          1.37    16.15        -0.56          5.86          0.09

Currencies                     Carry       4.76     10.73        -1.00          5.31          0.44
                                EW         2.68      7.00        -0.05          3.34          0.38




                          Table III: Correlation of Global Carry Strategies
Panel A reports the monthly return correlations between carry strategies for each asset class where carry trades are
performed using individual securities within each asset class. Panel B reports monthly correlations for carry trades
across asset classes performed using the regional/group level portfolios.



   Panel A: Correlations of Carry Trade Returns by security within an Asset Class

                EQ      FI 10Y      FI 10Y−2Y        Treasuries     COMM          FX     Credit      Calls      Puts
EQ              1.00     0.17           0.13            0.07         -0.02        0.05    0.06       0.11       -0.09
FI 10Y                   1.00           0.66            0.09          0.05        0.15   -0.02       -0.07       0.06
FI 10Y−2Y                               1.00            0.11          0.08        0.14   -0.08        0.00       0.09
Treasuries                                              1.00         0.12        -0.05    0.12       0.08       -0.06
COMM                                                                  1.00        0.02    0.04       -0.15       0.08
FX                                                                                1.00    0.21       -0.14       0.11
Credit                                                                                    1.00       -0.04       0.09
Calls                                                                                                 1.00       0.15
Puts                                                                                                             1.00

Panel B: Correlation of Carry Trade Returns by Region/Group within an Asset Class

                EQ      FI 10Y      FI 10Y−2Y         COMM             FX
EQ              1.00     0.16           0.10           -0.02          0.06
FI 10Y                   1.00           0.64           -0.01          0.04
FI 10Y−2Y                               1.00            0.03           0.13
COMM                                                    1.00          -0.02
FX                                                                     1.00



                                                         53
                             Table IV: Carry Trade Exposures to Other Factors
The table reports regression results for each carry portfolio’s returns in each asset class on a set of other portfolio returns or
factors that have been shown to explain the cross-section of asset returns: the passive long portfolio returns (equal-weighted
average of all securities) in each asset class, the value and momentum asset class-specific factors of Asness, Moskowitz, and
Pedersen (2012), and the time-series momentum (TSMOM) factor of Moskowitz, Ooi, and Pedersen (2012), where these latter
factors are computed for each asset class separately for equities, fixed income, commodities, and currencies. For fixed income
slope and Treasuries, we use the fixed income factors and for the credit and options strategies we use the global-across-all-
asset-class diversified value and momentum “everywhere” factors of Asness, Moskowitz, and Pedersen (2012) (which includes
individual equity strategies, too) and the globally diversified across all asset classes TSMOM factor of Moskowitz, Ooi, and
Pedersen (2012). Panel A reports both the intercepts or alphas (in percent) from these regressions as well as the betas on the
various factors for the carry strategies that on individual securities within each asset class. Panel B reports the same for the
regional/group level portfolios within each asset class. The last two columns of Panel A report regression results for the global
carry factor, GCF , on the all-asset-class market, value, momentum, and TSMOM factors. The last two rows report the R2
from the regression and the information ratio, IR, which is the alpha divided by the residual volatility from the regression.
Panel B reports results of the same regressions for the regional/group carry strategies. All t-statistics are in parentheses.


                                                Panel A: by security within an Asset Class

                  Equities global                     FI Level                    FI Slope                 Treasuries            Commodities

α                  0.79             0.77           0.35          0.33         0.34           0.29       0.03        0.02        0.93         0.64
                ( 4.51 )         ( 4.51 )       ( 3.06 )      ( 3.08 )     ( 4.00 )       ( 3.63 )    ( 3.38 )    ( 2.74 )    ( 3.43 )    ( 2.57 )
Passive long      -0.06            -0.06          -0.07         -0.18        -0.07          -0.23       0.16        0.12        0.01        -0.02
                ( -1.10 )        ( -1.16 )      ( -0.94 )     ( -2.10 )    ( -0.91 )      ( -3.03 )   ( 2.57 )    ( 3.51 )    ( 0.12 )    ( -0.31 )
Value                               0.17                         0.07                        0.07                    0.00                    -0.21
                                 ( 1.84 )                     ( 0.51 )                    ( 0.64 )                ( -0.67 )               ( -2.96 )
Momentum                            0.06                         0.56                        0.43                   0.00                     0.29
                                 ( 0.74 )                     ( 4.26 )                    ( 4.37 )                ( 0.04 )                 ( 3.81 )
TSMOM                              -0.04                         0.03                        0.04                   0.00                     -0.04
                                 ( -1.69 )                    ( 1.82 )                    ( 3.12 )                ( 0.80 )                ( -0.45 )
R2                0.01              0.03          0.00           0.16          0.00          0.20       0.08        0.07       0.00          0.20
IR                0.91              0.90          0.57           0.61          0.71          0.70       0.54        0.64       0.60          0.47

                            FX                           Credits                      Calls                    Puts                   GCF

α                 0.40             0.30           0.02          0.02          3.21           6.93       13.02       12.55       0.53        0.44
                ( 3.31 )         ( 2.31   )     ( 2.85 )      ( 1.70 )     ( 1.07 )       ( 2.15 )    ( 4.74 )    ( 4.55 )    ( 6.52 )    ( 5.51 )
Passive long      0.17             0.22           0.02          0.14         -0.34          -0.35       -0.08       -0.09       0.10        0.14
                ( 2.47 )         ( 3.46   )     ( 0.50 )      ( 2.31 )     ( -5.90 )      ( -6.07 )   ( -1.85 )   ( -2.10 )   ( 1.34 )    ( 1.78 )
Value                              0.11                         0.01                        -5.96                     2.82                   0.08
                                 ( 1.08   )                   ( 0.81 )                    ( -2.14 )                ( 0.98 )               ( 1.00 )
Momentum                           0.03                         0.00                        -4.32                    2.14                    0.10
                                 ( 0.31   )                   ( -0.21 )                   ( -2.54 )                ( 1.01 )               ( 1.45 )
TSMOM                              0.01                         0.00                        -0.92                    -0.77                  -0.01
                                 ( 0.25   )                   ( -1.42 )                   ( -1.00 )               ( -1.07 )               ( -0.22 )
R2                0.03             0.05           0.00          0.07           0.39          0.43       0.05         0.07      0.02         0.04
IR                0.63             0.47           0.45          0.39           0.29          0.64       1.61         1.56      1.05         1.24

                                              Panel B: by region/group within an Asset Class

                  Equities global                     FI Level                    FI Slope               Commodities                     FX

α                  0.51             0.50           0.36          0.38         0.39           0.34       1.24        0.77        0.33        0.25
                ( 2.73 )         ( 2.51 )       ( 2.70 )      ( 2.76 )     ( 3.63 )       ( 3.17 )    ( 2.76 )    ( 1.74 )    ( 1.96 )    ( 1.40   )
Passive long      -0.03            -0.03          -0.12         -0.05        -0.15          -0.12       0.11        0.01        0.31        0.37
                ( -0.61 )        ( -0.57 )      ( -1.43 )     ( -0.64 )    ( -1.76 )      ( -1.35 )   ( 0.71 )    ( 0.08 )    ( 2.68 )    ( 3.14   )
Value                               0.10                         0.16                        0.14                    0.12                   0.10
                                 ( 1.05 )                     ( 1.36 )                    ( 1.56 )                ( 0.88 )                ( 0.63   )
Momentum                            0.06                         0.14                       -0.03                    0.62                   0.04
                                 ( 0.67 )                     ( 1.09 )                    ( -0.30 )               ( 3.62 )                ( 0.28   )
TSMOM                              -0.03                        -0.02                        0.01                   -0.03                   0.00
                                 ( -1.18 )                    ( -1.49 )                   ( 0.70 )                ( -0.17 )               ( 0.02   )
R2                0.00              0.01          0.01           0.02          0.02          0.02       0.00        0.13       0.04         0.05
IR                0.56              0.54          0.51           0.56          0.68          0.61       0.48        0.32       0.37         0.29




                                                                          54
   Table V: Decomposing Carry Trade Returns into Static and Dynamic Components.
The table reports the results of the static and dynamic decomposition according to equation (27).



Individual securities                          Static                   Dynamic                     % Dynamic

Equities global                                 -0.1%                     9.3%                        101%
Fixed income - 10Y global                       0.6%                      3.3%                        86%
Fixed income - 10Y−2Y global                     0.1%                      3.7%                        99%
US Treasuries                                    0.3%                      0.2%                        42%
Commodities                                      4.1%                      7.1%                        64%
Currencies                                       2.2%                      3.1%                        58%
Credit                                           0.2%                      0.1%                        30%
Options calls                                   -7.2%                     70.8%                       111%
Options puts                                    -0.4%                    179.3%                       100%

Regions and groups                             Static                   Dynamic                     % Dynamic

Equities global                                 -0.6%                     6.6%                        111%
Fixed income - 10Y global                       0.5%                      3.3%                        87%
Fixed income - 10Y−2Y global                     0.2%                      3.9%                        96%
Commodities                                     -0.4%                     15.4%                       103%
Currencies                                       2.3%                      2.4%                        51%




                                                          55
                                                               Table VI: How Does Carry Predict Returns?
     The table reports the results from the panel regressions of equation (28) for each asset class with and without asset/instrument and time fixed effects, repeated here:

                                                                                i
                                                                               rt+1 = ai + bt + cCti + εit+1 ,

     where ai is an asset-specific intercept (or fixed effect), bt are time fixed effects, Cti is the carry on asset i at time t, and c is the coefficient of interest that measures how well
     carry predicts returns. Without asset and time fixed effects, c represents the total predictability of returns from carry from both its passive and dynamic components. Including
     time fixed effects removes the time-series predictable return component coming from general exposure to assets at a given point in time. Similarly, including asset-specific fixed
     effects removes the predictable return component of carry coming from passive exposure to assets with different unconditional average returns. By including both asset and
     time fixed effects, the slope coefficient c in equation (28) represents the predictability of returns to carry coming purely from variation in carry. Coefficient estimates, c and
     their associated t-statistics from the regressions are reported below.



     Strategy               Contract FE        Time FE        Coefficient, c     t-statistic           Strategy         Contract FE        Time FE       Coefficient, c        t-statistic

     Equities global               X                X              1.14             4.15              Currencies               X               X               1.09               2.69
                                   X                               1.27             2.87                                       X                               1.60               2.69
                                                    X              1.08             4.00                                                       X               0.82               3.00
                                                                   1.21             2.85                                                                       1.28               3.23




56
     FI, 10Y global                X                X              1.44             3.08                 Credit                X               X               1.46               2.01
                                   X                               1.56             3.09                                       X                               2.19               2.82
                                                    X              1.19             2.97                                                       X               1.20               2.57
                                                                   1.47             3.24                                                                       2.07               2.97

     FI, 10-2Y global              X                X              2.51             3.72            Options, calls             X               X              0.16                1.45
                                   X                               2.38             2.94                                       X                              -0.04               -0.20
                                                    X              1.79             3.47                                                       X               0.15                1.35
                                                                   2.08             3.00                                                                      -0.05               -0.25

     US Treasuries                 X                X              0.45             2.65            Options, puts              X               X               0.54               7.12
                                   X                               0.60             1.68                                       X                               0.78               3.35
                                                    X              0.59             4.27                                                       X               0.54               7.09
                                                                   0.64             2.14                                                                       0.77               3.38

     Commodities                   X                X              0.01             0.13
                                   X                               0.01             0.13
                                                    X              0.07             0.87
                                                                   0.06             0.79
                                                                     Table VII: Carry Timing Strategies
     The table reports results for pure timing strategies on each asset using carry and ignoring any cross-sectional information from carry. Specifically, for every
     security we long if the carry is positive and short if it is negative. We do this for every security within an asset class and then take the equal-weighted
     average of these timing strategy returns based on carry across all securities within an asset class. Panel A reports the results for each asset class as well as
     for the regional/group level portfolios. Panel B repeats the timing exercise, but where we go long (short) a security if its carry is above (below) its rolling
     sample mean over the last five years.



                                         Panel A: Timing Relative to Zero                              Panel B: Timing Relative to Rolling Mean
     Individual securities       mean      stdev skewness kurtosis Sharpe ratio                        mean   stdev skewness kurtosis Sharpe ratio

     Equities                     7.40      18.55        0.39          4.49           0.40             12.15      16.91         0.10         4.97            0.72

     FI global, 10Y               7.09      10.93        -0.16         4.05           0.65              6.82       9.89        -0.11         4.56            0.69

     FI global, 10Y−2Y            6.90       9.62        -0.15         4.29           0.72              4.97       8.63        -0.13         5.00            0.58

     Treasuries                   1.36       2.28        -0.48        14.51           0.60              0.59       1.93        -1.26        22.34            0.31




57
     Commodities                  8.28      20.78        0.13          5.56           0.40             12.20      16.24        -0.34         3.57            0.75

     Currencies                   7.86      10.08        -0.72         5.63           0.78              5.04       9.50        -0.50         4.35            0.53

     Credit                       1.27       2.00        -0.24         8.00           0.64              1.15       1.95        -0.30         8.69            0.59

     Options calls              146.45     626.92        -1.15         3.88           0.23             -35.66     264.00       -2.12        13.35           -0.14

     Options puts               597.76     592.72        -1.94         7.11           1.01             233.12     244.04        2.61        22.49            0.96

     Regions/groups              mean       stdev     skewness      kurtosis     Sharpe ratio          mean       stdev      skewness      kurtosis    Sharpe ratio

     Equities                     4.81      21.53        0.65          5.90           0.22             10.12      20.69        -0.11         4.00            0.49

     FI global, 10Y               6.78      11.38        -0.10         3.72           0.60              7.67      10.84        -0.02         4.08            0.71

     FI global, 10Y−2Y            7.21       9.70        -0.14         4.23           0.74              5.51       9.21        -0.07         4.63            0.60

     Commodities                  7.47      31.22        0.45          6.36           0.24             14.02      28.53         0.60         7.28            0.49

     Currencies                   8.26      10.48        -0.68         4.72           0.79              4.88       9.28        -0.29         3.90            0.53
Table VIII: The Returns to Carry Strategies Across Asset Classes During Carry Drawdowns
and Expansions.
 The table reports the annualized mean and standard deviation of returns to carry strategies and to the equal-weighted
 index of all securities within each asset class during carry “expansions” and “drawdowns”, where carry “drawdowns”
 are defined as periods where the cumulative return to carry strategies is negative, defined as follows

                                              t
                                              X                          u
                                                                         X
                                      Dt ≡          rs −      max              rs ,
                                                           u∈{1,...,t}
                                              s=1                        s=1

 where rs denotes the return on the global carry factor for all periods over which Dt < 0. Carry “expansions” are
 defined as all other periods.



                                              Carry expansions                            Carry drawdowns

 Asset class              Strategy          Mean               Stdev                  Mean                Stdev

 Equities                   Carry           15.03              9.71                    -6.15              10.95
                             EW              8.31              13.73                   -3.62              19.87

 FI global, 10Y             Carry           10.84                6.19                 -13.90               7.93
                             EW              3.75                6.53                  8.33                7.55

 FI global, 10Y−2Y          Carry            8.10                5.10                  -7.25               5.98
                             EW              2.94                5.45                   6.85               6.34

 Treasuries                 Carry            0.97                0.64                  -0.57               0.65
                             EW              0.98                1.14                   0.10               1.34

 Commodities                Carry           21.49              17.33                  -13.23              20.24
                             EW              4.54              11.73                   -7.24              16.68

 Currencies                 Carry           10.06                7.29                  -6.81               8.00
                             EW              5.17                7.68                  -2.95               8.89

 Credit                     Carry            0.60                0.52                  -0.50               0.45
                             EW              0.84                1.03                  -0.61               1.15

 Options calls              Carry            152                 138                   -161                225
                             EW              195                 272                   -237                389

 Options puts               Carry            258                 77                     -22                124
                             EW              364                 238                    132                409




                                                            58
       Table IX: Correlation of Carry Strategies During Expansions and Drawdowns
Panel A reports the monthly return correlations between carry strategies for each asset class during carry expansions
and Panel B reports monthly correlations for carry returns during carry drawdowns. Bold indicates significantly
different correlation estimates between expansions and drawdowns.



            Panel A: Correlations of Carry Trade Returns during expansions

                 EQ      FI 10Y     FI 10Y−2Y        Treasuries     COMM          FX      Credit     Calls     Puts
EQ               1.00     0.10          0.03            0.03         -0.08       -0.03     0.02       0.02     -0.07
FI 10Y                    1.00          0.60            0.04         -0.03        0.06    -0.14      -0.11      0.02
FI 10Y−2Y                               1.00            0.09          0.00        0.08    -0.19      -0.10     -0.01
Treasuries                                              1.00         0.10        -0.08     0.04       0.00      0.02
COMM                                                                  1.00       -0.05     0.00      -0.19     -0.02
FX                                                                                1.00     0.03      -0.13     -0.21
Credit                                                                                     1.00      -0.06     -0.14
Calls                                                                                                 1.00      0.07
Puts                                                                                                            1.00

            Panel B: Correlation of Carry Trade Returns during drawdowns

                 EQ      FI 10Y     FI 10Y−2Y        Treasuries     COMM          FX      Credit     Calls     Puts
EQ               1.00     0.04          0.06            0.01         -0.04       -0.07    -0.09       0.09     -0.41
FI 10Y                    1.00          0.61           -0.07         -0.07       -0.03    -0.18      -0.26     -0.19
FI 10Y−2Y                               1.00           -0.08          0.03       -0.01    -0.19      -0.08     -0.11
Treasuries                                              1.00         0.00        -0.20     0.02       0.07     -0.37
COMM                                                                  1.00       -0.02    -0.10      -0.28      0.03
FX                                                                                1.00     0.48      -0.38     0.27
Credit                                                                                     1.00      -0.19      0.36
Calls                                                                                                 1.00      0.08
Puts                                                                                                            1.00




                                                          59
    Table X: Higher Frequency Movements within Carry Drawdowns and Expansions.
The table reports the annualized mean and standard deviation of returns to carry strategies for each asset class during
the first and second half of carry “drawdowns” (Panel A) and “expansion” (Panel B), separately. For this analysis
we only look at carry drawdown and expansion periods that last at least four months and divide each drawdown and
expansion into two halves.



                                                          1st half                                 2nd half

Asset class              Strategy                 Mean               Stdev                 Mean               Stdev

                                                 Panel A: Carry Drawdowns

Equities                   Carry                   -1.1               4.1                    0.8               4.5
FI 10Y                     Carry                   -1.4               2.1                   -0.6               1.7
FI 10Y−2Y                  Carry                   -1.0               1.6                    0.1               1.0
Treasuries                 Carry                    0.0               0.2                   -0.1               0.2
Commodities                Carry                   -1.5               5.5                   -2.2               6.7
Currencies                 Carry                   -0.4               2.1                   -0.4               1.8
Credit                     Carry                    0.0               0.1                    0.0               0.1
Options calls              Carry                   -0.1              78.4                  -14.5              42.6
Options puts               Carry                   7.7                4.5                  -23.5              63.5

                                                  Panel B: Carry Expansions

Equities                   Carry                    0.8               2.5                   1.5                2.7
FI 10Y                     Carry                    0.8               1.6                   1.0                2.0
FI 10Y−2Y                  Carry                    0.6               1.5                   0.7                1.5
Treasuries                 Carry                    0.1               0.2                   0.1                0.2
Commodities                Carry                    1.8               4.9                   1.1                4.6
Currencies                 Carry                    0.5               2.4                   1.0                1.9
Credit                     Carry                    0.1               0.2                   0.1                0.1
Options calls              Carry                   16.5              19.5                   3.9               46.9
Options puts               Carry                   23.5              21.8                  20.3               22.9




                                                           60
        Table XI: Static and Dynamic Risk Exposure in Drawdowns and Expansions
The table reports the decomposition of the returns to carry into their static and dynamic components during
drawdowns and expansions for each asset class’s carry strategy. The static and dynamic decomposition follows
equation (27) and drawdowns and expansions are defined according to equation (29). The table reports the profits
coming from the static and dynamic positions of each carry strategy, as well as the total carry strategy and reports
the percentage of carry profits coming from the dynamic positions, each reported separately during drawdowns and
expansions.



                                   Drawdowns                                            Expansions

Asset class       Static    Dynamic        Total    %Dynamic           Static    Dynamic       Total    %Dynamic

Equities            -2.9          -3.3      -6.2            53.0           1.0         14.1     15.0            93.5
FI 10Y              -3.6         -10.3     -13.9            74.4           2.2          8.7     10.8            79.9
FI 10Y−2Y           -3.2          -4.1      -7.3            56.3           1.3          6.8      8.1            83.7
Treasuries           0.1          -0.7      -0.6           122.8           0.3          0.6      1.0            66.0
Commodities          2.5         -15.7     -13.2           119.0           4.7         16.8     21.5            77.9
Currencies          -4.6          -2.2      -6.8            32.7           4.9          5.2     10.1            51.2
Credit              -0.3          -0.2      -0.5            42.0           0.4          0.2      0.6            35.0
Options calls      -15.4        -146.1    -161.5            90.5          -4.0        155.6    151.6           102.7
Options puts        -1.4         -20.8     -22.2            93.8           0.0        257.5    257.6           100.0




                                                         61
Figures


                    GCF
             2
                    Currency carry


           1.5



             1



           0.5



             0



         -0.5
                 1985          1990           1995           2000           2005           2010



Figure 1: Cumulative returns on the global carry factor. The figure displays the cumulative sum
of the excess returns of the global carry factor, a diversified carry strategy across all asset classes, and the
currency carry portfolio applied only to currencies. The global carry factor is constructed as the equal-
volatility-weighted average of carry portfolio returns across the asset classes. Specifically, we weight each
asset classes’ carry portfolio by the inverse of its sample volatility so that each carry strategy in each asset
class contributes roughly equally to the total volatility of the diversified portfolio. The sample period is
from 1972 until September 2012. The two series are scaled to the same volatility for ease of comparison.




                                                      62
          0.1

         0.05

             0

       -0.05

         -0.1

       -0.15

         -0.2

       -0.25                                                    Drawdowns global carry factor
                                                                Global recession indicator
         -0.3
                  1975        1980       1985       1990        1995 2000 2005 2010

Figure 2:      Drawdown Dynamics of the Global Carry Factor.                                  The figure shows
the drawdown
         Pt         dynamics   of     the
                                        Pu global    carry     strategy.      We    define   the   drawdown as:
Dt ≡       s=1  r s  −  max u∈{1,...,t}   s=1 r s , where  r s  denotes  the return on  the global  carry strategy.
We construct the global carry factor by weighing the carry strategy of each asset classes by the inverse
of the standard deviation of returns, and scaling the weights so that they sum to one. The dash-doted
line corresponds to a global recession indicator. The sample period is 1972 to September 2012.




                                                        63
