                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                PHYSICIAN BELIEFS AND PATIENT PREFERENCES:
        A NEW LOOK AT REGIONAL VARIATION IN HEALTH CARE SPENDING

                                          David Cutler
                                        Jonathan Skinner
                                        Ariel Dora Stern
                                        David Wennberg

                                       Working Paper 19320
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19320


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           August 2013, Revised February 2018




Comments by Amitabh Chandra, Elliott Fisher, Mike Geruso, Tom McGuire, Joshua Gottlieb,
Nancy Morden, Matt Shapiro, Allison Rosen, Gregg Roth, Pascal St.-Amour, Victor Fuchs, 2
anonymous reviewers, and seminar participants were exceedingly helpful. We are grateful to F.
Jack Fowler and Patricia Gallagher of the University of Massachusetts Boston for developing the
patient and physician questionnaires. Funding from the National Institute on Aging (T32-
AG000186-23 and P01-AG031098 to the National Bureau of Economic Research and P01-
AG019783 and U01-AG046830 to Dartmouth) and LEAP at Harvard University (Skinner) is
gratefully acknowledged. De-identified survey data are available at http://
tdicauses.dartmouth.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19320.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2013 by David Cutler, Jonathan Skinner, Ariel Dora Stern, and David Wennberg. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Physician Beliefs and Patient Preferences: A New Look at Regional Variation in Health Care
Spending
David Cutler, Jonathan Skinner, Ariel Dora Stern, and David Wennberg
NBER Working Paper No. 19320
August 2013, Revised February 2018
JEL No. H51,I1,I11,I18

                                         ABSTRACT

There is considerable controversy about the causes of regional variations in health care
expenditures. Using vignettes from patient and physician surveys linked to fee-for-service
Medicare expenditures, this study asks whether patient demand-side factors or physician supply-
side factors explain these variations. The results indicate that patient demand is relatively
unimportant in explaining variations. Physician organizational factors matter, but the most
important factor is physician beliefs about treatment. In Medicare, we estimate that 35 percent of
spending for end-of-life care, and 12 percent of spending for heart attack patients (and for all
enrollees) is associated with physician beliefs unsupported by clinical evidence.


David Cutler                                    Ariel Dora Stern
Department of Economics                         Harvard Business School
Harvard University                              Morgan Hall 433
1875 Cambridge Street                           Boston, MA 02163
Cambridge, MA 02138                             astern@hbs.edu
and NBER
dcutler@harvard.edu                             David Wennberg
                                                Geisel School of Medicine
Jonathan Skinner                                35 Centerra Parkway
Department of Economics                         Lebanon, NH 03766
6106 Rockefeller Hall                           david.e.wennberg@dartmouth.edu
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
jonathan.skinner@dartmouth.edu
I. Introduction


       Regional variations in rates of medical treatments are large in the United
States and other countries (Skinner, 2012). In the U.S. fee-for-service Medicare
population, price-adjusted, per-enrollee 2014 spending varies nearly two-fold
across areas. Similar price-adjusted variations are found in the under-65
population (Cooper et al., 2015), and do not appear to be explained by patient
illness or poverty (Institute of Medicine, 2013).
       What drives such variation in treatment and spending? One possibility is
patient demand. Most studies of variations have been conducted in settings
where all patients have similar and generous insurance policies, so price
differences and income effects are likely to be small. Still, heterogeneity in
patient preferences for care may play a role. In very acute situations, some
patients may prefer to try all possible measures to (potentially) prolong life,
while others may prefer palliation and an out-of-hospital death. If people who
value and demand life-prolonging treatments tend to live in the same areas,
patient preference heterogeneity could lead to regional variation in equilibrium
outcomes (Anthony, et al., 2009; Baker, et al., 2014; Mandelblatt, et al., 2012).
       Another possible source of variation arises from the supply side. In
“supplier-induced demand,” a health care provider shifts a patient’s demand
curve beyond the level of care that the fully-informed patient would otherwise
want. This would be true in a principal-agent framework (McGuire and Pauly,
1991) if prices are high enough or income is scarce. While physician utilization
has been shown to be sensitive to prices (Jacobson, et al., 2006; Clemens and
Gottlieb, 2014), it would be difficult to explain the magnitude of U.S. Medicare
spending variations using prices alone, since federal reimbursement rates do not
vary greatly across areas.




                                        1
       Variations in supply could also occur if physicians respond to
organizational pressure or peer pressure to treat patients more intensively, or
maintain differing beliefs about appropriate treatments – particularly for
conditions where there are few professional guidelines (Wennberg, et al., 1982).
If this variation is spatially correlated – for example, if physicians with more
intensive treatment preferences hire other physicians with similar practice styles
– the resulting regional differences in beliefs could explain regional variations in
equilibrium spending.
       It has proven difficult to separately estimate the impact of physician
beliefs, patient preferences, and other factors as they affect equilibrium
healthcare outcomes, largely because of challenges in identifying factors that
affect only supply or demand (Dranove and Wehner, 1994). Finkelstein, et al.
(2016) address these challenges by following Medicare enrollees who moved to
either higher or lower spending regions, finding that roughly half of the
difference in spending across areas can be attributed to supply, and
approximately half to demand. Their study, however, cannot identify the
specific components of demand-side factors (e.g., preferences) nor supply-side
factors (income and substitution effects, or physician beliefs).
       In this study, we use “strategic” survey questions of physicians and
patients (in the sense of Ameriks et al., 2011) to avoid several concerns related
to risk-adjustment and endogeneity in estimating a unified model of regional
Medicare expenditures. Strategic surveys have been used to estimate underlying
preference parameters such as risk aversion (Barsky et al., 1997), the demand
for precautionary saving (Ameriks et al., 2011), and long-term care insurance
(Ameriks et al., 2016). Vignettes have been shown to predict actual physician
behavior in clinical settings (e.g. Peabody, et al., 2000 and 2004; Dresselhaus, et
al., 2004; Mandelblatt, et al., 2012; Evans, et al., 2015). In prior work, our
physician surveys have been used by Sirovich, et al. (2008) and Lucas et al.




                                         2
    (2010) to find that Medicare spending predicted physician treatment intensity,
    but these studies did not adjust for patient demand, nor could they answer the
    question of whether (and which) supply side factors explain observed variation
    in Medicare expenditures.1
           In our study, physician incentives and beliefs are captured using detailed,
    scenario-based surveys that present physician-respondents with questions about
    their financial and practice organization, and with vignette-based questions
    about how the physician would manage elderly individuals with specific chronic
    health conditions and a given medical and treatment history.2 Patient preferences
    are measured by a different survey of Medicare enrollees age 65 and older
    asking about preferences among a variety of aggressive and/or palliative care
    interventions. Previous studies using this survey (Anthony, et al., 2009; Barnato,
    et al., 2007; Baker, et al., 2014) found a small but discernible influence of
    patient preferences on regional variations in health care spending.3
           We develop an equilibrium model that specifies health care intensity (as
    measured by expenditures) as a function of a variety of factors specific to health
    care providers’ and patients’ preferences. To estimate this requires a
    multivariate model in which supply and demand factors are on the right-hand
    side of the equation, and overall intensity (or expenditures) are on the left-hand




1
  In these studies, because spending was on the right-hand side of the equation, and physician
survey responses on the left, they could not estimate whether survey responses explain regional
variations in spending, nor could the different factors (e.g., financial incentives, vignette
responses) be considered in a multivariate framework.
2
  However, our surveys do not capture “deep” preference parameters as in (e.g.) Barsky et al.
(1997).
3
  The Baker et al. (2014) study used the same patient-level survey data to create regional measures
of patient preferences, and attempted to explain differences in spending using these measures.
They included potentially endogenous hospital bed and physician supply to adjust for the supply-
side, rather than the physician survey data we use.




                                                3
    side. We use Hospital Referral Region4 (HRR)-level measures that account for
    both physician and patient responses within each HRR, and estimate models at
    the HRR level for 74 of the largest areas (covering roughly half of the Medicare
    population). We also test our model at the individual level for Medicare fee-for-
    service patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) admitted to hospital
    during 2007-2010. This latter sample allows us to control more accurately for
    individual health status and poverty, and to examine the association between
    physician characteristics and quality of care.
           In our empirical exercises, we characterize physicians along two non-
    exclusive dimensions: those who consistently and unambiguously recommended
    intensive care beyond what would be indicated by current clinical guidelines
    (whom we refer to as “cowboys”), and those who consistently recommended
    palliative care for the very severely ill (whom we refer to as “comforters”). At
    the HRR level, we explain roughly 60% of the variation in end-of-life spending
    by knowing only these two composite measures of physician treatment intensity
    combined with the frequency with which physicians recommend that their
    patients return for routine office visits. Our results are consistent with those in
    Finkelstein, et al. (2016) whose estimated supply-side variations are similar to
    (or a bit larger than) those reported below. Conditional on the supply side, we
    find that in this setting, demand-side Medicare patient preferences explain much
    less of total spending, consistent with other previous studies (Anthony, et al.,
    2009; Barnato, et al., 2007; Baker, et al., 2014; Bederman et al., 2011, and
    Gogineni, et al., 2015).
           Prior studies have not been able to explain why some physicians practice
    very aggressively (cowboys) while others are more likely to treat end-of-life


4
  The Dartmouth Atlas has defined 306 hospital referral regions based on patient migration data
from the Medicare claims data in 1992/93. Each region required a tertiary hospital providing
cardiovascular surgical procedures and for neurosurgery. (Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care, 2013)




                                               4
patients with palliative care (comforters). We use the full sample of surveyed
physicians to examine factors associated with the likelihood of being a cowboy
or a comforter (few physicians were both). We find that only a small fraction of
physicians report making recent decisions purely due to financial considerations.
We also find that “pressure to accommodate” either patients (by providing
treatments that are not needed) or referring physicians’ expectations (doing
procedures to keep them happy) have a modest but significant relationship with
physician beliefs about appropriate care. While many physicians report making
clinical interventions as a result of malpractice concerns, these responses do not
explain variation in treatment recommendations.
       Ultimately, the largest degree of residual variation appears to be
explained by differences in physician beliefs about the efficacy of particular
therapies. Physicians in our data have starkly different views about how to treat
the same patients. These views are not strongly correlated with demographics,
financial incentives, background, or practice characteristics, and are often
inconsistent with evidence-based professional guidelines for appropriate care.
Extrapolating from the sample of HRRs, we calculate that as much as 35 percent
of end-of-life fee-for-service Medicare expenditures, 12 percent of Medicare
expenditures for heart attack patients, and 12 percent of overall Medicare
expenditures are explained by supply-side (physician) beliefs that cannot be
justified either by patient preferences or by evidence of clinical effectiveness.
       This paper proceeds as follows: the next section provides a graphical
interpretation of the theory (with derivations in Appendix A); Section III
provides data and estimation strategies, while Section IV presents the results,
with particular attention paid to methodological challenges to the vignette
approach raised by Sheiner (2014). Section V concludes.
II. A Model of Variation in Medical Intensity




                                        5
            We develop a simple model of patient demand and physician supply,
    presented in detail in Appendix A.5 On the demand side, the patient’s indirect
    utility function is a function of out-of-pocket prices, income, health, and
    preferences for care. Solving this for optimal intensity of care yields patient
    demand xD. As in McGuire (2011), we assume that xD is the fully informed
    patient’s demand for the quantity of care or procedures prior to any demand
    “inducement.”
            On the supply side, we assume that physicians seek to maximize the
    perceived health of their ith patient, si(x), by appropriate choice of inputs x,
    subject to patient demand (xiD), financial considerations, and organizational
    factors. Note that the function s(x) captures both patient survival and patient
    quality of life, for example as measured by quality-adjusted life years (QALYs).
            Individual physicians are assumed to be price-takers, but face a wide
    range of reimbursement rates from private insurance providers, Medicare, and
    Medicaid.6 We summarize the model graphically in Figure 1, with further
    details in Appendix A. The downward sloping curve, s'(x), represents the true
    value of the treatment x where patients are lined up in decreasing order of
    appropriateness for treatment. This is not a demand curve per se, but instead
    reflects diminishing returns to treatment by moving further into the population
    of patients less likely to benefit. The “supply” curve, λ, reflects rising costs to
    physicians, converting dollars to QALYs by taking the inverse of the social cost-
    effectiveness ratio (e.g., $100,000 per life-year). The optimum is therefore the
    intersection of the supply and demand curves, at Point A.




5
 Also see Chandra and Skinner (2012); Finkelstein et al. (2016) as well draw on this model.
6
 The model is therefore simpler than models in which hospital groups and physicians jointly
determine quantity, quality, and prices, (Pauly, 1980) or in which physicians exercise market
power over patients to provide them with “too much” health care (McGuire, 2011).




                                                6
        Why might the equilibrium quantity of care provided differ from A? In
traditional supplier-induced demand models, reimbursement rates for
procedures, taste for income, and organizational or peer effects would cause the
supply curve to shift to (say) λ*, leading to (in this case) higher utilization.
Traditional supplier-induced demand effects occur via movement along the
marginal benefit curve, s′(x). Alternatively, patient demand could affect the
quantity consumed. But so long as patients perceive their true medical benefit
curve, s′(x), demand factors such as preference, income, and prices will shift the
λ curve, so that λ*, for example, corresponds to a patient with a higher income
or a more modest copay, for example.
        Less conventionally, the marginal value curve may differ across
physicians and their patients, for example as shown in Figure 1 by g′(x), which
could represent a more skilled physician. Thus, Point C in Figure 1 corresponds
to greater intensity of care than Point A and arises naturally when the physician
is more productive. For example, heart attack patients experience better
outcomes from cardiac interventions in regions with higher rates of
revascularization, consistent with a Roy model of occupational sorting (Chandra
and Staiger, 2007; 2017). Conditional on characteristics, patients treated in
regions where the true productivity curve is g′(x) will experience better health
outcomes.
        Alternatively, physicians may be overly optimistic with respect to their
ability to perform procedures, leading to expected benefits that exceed realized
benefits (Comin et al., 2017). Baumann, et al. (1991) have documented the
phenomenon of “macro uncertainty, micro certainty” in which physicians and
nurses exhibit overconfidence in the value of their treatment for a specific
patient (micro certainty) even in the absence of a general consensus as to which
procedure is more clinically effective (macro uncertainty). Ransohoff, et al.
(2002) has noted a further psychological bias towards more aggressive treatment




                                         7
decisions: If the patient gets better, the physician gets the credit, but if the
patient gets worse, the physician is able to say that she did everything possible.
           To see this in Figure 1, suppose the actual benefit is realized along the
curve s′(x) but the physician’s perceived benefit is along the curve g′(x). The
equilibrium achieved will then be at Point D: in this scenario, the marginal
treatment harms the patient, even though the physician expects the opposite,
incorrectly believing they are targeting Point C. In equilibrium, this type of
supplier behavior would appear consistent with classic supplier-induced
demand, but the cause is quite different. Most importantly, here the physician
would not need to consciously “over-treat” (and thus harm) the patient, as in
standard supplier-induced demand models.
           How can we distinguish among these scenarios? Using the estimation
equation derived in Appendix A, we use information about patient income and
preferences for treatment to capture demand effects. For supply effects, we
document traditional supplier-induced demand measures through detailed
questions to individual physicians regarding financial pressure, peer
expectations, and willingness to cater to patient demand. To measure beliefs,
we use vignettes describing well-defined clinical cases. We can further
distinguish between a Roy model of treatment (as in Chandra and Staiger, 2007)
and one of overconfidence by testing whether patients experience higher quality
care in regions with a greater share of cowboys and/or more frequent follow-up
visits.
III.      Data and Estimation Strategy
           In this section, we discuss the practicalities of estimating supply and
demand using detailed survey data. Even detailed clinical data reveal only a
subset of what a physician knows about her patients’ health and reveal virtually
nothing about non-clinical drivers of patients’ demand for health care services.
We use the results of a vignette-based physician survey to proxy for physician




                                           8
    beliefs about appropriate care (supply), and a complementary vignette-based
    patient survey to capture patient’s preferences for care (demand). Ameriks, et al.
    (2011) and Ameriks et al. (2016) use “strategic surveys” to address similar
    challenges in identifying supply and demand factors, although the approach is
    relatively novel in health care economics.
           We assume that the physician’s responses to the vignettes are “all in”
    measures, reflecting physician beliefs as well as the variety of financial,
    organizational, and capacity-related constraints physicians face. For example, if
    a physician responds to a vignette by proposing a specific treatment that in turn
    generates revenue for her practice, we assume that any potential financial benefit
    is already reflected in her response. An alternative assumption is that the
    physician’s response purely reflects clinical beliefs (for example, how one might
    answer for qualifying boards), and is not representative of the day-to-day
    realities of their practice. While we cannot fully address this limitation, we
    consider this alternative assumption about behavior7 by including organizational
    and financial variables in the estimation equations in addition to the vignette
    estimates. That the organizational and financial variables add so little
    explanatory power to the regression is consistent with our “all-in” assumption.
           In an ideal world, patient survey responses would be matched with those
    of their physicians. Because our data do not directly link physician and patients
    responses (nor are we permitted to match physician responses to their claims
    data), we instead match supply and demand at the area level using HRRs.8
    Physician Surveys


7
  See Table 8 of Appendix C.
8
  Spending measures are based on area of patient residence, not where treatment is actually
received, to avoid biases arising from large “destination” medical centers in regions like Boston,
MA or Rochester, MN. For the analysis of urgent AMI, patients are unlikely to seek care outside
of the HRR since every minute counts for survival. For these we link physician and patient
responses to the HRRs in which the hospitals are located.




                                                 9
          Two subsamples were drawn from the American Medical Association
    Database: cardiologists and primary care physicians (PCPs).9,10 A total of 999
    cardiologists were randomly selected to receive the survey. Of these, 614
    cardiologists responded, for a response rate of 61.5 percent. Some physicians
    surveyed did not self-identify as cardiologists, and others were missing crucial
    information such as practice type, leaving us a final sample of 598 cardiologists
    with complete survey responses. The PCP responses come from a parallel
    survey of self-identified PCPs (family practice, internal medicine, or internal
    medicine/family practice). A total of 1,333 PCPs were randomly selected to
    receive the survey and 967 individuals had complete responses to the survey for
    a response rate of 72.5 percent.11
    Patient Survey
           The patient survey sampling frame included all Medicare beneficiaries in
    the 20 percent denominator file who were age 65 or older on July 1, 2003
    (Barnato et al., 2007). A random sample of 4,000 individuals was drawn; the
    response rate was 72.1 percent, leading to 2,882 total survey responses.
    Utilization and Quality Data

9
  The document outlining “Survey Methods and Findings” (from The Center for Survey Research,
University of Massachusetts Boston [CSR/UMass] and Dartmouth Medical School) is available
upon request; our discussion follows Sirovich et al. (2008). A mail survey of PCPs and
cardiologists was conducted by CSR/UMass. To construct the survey, focus groups concentrated
on the development and wording of realistic clinical vignettes, to ensure that the questions were
well understood and the answers meaningful. Next, Masterfiles of the American Medical
Association and American Osteopathic Association were used to obtain a random sample of
domestic PCPs (self-identified as family practice, general practice, or internal medicine) or
cardiologists practicing at least twenty hours per week. Residents and retired physicians were
ineligible. After telephone verification of the physician’s offices, each physician was mailed a
survey along with a twenty-dollar bill, with a telephone follow-up.
10
   The PCP survey oversampled in four targeted cities: two areas of low intensity (Minneapolis,
MN; Rochester, NY) and two areas of high intensity (Manhattan, NY; Miami, FL).
11
   Physician and patient survey responses could vary systematically by demographic covariates
such as age, sex, and race or ethnicity, leading to greater sampling variability if we happen to
sample a few physicians, for example, in one group. However, our main regression results (Table
3) were very similar with such adjustment (presented in Appendix Tables C3 and C4), so we did
not pursue this approach.




                                               10
           We match the survey responses to Medicare expenditure data from the
 Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care (2013). The Atlas includes detailed data on
 how medical resources are distributed and used in the United States, using
 Medicare data to provide information and analysis about national, regional, and
 local markets, as well as hospitals and their affiliated physicians.
           Our primary dependent variable is the natural logarithm of price, age,
 sex, and risk-adjusted HRR-level, per-patient Medicare expenditures in the last
 two years of life for enrollees over age 65 with a number of fatal illnesses. 12
 These measures implicitly adjust for differences across regions in health status:
 an individual with renal failure who subsequently dies is likely to be in similar
 (poor) health regardless of whether she lives. End-of-life measures are
 commonly used to instrument for health care intensity (e.g., Fisher et al., 2003a
 and 2003b; Doyle, 2011; Romley et al., 2011). (In addition, we consider overall
 HRR-level Medicare spending, adjusted only for price, age, sex, and race
 differences.) Initially, we limit our attention to the 74 HRRs with a minimum of
 three patients, three cardiologists (average = 5.6), and at least one PCP (average
 = 7.7) surveyed, leading to an attenuated sample of physicians (N=985 in the
 restricted sample) and patients (N = 1,516 in the restricted sample with an
 average of 20.5 patient respondents per HRR).13
           We also consider a third measure of utilization: one-year Medicare
 expenditures after admission for AMI during 2007-2010 in the fee-for-service
 population. The advantage of this patient-level data is that we are better able to
 address concerns that physician practice patterns are correlated with

12
   These include congestive heart failure, cancer/leukemia, chronic pulmonary disease, coronary
artery disease, peripheral vascular disease, severe chronic liver disease, diabetes with end organ
damage, chronic renal failure, and dementia, which account for 90 percent of end-of-life spending.
13
   To address potential measurement error of the constructed variables on the right-hand side of
this regression specification, we bootstrap the entire estimation process 1,000 times to calculate all
standard errors in HRR-level regressions, beginning with the construction of the HRR-level
physician and patient samples, and proceeding through the HRR-level regression analysis.




                                                 11
     unobservable health status of patients (Sheiner, 2014). By limiting our attention
     to AMI patients – all of whom are seriously ill – and by using extensive risk-
     adjustment based on comorbidities during admission, quintiles of ZIP code
     income, and an HCC (hierarchical condition categories) score based on previous
     outpatient and inpatient diagnoses, we can better adjust for differences across
     regions in underlying health.
            We also consider quality measures. In the aggregated analysis, we use
     multiple Medicare measures from the “Hospital Compare” database aggregated
     to the HRR level. In the AMI data, we use two quality measures: risk-adjusted
     one-year mortality and risk-adjusted percutaneous coronary interventions (PCI),
     or stents, on the day of admission. Clinical trials have shown that same-day PCI
     yield the greatest benefit for patients (Keeley et al., 2003; Boden et al., 2007).
     Patient survey vignette detail
           We use responses to five survey questions that ask patients about their
     likelihood of wanting unnecessary tests or cardiologist referrals in the case of
     new chest pain as well as preferences for comfort vs. intensive life-prolonging
     interventions in an end of life situation. The exact language used in these
     vignettes is reproduced in Appendix B. Since the questions patients respond to
     are hypothetical and typically describe scenarios that have not yet happened, we
     think of them as preferences not affected by physician advice (xD).
            Two of the questions on the patient survey relate to unnecessary care,
     asking respondents if they would like a test or cardiac referral even if their PCP
     did not think they needed one (Table 1).14 Overall, 73 percent of patients wanted
     such an unneeded test and 56 percent wanted an unneeded cardiac referral.
     However, there is wide variation across regions in average responses to these


14
  This question captures pure patient demand independent of what the physician wants. Note,
however, that patients could still answer they would not seek an additional referral if they were
unwilling to disagree with their physician.




                                                 12
questions. Figure 2 shows density plots of patient preferences for the main
questions in the patient survey for the 74 HRRs considered (weighted by the
number of patients per HRR). Superimposed on the Figure is the simulated
distribution based on 1,000 bootstrap samples, with replacement, under the null
hypothesis that individuals were randomly assigned to areas. P–values for over-
dispersion are reported in the last column of Table 1; these indicate that the
observed variation is significantly greater than can be explained by random
variation.
        Three other patient questions, grouped into two binary indicators each,
measure preferences for end-of-life care. One reflects patients’ desire for
aggressive care at the end of life: whether they would want to be put on a
respirator if it would extend their life for either a week (one question) or a
month (another question). The next question asks if, in situations in which the
patient reached a point at which they were feeling bad all of the time, the patient
would want drugs to feel better, even if those drugs might shorten their life. In
each case, there is statistically significant variation across HRRs (Table 1).
        Patients’ preferences are sometimes correlated across questions. For
example, the correlation coefficient between wanting an unneeded cardiac
referral and wanting an unnecessary test is 0.43 (p < .01). But other
comparisons point to modest, negative associations, for example a -0.28
correlation coefficient between wanting palliative care and wanting to be on a
respirator at the end of life.
Potential biases in the patient survey.
        One concern with these questions is that they are hypothetical, and might
not reflect true patient demand. However, Anthony et al. (2009) have linked
survey respondents to the individuals’ Medicare claims, and found a strong link
between preferences and care-seeking behavior (e.g., physician visits) at the
individual level (also see Mandelblatt et al., 2012). Questions about end-of-life




                                          13
     care may appear abstract until the patient actually faces decisions related to end-
     of-life care, but our results are similar even with a subset of respondents age 80+
     where end-of-life scenarios and treatment decisions are likely to be more salient.
     Moreover, Medicare enrollees are increasingly choosing to create advanced
     directives that specify their end-of-life choices well before they face those
     decisions. 15
              Another limitation of the study is the possibility that patient survey
     responses are measured with more error than physician responses, which may
     lead us to under-estimate the role of patient preferences in determining
     utilization. Patient-level sample sizes are larger than physician sample sizes, but
     physicians treat multiple patients (and even those small samples are a larger
     fraction of the physician population), and so may better capture underlying
     physician beliefs. While we cannot rule out this hypothesis, we do not find a
     strong correlation between utilization and patient preferences even in the subset
     of HRRs with at least 20 patient surveys.16
             Finally, because higher proportions of patients shared aggressive
     preferences relative to the proportion of “cowboy” physicians, the patient survey
     data may constitute a less sensitive test for aggressive tastes. As a result of all of
     the above factors, patient preferences may be measured with more error than
     physician beliefs in these surveys.
     Physician survey vignette detail



15
   According to one study, more than half of elderly Americans have advanced care directives. The
primary reason for not having one was being unaware of their existence (Rao, et al., 2014).
16
   In addition, the IOM report (2013) and Newhouse and Garber (2013) have noted that even
within HRRs, there is considerable variation in utilization at the much smaller hospital service
area (HSA) level. Assuming that our sample of physicians and patients are drawn randomly within
HRRs from different HSAs, this would imply that the average HRR-level samples of (e.g.)
physician beliefs would be measured with greater error. This makes it even more surprising that
responses from just a handful of physicians in an HRR could provide such a strong prediction for
that region’s end-of-life spending.




                                               14
       Prior research has established that in practice, physicians “do what they
say they’d do” in surveys. For example, physicians’ self-reported testing
intensity has been shown to be predictive of population-based rates of coronary
angiography (Wennberg et al., 1997). The detailed clinical vignette questions
used in the physician surveys are shown in Appendix B and summary statistics
are presented in Table 1.
       We first consider the vignette for Patient A, which asks a physician how
frequently they would schedule routine follow-up visits for a patient with stable
angina whose symptoms and cardiac risk factors are well controlled on current
medical therapy (for cardiologists) or a patient with hypertension (for PCPs).
The response is unbounded, and expressed in months, but in practice individual
physician responses ranged from 1 to 24 months. Figure 3a presents a HRR-
level histogram of averages from the cardiology survey for 74 HRRs.
       How do these responses correspond to guidelines for managing such
patients? The 2005 American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association [ACC/AHA] guidelines (Hunt et al., 2005) – what most
cardiologists would have considered “the cardiology Bible” at the time the
survey was fielded – recommended follow-up every 4-12 months. However,
even with these broad recommendations, we find that 21 percent of cardiologists
are “high follow-up” in the sense of recommending visits more frequently than
every 4 months, and 1.4 percent are “low follow-up” and recommend visits less
frequently than every 12 months. These physicians were geographically
clustered in a subset of HRRs (p<.01 in a test of the null of no correlation) and
the distribution of high follow-up cardiologists across HRRs is shown in Figure
3b.
       The equivalent measure for PCPs is recommended follow-up frequency
for a patient with well-controlled hypertension. The Seventh Report of the Joint
National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of




                                       15
     High Blood Pressure (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2004),
     which represented guideline-based recommendations at the time, suggests
     follow-up for this type of patient every 3-6 months. Based on this range, 4.4
     percent of PCPs in our sample are “high follow-up” physicians and 8.8 percent
     are “low follow-up” physicians.17
             The next two vignettes focus on patients with heart failure, a much
     costlier setting. Heart failure is also a natural scenario to consider because it is
     common, the disease is chronic, its prognosis is poor, and treatment is
     expensive. Vignettes for Patients B and C ask questions about the treatment of
     Class IV heart failure, the most severe classification and one in which patients
     experience symptoms at rest. In both patient scenarios, the vignette patient is on
     maximal (presumably optimal) medications, and neither patient described is a
     candidate for revascularization: Patient B has already had a coronary stent
     placed without symptom change, and Patient C is explicitly noted to not be a
     candidate for this procedure. The key differences between the two scenarios are
     the respective patients’ ages (75 for Patient B, 85 for Patient C), the presence of
     asymptomatic non-sustained ventricular tachycardia in Patient B, and severe
     symptoms that resolve partially with increased oxygen in Patient C.
             Cardiologists in the survey were asked about various interventions as
     well as palliative care for each of these patients. For Patient B, they were given
     five choices: three intensive treatments (repeat angiography; implantable cardiac
     defibrillator [ICD] placement, and pacemaker insertion), one involving
     medication (antiarrhythmic therapy), and palliative care. For Patient C, each


17
   Office visits are not a large component of physicians’ incomes (or overall Medicare
expenditures). Thus, any correlation between the frequency of follow-up visits and overall
expenditures would most likely be because frequent office visits are also associated with
additional highly remunerated tests and interventions (such as echocardiography, stress imaging
studies, and so forth) that further set in motion the “diagnostic-therapeutic cascade” (Lucas, et al.,
2008).




                                                  16
     physician is also presented with three intensive options (admit to the ICU/CCU,
     placement of a coronary artery catheter, and pacemaker insertion), two less
     aggressive options (admit to the hospital [but not the ICU/CCU] for diuresis,
     and send home on increased oxygen and diuretics), and palliative care. In each
     scenario, cardiologists separately reported their likelihood of recommending
     each potential intervention on a 5-interval range from “always / almost always”
     to “never.” Each response is recorded independently of other responses. For
     example, physicians could “frequently” recommend both palliative care and one
     (or more) additional intervention(s).
            Beginning with the obvious, both patients described in the survey
     deserve a frank conversation about their prognosis and an ascertainment of their
     preferences for end-of-life care. The one-year mortality rate for each patient is
     expected to be as high as 50 percent (Ahmed et al., 2006). If compliant with
     guidelines, therefore, all physicians should have answered “always/almost
     always”, or at least “most of the time,” when reporting their likelihood of
     initiating or continuing discussions about palliative care.18
            For Patient B, only 29 percent of cardiologists responded that they would
     initiate or continue discussions about palliative care “most of the time” or
     “always/almost always.” For Patient C, 44 percent of cardiologists and 47
     percent of PCPs were likely to recommend this course of action “most of the
     time” or “always/almost always.” In both cases, physicians’ recommendations
     fall far short of guidelines. We classify a doctor as a “comforter” if they would
     discuss palliative care with the patient “always / almost always” or “most of the
     time” for both Patients B and C (among cardiologists) or for Patient C only



18
  The AHA-ACC guidelines say that “patient and family education about options for formulating
and implementing advance directives and the role of palliative and hospice care services with
reevaluation for changing clinical status is recommended for patients with HF [heart failure] at the
end of life.” (Hunt, et al., 2005, p. e206).




                                                17
 (among PCPs, who did not have Patient B’s vignette in their survey). In our
 restricted analysis sample, 27 percent of cardiologists and 44 percent of PCPs
 met this definition of a comforter.
         We now turn to more medically intensive aspects of patient management,
 where the language in the vignettes was carefully constructed to relate to clinical
 guidelines. Several key aspects of Patient B rule out both the ICD and
 pacemaker insertion19 and indeed the ACC-AHA guidelines explicitly
 recommend against the use of an ICD for Class IV patients (Hunt et al., 2005).
 Since Patient C is already on maximal medications and is not a candidate for
 revascularization, the physician’s goal should be to keep him as comfortable as
 possible. This should be accomplished in the least invasive manner possible
 (e.g., at home), and if that is not possible, in an uncomplicated setting, for
 example during admission to the hospital for simple diuresis. According to the
 ACC/AHA guidelines, no additional interventions are appropriate for this
 patient.20
         Despite these guideline recommendations, physicians in our data show a
 great deal of enthusiasm for additional interventions. For Patient B, over one
 quarter of the cardiologists surveyed (28 percent) would recommend a repeat
 angiography at least “some of the time.” Similarly, 62 percent of cardiologists
 would recommend an ICD “most of the time,” or “always/almost always,” while
 45 percent would recommend a pacemaker at least “most of the time.” For
 Patient C, 18 percent of cardiologists would recommend an ICU/CCU



19
   This includes his advanced stage, his severe (Class IV) medication refractory heart failure, and
the asymptomatic non-sustained nature of the ventricular tachycardia.
20
   This patient’s clinical improvement with increased oxygen (see vignette in Appendix B) also
argues against more intensive interventions. Moreover, even a simple but invasive test, the
pulmonary artery catheter, has been found to be of no marginal value over good clinical decision
making in managing patients with congestive heart failure (CHF), and could even cause harm
(ESCAPE, 2005).




                                                 18
admission, 2 percent would recommend a pulmonary artery catheter and 14
percent would recommend a pacemaker at least “most of the time.”
         Cardiologists’ responses on aggressive interventions are highly
correlated across Patients B and C. Of the 28 percent (N=170) of cardiologists
in the full physician sample who would “frequently” or “always/almost always”
recommend at least one of the high-intensity procedures for Patient C, 90
percent (N=153) would also frequently or always/almost always recommend at
least one high-intensity intervention for Patient B. We use this overlap to define
a “cowboy” cardiologist as one who would recommend at least one of the three
possible intensive treatments for both Patients B and C at least “most of the
time.” Because Vignette Patient B was not presented to PCPs, we use their
responses to questions about Vignette Patient C to categorize them using the
same criteria. In total, 26 percent of the cardiologists and 23 percent of PCPs in
our sample are classified as cowboys.
         All told, we consider four main measures of physician behavior (supply):
high or low frequency of follow-up visits, a dummy variable for being a
cowboy, and a dummy variable for being a comforter. How are these measures
related to one another? Table 2 shows that physicians with a low follow-up
frequency are more likely to be comforters and less likely to be cowboys than
physicians with a high follow-up frequency. Similarly, cowboy physicians are
unlikely to be comforter physicians (although a small minority were classified as
both).


IV. Estimation results
         Our first set of empirical results runs a “horse race” between area-level
supply and demand factors to asses which set of factors can better explain actual
HRR-level expenditures measures. In our second set of estimates, we return to
the full sample of physicians to understand why they hold the beliefs they do by




                                         19
 relating individual physician vignette responses to physicians’ financial and
 organizational incentives.
 Do Survey Responses Predict Regional Medicare Expenditures?
          We begin with end-of-life spending, since it is a measure of utilization
 that is most likely to be sensitive to differences across regions for patients who,
 like those in our vignettes, are at a high risk of death.21 Figure 4 presents scatter
 plots of area-level end of life spending vs. measures of supply and demand for
 care. The measures included here are the fraction of all physicians in the area
 who are cowboys (panel a), the fraction of physicians who are comforters (panel
 b), the fraction of physicians who recommend follow-up more frequently than
 recommended guidelines (panel c), and the share of patients who desire more
 aggressive care at the end of life (panel d). Each circle represents one HRR, with
 its size proportional to the size of the survey sample represented.
          In the case of the three supply-side variables in Figure 4, the results are
 consistent with a meaningful role in determining spending. Despite the relatively
 small sample sizes of physicians in each HRR, end of life spending is positively
 related to the cowboy ratio, negatively related to the comforter ratio, and
 positively related to the fraction of doctors recommending follow-up visits more
 frequently than clinical guidelines indicate. The demand variable, in contrast, is
 not strongly related to spending; the data points do not reveal a clear
 relationship.
         Table 3 explores these results more formally with regression estimates of
 the natural log of end-of-life expenditures in the last two years of life (columns
 1-6) and overall Medicare expenditures (column 7). The statistical significance
 of all results is robust to adjusting standard errors using 1,000 bootstrap samples


21
   End-of-life spending is also highly correlated with prospective measures such as spending for
advanced lung-cancer (Keating et al., 2016) and overall spending among those at high risk of
death (Kelley et al., 2017).




                                                20
 of patient and physician surveys. As the first column shows, the local proportion
 of cowboys and comforters explains 34 percent of the observed regional
 variation in end-of-life spending. Further, the estimated magnitudes are large:
 increasing the percentage of cowboys by one standard deviation (15 percentage
 points) is associated with a 12 percent increase in 2-year end-of-life
 expenditures, while increasing the fraction of comforters by one standard
 deviation (18 percentage points) implies a 5.7 percent decrease in those
 expenditures. These relationships between spending and the local fractions of
 cowboys and comforters are robust to a number of alternative specifications.22
 Results also hold when each physician sample is analyzed separately (Appendix
 C, Tables 1 and 2) and when survey responses are age, sex, and race/ethnicity-
 adjusted (Appendix C, Tables 3 and 4).
        Column 2 of Table 3 shows that the indicator for the share of physicians
 recommending high frequency follow-up is also a meaningful predictor of HRR-
 level end-of-life spending; conditional on the fraction of cowboys and
 comforters, an increase of one standard deviation (12 percentage points) of high
 follow-up physicians is associated with a 13 percent increase in 2-year end-of-
 life spending. While the low frequency follow-up coefficient is meaningful in
 magnitude – implying roughly a 3 percent reduction in spending for a one
 standard deviation increase in low follow-up physicians – it is not statistically
 significant. Notably, the combination of just these four variables about supplier
 beliefs alone can explain over 60 percent of the observed end-of-life spending
 variation in the 74 HRRs in this sample.23

22
   In robustness tests not presented, we further find that the observed patterns are robust to the
exclusion of “small cells” (HRRs with fewer than eight physician surveys), to controlling for
percent poverty and percent black at the HRR level, and to re-weighting HRRs by their patient
population.
23
   As Black, et al. (2000) note, the OLS estimate is a lower bound and under weak assumptions,
the expected value of the OLS parameter estimate is of smaller magnitude than the true parameter.
(The R2 is also a lower bound owing to measurement error.)




                                               21
           The next two columns add various HRR-level measures of patient
 preferences to the regressions: the share of patients wishing to have unneeded
 tests in a cardiac setting, the share of patients wanting to see an unneeded
 cardiologist, the share of patients preferring aggressive end-of-life care, and the
 share preferring comfortable end-of-life care. None of these variables are
 statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Excluding the physician belief
 variables entirely, as in column 6, the R-squared value from the regression
 incorporating patient preference variables alone is 0.20 (slightly larger than in
 Baker et al., 2014). In further sensitivity analyses, we also considered using
 alternate and/or additional measures of patient demand recovered from the
 patient survey, or financial variables from the physician surveys. When
 predicting Medicare spending in the last two years of life, these alternate
 measures do not increase the explanatory power of our regression models, nor
 are the coefficients related to patient demand factors statistically significant at
 conventional levels.24
           Regressions for the natural log of total per patient Medicare expenditures
 are presented in the final column of Table 3; coefficients are similar but in this
 specification, the role of patient preferences for comfort-oriented care emerges
 as statistically significant, consistent with Finkelstein et al. (2016), who find that
 patient demand explains a significant share of Medicare spending in a non-end-
 of-life context.
           We further consider the possibility that physicians’ aggressiveness in
 end-of-life care may be related to overall quality. We analyze the range of

24
   Nor were our results driven by differences between east-coast versus west-coast medical
practices; similar results were obtained when east and west coasts were estimated separately. It is
also possible that there is an interaction effect between patient preferences and physician beliefs –
for example if aggressive physicians interact with patients with preferences for aggressive care –
to generate even more utilization (or conversely for comforter physicians and patients who
demand palliative care to interact and reduce care provided in a mutually reinforcing way). We
test this in Appendix C, Table C6, but do not find evidence for this hypothesis.




                                                 22
     quality measures from the CMS Hospital Compare data (December 2005 data
     release,25 averaged at the HRR level), but find few statistically significant
     correlations between the fraction of aggressive physicians (cowboys) and quality
     measures. Of the seventeen quality measures considered, only two26 have a
     statistically significant correlation with the fraction of cowboys in a region (and
     those were negative correlations); the remainder showed no significant
     correlation with the cowboy fraction.
     Expenditures and Outcomes in Acute Myocardial Infarction
            We next consider expenditures and outcomes in a sample of AMI
     patients. By focusing on physician vignette measures, which we think are of
     primary importance in acute and post-acute treatment decisions, we are able to
     expand the sample size to 137 HRRs accounting for 71% of the entire AMI
     sample or a total of 560,392 patients.27 Spending measures are adjusted for
     differences across regions in prices using the Gottlieb et al. (2010) method,28
     and all regressions are clustered at the HRR level. Summary statistics are
     presented in Table 7 of Appendix C.
            Regression estimates are presented in Table 4, with expenditures in
     levels in column 1, and in natural logs in column 2. As expected, the risk-
     adjustment HCCs are large in magnitude and highly significant, but conditional



25
   Data available at: https://data.medicare.gov/data/archives/hospital-compare
26
   The two quality measures were: (a) AMI patients with left ventricular systolic dysfunction (and
without contraindications) who were prescribed an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitor or an angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB) at hospital discharge, and (b) Pneumonia
patients who receive their first dose of antibiotic within 4 hours of arrival at the hospital.
27
   In sensitivity analysis, not reported, we also included patient demand variables, but none were
significant in any of the regression analyses, except for one: The patient aggressiveness measure
was associated with a lower probability of early PCI (stenting), the reverse of what one might
expect.
28
   Gottlieb et al. (2010) use a price-adjustment method that sets a common national price for each
individual Medicare service, and thus removes price differences across regions owing to cost-of-
living adjustments, payments provided for graduate medical programs, and disproportionate-share
programs, and other items.




                                                23
on health status, ZIP income quintile coefficients are all generally small in
magnitude. The coefficients for cowboy ($7,644) and high revisit rates
($16,562) are large relative to the mean value ($45,827) and highly statistically
significant. There is a strong negative coefficient for comforters (-$2,911), and
while the coefficient for low revisit rates (-$3,269) is in the expected direction,
the estimate is not statistically significant at conventional levels, as was the case
in Table 3. Similar results are shown in the natural log model, albeit with
coefficients that imply slightly smaller proportional effects. Regression
estimates weighted by the number of physicians in the survey (Columns 3 and 4)
exhibit coefficients with larger magnitudes than the unweighted regressions; the
coefficients imply that high-follow-up physicians are associated with roughly
36% greater one-year expenditures for AMI patients.
       Finally, Table 4 provides evidence on the hypothesis that regions with a
greater share of cowboy or high follow-up physicians experience higher quality
care for AMI patients. Column 5 provides estimated marginal effects from
probit models of one-year survival, with a mean of 68 percent. None of the
physician characteristics are individually significant predictors of survival, and
the p-value for the F-test of all variables combined is 0.43.
       Consider next the estimates for early PCI (mean, 26 percent), in column
6 of Table 4. Neither the cowboy nor comforter variables are associated with
early PCI. Follow-up rates, by contrast, are associated negatively with early
PCI; the coefficient for the fraction of high follow-up rate physicians implies a
6.3 percent lower early PCI rate, with the converse true for low-follow-up
physicians (The F-test of all four variables is jointly significant at the 0.01
level). Along with results reported above, these estimates for early PCI provide
no evidence for the hypothesis that “cowboy” physicians, as defined in this
study, are more aggressive because of greater skill (e.g., Chandra and Staiger,
2007). Instead, these results are consistent with our model in which physician




                                         24
beliefs that are unsupported by clinical evidence can increase utilization without
benefiting patients.
What factors predict physician responses to the vignettes?
       To this point, we have shown that aggregated physician vignette
responses explain regional patterns in spending, and that these responses vary
across areas far more than would be expected to occur at random. But this
finding raises the question: what explains observed variation in physician
treatment beliefs? In this section, we use the entire sample of physicians to test
for the relative importance of financial and organizational factors in explaining
physician recommendations. We interpret the residual, conditional on financial
and organizational factors, as “beliefs.”
       Various measures relating to reimbursement are reported in Table 1 for
all physicians. We focus on three of these in particular: the share of patients for
whom a physician is reimbursed on a capitated basis (on average, 15 percent),
the share of a physician’s patients whose primary health insurance is Medicare
(42 percent), and the share of a physician’s patients on Medicaid (10 percent),
with capitated payment and Medicaid generally associated with lower marginal
reimbursement. A second set of questions asks about characteristics of the
physician and her practice: 29 percent work in small practices (solo or 2-
person), 57 percent work in single or multi-specialty group practices, and 13
percent work in HMOs or hospital-based practices. We also observe a number of
characteristics about the physician, including age, gender, whether she is board
certified, and the number of days per week she spends seeing patients.
       Third, the survey asks about a physician’s self-assessed responsiveness
to external incentives, including how frequently, if ever, she had intervened on a
patient for non-clinical reasons in the past 12 months. We create a set of binary
variables that indicates whether a physician responded to each set of incentives
at least “sometimes” (i.e. “sometimes” or “frequently”) over the past year. For




                                        25
example, among cardiologists, 31 percent reported that they had sometimes or
frequently performed a cardiac catheterization because of the expectations of the
referring physician and 38 percent of all physicians reported having intervened
medically because of a colleague’s expectations (Table 1).
       Table 5 presents coefficients from a linear probability model with HRR-
level random effects for three regressions at the physician level (results are
similar with clustering at the HRR level). Our dependent variables are binary
indicators for whether the physician is a cowboy (column 1), a comforter
(column 2), or recommends high frequency follow-up (column 3), the three
categories with predictive power in the main specifications (Table 3). In each
model, we include basic physician demographics: age, gender, board
certification status, whether the physician is a cardiologist, days per week spent
seeing patients, and cardiologists per 100,000 Medicare beneficiaries.
       Notably, some physician characteristics are predictive of physician
types: cardiologists are significantly more likely (by over 20 percentage points)
to be high follow-up doctors, and older physicians in the sample are somewhat
more likely to be cowboys and high follow-up doctors: a 20-year increase in age
is associated with an 6 percentage point increase in the probability of being a
cowboy and a 8 percentage point increase in the probability of being a high
follow-up doctor. Physicians seeing patients on more days per week are more
likely to be comforters.
       A substitution effect would imply that lower incremental reimbursements
associated with treating a larger share of Medicaid and capitated patients would
lead to fewer interventions and more palliative care, while an income effect
would suggest the opposite. Table 5 shows that physicians with a larger fraction
of Medicaid (but not capitated patients) are more likely to be cowboys,
supporting a stronger income effect in our sample.




                                        26
            Some organizational factors are clearly associated with physician beliefs
     about appropriate practice. Physicians in solo or 2-person practices are far more
     likely to be both cowboys and high follow-up doctors than physicians in single
     or multi-specialty group practices or physicians who are part of an HMO or a
     hospital-based practice. Whether cardiologists accommodate referring
     physicians – a financial factor (since cardiologists benefit financially from future
     referrals) as well as an organizational one – is a positive predictor of cowboy
     status among cardiologists.29 Self-reported responsiveness to malpractice
     concerns are high (nearly 39% of physicians report intervening for this reason),
     but are not statistically significant predictors of physician type.30 While
     individual-level regressions with binary dependent variables often exhibit
     modest R2 (the largest is just 0.16), the limited explanatory power of these
     regressions suggests a key role for physician beliefs regarding the productivity
     of treatments, rather than behaviors systematically related to financial,
     organizational, or other factors.
     Challenges to Identification
            One concern with the use of vignettes is the possibility that physicians
     who practice in areas with high rates of prevailing illness may recommend
     higher rates of follow-up care simply because their patients are sicker on
     average. This would then lead to a spurious correlation between the fraction of
     high follow-up (or cowboy) physicians and spending (Sheiner, 2014).
     Empirically, however, physicians in the quartile of HRRs with the greatest level
     of poverty are less likely to recommend a follow-up visit within 3 months than


29
   Note that the question on responding to referring doctor expectations appeared in the
cardiologist survey only, and so reflects the preferences of cardiologists only; the cardiology
dummy variable therefore reflects both the pure effect of being a practicing cardiologist, and a
secondary adjustment arising from the referral question being set to zero for all PCPs.
30
   Perhaps because procedures performed on high-risk patients (such as Patients B and C) can
increase the risk of a malpractice suit (Currie and MacLeod, 2008).




                                                27
 the average physician, although the results are not significant. Similarly, there
 was a negative but statistically insignificant association between the fraction of a
 physician’s Medicaid patients and the likelihood of a quick follow-up visit.31
 Finally, in separate, unreported regressions, we confirm that results in Table 3
 are robust to controlling for percent poverty and the percent of black patients at
 the HRR level.
           Nor is it the case that more intensive treatment is medically appropriate
 in the setting of congestive heart failure patients, whether for low-income or
 high-income patients. For example, one of the possible “cowboy” interventions
 for Patient B, a 75-year-old with Class IV heart failure is an implantable
 defibrillator. Professional societies uniformly recommend against its use for
 Class IV CHF patients – and indeed, Medicare refuses to pay for it – because the
 risks (faulty leads, infections, painful death) outweigh the benefits for the
 average patient. It would be even less appropriate for patients with poor access
 to follow-up care and higher mortality risk, as one might find in low-income
 states.
           Finally, Sheiner (2014) notes that better practice styles might be
 associated with higher social capital (e.g., Skinner and Staiger, 2007), and thus
 proxy for unobservable patient health conditional on conventional risk
 adjustment.32 If so, moving from a state with better practice styles to worse
 practice styles should have no impact on spending in the short-term. Yet
 Finkelstein et al. (2016) found that our measure of “cowboy cardiologists”
 explains significant differences in Medicare expenditures for elderly enrollees

31
   Nor is there evidence that physicians respond differently in prescribing follow-up visits based
on patient race or income, although there were significant differences by sex (Aber et al., 2006).
32
   Recall that the AMI regressions adjust for the HCC score, so any additional biases related to
social capital would arise from unobservable health factors uncorrelated with the HCC score.
Even the HCC “risk-adjustment” score is likely to capture physician intensity, as patients treated
more intensively tend to be diagnosed with more diseases (Song et al., 2010; Finkelstein et al.,
2016).




                                                28
 who move. These findings are consistent with the view that physician beliefs
 exert a large impact on health care utilization.


 V. Discussion and Conclusion
 While there is a good deal of regional variation in medical spending and care
 utilization in the U.S. and elsewhere, there is little agreement about the causes of
 such variations. Do differences arise from variation in patient demand, variation
 in physician behavior, or both? In this paper, we find that regional measures of
 patient demand, as characterized by responses to a nationwide survey, have
 modest predictive associations with regional end-of-life expenditures (Anthony,
 et al., 2009; Baker et al., 2014). We find a much stronger role for local
 physician beliefs in explaining Medicare expenditures, even after adjusting for
 conventional demographic, organizational, and financial incentives facing
 physicians.
          Although practice type is associated with treatment recommendations,
 physician beliefs are not otherwise strongly correlated with conventional
 organizational and financial incentives for physicians that typically play a
 central role in most economic models of physician behavior. Traditional factors
 in supplier-induced demand models, such as the fraction of patients paid through
 capitation (or on Medicaid), or physicians’ responsiveness to financial factors,
 play a relatively small role in explaining equilibrium variations in utilization
 patterns in our context. Organizational factors, such as accommodating
 colleagues, explain somewhat more of the observed variation in individual
 intervention decisions, leaving a considerable degree of unexplained differences
 in physician beliefs about the effectiveness of specific procedures and
 treatments.33

33
   This result is consistent with Epstein and Nicholson (2009), who find large variations in
Cesarean section surgical rates among obstetricians within the same practice, and with Chassin’s




                                               29
          Unfortunately, we cannot shed light on how these differences in
 physician beliefs arise. Previous hypotheses have included variation in medical
 training (Epstein and Nicholson, 2009) or personal experiences with different
 interventions (Levine-Taub, et al., 2015). Yet simple heterogeneity in physician
 beliefs alone cannot explain regional variation in expenditures, since the
 observed regional patterns in physician beliefs exhibit far greater inter-region
 variation than would be expected due to chance: spatial correlation in physician
 beliefs is clearly implied by the data. We do find that physicians’ propensity to
 intervene for non-clinical reasons is related to the expectations of physicians
 with whom they regularly interact, a result consistent with network models of
 diffusion (Moen et al., 2017). Similarly, Molitor (2016) finds that cardiologists
 who move to more or less aggressive regions change their practice style to better
 conform to local norms.
          How much would Medicare expenditures change in a counterfactual
 setting in which there were no cowboys, all physicians were comforters, and all
 physicians met guidelines for follow-up care? While we recognize the
 conjectural nature of this calculation and the fact that our estimates are limited
 to the Medicare fee-for-service population in the HRRs where we have survey
 data, our results imply that in total, these regions would see a decline of 35
 percent in end-of-life Medicare expenditures, 12 percent for spending following
 AMI, and up to 12 percent in total Medicare expenditures.34
          There are several limitations to our study. One is that our speculative
 inferences above regarding the importance of physician beliefs are based solely
 on Medicare fee-for-service data, and may not extend to other populations.
 Indeed, Cooper et al. (2015) found a very small regional correlation between


(1993) “Enthusiasm Hypothesis” – that regional differences in the use of health care services are
caused by differences in the prevalence of physicians who are enthusiasts for those services.
34
   The AMI estimates use column 3 from Table 4.




                                                30
Medicare expenditures and commercially-insured under-65 individuals living in
the same area. This finding is explained in part by the negative correlation
between commercial prices and Medicare spending (Romley et al., 2015), but
there is also evidence on the correlation between utilization rates (that is,
quantities) between commercial and Medicare enrollees of roughly 0.6 or less
(IOM, 2013; Chernew et al., 2010). Most relevant for our analysis, Baker et al.
(2008) used California data to compare end-of-life spending between Medicare
and commercially insured fee-for-service and preferred provider enrollees, and
found a correlation of 0.64 in hospital days during the last 2 years of life,
suggesting a stronger correlation across age groups in similar types of treatment.
Nonetheless, these studies suggest caution in making inferences about overall
regional intensity from the beliefs of physicians regarding the treatment of
cardiovascular disease, as the intensity of beliefs could be quite different for
(e.g.) obstetricians in the same region treating low-birthweight babies.
       Our results do not imply that economic incentives are unimportant.
Clearly, changes in payment margins have a large impact on behavior, as has
been shown in a variety of settings (Clemens and Gottlieb, 2014; Jacobson et al.,
2006). But the prevalence of geographic variations in European countries,
where economic incentives are often blunted (Skinner, 2012), is consistent with
the view that economic incentives cannot entirely explain observed geographic
variations in health utilization, and that physician beliefs could plausibly play a
large role in explaining such variations. A better understanding of both how
physician beliefs form, and how they can be changed, is therefore a key
challenge for future policy and research.




                                        31
                                   References

Ahmed, Ali, Wilbert S. Aronow, and Jerome L. Fleg. 2006. “Higher New York
Heart Association Classes and Increased Mortality and Hospitalization in Heart
Failure Patients with Preserved Left Ventricular Function.” American Heart
Journal 151(2): 444-450.

Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, Steven Laufer, and Stijn van Nieuwerburgh.
2011. “The Joy of Giving or Assisted Living? Using Strategic Surveys to Separate
Public Care Aversion from Bequest Motives.” Journal of Finance 66(2): 519-561.

Ameriks, John, Joseph Briggs, Andrew Caplin, Matthew D. Shapiro, and
Christopher Tonetti. 2016. “Late-in-Life Risks and the Under-Insurance Puzzle.”
NBER Working Paper No. 22726.

Anthony, Denise L., M. Brooke Herndon, Patricia M. Gallagher, Amber E.
Barnato, Julie P.W. Bynum, Daniel J. Gottlieb, Elliott S. Fisher, and Jonathan S.
Skinner. 2009. "How Much Do Patients’ Preferences Contribute to Resource
Use?" Health Affairs 28(3): 864-873.

Arber, Sara, John McKinlay, Ann Adams, Lisa Marceau, Carol Link, and Amy
O’Donnell. 2006. "Patient Characteristics and Inequalities in Doctors’ Diagnostic
And Management Strategies Relating to CHD: A Video-Simulation
Experiment." Social Science & Medicine. 62(1): 103-115.

Baker, Laurence C., Elliott S. Fisher, and John E. Wennberg. 2008. "Variations in
Hospital Resource Use for Medicare and Privately Insured Populations in
California." Health Affairs 27(2): w123-w134.

Baker, Laurence C., M. Kate Bundorf, and Daniel P. Kessler, 2014. “Patients’
Preferences Explain a Small but Significant Share of Regional Variation in
Medicare Spending,” Health Affairs 33(6): 957-63.

Barnato, Amber E., M. Brooke Herndon, Denise L. Anthony, Patricia M.
Gallagher, Jonathan S. Skinner, Julie PW Bynum, and Elliott S. Fisher. 2007.
"Are Regional Variations in End-Of-Life Care Intensity Explained by Patient
Preferences?: A Study of the US Medicare Population." Medical Care 45(5): 386-
393.

Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro.
1997. "Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental




                                        32
Approach in the Health and Retirement Study." The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112(2): 537-579.

Baumann, Andrea O., Raisa B. Deber, Gail G. Thompson. 1991. “Overconfidence
Among Physicians and Nurses: The ‘Micro-Certainty, Macro-Uncertainty’
Phenomenon.” Social Science and Medicine 32(1): 167-74.

Bederman, S. Samuel, Peter C. Coyte, Hans J. Kreder, Nizar N. Mahomed,
Warren J. McIsaac, and James G. Wright. 2011. "Who's in the Driver's Seat? The
Influence of Patient and Physician Enthusiasm on Regional Variation in
Degenerative Lumbar Spinal Surgery: A Population-based Study." Spine 36(6):
481-489.

Black, Dan A.; Mark C. Berger; Frank A. Scott. 2000. “Bounding Parameter
Estimates with Nonclassical Measurement Error.” Journal of the American
Statistical Association. 95(451): 739-748.

Boden, William E., O'Rourke, Robert A., Teo, Koon K., and the COURAGE Trial
Research Group. 2007. “Optimal Medical Therapy with or without PCI for Stable
Coronary Disease” New England Journal of Medicine 356: 1503-1516.

Campbell, Eric G., Sowmya R. Rao, Catherine M. DesRoches, Lisa I. Iezzoni,
Christine Vogeli, Dragana Bolcic-Jankovic, and Paola D. Miralles. 2010.
“Physician Professionalism and Changes in Physician-Industry Relationships
From 2004 to 2009.” Archives of Internal Medicine, 170(20): 1820-26.

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, National Health Expenditure Fact
Sheet, updated June, 2017. https://www.cms.gov/research-statistics-data-and-
systems/statistics-trends-and-reports/nationalhealthexpenddata/nhe-fact-
sheet.html

Chandra, Amitabh, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2007. “Productivity Spillovers in
Healthcare: Evidence from the Treatment of Heart Attacks.” Journal of Political
Economy 115: 103-140.

Chandra, Amitabh, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2017. ‘Identifying Sources of
Inefficiency in Health Care.’ National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 24035.




                                       33
Chandra, Amitabh, and Jonathan Skinner. 2012. “Productivity Growth and
Expenditure Growth in U.S. Health Care.” Journal of Economic Literature 50(3):
645-80.

Chassin, Mark R. 1993. "Explaining Geographic Variations: The Enthusiasm
Hypothesis." Medical Care 31(5 Suppl): YS37-YS44.

Chernew, Michael E., Lindsay M. Sabik, Amitabh Chandra, Teresa B. Gibson,
and Joseph P. Newhouse. 2010. "Geographic Correlation between Large-Firm
Commercial Spending and Medicare Spending." The American Journal of
Managed Care. 16(2): 131.

Clemens, Jeffrey, and Joshua D. Gottlieb. 2014. "Do Physicians' Financial
Incentives Affect Medical Treatment and Patient Health?." The American
Economic Review. 104(4): 1320-1349.

Comin, Diego, Jonathan Skinner, and Douglas Staiger. 2017. “Overconfidence
and the Diffusion of Medical Technology,” Working Paper, Dartmouth College.

Cooper, Zack, Stuart V. Craig, Martin Gaynor, and John Van Reenen. 2015. “The
Price Ain't Right? Hospital Prices and Health Spending on the Privately Insured,”
NBER Working Paper No. 21815.

Currie, Janet, and W. Bentley MacLeod. 2008. “First Do No Harm? Tort Reform
and Birth Outcomes.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(2): 795-830.

Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care. 2013.
http://www.dartmouthatlas.org/tools/downloads.aspx.

Doyle Jr, Joseph J. 2011. "Returns to Local-Area Healthcare Spending: Evidence
from Health Shocks to Patients Far from Home." American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics 3(3): 221-243.

Dranove, David, and Paul Wehner. 1994. “Physician-Induced Demand for
Childbirths,” Journal of Health Economics 13(1): 61–73.

Dresselhaus, Timothy R., John W. Peabody, Jeff Luck, and Dan Bertenthal. 2004.
"An Evaluation of Vignettes for Predicting Variation in the Quality of Preventive
Care." Journal of General Internal Medicine 19(10): 1013-1018.




                                       34
Epstein, Andrew J., and Sean Nicholson. 2009. "The Formation and Evolution of
Physician Treatment Styles: An Application to Cesarean Sections," Journal of
Health Economics 28(6): 1126-1140.

ESCAPE: The ESCAPE Investigators and ESCAPE Study Coordinators. 2005.
“Evaluation Study of Congestive Heart Failure and Pulmonary Artery
Catheterization Effectiveness: The ESCAPE Trial.” Journal of the American
Medical Association. 294(13): 1625-1633.

Evans, Spencer C., Michael C. Roberts, Jared W. Keeley, Jennifer B. Blossom,
Christina M. Amaro, et al. 2015. “Vignette Methodologies for Studying
Clinicians’ Decision-Making: Validity, Utility, and Application in ICD-11 Field
Studies. International Journal of Clinical and Health Psychology 15(2): 160-170.

Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams. 2016. “Sources of
Geographic Variation in Health Care: Evidence from Patient Migration.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economic 121(4): 1681-1726.

Fisher, Elliott S., David E. Wennberg, Thrse A. Stukel, Daniel J. Gottlieb, Francis
Lee Lucas, and Etoile L. Pinder. 2003 “The implications of regional variations in
Medicare spending. Part 1: the content, quality, and accessibility of care.” Annals
of internal medicine 138: 273-287.

Fisher, Elliott S., David E. Wennberg, Terese A. Stukel, Daniel J. Gottlieb,
Francis Lee Lucas, et al. 2003. “The Implications of Regional Variations in
Medicare Spending. Part 2: Health Outcomes and Satisfaction with Care.” Annals
of Internal Medicine 138: 288-98.

Gogineni, Keerthi, Katherine L. Shuman, Derek Chinn, Nicole B. Gabler, and
Ezekiel J. Emanuel. 2015. "Patient Demands and Requests for Cancer Tests and
Treatments." JAMA Oncology 1(1): 33-39.

Gottlieb, Daniel J., Weiping Zhou, Yunjie Song, Kathryn Gilman Andrews,
Jonathan S. Skinner, and Jason M. Sutherland. 2010. "Prices Don’t Drive
Regional Medicare Spending Variations." Health Affairs 29(3): 537-543.

Hunt, Sharon Ann, William T. Abraham, Marshall H. Chin, Arthur M. Feldman,
Gary S. Francis, et al. 2005. “ACC/AHA 2005 Guideline Update for the
Diagnosis and Management of Chronic Heart Failure in the Adult” Circulation
112:e154-e235.




                                        35
Institute of Medicine, Committee on Geographic Variation in Health Care
Spending and Promotion of High-Value Care; Board on Health Care Services;
Newhouse JP, Garber AM, Graham RP, et al., editors. “Variation in Health Care
Spending: Target Decision Making, Not Geography.” Washington (DC): National
Academies Press (US); 2013 Oct 1. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK201647/.

Jacobson, Mireille, A. James O’Malley, Craig C. Earle, Juliana Pakes, Peter
Gaccione and Joseph P. Newhouse. 2006. “Does Reimbursement Influence
Chemotherapy Treatment for Cancer Patients?.” Health Affairs 25(2): 437-443.

Keating, Nancy L., Mary Beth Landrum, Haiden A. Huskamp, Elena M. Kouri,
Holly G. Prigerson, Deborah Schrag, Paul K. Maciejewski, Mark C. Hornbrook,
and David A. Haggstrom. 2016. "Dartmouth Atlas Area-Level Estimates of End-
of-Life Expenditures: How Well Do They Reflect Expenditures for Prospectively
Identified Advanced Lung Cancer Patients?." Health Services Research 51(4):
1584–1594

Keeley, Ellen C., Judith A. Boura, and Cindy L. Grines. 2003. “Primary
Angioplasty Versus Intravenous Thrombolytic Therapy for Acute Myocardial
Infarction: A Quantitative Review of 23 Randomised Trials.” The Lancet
361(9351):13-20.

Kelley, Amy S., Evan Bollens-Lund, Kenneth E. Covinsky, Jonathan S. Skinner,
and R. Sean Morrison. 2017. "Prospective Identification of Patients at Risk for
Unwarranted Variation in Treatment." Journal of Palliative Medicine. Epub ahead
of publication.

Levine-Taub, Anna A., Anton Kolotilin, Robert S. Gibbons, Ernst R. Berndt.
2015. “The Diversity of Concentrated Prescribing Behavior: An Application to
Antipsychotics.” Journal of Health Economics 40: 26-39.

Lucas, Francis Lee, Andrea E. Siewers, David J. Malenka, and David E.
Wennberg. 2008. “Diagnostic-Therapeutic Cascade Revisited. Coronary
Angiography, Coronary Artery Bypass Surgery, and Percutaneous Coronary
Intervention in the Modern Era.” Circulation 118: 2797-2802.

Lucas, Frances Lee, Brenda E. Sirovich, Patricia M. Gallagher, Andrea E.
Siewers, and David E. Wennberg. 2010. “Variation in Cardiologists’ Propensity
to Test and Treat: Is it Associated with Regional Variation in Utilization?”
Circulation: Cardiovascular Quality and Outcomes 3: 253-60.




                                      36
Mandelblatt Jeanne S., Leigh Anne Faul, Gheorghe Luta, Solomon B. Makgoeng,
Claudine Isaacs, et al. 2012. “Patient and Physician Decision Styles and Breast
Cancer Chemotherapy Use in Older Women: Cancer and Leukemia Group B
Protocol 369901” Journal of Clinical Oncology 30(21): 2609-14.

McGuire, Thomas G. 2011. “Physician Agency and Payment for Primary Medical
Care.” In The Oxford Handbook of Health Economics, edited by Sherry Glied and
Peter C. Smith. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

McGuire, Thomas G., Pauly, M. 1991. “Physician Response to Fee Changes with
Multiple Payers.” Journal of Health Economics 10(4): 385-410.

Moen, Erika L., Andrea M. Austin, Julie P. Bynum, Jonathan Skinner, and A.
James O’Malley. 2016. "An analysis of Patient-Sharing Physician Networks and
Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillator Therapy." Health Services and Outcomes
Research Methodology 16(3): 132-153.

Moliter, David. 2016. “The Evolution of Physician Practice Styles: Evidence from
Cardiologist Migration.” NBER Working Paper No. 22478. Forthcoming,
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.

Newhouse, Joseph P., and Alan M. Garber. “Geographic variation in Medicare
services.” New England Journal of Medicine 368, no. 16 (2013): 1465-1468.

Pauly, Mark. 1980. Doctors and Their Workshops: Economic Models of
Physician Behavior Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Peabody John W., Jeff Luck, Peter Glassman, Sharad Jain, Joyce Hansen,
Maureen Spell, and Martin Lee. 2004. “Measuring the Quality of Physician
Practice by Using Clinical Vignettes: A Prospective Validation Study.” Annals of
Internal Medicine 141(10): 771-80.

Peabody, John W., Jeff Luck, Peter Glassman, Timothy R. Dresselhaus, and
Martin Lee. 2000. "Comparison of Vignettes, Standardized Patients, and Chart
Abstraction: A Prospective Validation Study of 3 Methods for Measuring
Quality." Journal of the American Medical Association. 283(13): 1715-1722.

Rao, Jaya K., Lynda A. Anderson, Feng-Chang Lin, and Jeffrey P. Laux. 2014.
“Completion of Advance Directives Among U.S. Consumers.” American Journal
of Preventive Medicine 46(1): 65-70.




                                       37
Ransohoff, David F., Mary McNaughton Collins, and Floyd J. Fowler Jr. 2002.
“Why Is Prostate Cancer Screening So Common When the Evidence Is So
Uncertain? A System Without Negative Feedback.” The American Journal of
Medicine 113(8): 663-67.

Romley, John A., Anupam B. Jena, and Dana P. Goldman. 2011. "Hospital
Spending and Inpatient Mortality: Evidence from California." Annals of Internal
Medicine 154(3): 160-167.

Romley, John A., Sarah Axeen, Darius N. Lakdawalla, Michael E. Chernew, Jay
Bhattacharya, and Dana P. Goldman. 2015. "The Relationship between
Commercial Health Care Prices and Medicare Spending and Utilization." Health
Services Research 50(3): 883-896.

Sheiner, Louise. 2014. “Why the Geographic Variation in Health Care Spending
Cannot Tell Us Much about the Efficiency or Quality of our Health Care System,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2014(2):1-72.

Sirovich, Brenda, Patricia M. Gallagher, David E. Wennberg, and Elliott S.
Fisher. 2008. “Discretionary Decision Making by Primary Care Physicians and
the Cost of U.S. Health Care.” Health Affairs 27: 813-23.

Skinner, Jonathan, 2012. “Causes and Consequences of Geographic Variation in
Health Care.” In Handbook of Health Economics, edited by Thomas G. McGuire,
Mark Pauly, and Pedro P. Barros. Vol. 2. North Holland: Amsterdam.

Skinner, Jonathan, and Douglas Staiger. 2007. “Technological Diffusion from
Hybrid Corn to Beta Blockers.” In Hard-to-Measure Goods and Services: Essays
in Honor of Zvi Griliches, edited by E. Berndt and C. M. Hulten. University of
Chicago Press and NBER: Chicago.

Song, Yunjie, Jonathan Skinner, Julie Bynum, Jason Sutherland, John E.
Wennberg, and Elliott S. Fisher. 2010. "Regional Variations in Diagnostic
Practices." New England Journal of Medicine 363(1): 45-53.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2004. Seventh Report of the
Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of
High Blood Pressure (JNC7). NIH Publication No. 04-5230.




                                       38
Wennberg, John E., Benjamin A. Barnes and Michael Zubkoff. 1982.
“Professional Uncertainty and the Problem of Supplier-Induced Demand.” Social
Science and Medicine 16(7): 811–824.

Wennberg, David E., John D. Dickens, Jr., Lois Biener, Floyd J. Fowler, Jr.,
David N. Soule, and Robert B. Keller. 1997. “Do Physicians Do What They Say?
The Inclination to Test and Its Association with Coronary Angiography Rates.”
Journal of General Internal Medicine 12(3):172-176.




                                     39
Figure 1: Theoretical Model of Equilibrium Health Care Intensity




Notes: The model that corresponds to this figure is presented in detail in Appendix A. The curves
s′(x) and g′(x) represent two distinct marginal benefit curves – either real or perceived. The lines
l* and l represents two different sets of constraints. In the model, physicians assess the expected
marginal benefit of treatment and the constraints that they face and deliver care up to the point
where the two curves intersect.




                                                 1
Figure 2: Distributions of observed Patient Preferences vs. Simulated
Distributions (based on 1000 bootstrap samples with replacement)




                                 Fraction who would see unneeded cardiologist
                                    (simulated vs. observed density; p<0.01)
 density in patient sample
  10 15 20 25 30
              5
              0




                             0   .1    .2   .3      .4      .5      .6    .7   .8    .9   1
                                            fraction calculated at HRR level

                                            Density              Simulated Density




                                                                                     2
Notes: This figure shows density plots of patient preferences for the main questions in the patient
survey for the 74 HRRs considered (weighted by observations per HRR). A simulated distribution
based on 1,000 bootstrap samples under the null hypothesis that individuals were randomly
assigned to areas is superimposed on the observed distributions. P–values for over-dispersion are
reported in Table 1 and indicate that the observed variation is significantly greater than can be
explained by random variation.




                                                 3
Figure 3a: Distribution of Length of Time before Next Visit for Patient with
Well-Controlled Angina (Regional Averages for Cardiologists)
                                      Recommended Frequency of Follow-up Visits (months)
          30     50
                 40
    Percent
  20             10
                 0




                                      0   1     2        3     4       5     6      7    8      9        10   11   12
                                                                           Visits

Figure 3b: Distribution of High Follow-Up Physicians and Geographic
Correlation (Regional Averages for Cardiologists)
                                                  Fraction high follow-up cardiologists
                                               (simulated vs. observed density; p<0.01)
                                 25
  density in cardiologist sample
    5       10     015      20




                                      0   .1        .2       .3      .4      .5      .6    .7       .8        .9   1
                                                             fraction calculated at HRR level

                                                             Density                Simulated Density




Notes: Figure 3a presents a HRR-level histogram of averages from the cardiology survey for the
74 HRRs in the main analysis sample. Figure 3b shows the distribution of high-follow-up
cardiologists in this sample. A simulated distribution based on 1,000 bootstrap samples under the
null hypothesis that individuals were randomly assigned to areas is superimposed on the observed
distributions. P–values for over-dispersion are reported in Table 1 and indicate that the observed
variation is significantly greater than can be explained by random variation.




                                                                                        4
Figure 4: Natural Log of 2-year End-of-Life (EOL) Spending vs. Selected
Independent Variables

                                              (a) Cowboy Fraction & Ln 2-year EOL Spend                                                                  (b) Comforter Fraction & Ln 2-year EOL Spend




                                                                                                                                      11.5
                      11.5




                                                                                                                                             11.3
                               11.3




                                                                                                                        Ln 2-yr EOL Spending
          Ln 2-yr EOL Spending




                                                                                                                                      11.1
                        11.1




                                                                                                                              10.9
                10.9




                                                                                                                      10.7
        10.7




                                                                                                                                      10.5
                      10.5




                                      0         .1        .2        .3        .4         .5        .6    .7                                          0    .1       .2   .3    .4    .5      .6         .7
                                                                   Cowboy Fraction                                                                                           Comforter Fraction




                                          (c) High Follow-Up Fraction & Ln 2-year EOL Spend
                                                                                                                           11.5
                                                                                                                                                    (c) Aggressive Patient Fraction & Ln 2-year EOL Spend
               11.5




                                                                                                                                     11.3
                        11.3




                                                                                                                Ln 2-yr EOL Spending
   Ln 2-yr EOL Spending




                                                                                                                              11.1
                 11.1




                                                                                                                      10.9
         10.9




                                                                                                              10.7
 10.7




                                                                                                                           10.5
               10.5




                                      0              .1           .2            .3            .4        .5                                                     0         .1         .2            .3        .4   .5
                                                               High Follow-Up Fraction                                                                                  Aggressive Patient Fraction




Notes: Figure 4 presents scatter plots of area-level end of life spending vs. measures of supply and
demand for care. Measures included are: a) fraction of all physicians who are cowboys; b) fraction
of physicians who are comforters; c) fraction of high follow-up physicians; and d) the share of
patients who desire aggressive care at the end of life. Each circle represents one HRR, with size
proportional to the size of the survey sample represented.




                                                                                                                5
                                 Table 1: Primary Variables and Sample Distribution
Variable                                                    Mean               Individ. SD    Area Av. SD      P-value
Spending and Utilization
2-Year End-of-Life Spending                                 $55,194            -              $10,634          -
Average EOL Spending                                        $14,409            -              $3,983           -
Hip Fracture Patient Spending                               $52,282            -              $4,882           -
Patient Variables (N=1516)
Have Unneeded Tests                                         73%                45%            11%              <0.01
See Unneeded Cardiologist                                   56%                50%            14%              <0.01
Aggressive Patient Preferences Ratio                        8.0%               27%            7.0%             <0.01
Comfort Patient Preferences Ratio                           48%                50%            13%              <0.01
Primary Care Physician Variables (N= 570 in restricted sample)
Cowboy                                                      23%                42%            27%              <0.01
Comforter                                                   44%                50%            28%              <0.01
Follow-Up Low                                               8.8%               28%            19%              <0.01
Follow-Up High                                              4.4%               20%            6.4%             <0.01
Cardiologist variables (N=415 in restricted sample)
Cowboy                                                      26%                44%            20%              <0.01
Comforter                                                   27%                45%            23%              <0.01
Follow-Up Low                                               1.4%               12%            6.3%             -
Follow-Up High                                              21%                41%            22%              <0.01
All Physicians (N=985 in restricted sample)
Cowboy                                                      24%                43%            15%              <0.01
Comforter                                                   37%                48%            18%              <0.01
Follow-Up Low                                               5.7%               23%            8.6%             <0.01
Follow-Up High                                              12%                32%            12%              <0.01
Organizational and Financial Variables
Reimbursement
Fraction Medicare Patients                                  42%                22%            -                -
Fraction Medicaid Patients                                  10%                13%            -                -
Fraction Capitated Patients                                 15%                25%            -                -
Organizational Factors
Solo or 2-person Practice                                   29%                46%            -                -
Single/Multi Speciality Group Practice                      57%                50%            -                -
Group/Sta↵ HMO or Hospital-Based Practice                   13%                33%            -                -
General Controls
Physician Age                                               53                 10             -                -
Male                                                        81%                39%            -                -
Board Certified                                             88%                33%            -                -
Weekly Patient Days                                         2.9                1.5            -                -
Cardiologists per 100k (N=74, HRR-level)                    6.8                1.9            -                -
Responsiveness Factors
Responds to Referrer Expectations (Cardiologists only)      31%                46%            -                -
Responds to Colleague Expectations                          38%                49%            -                -
Responds to Patient Expectations                            54%                50%            -                -
Responds to Malpractice Concerns                            39%                49%            -                -
Responds to Practice Financial Incentives                   9%                 29%            -                -
Note: The table shows means for the (restricted) primary analysis sample. The p-value in the last column is
for the null hypothesis of no excess variance across areas and is taken from a bootstrap of patient or physician
responses across areas. For each of 1,000 simulations, we draw patients or providers randomly (with replacement)
and calculate the simulated area average and the standard deviation of that area average. The empirical distribution
of the standard deviation of the area average is used to form the p-value for the actual area average.
                              Table 2: Distribution of Physicians by Vignette Responses
                                       Panel A: PCPs (N=570 in restricted sample)
                                                     Cowboy                      Comforter
                         Follow-Up Frequency         No          Yes             No     Yes
                         Low                         41          9               34     16              8.8%
                         Medium                      387         108             270    225             88%
                         High                        12          13              15     10              4.4%
                                                     77%         23%             56%    44%
                              2                                                       2
                         p(       ):                 <0.001                      p(       ):   0.055

                                                     Comforter
                         Cowboy                      No       Yes
                         No                          236      204        77%
                         Yes                         83       47         23%
                                                     56%      44%
                              2
                         p(       ):                 0.013

                                   Panel B: Cardiologists (N=415 in restricted sample)
                                                     Cowboy                      Comforter
                         Follow-Up Frequency         No          Yes             No     Yes
                         Low                         6           0               5      1               1.4%
                         Medium                      240         80              228    92              77%
                         High                        61          28              69     20              21%
                                                     74%         26%             73%    27%
                              2                                                       2
                         p(       ):                 <0.001                      p(       ):   <0.001

                                                     Comforter
                         Cowboy                      No       Yes
                         No                          227      80         74%
                         Yes                         75       33         26%
                                                     73%      27%
                              2
                         p(       ):                 <0.001

                         This table shows the bivariate relationships between the guideline-defined indica-
                         tors for recommended follow-up frequency, as well as“Cowboy” and “Comforter”
                         status among both PCPs and cardiologists in the (restricted) analysis sample.
                         Chi-squared tests evaluate the null hypothesis that there is no association be-
                         tween pairs of indicators in the table.



                                  Table 3: Regression Estimates of Medicare Expenditures
                                     Combined sample: PCPs and cardiologists
                                              Medicare spending in last two years of life (columns 1-6)      Overall
                                               (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)         (7)
Cowboy physician share                        0.822     0.676      0.675     0.684       0.685                 0.904
                                            (0.196)   (0.143)    (0.131)   (0.132)     (0.123)               (0.182)
Comforter physician share                    -0.315    -0.200     -0.175    -0.161      -0.151                -0.274
                                            (0.144)   (0.098)    (0.098)   (0.099)     (0.096)               (0.136)
High follow-up physician share                          1.060      0.964     1.033       0.917                 1.066
                                                      (0.176)    (0.172)   (0.165)     (0.166)               (0.215)
Low follow-up physician share                          -0.307     -0.289    -0.402      -0.345                -0.673
                                                      (0.220)    (0.217)   (0.263)     (0.239)               (0.289)
Have unneeded tests patient share                                  0.297                 0.351     0.500       0.421
                                                                 (0.176)               (0.193)   (0.255)     (0.239)
See unneeded cardiologist patient share                           0.150                 0.132     0.543       -0.079
                                                                 (0.129)               (0.130)   (0.260)     (0.151)
Aggressive patient preferences share                                        -0.427      -0.294    -0.021      -0.695
                                                                           (0.408)     (0.379)   (0.518)     (0.404)
Comfort patient preferences share                                           -0.237      -0.282    -0.426      -0.639
                                                                           (0.137)     (0.144)   (0.217)     (0.173)
N                                              74        74         74        74          74        74          74
R2                                           0.356     0.619       0.644     0.634       0.662     0.203       0.623
2-year end-of-life spending (outcome in columns 1-6) and overall spending (outcome in column 7) are in natural log
form and are price, age, sex, and race adjusted. Results shown are for the 74 Hospital Referral Regions (HRRs)
with survey responses for at least 3 patients, 1 primary care physician, and 3 cardiologists. All regressions include
a constant, control for the fraction of primary care physicians in the sample, and are robust to controlling for %
black and % poverty at the HRR level. Survey sampling weights take into account di↵erences in the number of
physician observations per HRR.
Table 4: Regression Results for One-Year Medicare Spending and Quality: Acute Myocardial Infarction
Patients, 2007-10
                                          (1)               (2)               (3)             (4)                 (5)                 (6)
                                     1-year Med.     Ln 1-year Med     1-year Med.     Ln 1-year Med      1-year survival       Fraction with
                                    Expenditure       Expenditure      Expenditure       Expenditure                           Same-Day PCI
 Cowboy physician share                 7,644             0.142             10,870           0.196               0.006               0.016
                                       (1,720)           (0.034)           (2,419)         (0.044)             (0.008)             (0.019)
 Comforter physician share              -2,911            -0.050            -3,019          -0.046               0.009              -0.008
                                       (1,137)           (0.021)           (1,350)         (0.024)             (0.007)             (0.016)
 High follow-up physician share         16,560            0.270             22,310          0.360               -0.009              -0.063
                                       (2,530)           (0.046)           (3,215)         (0.051)             (0.013)             (0.027)
 Low follow-up physician share          -3,269            -0.084            -4,148          -0.115               0.015               0.089
                                       (2,855)           (0.055)           (3,463)         (0.058)             (0.015)             (0.032)
 HCC (2nd Quintile)                      5,297             0.106             5,423           0.108              -0.044              -0.027
                                       (195.4)           (0.003)           (251.6)         (0.004)             (0.002)             (0.002)
 HCC (3rd Quintile)                      8,535             0.176             9,098           0.187              -0.092              -0.053
                                       (227.5)           (0.004)           (353.4)         (0.007)             (0.002)             (0.002)
 HCC (4th Quintile)                     11,660             0.242            12,180           0.252              -0.149              -0.084
                                       (285.7)           (0.005)           (539.9)         (0.010)             (0.003)             (0.002)
 HCC (Highest Quintile)                 19,280             0.347            20,460           0.365              -0.258              -0.123
                                       (506.7)           (0.008)           (934.3)         (0.015)             (0.003)             (0.003)
 Black                                   4,823             0.052             4,543           0.046              -0.020              -0.039
                                       (531.3)           (0.009)           (731.8)         (0.010)             (0.003)             (0.004)
 Hispanic                                4,921             0.079             4,770           0.080               0.016              -0.005
                                       (1,175)           (0.024)           (1,264)         (0.028)             (0.005)             (0.005)
 Asian                                   1,385            -0.010             858.5          -0.017              -0.005              -0.023
                                       (1,141)           (0.023)          (1,399.3)        (0.026)             (0.007)             (0.011)
 Income (2nd Quintile)                  -233.9            -0.007            -405.1          -0.007               0.010               0.007
                                       (342.2)           (0.006)           (591.6)         (0.009)             (0.002)             (0.004)
 Income (3rd Quintile)                  -286.0            -0.009            -455.5          -0.012               0.012               0.009
                                       (326.2)           (0.006)           (552.3)         (0.008)             (0.002)             (0.004)
 Income (4th Quintile)                   160.0            -0.002            -363.8          -0.007               0.016               0.016
                                       (399.2)           (0.008)           (605.3)         (0.011)             (0.002)             (0.005)
 Income (Highest Quintile)               320.1             0.007            -678.7          -0.007               0.030               0.020
                                       (500.8)           (0.009)           (754.1)         (0.013)             (0.003)             (0.006)
 N                                     560,392           560,392           560,392         560,392            560,392              560,392
 R2                                     0.070             0.075             0.075           0.082                  –                   –
 These results are based on a 100% sample of fee-for-service Medicare enrollees, 2007-10 with mortality follow-up through 2011. Columns
 1 and 2 are unweighted and columns 3 and 4 are weighted by the number of physician respondents included in the sample. All results
 are for the 137 HRRs sample, with risk adjustment measures included but not reported for the following: age (65-69, 70-74, 75-79,
 80-84, 85+), fully interacted with sex, vascular disease, pulmonary disease, dementia, diabetes, liver failure, renal failure, cancer, plegia
 (stroke), rheumatologic disease, HIV, and location of the AMI: Anterolateral, inferolateral, inferoposterior, all other inferior, true
 posterior walls, or subendocardial, other site, or not otherwise specified. All models include year fixed e↵ects. Reported coefficients in
 columns 5 and 6 are marginal e↵ects from Probit regressions.
            Table 5: Predictors of Cowboy, comforter & high follow-up physician types

                                                       (1)                    (2)                         (3)
                                                 Cowboy physician      Comforter physician     High follow-up physician
General Controls
Cardiologist dummy                                     0.005                  -0.092                     0.222
                                                      (0.042)                (0.048)                    (0.029)
Age                                                    0.003                  0.000                      0.004
                                                      (0.001)                (0.002)                    (0.001)
Male                                                   0.027                  -0.072                     -0.078
                                                      (0.037)                (0.042)                    (0.025)
Weekly patient days                                    -0.011                  0.024                      0.008
                                                      (0.009)                (0.011)                    (0.006)
Board certified                                        -0.033                 -0.035                     0.010
                                                      (0.043)                (0.049)                    (0.030)
Reimbursement
Fraction capitated patients                            0.001                  -0.000                     0.000
                                                      (0.001)                (0.001)                    (0.000)
Fraction Medicaid patients                             0.004                  0.001                      0.001
                                                      (0.001)                (0.001)                    (0.001)
Fraction Medicare patients                             0.001                  0.000                      0.000
                                                      (0.001)                (0.001)                    (0.000)
Organizational Factors
(Baseline = Solo or 2-person Practice)                   -                       -                         -

Single/multi speciality group practice                 -0.101                 -0.008                     -0.164
                                                      (0.032)                (0.037)                    (0.022)
Group/sta↵ HMO or hospital-based practice              -0.171                  0.038                     -0.153
                                                      (0.047)                (0.053)                    (0.032)
Responsiveness Factors
Responds to patient expectations                        -0.036                  0.047                    -0.007
                                                       (0.036)                (0.041)                   (0.025)
Responds to colleague expectations                      -0.015                 -0.005                     0.026
                                                       (0.030)                (0.035)                   (0.021)
Responds to referrer expectations                       0.061                  -0.022                    -0.033
                                                       (0.046)                (0.053)                   (0.032)
Responds to malpractice concerns                        0.041                   0.045                     0.006
                                                       (0.030)                (0.034)                   (0.021)
N                                                        978                     978                       978
R2 (within)                                             0.048                  0.046                     0.150
  2
R (between)                                             0.075                  0.009                     0.117
R2 (overall)                                            0.059                  0.040                     0.157
All logit regressions include a constant, HRR-level random e↵ects, and general physician-level controls. Additional
explanatory variables include financial, organizational and responsiveness factors. The question on responding to
referring doctor expectations appeared in the cardiologist survey only, and therefore represents the preferences
of cardiologists only; the cardiology dummy variable therefore reflects both the pure e↵ect of being a practicing
cardiologist, and a secondary adjustment arising from the referral question being set to zero for all primary care
physicians. All results are robust to including a measure of capacity (cardiologists per 100k Medicare beneficiaries)
among the explanatory variables.
Appendix A: A Model of Variation in Utilization
           We develop a simple model of patient demand and physician supply. The
demand side of the model is a standard one; the patient’s indirect utility function
is a function of out-of-pocket prices (p), income (Y), health (h), and preferences
for care (η); V = V(p, Y, h, η). Solving this for optimal intensity of care, x, yields
xD.
           On the supply side, we assume that physicians seek to maximize the
perceived health of their patient, s(x), by appropriate choice of inputs x, subject to
patient demand (xD), financial considerations, and organizational factors.
           Following Chandra and Skinner (2012), we write the physician’s overall
utility as:
                    (A.1) ! = Ψ$(& ) + Ω(* + +& − -) − .(|& − & 0 |) −
2(|& − & 3 |)
where Ψ is perceived social value of improving health, Ω is the physician’s utility
function of own income, comprising her fixed payment W (a salary, for example)
net of fixed costs R, and including the incremental “profits” from each additional
test or procedure performed, π.35 The sign of π depends on the type of procedure
and the payment system faced by the physician.
           The third term represents the loss in provider utility arising from the
deviation between the quantity of services the provider actually recommends (x)
and what the informed patient demands (xD). This function could reflect classic
supplier-induced demand – from the physician’s point of view, xD is too low
relative to the physician’s optimal x – or it may reflect the extent to which
physicians are acting as the agent of the (possibly misinformed) patient, for
example when the patient wants a procedure that the physician does not believe is
medically appropriate. The fourth term reflects a parallel influence on physician


35
     We ignore capacity constraints, such as the supply of hospital or ICU beds.




                                                   1
decision-making exerted by organizational factors that do not directly affect
financial rewards, such as (physician) peer pressure.
        The first-order condition for (1) is:
                 (A.2) Ψ$ 4 (& ) = −Ω4 + + . 4 + 24 ≡ 6


Physicians provide care up to the point where the choice of x reflects a balance
between the perceived marginal value of health, Ψs′(x), and factors summarized
by λ: (a) the incremental change in net income π, weighted by the importance of
financial resources Ω′, (b) the incremental disutility from moving patient demand
away from where it was originally, .′, and (c) the incremental disutility from how
much the physician’s own choice of x deviates from her organization’s perceived
optimal level of intervention, 24 .
        In this model,36 there are two ways to define “supplier-induced demand.”
The broadest definition is simply the presence of any equilibrium quantity of care
beyond the level of the ex-ante preferences of an informed patient, i.e. x > xD.
This is still relatively benign, as the marginal value of this care may still be
positive. Supplier-induced demand could more narrowly be defined as s(x) - s(xD
) ≤ 0; for additional care provided at the margin, patients gain no improvement in
health outcomes and may even experience a decline in health or a significant
financial loss. Importantly, both of these definitions are ambiguous about the
question of physician knowledge of inducement beyond clinically appropriate
levels. That is, a physician with strong (but incorrect) beliefs may over-treat her
patients, even in the absence of financial or organizational incentives to do so.
        To develop an empirical model, we adopt a simple closed-form solution of
the utility function for physician i:37


36
   A more general model would account for the patient’s ability to leave the physician and seek
care from a different physician, as in McGuire (2011).
37
   We are grateful to Pascal St.-Amour for suggesting this approach.




                                                2
                                                                     <
                       (A.1′) !8 = Ψ$8 (&8 ) + 9[*8 + +8 &8 − -8 ] − = (&8 −
              ?
& 8 0 )= –        (&8 − &8 3 )=
              =

Note that ω/Ψ reflects the relative tradeoff between the physician’s income and
the value of improving patient lives, and thus might be viewed as a measure of
“professionalism,” as in Campbell, et al. (2010). The first-order condition is
therefore:
                       (A.2′) $84 (&8 ) = 6 ≡ (−9+8 + .(&8 − &8 0 ) + 2(& − &8 3 ))/Ψ
Note that λ is linear in x with an intercept equal to −(9+8 + .&8 0 + 2&8 3 )/Ψ.
Note also the key assumption that patients are sorted in order from most
appropriate to least appropriate for treatment, thus describing a downward sloping
s'(x) (marginal utility of treatment) curve. The equilibrium is where s'(x) = λ, at
point A. A shift in the intercept, which depends on reimbursement rates for
procedures π, taste for income ω, regional demand xD, and organizational or peer
effects xO, would yield a different λ*, and hence a different utilization rate.
However, all of these factors affect the intensity of treatments via a movement
along the marginal benefit curve, s′(x).
             Alternatively, it may be that si′(x) differs across physicians – i.e. physician
productivity differs, rather than physician constraints. For example, if gi′(x) = αi +
s′(x), where s′(x) is average physician productivity and α varies across regions,
this would be represented as a shift in the marginal benefit curve. Point C in
Figure 1 corresponds to greater intensity of care than point A and arises naturally
when the physician is or just believes she is more productive. For example, heart
attack patients experience better outcomes from cardiac interventions in regions
with higher rates of revascularization, consistent with a Roy model of
occupational sorting (Chandra and Staiger, 2007). Because patients in regions
with high intervention rates benefit differentially from these interventions, this




                                                3
scenario does not correspond to the narrow definition of “supplier-induced
demand.”
       The productivity shifter αi may also vary because of “professional
uncertainty” – a situation in which the physician’s perceived αi differs from the
true αi (Wennberg, et al., 1982). Physicians may be overly optimistic with
respect to their ability to perform procedures, leading to expected benefits that
exceed actual realized benefits, as noted in the main text. For example, suppose
the actual benefit is s′(x) but the physician’s perceived benefit is g′(x). The
equilibrium is point D: the marginal treatment harms the patient, even though the
physician believes the opposite, incorrectly believing they are at point C. In
equilibrium, this supplier behavior would appear consistent with classic supplier-
induced demand, but the cause is quite different.
       Empirical Specification. To examine these theories empirically, we
consider variation in practice at the regional level (for reasons explained below)
but adjusting for health status, h. Taking a first-order Taylor-series
approximation of equation (A.2′) for region i yields a linear equation that groups
equilibrium outcomes into two components, demand factors ZD and supply factors
ZS:
               (A.3) &8 = &̅ + B80 + B8C + D8 .
The demand-side component is:
                              <
               (A.4) B80 =        (&80 − &̅ 0 )
                              E

where F = −Ψ$"(&̅ ) + . + 2. This first element of equation (5) reflects the
higher average demand for health care, multiplied by the extent to which
physicians accommodate that demand, ϕ. The supply side component is:
                              I
               (A.5) B8C = {ωΔ+8 + πΔ98 + 2(&8 3 − &̅ 3 ) + ΨΔO8 }
                          J

The first term in equation (A.5) reflects how the difference in profits in region i
vs. the national average (Δπ) affects utilization. The second term reflects the




                                             4
extent to which physicians weigh income more heavily. The third term captures
organizational goals in region i relative to national averages (&8 3 − &̅ 3 ). The
final term captures the impact of different physician beliefs about productivity of
the treatment (ΔO8 ); this term shifts the marginal productivity curve.
       Equation (A.3) can be expanded to capture varying parameter values as
well. For example, in some regions, physicians may be more responsive to patient
demand (a larger ϕi). Such interaction effects, would reflect the interaction of
supply and demand and would magnify the responses here.




                                          5
   Appendix B: Survey Questions and Definitions

                                  Clinical Vignettes and Response Options

                                        Panel I: Patient Questions

SCENARIO 1- Questions relating to less-severe cardiac care preferences: Suppose you noticed a mild but
definite chest pain when walking up stairs....Suppose you went to your regular doctor for that chest pain and
your doctor did not think you needed any special tests but you could have some tests if you wanted.
a) If the tests did not have any health risks, do you think you would probably have the tests or probably not
have them?
    a - have tests
    b - not have tests
b) Suppose your doctor told you he or she did not think you needed to see a heart specialist, but you could see
one if you wanted. Do you think you would probably ask to see a specialist, or probably not see a specialist?
    a - see specialist
    b - not see specialist


SCENARIO 2 - Questions relating to end of life care preferences: The next set of questions are about care a
patient may receive during the last months of life. Remember, you can skip any question you don’t want to
answer. Suppose that you had a very serious illness. Imagine that no one knew exactly how long you would
live, but your doctors said you almost certainly would live less than 1 year.
a) If you reached the point at which you were feeling bad all the time, would you want drugs that would make
you feel better, even if they might shorten your life?
    a - yes: drugs
    b - no
b1) If you needed a respirator to stay alive, and it would extend your life for a week, would you want to be
put on a respirator?
b2) If it would extend your life for a month, would you want to be put on a respirator?
    a - yes: respirator
    b - no

Answers other than “yes” or “no” (e.g., “not concerned” or “I dont know”) are treated as missing data.
Item non-response was less than 1% among eligible respondents.



                                       Panel II: Physician Questions
In the next set of questions, you will be presented with brief clinical descriptions for three di↵erent patients.
For each, you will be asked a series of questions regarding how you would be likely to treat that patient were
he or she in your care.

PATIENT A - CARDIOLOGIST - For this question, think about a patient with stable angina whose symptoms
and cardiac risk factors are now well controlled on current medical therapy. In general, how frequently do
you schedule routine follow-up visits for a patient like this?
   *Answer recorded in number of months
PATIENT A - PCPs: In general, how frequently do you schedule routine follow-up visits for a patient with
well-controlled hypertension?
   *Answer recorded in number of months
PATIENT B: A 75 year old man with severe (Class IV) congestive heart failure from ischemic heart disease,
is on maximal medications and has e↵ective disease management counseling. His symptoms did not improve
after recent angioplasty and stent placement and CABG is not an option. He is uncomfortable at rest. He
is noted to have frequent, asymptomatic nonsustained VT on cardiac monitoring. He has adequate health
insurance to cover tests and medications. At this point, for a patient presenting like this, how often would
you arrange for each of the following?

CARDIOLOGIST SURVEY
  a - Repeat angiography
  b - Initiate antiarryghmic therapy
  c - Recommend an Implantable Cardiac Defibrilator (ICD)
  d - Recommend biventricular pacemaker for cardiac resynchronization
  e - Initiate or continue discussions about palliative care

POSSIBLE RESPONSES
  1 Always/Almost always
  2 Most of the time
  3 Some of the time
  4 Rarely
  5 Never

PATIENT C: An 85 year old male patient has severe (Class IV) congestive heart failure from ischemic heart
disease, is on maximal medications, and is not a candidate for coronary revascularization. He is on 2 liters
per minute of supplemental oxygen at home. He presents to your office with worsening shortness of breath
and difficulty sleeping due to orthopnea. Office chest xray confirms severe congestive heart failure. Oxygen
saturation was 85% and increased to 94% on 4 liters and the patient is more comfortable. He has adequate
health insurance to cover tests and medications. At this point, for a patient presenting like this, how often
would you arrange for each of the following?

PCP and CARDIOLOGIST SURVEY
a - Allow the patient to return home on increased oxygen and increased diuretics
b - Admit to the hospital for aggressive diuresis (not to the ICU/CCU)
c - Admit to the ICU/CCU for intensive therapy and monitoring
d - Place a pulmonary artery catheter for hemodynamic optimization
e - Recommend biventricular pacemaker for cardiac resynchronization
f - Initiate or continue discussions about palliative care

POSSIBLE RESPONSES (both surveys)
1 Always/Almost always
2 Most of the time
3 Some of the time
4 Rarely
5 Never
                                                             Full Variable Definitions

                                                                   Panel I: Patient variables:
Have unneeded tests patient share         Fraction   of   patients who would like to have tests even if “doctor did not think [they were] needed”
See unneeded cardiologist patient share   Fraction   of   patients who would like to see a specialist even if doctor “did not think [patient] needed to”
Aggressive patient preferences share      Fraction   of   patients who would like to be on a respirator to extend their life by 1 week or 1 month
Comfort patient preferences share         Fraction   of   patients who would like to take drugs to be comfortable, “even if they might shorten [their] life”

                                               Panel II: Physician (cardiologist & PCP) variables:
Cowboy physician (share)                  (Fraction of) cowboys among the local (HRR-level) physician population surveyed
Comforter physician (share)               (Fraction of) comforters among the local (HRR-level) physician population surveyed
Low follow-up physician (share)           (Fraction of) physicians (HRR-level) who recommend follow-up less frequently than medical guidelines suggest
High follow-up physician (share)          (Fraction of) physicians (HRR-level) who recommend follow-up more frequently than medical guidelines suggest
Responds to patient expectations          Physician at least “sometimes” intervenes when “patient expected to undergo the procedure”
Responds to colleague expectations        Physician at least “sometimes” intervenes when “colleagues would do so in the same situation”
Responds to referrer expectations         Physician at least “sometimes” intervenes “to satisfy the expectations of the referring physician”
Responds to malpractice concerns          Physician at least “sometimes” intervenes “to protect against a possible malpractice suit”


                                                      Panel III: Other variables (all physicians):
Practice Type 1                            Physician is part of a solo or 2-person practice
Practice Type 2                            Physician is part of a singe or multi speciality group practice
Practice Type 3                            Physician is part of a group or sta↵ model HMO or a Hospital based practice
Fraction capitated patients                Fraction of patients for which physician is reimbursed on a captiated basis
Fraction Medicaid patients                 Fraction of patients a physician sees who are on Medicaid
Fraction Medicare patients                 Fraction of patients a physician sees who are covered by Medicare
Weekly patients days                       Number of days per week a physician spends seeing patients
Age                                        Physician’s age in years
Board certified                            Physician is currently board certified in her speciality
Cardiologists per 100k                     Cardiologists per 100,000 Medicare beneficiaries in HRR of practice as reported in the 2005 Dartmouth Atlas
Notes: detailed explanations of the algorithm used to define “Cowboys” (physicians aggressive beyond clinical guidelines) and “Comforters”
(physicians who show a strong likelihood of recommending palliative and comfort-oriented care) are described in the paper. The indicator for
“Aggressive Patient Preferences” combines two questions: affirmative responses to both part b1 and b2 of Patient Scenario 2 (see Appendix
A above for original survey text)
Appendix C: Further Results

                 Appendix Table C1: Regression Estimates of Medicare Expenditures
                                      (Cardiologists Only)
                                                        Cardiologists
                                                  Medicare spending in last two years of life (columns 1-6)     Overall
                                                   (1)       (2)         (3)      (4)         (5)       (6)        (7)
   Cowboy physician share                         0.477     0.415       0.337    0.443       0.365                0.483
                                                (0.132)   (0.125)     (0.119)  (0.122)     (0.114)              (0.168)
   Comforter physician share                     -0.215    -0.221      -0.190   -0.174      -0.150               -0.191
                                                (0.102)   (0.088)     (0.081)  (0.082)     (0.075)              (0.124)
   High follow-up physician share                           0.800       0.820    0.795       0.789               0.719
                                                          (0.470)     (0.444)  (0.450)     (0.417)              (0.580)
   Low follow-up physician share                           -0.342      -0.315   -0.398      -0.355               -0.611
                                                          (0.142)     (0.140)  (0.152)     (0.136)              (0.196)
   Have unneeded tests patient share                                    0.227                0.283     0.514      0.326
                                                                      (0.228)              (0.225)   (0.263)    (0.273)
   See unneeded cardiologist patient share                             0.409                0.374     0.539      0.255
                                                                      (0.177)              (0.168)   (0.262)    (0.189)
   Aggressive patient preferences share                                         -0.615      -0.490    -0.012     -0.976
                                                                               (0.426)     (0.400)   (0.503)    (0.465)
   Comfort patient preferences share                                            -0.360      -0.368    -0.383     -0.723
                                                                               (0.191)     (0.190)   (0.222)    (0.247)
   N                                               74        74          74       74          74        74         74
   R2                                            0.251      0.358       0.422    0.394       0.456     0.199      0.397
   2-year end-of-life spending (outcome in columns 1-6) and overall spending (outcome in column 7) are in natural log
   form and are price, age, sex, and race adjusted. Results shown are for the 74 Hospital Referral Regions (HRRs)
   with survey responses for at least 3 patients, 1 primary care physician, and 3 cardiologists. All regressions include
   a constant and control for the fraction of primary care physicians in the sample. Survey sampling weights take into
   account di↵erences in the number of physician observations per HRR.




                 Appendix Table C2: Regression Estimates of Medicare Expenditures
                                          (PCPs Only)
                                                         PCPs
                                               Medicare spending   in last two years of life (columns 1-6)     Overall
                                                (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)        (7)
   Cowboy physician share                      0.276    0.235       0.278       0.231       0.291                0.521
                                              (0.180)  (0.100)     (0.099)    (0.098)     (0.095)              (0.155)
   Comforter physician share                   0.035    0.082       0.108       0.046       0.062               -0.047
                                              (0.157)  (0.112)     (0.109)    (0.092)     (0.088)              (0.114)
   High follow-up physician share                       0.751       0.689       0.738       0.661                0.840
                                                       (0.112)     (0.107)    (0.108)     (0.100)              (0.148)
   Low follow-up physician share                        -0.345      -0.253     -0.366      -0.329                0.026
                                                       (0.224)     (0.276)    (0.195)     (0.218)              (0.253)
   Have unneeded tests patient share                                 0.233                  0.381     0.514      0.471
                                                                   (0.207)                (0.188)   (0.263)    (0.250)
   See unneeded cardiologist patient share                          0.168                  0.110     0.539      -0.024
                                                                   (0.177)                (0.171)   (0.262)    (0.217)
   Aggressive patient preferences share                                         0.065       0.167    -0.012      0.079
                                                                              (0.340)     (0.336)   (0.503)    (0.381)
   Comfort patient preferences share                                           -0.185      -0.237    -0.383     -0.562
                                                                              (0.172)     (0.167)   (0.222)    (0.201)
   N                                              74        74        74         74          74        74         74
   R2                                           0.047     0.553     0.571       0.565       0.591     0.199      0.553
   2-year end-of-life spending (outcome in columns 1-6) and overall medicare spending (outcome in column 7) are in
   natural log form and are price, age, sex, and race adjusted. Results shown are for the 74 Hospital Referral Regions
   (HRRs) with survey responses for at least 3 patients, 1 primary care physician, and 3 cardiologists. All regressions
   include a constant and control for the fraction of primary care physicians in the sample. Survey sampling weights
   take into account di↵erences in the number of physician observations per HRR.
                Appendix Table C3: Regression Estimates of Medicare Expenditures
                 (Age, Sex, and Race-Adjusted Physician and Patient Survey Data)
                                      Combined sample: PCPs and cardiologists
                                                    Medicare spending in last two years of life (columns 1-6)    Overall
                                                     (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)       (7)
Cowboy physician share (adj)                        0.726      0.682     0.718      0.681      0.717               0.933
                                                  (0.200)    (0.158)   (0.150)    (0.147)    (0.142)             (0.204)
Comforter physician share (adj)                    -0.338     -0.207    -0.208     -0.167     -0.167              -0.310
                                                  (0.146)    (0.105)   (0.111)    (0.103)    (0.106)             (0.154)
High follow-up physician share (adj)                           1.150     1.105     1.131      1.080                1.277
                                                             (0.220)   (0.217)    (0.209)    (0.204)             (0.262)
Low follow-up physician share (adj)                           -0.442    -0.411     -0.572     -0.530              -0.919
                                                             (0.260)   (0.264)    (0.307)    (0.297)             (0.394)
Have unneeded tests patient share (adj)                                  0.272                 0.279     0.078     0.392
                                                                       (0.187)               (0.201)   (0.302)   (0.230)
See unneeded cardiologist patient share (adj)                           0.053                 0.075     0.493     -0.141
                                                                       (0.164)               (0.162)   (0.257)   (0.199)
Aggressive patient preferences share (adj)                                         -0.456     -0.423    -0.477    -0.811
                                                                                  (0.424)    (0.416)   (0.633)   (0.496)
Comfort patient preferences share (adj)                                            -0.133     -0.193    -0.228    -0.517
                                                                                  (0.156)    (0.182)   (0.214)   (0.199)
N                                                    74         74        74         74         74        74        74
R2                                                 0.284      0.573     0.588      0.584      0.600     0.083      0.578
2-year end-of-life spending (outcome in columns 1-6) and overall medicare spending (outcome in column 7) are
in natural log form and are price, age, sex, and race adjusted. Results shown are for the 74 Hospital Referral
Regions (HRRs) with survey responses for at least 3 patients, 1 primary care physician, and 3 cardiologists. All
regressions include a constant and control for the fraction of primary care physicians in the sample. All respondent
data adjusted for age, sex, race/ethnicity. Survey sampling weights take into account di↵erences in the number of
physician observations per HRR.




                Appendix Table C4: Regression Estimates of Medicare Expenditures
                     (Age, Sex, and Race-Adjusted Physician Survey Data)
                                      Combined sample: PCPs and cardiologists
                                              Medicare spending in last two years of life (columns 1-6)   Overall
                                               (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)      (7)
  Cowboy physician share (adj)               0.726       0.682     0.695     0.688       0.704              0.927
                                            (0.200)    (0.158)   (0.145)   (0.146)     (0.138)            (0.204)
  Comforter physician share (adj)            -0.338     -0.207    -0.192    -0.169      -0.174             -0.315
                                            (0.146)    (0.105)   (0.107)   (0.103)     (0.100)            (0.152)
  High follow-up physician share (adj)                  1.150     1.030     1.121       0.974               1.167
                                                       (0.220)   (0.210)   (0.206)     (0.197)            (0.253)
  Low follow-up physician share (adj)                   -0.442    -0.417    -0.535      -0.455             -0.805
                                                       (0.260)   (0.261)   (0.299)     (0.278)            (0.349)
  Have unneeded tests patient share                                0.382                 0.452     0.500    0.550
                                                                 (0.183)               (0.196)   (0.255)  (0.245)
  See unneeded cardiologist patient share                         0.123                 0.102     0.543    -0.125
                                                                 (0.148)               (0.145)   (0.260)  (0.181)
  Aggressive patient preferences share                                      -0.404      -0.225    -0.021   -0.592
                                                                           (0.445)     (0.414)   (0.518)  (0.448)
  Comfort patient preferences share                                         -0.236      -0.294    -0.426   -0.649
                                                                           (0.158)     (0.168)   (0.217)  (0.201)
  N                                            74         74        74        74          74        74       74
  R2                                         0.284      0.573     0.606     0.587        0.624     0.203    0.597
  2-year end-of-life spending (outcome in columns 1-6) and overall medicare spending (outcome in column 7) are
  in natural log form and are price, age, sex, and race adjusted. Results shown are for the 74 Hospital Referral
  Regions (HRRs) with survey responses for at least 3 patients, 1 primary care physician, and 3 cardiologists. All
  regressions include a constant and control for the fraction of primary care physicians in the sample. Physician
  survey data adjusted for age, sex, race/ethnicity. Survey sampling weights take into account di↵erences in the
  number of physician observations per HRR.
Appendix Table C5: Expanded Regression Estimates of Medicare Expenditures
                          Combined Sample: Cardiologists and PCPs
                                                    (1)       (2)             (3)         (4)
    Cowboy physician share                        0.887      0.810           0.942       0.854
                                                 (0.201)   (0.182)         (0.224)     (0.184)
    Comforter physician share                     -0.311    -0.325          -0.301      -0.326
                                                 (0.162)   (0.170)         (0.167)     (0.172)
    High follow-up physician share                 1.272     1.140          1.309        1.172
                                                 (0.238)   (0.252)         (0.230)     (0.252)
    Low follow-up physician share                 -0.556    -0.429          -0.575      -0.450
                                                 (0.290)   (0.229)         (0.290)     (0.234)
    Fraction capitated patients                              0.001                       0.001
                                                           (0.003)                     (0.003)
    Fraction Medicaid patients                              -0.003                      -0.003
                                                           (0.010)                     (0.009)
    Single/multi speciality group practice                  -0.185                      -0.183
                                                           (0.226)                     (0.232)
    Group/sta↵ HMO or hospital-based practice                0.439                       0.400
                                                           (0.218)                     (0.212)
    Responds to patient expectations                                         0.212       0.158
                                                                            (0.209)    (0.189)
    Responds to colleague expectations                                       -0.062     -0.011
                                                                            (0.180)    (0.175)
    Responds to referrer expectations                                        -0.005      0.004
                                                                            (0.180)    (0.170)
    Responds to malpractice concerns                                         -0.209     -0.126
                                                                            (0.171)    (0.159)
    N                                                   74         74          74          74
    R2                                                0.555      0.597       0.565       0.601
    2-year end-of-life spending (outcome in columns 1-6) and overall medicare spending
    (outcome in column 7) are in natural log form and are price, age, sex, and race adjusted.
    Results shown are for the 74 Hospital Referral Regions (HRRs) with survey responses for
    at least 3 patients, 1 primary care physician, and 3 cardiologists. All regressions include
    a constant and control for the fraction of primary care physicians in the sample. Survey
    sampling weights take into account di↵erences in the number of physician observations
    per HRR.
  Appendix Table C6: Regression Estimates of Medicare Expenditures with Interaction Terms and Additional Measures of Spending

                                   Combined Sample of PCPs and Cardiologists (dependent variables listed in column headings; all in natural logs)
                                                                        (1)                          (2)                         (3)                       (4)                     (5)
                                                           2-yr end-of-life spending    2-yr end-of-life spending    2-yr end-of-life spending  Total spend (average      Total spend (hip
                                                            (as in Table 3, col. 5)                                                                per beneficiary)        fracture cohort)
Cowboy physician share                                                0.685                        0.903                       0.688                      0.904                   0.292
                                                                     (0.123)                      (0.445)                     (0.118)                   (0.182)                 (0.084)
Comforter physician share                                             -0.151                       -0.142                      0.502                     -0.274                  -0.051
                                                                     (0.096)                      (0.091)                     (0.297)                   (0.136)                 (0.067)
High follow-up physician share                                         0.917                        0.999                      0.894                      1.066                  0.322
                                                                     (0.166)                      (0.155)                     (0.164)                   (0.215)                 (0.108)
Low follow-up physician share                                         -0.345                       -0.259                      -0.350                    -0.673                  -0.109
                                                                     (0.239)                      (0.215)                     (0.213)                   (0.289)                 (0.152)
Have unneeded tests patient share                                      0.351                        0.254                      0.394                      0.421                   0.047
                                                                     (0.193)                      (0.195)                     (0.184)                   (0.239)                 (0.131)
See unneeded cardiologist patient share                               0.132                        0.116                       0.120                     -0.079                  0.171
                                                                     (0.130)                      (0.125)                     (0.123)                   (0.151)                 (0.109)
Aggressive patient preferences share                                  -0.294                        0.627                       1.340                    -0.695                  -0.057
                                                                     (0.379)                      (0.496)                     (0.713)                   (0.404)                 (0.250)
Comfort patient preferences share                                     -0.282                       -0.275                      -0.072                    -0.639                  -0.094
                                                                     (0.144)                      (0.208)                     (0.233)                   (0.173)                 (0.104)
Cowboy share * aggressive patient preferences share                                                -3.259
                                                                                                  (1.162)
Cowboy share * comfort patient preferences share                                                    0.188
                                                                                                  (0.697)
Comforter share * aggressive patient preferences share                                                                         -4.461
                                                                                                                              (1.669)
Comforter share * comfort patient preferences share                                                                            -0.592
                                                                                                                              (0.513)
N                                                                        74                           74                          74                        74                      74
R2                                                                    0.662                        0.688                       0.680                      0.623                  0.431
2-year end-of-life spending and overall spending are in natural log form and are price, age, sex, and race adjusted. Hip fracture cohort spending is adjusted for age, sex, race, comorbid
conditions at admission, and the hierarchical condition categories risk-adjustment index for the six months prior to admission. Results shown are for the 74 Hospital Referral Regions
(HRRs) with survey responses for at least 3 patients, 1 primary care physician, and 3 cardiologists. All regressions include a constant and control for the fraction of primary care
physicians in the sample. Survey sampling weights take into account di↵erences in the number of physician observations per HRR.
Appendix Table C7: Summary Statistics for Additional AMI Data in Table 4
                             (137 HRRs, N = 603,457)
                                            Mean     Median    Standard
                                                               Deviation
          1-Year Medicare Expenditures       45,827   32,859    42,208
          Median ZIP Household Income        56,251   50,623    22,497
          Log 1-Year Medicare Expenditures    10.41    10.40     0.80
          1-Year Survival                      0.68    1.00      0.47
          Same Day PCI (stent)                0.26     0.00      0.44
          Age                                 78.85   79.00      8.28
          Fraction Black                      0.08     0.00      0.26
          Fraction Hispanic                   0.02     0.00      0.13
          Fraction Asian                      0.01     0.00      0.12
          Fraction Female                     0.50     1.00      0.50
          Average HCC                         1.73     1.31      1.35
          Vascular Disease                    0.08     0.00      0.27
          Pulmonary Disease                   0.17     0.00      0.38
          Dementia                            0.03     0.00      0.18
          Renal Disease                        0.18    0.00      0.38
          Cancer (non-metastatic)             0.05     0.00      0.22
          Cancer (metastatic)                 0.01     0.00      0.11
          Congestive Heart Failure             0.40    0.00      0.49
          AIDS                                0.00     0.00      0.02
          Plegia (stroke)                     0.00     0.00      0.05
          Liver disease                        0.00    0.00      0.06
          Diabetes                            0.26     0.00      0.44
          Rheumatologic Disease                0.01    0.00      0.10
          Peripheral Vascular Disease          0.02     0.00     0.12
          AMI Location: Anterolateral         0.02     0.00      0.14
          Anterior wall                       0.07     0.00      0.26
          Inferolateral                        0.02    0.00      0.13
          Inferoposterior                      0.01    0.00      0.11
          All other inferior                   0.09    0.00      0.28
   Appendix Table C8: Regression Estimates of Medicare Expenditures with Additional Survey Data

Combined Sample of PCPs and Cardiologists (dependent        variable = 2-year end-of-life spending)
                                               (1)              (2)        (3)              (4)
Cowboy physician share                        0.854            0.800      0.913            0.848
                                            (0.188)          (0.175)    (0.212)          (0.177)
Comforter physician share                    -0.326           -0.335     -0.315           -0.336
                                            (0.159)          (0.164)    (0.162)          (0.164)
High follow-up physician share                1.239            1.138     1.275             1.173
                                            (0.234)          (0.254)    (0.225)          (0.254)
Low follow-up physician share                -0.533           -0.405     -0.554           -0.430
                                            (0.270)          (0.215)    (0.267)          (0.220)
Fraction capitated patients                                    0.001                       0.000
                                                             (0.003)                     (0.003)
Fraction Medicaid patients                                    -0.003                      -0.003
                                                             (0.010)                     (0.010)
Single/multi speciality group practice                        -0.156                      -0.152
                                                             (0.231)                     (0.238)
Group/sta↵ HMO or hospital-based practice                      0.466                       0.424
                                                             (0.215)                     (0.208)
Responds to patient expectations                                          0.211            0.162
                                                                        (0.203)          (0.186)
Responds to colleague expectations                                       -0.060           -0.018
                                                                        (0.174)          (0.171)
Responds to referrer expectations                                        -0.001            0.014
                                                                        (0.179)          (0.170)
Responds to malpractice concerns                                         -0.233           -0.152
                                                                        (0.171)          (0.157)
N                                                    74          74        74                74
R2                                                 0.564       0.606     0.576             0.611
2-year end-of-life spending is reported in natural log form and is price, age, sex, and race ad-
justed. Results shown are for the 74 Hospital Referral Regions (HRRs) with survey responses
for at least 3 patients, 1 primary care physician, and 3 cardiologists. All regressions include
a constant and control for the fraction of primary care physicians in the sample. Survey
sampling weights take into account di↵erences in the number of physician observations per
HRR.
