NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO EQUILIBRIUM REAL BUSINESS
CYCLE THEORIES EXPLAIN POST-WAR
U.S. BUSINESS CYCLES?

Martin Eichenbaum

Kenneth J. Singleton

Working Paper No. 1932

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1986

We have benefited from helpful discussions with Lars Hansen,
Bennett McCallum, Allan Meltzer, Dan Peled, Michael Woodford, and
our discussants Robert Barro and Greg Mankiw. Research assistance
was provided by Kun-hong Kim and David Marshall. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Working Paper #1932
May 1986

Do Equilibrium Real Business Cycle Theories
Explain Post-War U.S. Business Cycles?

ABSTRACT

This paper presents and interprets some rw evidence on the validity of
the Real Business Cycle approach to business cycle analysis. The analysis is

conducted in the context of a nnetary business cycle model which makes
explicit one potential link between monetary policy and real allocations.
This model is used to interpret Granger causal relations between nominal and

real aggregates. Perhaps the nost striking empirical finding is that money

growth does not Granger cause output growth in

the context of several

multivariate VARs and for various sample periods during the post war period in

the U.S. Several possible reconciliations of this finding with both real and
monetary business cycles models are discussed.

We find that it is difficult

to reconcile our npirical results with the view that

exogenous monetary

shocks were an important independent source of variation in output growth.

Martin Eichenbaum
Graduate School of
Industrial Administration
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
(412)

268-3683

Kenneth J. Singleton
Graduate School of
Industrial Administration
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

(412) 268-8838

1. Introduction

During the past decade there has been a resurgence of interest in
equilibrium real business cycle theories. According to these theories, the
recurrent fluctuation in outputs, consumptions, investments, and other real
quantities- -

what

shall refer to

as the business cycle phenomenon- -

is

precisely what one should expect to emerge from industrial market economies in

which consumers and firms solve intertemporal optimum problems under
uncertainty.

Moreover, fluctuations in real quantities are attributed to

exogenous technological and taste shocks combined with various sources of
endogenous dynamics including adjustment costs, time-to-build capital goods,

and the non-time-separability of preferences (e.g., Kydland and Prescott
(1982), Long and Plosser (1983), Kydland (1984), and Prescott (1986)). Common
characteristics of these models are that there is a complete set of contingent

claims to future goods and services, agents have common information sets, and

the only "frictions" in the economy are the to technological factors. In
particular, real business cycle (RBC) uDdels abstract entirely from monetary
considerations and the fact that exchange in modern economies occurs via the
use of fiat money.

There are two interpretations of this modeling strategy.

The first

interpretation is that monetary institutions and monetary policy are assumed
to be inherently neutral in the sense that real allocations are invariant to

innovations in financial arrangements and nDnetary policy. Money is a veil
regardless of how much the veil flutters. The second interpretation is that

the market organizations and the nature of monetary policy in the sample

period being examined are such as that an RBC model provides an accurate
characterization of the real economy.

Under this interpretation RBC models

2

may be useful frameworks for examining the determination of real allocations

for certain institutional environments and

classes of monetary policies.

Money may be a veil as long as the veil does not flutter too much.

In

our

view, proponents of RBC theories are rt claiming that monetary policy cannot

or has never had a significant impact on the fluctuation of real output,
investment, or consumptions. Rather we subscribe to the second interpretation

of RBC analyses as investigations of real allocations under the assumption

that, to a good approximation, monetary policy shocks have played an
insignificant role in determining the behavior of real variables.

The assumption in equilibrium RBC models that monetary shocks have not
been an important source of aggregate fluctuations is similar to the basic

premise of certain early Keynesian ndels.

According to these nodels,

interest rates affected at most long-lived fixed investments, so the interest

elasticity of aggregate demand was perceived as being low.

Furthermore, the

principal shocks impinging on the economy had their direct effects on
aggregate demand.

In particular, investment was thought to be influenced

capriciously by "animal spirits." Thus, aggregate fluctuation was associated
primarily with real shocks.

Indeed, the economic environment was assumed to

be such that changes in the money supply (both systematic and current updated
shocks) had small impacts on real economic activity.

The latter feature of

these models led to the conclusion that fiscal policy was preferred to
monetary policy for stabilizing output fluctuation.

More recent Keynesian-style models share some common features with both
early Keynesian and equilibrium RBC models, lxi.t they are also fundamentally

different in several important respects.

Proponents of modern Keynesian

models often argue that monetary policy shocks have not been a significant

3

source of "instabilityt' in the U.S. economy.

p.12) states that ".

.there

For cample Modigliani (1977,

is ro basis for the nrnetarists' suggestion that

our post war instability can be traced to nonetary instability.. .".

Thus on

this feature of the economy, proponents of modern Keynesian models and of
equilibrium RBC theories are often in agreement.

However, for at least two reasons, it would be misleading to argue that
equilibrium RBC models and Keynesian models are simply different versions of

business cycle models in which only (or primarily) real shocks matter for
fluctuations in real quantities. First, the propogation mechanisms by which

exogenous shocks impinge on the endogenous variables are typically very
different in the tvo classes of nr,dels.

As noted above, equilibrium RBC

models focus on such technological frictions as gestation lags in building

capital or intertemporal nonseparability of preferences in generating
endogenous sources of dynamics. Contingent claims markets are assumed to be
complete and goods and asset prices adjust freely in competitive markets.

In

contrast, Keynesian models typically emphasize various frictions that prevent

perfectly flexible goods prices and wages (e.g., Modigliani 1958, Taylor
1980).

The sources of these rigidities may be frictions associated with

incomplete markets, contractual arrangements, or imperfect competition among
firms.

These differences in propogation mechanisms may imply very different

reactions of the equilibrium RBC and Keynesian economies to the same type of
shock.

Second, and closely related to this first consideration, the potential
roles for stabilization in these economic environments may be very different.

The inflexible prices and incomplete markets in Keynesian models have been
used to justify activist fiscal and nonetary policies designed to stabilize

4

output fluctuation. Of particular relevance for our analysis is the important
role often attributed to monetary policy in affecting the cyclical behavior of

real variables in Keynesian nodels. While exogenous nonetary policy shocks

may not be important sources of aggregate fluctuations, activist monetary
policies are often deemed to have had significant effects on the propogation
of nonmonetary shocks.

Hence, though the sources of uncertainty may be real,

it seems clear that noney plays a central role in nodern Keynesian nDdels.

This interpretation of modern Keynesian models was made explicitly by
Modigliani (1977, p.1): "Milton Friedman was once quoted as saying 'We are all

Keynesians, now,
monetarists

and I am quite prepared to reciprocate that we are all

if by nonetarism is nant assigning to the stock of noney a

major role in determining output and prices".

In contrast, equilibrium RBC models typically assume that there is a

complete set of contingent claims markets and that prices are perfectly
flexible.

One implication of these assumptions in the models that have been

examined to date is that real allocations are Pareto optimal. This, in turn,

implies that there is rx

role for a central policy authority.

Thus,

equilibrium RBC theories assume both that exogenous monetary shocks have not

been an important source of fluctuations, and that the policy rules followed

by the monetary authorities have not had an important role in propogating
nonmonetary shocks. For only under this joint hypothesis does it seem likely
that an equilibrium RBC model would accurately characterize the economy.

This paper presents and interprets some rw evidence on the validity of

the RBC proach to business cycle analysis.

Particular attention in given

to: (1) the question of whether monetary policy shocks were an important
determinant of real economic activity during the post war period, and (2)

5

several potentially important pitfalls in interpreting the available evidence

as supporting or refuting the validity of RBC models.

The analysis of the

first question bears on the validity of any business cycle model that assumes

such shocks have been important.

Certain aspects of our findings can be

viewed as being consistent with both early Keynesian and equilibrium RBC
models. However, the extreme assumptions that underlie the former models have
been largely rejected in the recent literature (see, e.g., Modigliani l977).1
Accordingly, in discussing potential interpretations of our empirical findings

we shall focus primarily on the properties of what we call equilibrium
business cycles models- -

monetary and nonmonetary models that are specified at

the level of preferences and technology. This allows us to address directly

the strengths and weaknesses of equilibrium RBC models as explanations of
fluctuations in the U.S. economy during the post war period.

To date, empirical investigations of RBC models have typically proceeded

by fitting these models to the data arid evaluating the extent to which the

cycles implied by the models match those exhibited by the data.

Virtually

without exception, studies of RBC models have rxt considered explicitly the
conditions under which RBC models emerge approximately or exactly as special

cases of monetary models of the business cycle. In contrast, we begin our
analysis in Section 3 by setting forth an explicit monetary business cycle
model. The presentation of this model serves three purposes.

First, we are

able to make precise one potential link between monetary policy actions and
real allocations in an equilibrium model. Money matters in this model because
agents face a cash-in-advance constraint. Therefore the money-output linkages

in our model are very iaich in the spirit of those in the recent models of

Lucas and Stokey (1983, 1984), Townsend (1982), and Svensson (1985) among

6

others. Within the context of this model, we provide sufficient conditions for

an RBC ndel to provide an accurate characterization of real fluctuation in
the monetary economy. The conditions discussed are, of course, specific to the

model examined. Nevertheless, we feel they are suggestive of the type of
strong restrictions on rxnetary policy rules that will be required for RBC
models to accurately approximate other, more complicated, monetary models.

Second, we use this nodel to interpret Granger causal relations between
nominal and real aggregates. Anticipating our results in Sections 4 and 5, we

find little npirical support for the proposition that noney growth or
inflation Granger cause output growth. Interpreted within the context of the

monetary nDdel of Section 3, these results suggest that exogenous shocks to
the monetary growth rate were not an important independent source of variation

in output growth during the post war period in the U.S.

Admittedly, this

conclusion emerges from considering a model with very simple specifications of

the production, nonetary exchange technologies as well as a specific market
structure. However, introducing more complicated market structures that lead

to sticky prices and wages as in Fischer (1977) or overlapping nominal
contracts as in Taylor (1980) would only increase the complexity of the
interaction between monetary growth and real economic activity. This added
complexity vuld make it more difficult to reconcile the thsence of Granger
causality of output growth by monetary growth with the belief that exogenous
monetary policy shocks were an important source of variation in output. More

generally, our npirical evidence suggests that nonetary nodels ich imply
that money growth rates Granger cause output growth are inconsistent with post
war U.S. data.

Third, for certain nonetary policy rules, our monetary model implies that

7

the failure to find Granger causality from money to output is not sufficient

for i

RBC

model to accurately characterize the economic aivironment.

More

precisely, we argue that even if real shocks are the predominant source of
variation in real quantities over the cycle, one may be seriously misled using
an RBC model to evaluate the implications of alternative government policies.

Essentially, nDnetary feedback policies can be set in a nanner that affects
the time series properties of output even though exogenous monetary shocks are

not important determinants of output. This may be true even though RBC models
appear to fit the data for the sample period by the usual criteria.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a
brief review of the literature on equilibrium RBC models, and our equilibrium

monetary business cycle model is presented in Section 3.

In Section 4, the

laws of motion for the quantity variables implied by an RBC model are compared

to those of the nnetary model. These two nodels are used to friterpret
bivariate vector autoregressive representations (VARs) of noney and output. A
more extensive set of empirical results are presented in Section 5.

"Variance

decompositions" for output are displayed for several inultivariate time series

models of output, monetary growth, inflation, and asset returns.
remarks are presented in Section 6,

8

Concluding

2. Overview of Equilibrium Business Cycle Models

A primary goal of business cycle analysis is to explain the recurrent
fluctuations of real aggregate economic quantities about their trends and the

co-movements among different aggregate economic time series. A key assumption

of real business cycle theories is that monetary policy actions are
unimportant for explaining either the amplitude or frequency

of business

cycles. In the words of King and Plosser (1984), RBC theories view "business
cycles as

arising

from variations in the real opportunities of the private

economy, which include shifts hi government purchases or tax rates as well as

technical and environmental conditions (p.363)." In this section we briefly
summarize some of the sources of variations in private market economies that
have received the most attention in the literature on RBC models.

In modeling aggregate fluctuations, RBC theorists

often distinguish

between the exogenous sources of uncertainty impinging on economic decisions
and the endogenous propagation mechanisms for the exogenous shocks. Adopting

this taxonomy, we shall consider, first, the various exogenous sources of
uncertainty that have typically been emphasized in the recent literature.

In

modern economies, many types of shocks impinge on the decisions of agents in
different sectors.

For the purpose of aggregate business cycle analyses, it

is typically assumed implicitly or explicitly that idiosyncratic sector or

agent-specific shocks "average out" and have no effect on aggregate
quantities.

On the other hand, the common components of individual shocks

that remain after aggregation are interpreted as the aggregate sources of

uncertainty in business cycle models. The number of these aggregate
disturbances is typically assumed to be small; often the number does not
exceed the number of real quantity variables appearing in the model.

9

Furthermore, when using RBC models to describe economic data, attention
has been restricted almost exclusively to exogenous shifts in the production
technologies of goods.

See, for example, Kydland and Prescott (1982), thng

and Plosser (1983), King and Plosser (1984), Altug (1985), and Hansen (1985).

Notably absent from these models are aggregate shocks to preferences and to
the fiscal policy rules of governments. The omission of shocks to preferences

seems to be simply a matter of taste.

Apparently, an implicit assumption in

many of the RBC theories is that large technology shocks are more likely than

large aggregate stochastic shifts in tastes.

We relax this assumption in

constructing our illustrative monetary and real business cycle models in
Sections 3 and 4.

The absence of shocks to government purchases or tax rates can be
explained by the nature of the models that have been developed to date.

Kydland and Prescott (1982), and many others since them, have examined
economies in which there is a complete set of markets for contingent claims to

future goods, there is m private information, and there are no public goods.
Therefore, real allocations are Pareto optimal in these economies and there is

no welfare improving role for a central government. The absence of incomplete

insurance and market failures from these models can in part be attributed to

the difficulties involved in analyzing aggregate fluctuations in general
equilibrium when such "frictions" are present.

However, in some cases, their

absence also seems to be a manifestation of the belief that aggregate
fluctuation in output that approximates that observed historically can be
generated by equilibrium models without introducing these frictions. Long and

Plosser (1983), for example, state, regarding their model, 'We believe that
major features of observed business cycles typically will be found in the kind

10

of model economy outlined above (p.42).'t A similar view has recently been
expressed by Prescott (1986): "Given the people's ability and willingness to
inter- and intra-temporally substitute consumption and leisure and given the
nature of the changing production set, there would be a puzzle if the American
economy did not display the business cycle phenomena. By display the business

cycle phenomena, I mean that the amplitudes of fluctuations of the key
economic aggregates and their serial correlation properties are close to that
predicted by theory (p. 1)."

Although RBC models have relied on unobserved technology shocks to induce

fluctuations in output, investment, consumptions, and hours worked, these
models typically adopt quite parsimonious time series representations of these
shocks.

Parsimony is important if these imdels are to have refutable

implications.

It has long been known that low order stochastic difference

equations can generate recurring irregular cyclical fluctuations not unlike
those exhibited by aggregate time series. Thus, the covariograin of a given set

of variables implied by a model can be matched to the sample covariagram of

the data by specifying sufficiently rich laws of ntion for the unobserved

shocks in a model.

But it is clear that profligately parameterized

specifications of unobserved shock processes do rt yield interesting
explanations of business cycles.

RBC nodels lead to overidentifying

restrictions on the autocovariance functions by allowing for only a small

number of shocks with parsimonious time series representations.

More

complicated patterns of autocorrelations and patterns of cross-correlations
among the variables are then induced by endogenous sources of dynamics. It is
these endogenous sources of dynamics (what King and Plosser (1985) refer to as

the propagation mechanisms)

that are the centerpieces of equilibrium RBC

11

theories.

To date, RBC theorists have stressed the role of technology and agents'

preferences in magnifying the response of economic systems to exogenous
impulses. For example, Kydland and Prescott (1982) assume that it takes time

to build capital goods (i.e., more than one period or decision interval).

This time-to-build technology has an important effect on the time series
properties of investment and output. They also assume that consumers' utility

from leisure in the current period depends on past leisure decisions.
Specifically, the marginal utility of an additional unit of leisure today is

larger (smaller) the smaller (larger) is the amount of leisure consumed in
This specification of preferences leads to substantially

previous periods.

more intertemporal substitution of leisure than the comparable time-separable

specification of preferences.

Since hours worked are more sensitive to a

given change in the real wage rate with this specification of preferences,
they are better able to capture the fluctuation in aggregate hours than the
corresponding model with time-separable utility.

ISeverthe1ess, their model

falls short of providing an adequate explanation of the time series behavior
of hours worked.

Efforts are currently underway to enrich the specification

of the labor market in their nodel in an attempt to improve the fit of the
model (Hansen 1985).

Although the nodels examined by Kydland and Prescott (1982) and Kydland
(1984) fail to fully explain fluctuation in hours worked, it is nevertheless

striking that they do so well in attempting to replicate the time series
behavior of several of the economic aggregates considered. As the authors
emphasize, their results are certainly encouraging for they show that fairly

simple dynamic equilibrium models are capable of generating the types of

12

cycles that are similar to those that have been observed historically.

Moreover, these examples provide a useful reminder of the fact that
fluctuation in real quantities per se need not

reduce social welfare; real

allocations are Pareto optimal in their model.

Those economists who believe firmly that monetary fluctuations and the
actions of the nDnetary authority are central to an understanding of business

cycles may be inclined to dismiss these nodels outright because of their
omission of monetary considerations. Yet there seems to be both indirect and

direct evidence that such a dismissal is difficult to support.

Indirect

evidence is provided by Kydland and Prescott (1982), Long and Plosser (1983),

and Kydland (1984), among

others.

These authors have shown that, for

plausible values of the parameters characterizing preferences and technology,
the variances of the shocks to technology can be chosen such that equilibrium
RBC models imply

empirical

second moments for certain real aggregates that

approximately match the corresponding sample second moments.

More formal evidence is provided in the
(l980a, l980b).

provocative

studies by Sims

He found that nonetary shocks had little explanatory power

for industrial production during

the post

World War II period, when

lagged

values of industrial production and nominal interest rates were included.
Sims interpreted the contribution of nominal interest rates in predicting
industrial production as capturing expectations about the future productivity

of capital, which is wry much in the spirit of real business cycle analysis.
Litterman

and Weiss

interpretation

(1985) corroborate Sims' findings and

also give an RBC

to their findings.

The models considered by Kydland and Prescott (1982) and Long and
(1983) are

representative

agent

nodels

13

Plosser

with complete markets so that credit

does not enter prominently in the determination of real quantities. King and
Plosser (1984) have discussed an extended version of an equilibrium RBC model

in which there is a role for organized credit markets. Their model can be
interpreted as a RBC model in hich certain (perhaps informational) frictions

in private markets lead to the creation of institutions that specialize in
issuing credit. King and Plosser proceed to argue that, while credit may have

an important influence on the nature of aggregate fluctuations, the actions

of the Federal Reserve's Open Market Committee may not be an important
independent source of fluctuations in real quantities and relative prices. As

evidence for this proposition, they rote that real tput seems to be
significantly correlated with inside money but is only weakly correlated with
outside money.

More recently, critics of the view that RBC theories are accurate
characterizatons of the post war experience have noted that these findings are
also consistent with comparably simple business cycle models in which monetary

policy plays an important role. For instance, McCallum (1983a) has shown that

if the Federal Reserve followed an interest rate rule (or mixed interest

rate-monetary aggregate rule) for nost of the postwar period, then the

interest rate innovation in Sims' regressions may be a proxy for the
innovation in the policy rule of the Fed. For the same reasons, the analysis
by King and Plosser (1984) may not accurately capture the effects of nonetary
policy shocks on real output (McCallum 1985).

Critics of RBC models have provided several additional challenges to the
conclusion that the RBC models studied to date explain the post war experience

in the U.S. Most of the studies purporting

provide evidence in support of

RBC models have examined only a limited set of own- and cross-correlations of

14

aggregate quantity variables.

In particular, cross-correlations of relative

prices and asset returns with aggreate real quantities have typically not been

studied. There is r a priori reason hy the restrictions examined should be
given more weight than other restrictions on cross-correlations in evaluating

the performance of these models. When cross-correlations of asset returns and

output are examined there is substantially uDre evidence against PBC ndels
(see, for example, hra and Prescott (1985)). Moreover, when particular RBC

models are subjected to formal methods of estimation and inference which
incorporate a fairly comprehensive set of moment restrictions, the results are

not supportive of the models (e.g., Altug (1985), Eichenbaum, Hansen and
Singleton (1985), and Mankiw, Roteinberg and Summers (1985)).

The acceptance or rejection of RBC nwdels must be based in part on an
assessment of the plausibility of the variances and autocorrelations of the
technology shocks..2

Kydland and Prescott (1982) take their structure of

preferences and technology as given and then termine the values of the
variances of the shocks to technology that are consistent with particular
second moments of observed variables. Prescott (1986) provides an estimate of

the standard deviation of the shock to technology in a simple growth model,

but this measure is in effect the standard error of the residual from
regressing the growth rate of output on the growth rates of capital and labor.

This measure is justified by his assumption of a Cobb-Douglas production
function defined over labor and capital and thus is clearly model dependent in

same manner that the Kydland-Prescott estimates of standard deviations were
model dependent. In a manner that attempts to account for maasurement errors,

Prescott estimates the ratio of the standard deviations of the percentage
changes in the technology shock and output to be approximately .40. It seems

15

difficult to assess the plausibility of this estimate and related estimates

provided by Kydland and Prescott (1982), especially in light of the highly
aggregated nature of their models.

Furthermore, we have little independent evidence about the absolute
magnitudes of these second moments, since the theories do not lead us to
specific sources for these disturbances.

Hamilton (1983) provides some

descriptive evidence that oil price shocks were an an important source of
aggregate fluctuations in the U.S. during the post war period. Also, Miron

(1985) argues that weather shocks are an important source of variation in
aggregate consumption.

This strategy of attempting to quantify the various

shocks impinging on the economy may yield important insights into the nature
of real shocks underlying business cycles.

A complementary strategy is to assess anpirically the relative importance

of alternative types of shocks in the context of models that accommodate
various types of shocks.

RBC theorists have not attempted to assess the

relative importance of monetary versus technology shocks, for example.

A

comparison of the stochastic properties of these shocks may lead to more
convincing conclusions about RBC models than statements about the absolute

magnitudes of technology or preference shocks. In modelá that accommodate
monetary shocks, it would be possible to decompose the variation in output
into variation attributable to monetary and real shocks (assuming the model is
identified).

Then the theoretical problem of characterizing the classes of

economies and monetary policies for which real allocations are woll described

by RBC models could be addressed. To our knowledge, King and Plosser (1984)
have come closest to attempting such an exercise. However, they stop short of

constructing a monetary nxdel and evaluating the relative importance of

16

alternative shocks. Constructing a model at a plausible level of generality
and performing these calculations is admittedly a formidable task. Recent work

is just beginning to provide the necessary tools needed to solve for the

stochastic equilibria of monetary nde1s (e.g., Lucas and Stokey 1984).
Nevertheless, simple illustrative monetary models can be constructed, and it
is this task to which we turn next.

17

3. An Equilibrium Business Cycle Model
In this section we present an equilibrium business cycle model and discuss

some of its properties.

The model is of a

monetary economy in which

anticipated nxrnetary growth has real economic effects. Money is introduced
into the nxdel using the construct of a cash-in-advance constraint and this

constraint is the only source of nonetary nonneutrality in this ndel. In
particular, we abstract from frictions that might lead to sticky prices or
wages and agents are assumed to have rational expectations. The exclusion of
these and other sources of frictions from the economic environment should not

be interpreted as rcessarily reflecting a view that other frictions are
absent from nodern economies.

Rather, we are intentionally constructing an

economic model that is simple to analyze and which allows us to discuss
several pitfalls in interpreting the time series evidence that purportedly
supports or refutes RBC nDdels, Many of our observations are valid for a much
larger class of real and monetary models than those examined explicitly.
The monetary business cycle model which we consider is an extended version
of the RBC model discussed by Garber and King (1983) (which is closely related

to the model in Long and Plosser (1983)).

Suppose that a representative,

competitive firm produces a nondurable consumption good Yt using the input Xt.
The production function for Yt is given by

(3.1)

yt—xAt,

where ) is a shock to the consumption good technology at date t.

The

intermediate good Xt depreciates at the rate of 100% when used in production.
The firm buys Xt from consumers in a competitive market at the unit real price

of wt. Acquisitions of the input are made so as to maximize the expected

18

discounted value of future profits. For our model, this optimum problem
simplifies to the following static optimum problem: at each date t the firm
chooses xt to maximize
(3.2)

xt t -

Wt Xt.

Profits of the firm are returned each period to the shareholders in the form
of dividends, dt.

The intermediate good, xt, is storable. The representative consumer has an

initial endowment of the intermediate good of k0. The law of motion for the
consumer's holdings of the intermediate good at the beginning of period t is
given by

(3.3)

kt =

e [kt1

-

xtiJ.

In (3.3), e represents a stochastic shock to the storage technology.
In addition to holdings of the intermediate good, the wealth of the
representative consumer includes holdings of claims to the future cash flows
of the firm and money holdings. We shall let zt denote the number of shares in

the firm held by the consumer and q (Q) denote the ex-dividend real (money)
price per share in the firm.

There are a variety of ways in which to generate valued fiat money in

theoretical models (see, e.g., the volume edited by Kareken and Wallace
(1980)). Following Lucas (1980,1984), Townsend (1982), Lucas and Stokey
(1984), and Svensson (1985), we adopt the construct of a cash-in-advance
constraint.

While this construct is known

to

have some undesirable

characteristics, it is analytically convenient and can be interpreted as
arising from a very special shopping time technology (e.g., McCallurn 1983b).

The timing conventions for monetary transactions in this economy are assumed

19

to be as follows.

The consumer enters the period t with a predetermined cash

balance Mt, and a predetermined share, zt, of claims to the dividends of the
representative firm. He learns the realizations of all time t random variables

and then chooses the quantity of intermediate goods (xt) to sell to the firm
and the amount of consumption goods (ct) to purchase at the dollar price 't.

Payment for the sale of xt to the firm is received in cash after the
consumption decision. Therefore, the money received (if any)

cannot be used

to relax the cash-in-advance constraint in period t. It follows that goods
purchases must obey the cash-in-advance constraint

(3.4)

Pt Ct

Mt.

After the goods market is closed, the consumer receives in cash his share of

dividends, Dtzt, 'where Dt is the money value of dividends at date t.

In

addition, the consumer receives a lump sum monetary transfer from the policy
authority in the amount t. Finally, at the end of period t, money and equity

shares in the firm are traded.

Thus, the evolution of the nominal money

holdings by the consumer are described by the equation

(3.5)

Mt÷1 + Qzt+i

[Mt -

Ptct] + [Q + D]z +

+

where W is the per unit cash payment from the firm to the consumer for
supplying the intermediate good. Dividing both sides of (3.4) and (3,5) by P
yields the real relations

(3.6)

Mt÷1/Pt + qz1 [mt - Ct] ÷ [q + dtjzt + WtXt +

(3.7)

Ct

nit,

where lower case letters denote real quantities and rt-Jt/Pt. We shall

20

henceforth assume that the constraint (3.7) is always binding. The consistency

of this assumption with the specification of other aspects of the model will
discussed subsequent to deriving the equilibrium law of motion for xt.

The consumer is assumed to choose contingency plans for Ct, xt, Mt+1 and
zt+l so as to maximize the logarithmic intertemporal objective function

(3.8) E0t Vt Thct,
subject to the constraints (3.3) and

(3.9)

In

Mt+1/Pt + qz÷1 —

[q +

dt]zt + WtXt + rt.

(3.8), Et denotes the expectation conditioned on agents' information set at

date t and the disturbance Vt is a taste shock, which is assumed to follow
the process

(3.10)

Vt —

IaIl,

where £net is normally distributed with mean zero and variance a.

The firstorder conditions for this optimum problem are

(3.11) Et

(3,12)

-wt.t +

+

— 0,

Et(wt+1 8t÷ et+i) — 0,

(3.13) -qt + Ett+i (q÷1 + dt+i)) — 0,
where t is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the constraint (3.9).
Substituting (3.11) into (3.12) gives

(3.14)

Et(Wt Vt÷i/Mt+i) —

Et(fl W.1 Vt+2 e÷1/M÷2).

21

Using (3.4), an equivalent way of writing (3.14) is

[ W-

(

1—

e+ Lif.+2
[8
I
t+2 Ct+2

which has the following interpretation. By selling a unit of the intermediate
good to the firm at date t the consumer receives W dollars, which can be used

to acquire the consumption good at date t+1. Therefore, the benefits from
providing xt are evaluated using the marginal utility of consumption at date

t+l (vt+i/ct÷i). On the other hand, postponement of the sale of x for one
periods yields the physical rate of return of

from storage. At date t-i-l

the consumer can then sell x for e+1 Wt+1 dollars, and these dollars can be
used to purchase consumption goods at date t÷2. Equation (3.14') states that

in equilibrium the consumer is indifferent between these two strategies.
Notice that the timing convention of our model implies that, in supplying the
intermediate

good to the firm at date t for a per unit nominal price W

consumers are effectively contracting for an uncertain per unit

at

price of

date t+l.

Equation

(3.14)

can

be used to determine

the equilibrium law of motion for

xt, once a money supply rule has been specified.
the

real

We assume that Mt follows

process

(3.15)

Mt (t),

Mt÷l

where St is a vector of state variables that are known at date t. (Recall that

Mt÷1 is known at the end of date t &id Mt is determined at date t-l.)
Substituting (3.15) into (3.14) and using the cash-in-advance constraint leads
to

(

.1

Wt- V1-

I f(st)ct

J

I

wt-+, e÷1

f(st÷1)
22

ct÷i

1

In equilibrium, Zt

(all equity claims are held) and Ct

=

Yt

(consumption equals output). Also, the first-order conditions to the firm's
optimum problem imply that the real price of the intermediate good equals the
marginal product of the good in production:

(3.17)

Wt

—

a

a—i

xt t•

Imposing these equilibrium conditions and using (3.16) gives

" l E•' 11÷

1
f(s)J

E

I P e.+1 v+2

(t+1)

I

Given that f(st) is

information set at date

in agents'

t,

it

is

straightforward to verify that

a-i

2

(3.19) x — 48 exp[½a6]

Xt..i t

e

f(st1)/f(st)

satisfies (3.18). Therefore, (3.19) is the equilibrium law of motion for x.
Taking logarithms of both sides of (3,19) gives

(3.20)

ioXt

2n[fl 4'

More general linear time

Xt.,i e]

series

+ (1nf(st,,) -

2nf(st)).

representations for 2nvt could easily be

accommodated; they would only complicate the manner in which preference shocks
enter (3.20).

Before proceeding with our discussion of (3.20),

it is instructive to

discuss briefly whether the assumption that the cash-in-advance constraint is

always binding is consistent with our assumptions about the distributions of

the exogenous shocks.

In the context of our model, the cash-in-advance

constraint is binding if and only if the nominal interest rate on a one-period

pure discount bond that pays off one cbllar is positive.

23

Thus, to check for

consistency e nust verify that, having imposed the constraint, the rminal

rate implied by the model is in fact positive. The rate of return on a
one-period nominal bond in this environment is given by4

b

'ti-a f(s)

2

exp(-½o6)/ - 1.

In the absence of preference shocks, a necesary and sufficient condition for

r÷1 to be positive is that the growth rate of money, f(st), exceed .
used the growth rate of Ml as a measure of (t)

in

We

our empirical analysis.

Interestingly, for the sample period 1949:1 through 1983:6, this measure of

(t) exceeds .995 (a plausible value of

for monthly decision intervals) in

all but five months. More generally, the assumption that r÷1 > 0 imposes
restrictions on the joint distribution of the taste shock,

and f(st).5

From (3.15) it is seen that the growth rate in the money supply,
(2nMt+1-1nMt), is equal to 2nf(st).

It follows that changes in the growth

rate of the money supply affect the consumer's decision rule for supplying
the intermediate good. The dependence of xt cri monetary growth, in turn,
implies that equilibrium c.ttput and dividends are also affected by monetary
policy. As is typical of models with cash-in-advance constraints, increases in

the growth rate of money decrease output. A similar property often emerges in

corresponding models in which money is introduced directly as an argument of

the agent's utility inction or through a shopping time transactions
technology. Lucas (1985) has conjectured that a positive relation between
money growth and output growth may obtain with the addition of informational

imperfections to models with cash-in-advance contraints. The qualitative

nature of the major conclusions drawn subsequently from (3.20) and our
empirical findings are not sensitive to whether the sign of the effect of
money on output in positive or negative. What is crucial is that money affect

24

real activity through more than just the current innovation in money.

Notice, that real allocations in r monetary economy are tnaffected by
permanent and proportional increases in either the level or the growth rate of

the money supply. Thus, this monetary model displays the property of super

neutrality. The result that a once and for all change in the level of the
money stock has no effect on ouput was derived in a more general setting by
Lucas (1984). The stronger result that money is super neutral will typically

not obtain in models in which consumers make non-trivial

labor supply

decisions as well as consumption decisions.
Examination of the logarithms of (3.1), (3.17), and (3.19) reveals several

interesting characteristics of the model set forth above:

(3.21)

=

£nxti + (a-l)lrwt
+ mnf(st1) lnf(st),

Enfl +

÷ met

-

(3.22)

2nct a2nx +

(3.23)

2nw — ma + (a-1)2rlxt +

Notice,

first of all, that output (mnct) is a function of both e (through xt)

and )...

This is an illustration of the more general principle that sectoral

shocks associated with the production of intermediate goods will have a

Furthermore, if these shocks are

cumulative effect on final output.

positively correlated, then the variance of the sum will exceed the sum of the

own variances. That the "aggregate" technological shock impinging on final
output represents such a combination of shocks may affect what is perceived to
be a plausible value for the variance of the shock to final output.
Equations (3.2l)-(3.23) also illustrate the well known, but often ignored,

25

fact that trends in the endogenous variables may be intimately related.
Simply put, this is because all of the endogenous variables are functions of

subsets of the same set of taste and technology shocks and trends enter the

model primarily through these shocks.

It turns t that many of r

statistical results using VARs are not insensitive to the assumptions about
the nature of trends in the variables examined. The sensitivity of estimates

from multivariate autoregressive representations to the method of detrending
has been noted previously by Kang (1985) and Bernanke (1985). In Section 5 we

use equations (3.2l)-(323)

to interpret the sensitivities of our results to

the specifications of trends.

Having deduced the equilibrium laws of ution for the real quantities in
our monetary model, we turn next to an investigation of conditions under which
an RBC model provides an accurate approximation to this economy.

26

4. Interpreting Bivariate VARs using Monetary and RBC Models

As background information for comparing the properties of the monetary and

RBC models,

it is

instructive to examine some empirical evidence.

Accordingly, we begin this section with a discussion of the findings from
estimating bivariate autoregressive time series representations of output and

money growth. A much more comprehensive set of empirical results is discussed
in Section 5.

The Granger causality relations between output and money were investigated

using monthly data for the U.S. economy over the sample period February 1949
through June 1983.

Output was measured by the Industrial Production Index

constructed by the Federal Reserve Board. Money was measured by Ml and was
obtained from the CITLBASE data tape. Table 4.1 displays the results for the

growth rate of output (the difference in the logarithm of industrial
production) arid the second difference in the logarithm of Ml.

The second

difference of the nney stock was used, because this is the empirical
counterpart to the construct appearing in the expression for Yt in Section
3,

Both Yt and 2.enM+1 were assumed to be covariance stationary

stochastic processes.

(The issue of trends is discussed in sore detail in

Section 5.) All VARs included twelve lags of each variable and a constant.

In none of the five sample periods considered does i2.2nMt÷1 Granger cause
at the one percent level. And only in the sample period 1959,2-1983,6

does L22nMt+1 Granger cause Yt at the five percent level.

Though not

reported in Table 4.1, the corresponding results obtained with 2nMt÷1 in
place of 22nMt÷1 were virtually identical.

These results could plausibly be interpreted as evidence in favor of the

view that RBC models provide accurate characterizations of the behavior of

27

real quantity variables for this sample period.

The remainder of this

section explores ways in which this interpretation of the evidence can be
reconciled with economic theory and ways in which advocates of various models
can be misled by this evidence.

In Subsection 4.A we study a version of the

model from Section 3 in which no cash-in-advance constraint is imposed. In

addition, we deduce conditions under which real allocations from this RBC

model correspond to those in the cash-in-advance economy. Subsection 4.B
explores the possibility of REC models providing an accurate, though not
exact, approximation to the monetary economy.

4.A. An RBC Model
Consider the following version of the economy of Section 3 in which agents

do not face a cash-in-advance constraint.

Suppose that

agents face the

period budget constraint

(4.1)

(dt + q) z + wt xt

ct + q zt+i

In this economy the consumption good is the n.uneraire and agents are paid in

consumption goods for supplying the intermediate good to the firm.

Payments

during period t are available for immediate consumption during period t. Also
suppose that the representative consumer chooses contingency plans for Ct, Xt,

and zt+i so as to maximize the logarithmic intertemporal objective ftnction
(3.8) subject to the constraints (3.3) and (4.1). In equilibrium, ztl (share
market clears), yt—ct (consumption equals output),

(4.2)

wtxt + dt —

Yt

(dividends plus factor costs exhaust output), and the supply and demand of the

28

intermediate good are equilibrated, so that (3.17) holds.

Imposing these

equilibrium conditions and using arguments similar to those leading to (3.19)
yields the following laws of motion for the quantity variables:
a-i

2
exp{½a]
x1 vti e,

(4.3)

xt

(4.4)

Ct

xt At,

(4.5)

dt =

(1-a) x At,

a

where the last expression follows from (4.2).
The equilibrium laws of notion for xt in the monetary and non-monetary

economies, given by (3.19)

and

(4.3)

respectively,

differ by the

multiplicative term {f(st.i)/f(st)] and the dating of the preference shock ii.
The latter difference arises because cash payments received at date t from the

sale of the intermediate good to the firm cannot be used to acquire the
consumption good until date t+1 in the monetary model.

When will the real allocations be identical in the nonetary and
non-monetary models described above? The difference between the dating of the
preference shock in the law of motion for xt will trivially be inconsequential

if preference shocks are absent from the nDdel.

Most of the RBC nDdels that

have been studied to date do exclude preference shocks. Alternatively, if the

preference shock follows a logarithmic random walk (a-.1), then again this
shock will not appear in the law of motion for Xt. Additionally, the monetary
term in (3.19) must be zero. This will be the case if the monetary authorities

follow a constant growth rate rule. Under these circumstances, (3.19) and
(4.3) give the same equilibrium laws of motion for x. This, in turn, implies

that the real equilibrium for the real and monetary models are identical,
sine dt and Ct are proportional to xt in both economies. Given that a=l, a

29

constant monetary growth rate is both rcessary and sufficient for the real
allocations to be identical in these economies.

In addition, it can be shown

that formulas for asset prices and relative prices of goods are identical in
the monetary and RBC models under these assumptions.

4.B Comparing Monetary and Real Business Cycle Models

Now, in fact, the monetary growth rate has not been constant over the
postwar period.

In our view, this observation alone is not sufficient to

dismiss an RBC explanation of aggregate fluctuations.

The extreme case of

monetary policy having no impact on real allocations, what we will refer to as

the strong RBC hypothesis, is presumably not what most proponants of RBC
theories have in mind when arguing that RBC models fit the data.

such claims

are more plausibly interpreted as

Instead,

statements about

the

insensitivity of real allocations to the current structure of financial
institutions, and the insignificance of exogenous shocks to the money supply
relative to exogenous real shocks. We refer to this latter interpretation as
the weak RBC hypothesis. Initially we discuss conditions under which measures

of monetary growth are rt likely to Granger cause the growth rate of output
under the weak RBC hypothesis.

Then, circumstances under which moasures of

monetary growth Granger cause the growth rate of output are discussed.

In our illustrative monetary model, the equilibrium quantities will be
approximately unaffected by exogenous money supply shocks if the change in the
growth rate of money is not too variable relative to preference and technology

shocks. Under this condition, the last term in expression (3.21),

(4.6)

.enxt —

1n +

Enxt1

÷ (a-l)Thvt +

30

2ne - r1Mt+1

can be ignored.

The corresponding expression from the RBC model set forth in

Section 4.A is
(4.7)

nxt — 2n$ +

÷ 2nêt.

+ nxt + (a-l)lru.'t1

Comparing (4.6) and (4.7) it is seen that hen

technology and taste

shocks

predominate the two laws of motion are nearly identical, the only difference
being the dating of the preference shock.

Thus, whether or not al, the RBC

model will provide a reasonably good approximation to the monetary economy
under this assumption about monetary growth.

Furthermore, for the sample

sizes typically considered in macroeconomic time series analyses, nxney may

not Granger cause output in this system due to statistical power
considerations.

It seems difficult to reconcile the absence of Granger causality from
money to output with the opposing view that monetary policy shocks contributed

significantly to the variability of itput thring r sample

the

period. Within

model of Section 3, one such reconciliation is achieved by assuming that

22nMt÷1 is serially uncorrelated (monetary growth follows a random walk).
Then the last term in (4.6) is serially uncorrelated.

Consequently, money

will not Granger cause output in the bivariate system [&2ny2€nM÷1]. This
will be the case even though money iocks affect itput and may have a large

variance relative to real shocks. The assumption that the change in the
monetary growth rate is serially uncorrelated is counterfactual, however (see
Table 4.1).

More generally, suppose that the monetary

growth rate is chosen by the

policy authorities to follow the process
(4.8)

AEnMt+1 —

—

.Qny..2 + y3 JnMt +
Y £ny1 +
(l--y3L)'[-y12ny1 + 2ny..2J + (l-i3LY'

31

't

where 1731<1,

is a random shock to the policy rule in period t that is

independent of the preference and technology shocks, and L is the lag
operator.

Taking the first difference of the output equation (3.22) and

substituting (4.8) for 22nMt÷1 and ignoring constant terms gives the
following equations:

(4.9) Yt a[(a-1)2nut + 0t - (l--y3L'(-y1 Yt-i + 2 inyt2)]
+
(4.10)

2frMt±1 —

(l--y3L)'[1

-

a(l--)'3L)1 bt,
iny..1 + 7 lny2 +

In this example, 22nMt÷1 will not Granger cause .2nyt only under the special

assumptions that --O in (4.8) and the composite shock {(a-l)2nvt + n9t +
1nAt + t] is serially uncorrelated. The assumption that the projection of
22riMt÷1 onto its own history and the past history of ny is not a function

of 21nMtj jO, is counterfactual. Also, we are not aware of any compelling
scientific evidence which strongly suggests that either the changes or levels
of the taste and technology shocks are white noise processes.

Of course, if the variance of the monetary policy shocks are small
relative to the variances of the real shocks, then money may not Granger cause

output even though A2lnMt+j is highly variable.

In particular, suppose that

the variance of (l--y3L)1 t is small relative to the variances of the terms

involving the other shocks, so that the monetary policy shock is not an
important independent source of variation of output in this model.

Then

inspection of (3.22), (3.23), and (4.9) reveals that monetary growth may fail

to Granger cause ttput in the nulivariate system [nxt,nct,1riwt,22nMt÷1].
This scenario presumably motivates RBC analyses.

While it is necessarily true that real shocks should be the focal point of

32

business cycle analyses if monetary shocks are relatively unimportant, as the
bivariate VARs suggest, it is premature to conclude that RBC models correctly
represent the structure

of the economy. The economic environment leading to

the use of fiat money as a medium of exchange may be very different than the

economic environment underlying RBC models.

That is, modern institutional

arrangements are associated with very different market structures than the

structures adopted in RBC models and hence monetary models may have very
different sources of endogenous dynamics.

To illustrate this point, consider again the output equation (4.9)

associated with the money supply rule (4.8). Suppose that the linear
combination of the taste and technology shocks in (4.9)

is serially

uncorrelated. The persistence in output is then due entirely to the fact that

the monetary policy rule feeds back on lagged itput growth; there is rthing
technological about this persistence.

Yet an RBC theorist might

explore

non-time-separable specifications of technology and preferences in order to
induce autocorrelations similar to those implied by (4.9).

It seems likely

that RBC models could be developed with sufficiently rich specifications of

preferences and technology to match the autocorrelations of output quite
closely. For, as noted previously, low order stochastic difference equations
are often acceptable representations of economic aggregates.

But inferences

about the structure of the economy using an RBC model could be very
misleading. It follows that policy analysis using the RBC formulation of the
economy could lead to misguided policy prescriptions.

As a second example of this phenomenon, suppose that 21nMt÷1 is set so as
to substantially attenuate (or completely offset) the impact of certain shocks

on Yt• Then the time series properties of 2nyt will be determined by the

33

remaining, shocks in (4.6) and money growth may not Granger cause output
growth.

Nevertheless, the properties of _2nyt are clearly affected by the

particular feedback rule adopted by the monetary authorities. We suspect that

a version of this scenario could be developed in which lagged values of
22nMt÷1 also were useful in predicting E2.2nMt+1.

Up to this point

have focused on situations in which money growth does

not Granger cause output growth.

In anticipation of empirical results using

linearly detrended data reported in Section 5, we briefly explore structural
interpretations of a Granger causal relation from nney to output.

The most

straightforward interpretation of such a statistical relation is that In fact
monetary policy actions are important determinants of aggregate real activity.
On the other hand, a statistical relation between money and output may reflect

the fact that money is proxying for unobserved shocks to tastes and
technologies. That is, if there are nre aggregate shocks to preferences and

technology than real variables included in the VAR, then in general 2M

will Granger cause the real variables. This is the interpretation of
money.output correlations adopted by Litterman and Weiss (1985).

To illustrate a signaling role for money, consider a trivariate VAR of

Yt'

and E22nMt÷1.

In our model, when a'l, there are three real

shcks so if monetary growth follows a feedback rule like (4.8), then 2nMt÷1
will convey information about [Enyt,z.2nxtJ that is rt embodied in the past
histories of the quantity variables. Thus, noney will Granger cause output in
this setting even if monetary policy shocks are absent from the model. On the

other hand, when a—l, there are only two real shocks so that the vector of
quantities will not be Granger caused by monetary growth if the variance of
the monetary shock is small.

34

In concluding this section, we examine the question of what proportion of
the variance of c1tput is accounted for by innovations in nominal aggregates.

Attempts at answering this question raise additional questions regarding the
interpretation of VARs.

We begin by describing a procedure proposed by Sims

(1980b) for calculating variance decompositions and then review an important

objection to the procedure which has been tised by Blanchard and Watson
(1984) and Bernanke (1985), among others.

These issues are intimately

connected with the set of circumstances under which Granger-causality tests
can be used to shed light on structural, rather than statistical, issues.

Let S- [S1t', S'] , where S1 is a j x 1 vector of real variables and
S2 is a (k-j) x 1 vector of nominal variables. We suppose that S has the
vector autoregressive representation,

(4l1)

G(L)St

Et

where G(L) is a k x k matrix polynomial in the lag operator L, I + G1L + G2L2

which satisfies the invertibility conditions, and

is a k x 1 vector

of serially uricorrelated disturbances which may be contemporaneously
correlated.

In general the elements of the vector e will be nonlinear

functions of the innovations to agents' preferences, productivity shocks and
nominal disturbances.

Suppose that the analyst estimates the parameters of

G(L) and the contemporaneous covariance of €,

(4.12)

E€t4

The analyst wishes to partition the variance of the T-step ahead forecast

error of a particular element of S into the portions attributable to
innovations in the different components of S.
Suppose that the forecast error variance of interest is that of the first

35

component of S.c, Sit. Let L1 be the 1 x k row vector with 1 in the first

place and zero elsewhere. Also let St

M(L)€t denote the nDving average

representation of St where M(L) is a k x k matrix of polynomials in the lag
operator which satisfies the invertibility conditions and M(L)G(L) =

I,

with

I being the k x k identity matrix. Then the T-step ahead forecast error of
S1 can be written as

(4.13)

EtSlt÷T -

Sjt+T — Ll(-€t+T

-

MlEt÷T1. .-MT1et÷l)
.

The variance of the T-step forecast error variance of S1, is equal to,

T-i k k
(4.14)

E({Sit÷T -

EtSlt÷T]2)

—
r—o

j—i 1—i

M.(l,j) Mr(l2)cj

where M(i,j) is the th element of the matrix Mr.

If EE is diagonal, then the percentage of the variance in the T-step
forecast of S1. due to innovations in the th variable,

T-i
100
(4.15)

2

2

T-ik
M(l,j) aj
r—o

j—i

As T approaches infinity the T-step ahead forecast error of S converges to
the ixiconditional variance of

Accordingly, the percentage of the

unconditional variance of S1. which is attributable to innovations in Sit is
well approximated by calculating (4.15) for large values of T.

In general, the matrix E is rt diagonal,

so that some set of

normalizations or identifying restrictions im.tst be imposed on the system
before a decomposition of S can be calculated.
new set of error terms ct

36

More precisely, we define a

(4.16)

ct =

ft

with F chosen such that

(4.17)

FEctcF'

Eetf =

FçF'

is a k x k diagonal positive definite matrix. Then (4.6) and

and

(4.18)

G(L)St =

Fct

are observationally equivalent representations of St. In general there are
an infinite number of matrices F which satisfy (4.17), so normalizations must
be imposed before calculating variance decompositions.

The sethod suggested by Sims (1980b) for decomposing the ctor 6t into

orthogonal components, (i.e., for choosing a particular matrix F) is to

proceed with a particular ordering of the elements of S and restrict
attention to the class of matrices F which are lower block triangular.

This

amounts to setting the th offdiagona1 elements of the th row of F1 equal
to minus the coefficient on

from the projection of the t1t element of t

on elements 1 through j-1 of t'(21' ..,j'l).
depends on the ordering of the variables,

In general the matrix F

Once the matrix F has been chosen

we can substitute t Fct into (4.15) to achieve the desired decomposition.

Notice that if E is diagonal then there is a unique matrix F=I which
satisfies (4,16) and (4.17).

As Sims (1980b), Blanchard and Watson (1984),

Bernanke (1985), and Cooley and LeRoy (1985) have noted this procedure for
choosing the matrix F presumes that the structural ndel for St

is

recursive

when E is not diagonal.
In the context of the following example, we discuss the pitfalls of Sims'

37

procedure when applied to our problem.

Consider again the representation

(4.9) for Einy. Relation (4.9) implies that the innovation to the owth
rate of output will be a linear combination of the innovations to agents'
preference shocks, sector specific technology shocks, and the change in the
growth rate of money. In order to make our example as simple as possible we

concentrate on a bivariate time series representation for Yt and 22nMt+1,
and simplify the stochastic structure of the model.

Suppose that preference

shocks follow a random walk (a—i), e-l, and the law of motion for the
technology shock is given by,

.inXt —

(4.19)

D(LY'€At,

1-Ld(L) is an invertible polynomial in the lag operator, d(L) =

where D(L)

(d1 + d2L + d3L2 + ...), and e is a serially uncorrelated random variable.
It is convenient to modify relation (4.6) by replacing the term i2ir1Mt÷1 by
zi22nMt+1 where z(O,l). When z is equal to one, we obtain the monetary model
of Section 3.

When z is equal to zero, we obtain the RBC model discussed in

Section 4.A which imposes the strong RBC hypothesis. Under these assumptions,

the law of motion for Yt becomes

(4.20) Yt —

where j4t

(4.21)

&2nAt

-

zapt

22nMt+1. Substituting (4.19) into (42O) and rearranging gives,

A2nYt —

d(L)tinyt..1

-

zaj

+ zad(L)iit..1 +

Next, suppose that the monetary authority sets the change in the monetary
growth rate according to the feedback rule,

38

(4.22)

it =

e(L)2nyti

+ f(L),ut..i + /ht + xeAt

where e(L) and f(L) are scalar invertible polynomials in the lag operator L,

x is a scalar constant, and t is a serially uncorrelated random variable.
and t are contemporaneously uncorrelated.

We assume that

Relations (4.21) and (4.22) imply that &2ny and j have the bivariate VAR
representation

(4.23)

1 za d(L)

AnYt1

't

zad(L) [iny1

—

I

I

0

j

1 e(L)

+

eitl

f(L)

where

lzax
(4.24)

-za

—
X

1

Suppose the analyst estimates the VAR (4.23) and has in hand estimates of the

three parameters of EE.

For this economic model E€ is a function of four

parameters: za, x, cr,

and a' where the last two parameters are the

variances of

and

respectively. It follows that the parameters of the

innovation covariance matrix cannot be identified separately from the
parameters of the regression equation.

This, in turn, implies that the

methods proposed by Blanchard and Watson (1984), Bernanke (1985), and Sims

(1985) for analyzing innovation covariance matrices are in general not
applicable to dynamic economic models.

Put differently, proponents of this

approach are implicitly ruling out a large and important class of dynamic
economic models as candidates for explaining business cycles.

Pursuing this observation, suppose that the empirical evidence suggests

that A.2ny is not Granger caused by p. Within the context of (4.23), this

39

implies that zcr=O unless we are in the counterfactual case where d(L) is
identically equal to f(L). Setting zO leads to the structural model

iny
(4.25)

—

d(L)

e(L)

0 [2nyt..1
I

f(L) LAit-i

1

0

x

1

The model (4.25) has three important features.

RBC model of Section 4.A.

xt1

First, it corresponds to the

Second, this model exhibits a block recursive

structure between the real and nnetary sectors.

Third, implementing Sims'

procedure for orthogonalizing the covariance matrix of the innovations in a

bivariate VAR by placing Yt before p would uncover the true orthogonal
shocks of interest.

It is worth emphasizing that the justification for the

ordering of the variables in this example depends critically ai the assumed

For the RBC model in Section 4.A,

pattern of Granger-causality results.

imposing the Granger rxn-causality of output by money identifies
parameters of the matrix

.

There

the

is no natural way to separate the

identification of EE from the specification of the structure in this dynamic
model.

Recall that the findings in Table 4.1 provide little evidence that &2ny

is Granger caused by A22nM1,

Therefore, consistent with the previous

discussion, we implemented Sims procedure for decomposing the variance of
by placing A2ny before i22nMt÷1. All of the variance decompositions
are for forty-eight month ahead forecast errors (T=48).

Table 4.1 displays

the decompositions and their associated standard errors.6 Notice that for all

the sample periods considered the innovation in 2hiMt+1 accounts for very

little of the variance of 2yt

In four of the five sample periods

considered the percentage of the variance of lny explained by innovations to

40

'Yt is within one standard error of ninety five percent. Even in the sample

period 1959,2-1983,6, where 22nMt÷1 Granger causes Qny at the five percent
level, the percentage of the variance of Jny accounted for by innovations in

Yt is within one standard error of ninety percent. Viewed as a whole, the
empirical results emerging from the bivariate time series analysis yield very
little evidence against the weak RBC hypothesis.

In Section 5 we analyze VARs that include additional variables as a check

on the robustness of the qualitative findings from the empirical analysis of
the bivariate VARs.

In decomposing the variance of the growth rate of output

we proceed under the null hypothesis imposed by the strong RBC hypothesis that
there is a block recursive structure between real and nominal variables.

41

5. Interpreting the Evidence from Vector Autoregressions

Much of the recent empirical evidence that has been used to support or

refute RBC models has come from studying vector autoregressive or moving
average representations of the variables comprising the models. See, for

example, Sargent (1976), Sims (1980a,b), King and Plosser (1984), Altug
(1985), and Bernanke (1985). In this section we examine the empirical evidence

from multivariate VARs in light of the discussion in Section 4, using monthly
data for the postwar U.S. economy.

At the outset of this discussion it is important to explore in detail the
role of detrending in the empirical analysis.

As noted in Section 3, several

authors have documented the sensitivity of the results from estimating
unconstrained VARs to the assumptions about trends.

At the same time,

previous studies have virtually ignored the fact that the trends are
determined both by the specification of the underlying uncertainty in the
economy and the structure of the economic model itself.

Therefore, how one

detrends is in general not independent of one's view about the structure of
the economy.

This observation represents an additional reason hy it is not

possible to embark on an empirical analysis of business cycle models using
VARs without implicitly or explicitly restricting the class of models being

investigated. We briefly illustrate the nature of these restrictions using
the models of Section 3.

Different specifications of preferences and technologies, as well as the
laws of motion for the exogenous shocks will in general lead one to consider
different autoregressive representations of the data.

For instance, had we

started with quadratic preferences and technologies, a linear representation

of the levels of the variables, instead of their logarithms, would have

42

emerged from the model. The question of whether trends are deterministic or

stochastic would then have been addressed to the levels of the variables.

Rather than working out in detail some of the many possible time series

representations that might emerge from alternative specifications of
preferences and technologies,

continue to focus on the log-linear

representation that emerges from the model in Section 3.

Even holding fixed

the specification of technology and preferences, it turns out that many

possible trend specifications may arise in our model from alternative
specifications of the structure of uncertainty.

To see this, it is convenient to work with a special case of the monetary

model given by (4.9) and (4.10). Suppose the monetary policy rule is given by
(5.1)

22nMt

1xt1 +

There is no deep economic significance to having monetary growth depend on the
intermediate good.

extensive

additional

This specification allows us to make cur points without

calculations using alternative specifications of the

model, Substituting (5.1) into the equation (3.21) gives (ignoring constants):

(5.2)

The

nxt —(lp)1xt1 + (a-l)lnvt + '8t -

expressions (3.22) and (3.23) for 2nct and 2nwt, respectively, are

unchanged. Notice that the coefficient on

in (5.2) is determined both

by the specifications of the storage technology for the intermediate good and

the monetary feedback rule. If p<O, then Znxt will be an explosive process

and so will 2nct and 2nwt. In this case, neither the removal of a
deterministic polynomial trend or first-differencing will render the logarithm

of output stationary! Similar examples of potentially explosive processes for

43

output are easily constructed by relaxing the assumption of independent taste
and technology shocks.

Also, we conjecture that an explosive output process

may well emerge in imdels with increasing returns to scale in production. For

instance, some specifications of learning-by-doing might generate such an
increasing returns to scale technology.

If, on the other hand, 2>p>O, then the trend in 2nxt will be determined by

For instance, if a subset of these

the properties of .2n11t1, 2net, and

variables exhibit linear deterministic trends and the other variables are
stationary stochastic processes, then the logarithms of output, consumption,

and the price of the intermediate good will also exhibit linear trends. An
assumption like this nust implicitly underlie the common practice of removing

linear trends. This result depends critically on the specification (5.1) of
the money supply rule.

If p—O, then removing linear trends from [nxt, hict,

2nwt] will not render these variable stationary (see below).

necessary in this model to adopt i

entirely

It would be

different specification of the

storage technology to preserve the linear trend assumption.
If 2>p>O and lTwt..i, 2ne,

and 2nAt are all stationary, then ny will

also be stationary. At least for the postwar period, the evidence seems not to
support this assumption about trends.

Finally, returning to the original specification of the model, if p=O,
then there is a unit root in the process for lnxt.

't also has a unit root and

If the technology shock

and 2ne are stationary process, then

2nc, and A2nwt are all stationary stochastic processes. This case is
of particular interest since Prescott (1986) has argued that the technology
shock in his model approximately follows a random walk.

Also, Altug (1985)

found that the estimated autoregressive parameter in her time series

44

representation of the technology shock was essentially unity. Thirdly, Nelson

and Plosser (1982) have argued that many real macroeconomic time series must

be differenced to induce stationarity. In our work we consider only the
possible need to first difference output. However, the need for higher order

differencing could be justified by introducing unit roots into the lnvt or

met processes.
With these observations in mind, we turn next to an empirical analysis of

monthly data for the postwar period. Let S' denote a k x 1 vector of
variables observed by the econometrician. In light of our previous discussion

is related to the k x 1 covariance

regarding trends, we assume that

stationary stochastic process, S, via one of the following two relations:

(5.3a) S' St + Ag(t)
or,

t
J.)U)

r*
A1t

c.

at-i

—

where g(t) is a scalar valued deterministic function of time and A is a k x k
matri! of constants, and St has the autoregressive representation (4.11).

As

before, we partition the vector S as,

(5.4)

S' —

{5t'

S2t']

where S1 is a j x 1 vector of real quantity variables and t

is

a (k-j) x 1

vector of relative prices and nominal variables.

Initially, we address the question of thether nominal aggregates have
predictive power for aggregate real output, once lagged outputs are accounted

45

Trivariate VAR's including measures of aggregate real output, the rate

for.

of inflation, and the stock of money were examined. That is,

(5.5)

S*' [ny, itt, £nMt+i]

where itt denotes the rate of inflation between time t-l and time

t.

(Recall

that Mt+j is chosen at date t.) Similar VARs were studied by Sims (1980a) and

Litterman and Weiss (1985).
study,

the

In order to allow comparisons with the latter

components of S' were taken to be nonthly versions of the data

used by Litterman and Weiss (1985) over the sample period 1949,2-1983,6.

The

variable y was nasured as the industrial production, Mt+1 s nEasured as
Ml, and itt was measured as the monthly change in the logarithm of the consumer

price index less shelter.

Seasonally adjusted versions of the noney, price

and output series were used.

It is worth pointing out that Sims (1980a) and Litterman and Weiss (1985)
estimated their VARs using levels of variables. Sims (1980a) does not discuss
the trend issue, while Litterman and Weiss (1985) note that their findings are

largely insensitive to whether or not linear trends are removed.
approach amounts to running a VAR using data on S rather than St. Here

Their

we

investigate the sensitivity of Litterman and Weiss' Granger-causality findings

to both changes in the sample period, and the removal of linear deterministic
trends or first-differencing the data.

Five sample periods

were considered: 1949,2-1983,6, 1952,1-1979,12,

1952,1-1983,6, 1959,2-1979,12 and 1959,2-1983,6. All VARs included twelve
lagged values of each variable and a constant. Table 5.1 displays the test
results for the null hypotheses that the coefficients on lagged values of itt

46

and £nMt (H7. and Hm, respectively) are zero in the context of the trivariate

VAR for S' (equation (5.5)).

The null hypothesis } is rejected at the one

percent level for the sample periods 1949,2-1983,6 and 1959,2-1983,6, but not
for the other three sample periods. The null hypothesis H. is rejected at the

one percent level cnly for the period 1959,2-1979,12. There is substantially
more evidence against the rull hypothesis HM at the five percent level; HM is
rejected at this level for all five sample periods.

Table 5.2 reports the corresponding tests for kiy with S* given by
(5.3a). The matrix A was chosen to be the 3 x 3 identity matrix, and the
function g(t) was given by

(5.6)

g(t) — a + bt

Thus the inputs into the VAR were the linearly detrended values of .EnYt, itt

and hlMt.fl, denoted by 2ny, ir, and nM1, respectively. Let H(H) denote
the null hypothesis that the coefficients on lagged values of .2nM+1 (itt') in

the iny' equation are zero, Interestingly, the strongest evidence against H

comes from the post-1959 sample periods.

For these sub-periods, } is

rejected at the one percent level. The null hypothesis H is not rejected at
the five percent significance level for any of the subperiods.

The results of Table 5.2 are based on a decomposition of the movements in

S into secular and cyclical components.

Secular movements ere modeled as

deterministic functions of time. A number of authors like Nelson and Plosser

(1982) have argued, on statistical grounds, that many macroeconomic time
series display stochastic rather then deterministic time trends.

Given the

weak power of existing statistical tests for detecting the presence of unit

47

roots in time series processes, it is not clear that these issues can be
settled on purely statistical grounds (see for example the discussion of
Nelson and Plosser (1982) in McCallum (1985)). However, we are sympathetic to

the possibility that a variety of aggregate time series are members of what
Nelson and Plosser (1982) call the class of difference stationary stochastic
processes. Moreover, several of the models in Section 3 and 4 are consistent
with the presence of a unit root in the autoregressive component of the time

series representation for the logarithm of real .1tput.

Therefore, we

re-estimated the trivariate VARs allowing for the possibility that the data
display stochastic trends.

However no attempt as made to decompose the

movements in real output (or the other components of St*) into secular and
cyclical components.

This is because we did not wish to impose the a priori

restriction that rxinina1 disturbances affect only the cyclical component of
real output.

Table 5.3 displays the results from testing the null hypotheses that the

coefficients on lagged values of inMt÷1 and t
and H, respectively) are zero.

in the ny equation (H

The trivariate VARs were estimated using

observations on S with St and S* related via (5.3b),

The matrix A was

chosen to be the 3 x 3 identity matrix so that S. is simply equal to

A

striking feature of the results is that neither H or H is rejected at the
five percent level for any of the postwar sample periods. These results stand
in sharp contrast to those reported in Tables 5.1 and 5.2.
To summarize this portion of our empirical analysis, the test results were

most sensitive to changes in the sample period when the VARs were estimated

using data which were not detrended in any way (as in Sims (1980a) and
Litterman and Weiss (1985)) and least sensitive when the VAR's were estimated

48

using first differenced data. In addition, the strongest evidence against the

null hypothesis that real output is exogenous with respect to measures of
inflation and the stock of nney was obtained 'when the VARs were estimated
There is r evidence against this null

using data 'which was not detrended.

hypothesis from VARs estimated using first-differenced data.

Next, we examine the consequences of adding asset returns to the joint
time series representation for output, inflation and money. Sims (1980a) and

Litterman and Weiss (1985) report that the role of money in VARs is very
sensitive to the inclusion of rates of return on Treasury bill securities.
For this reason, several VARs which included the ex post real value-weighted

return on stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange, r, and the ex post
real rate of return on one nrrnth Treasury bills, t, were estimated.

Real

rates of return were studied instead of nominal returns, because the nominal

rate of return on Treasury bills, R, displays a narked trend in the post war
period. This trend is far less pronounced for the real rate of return, r'.

The reasons for including stock returns in the empirical analysis are
three-fold. First, we are sympathetic with the opinion of Fischer and Merton
(1984) that macroeconomists have unduly neglected the role of the stock market

as a determinant of aggregate output.

Second, there are good theoretical

reasons to believe that stock returns are useful statistical predictors of
real output.

Changes in stock prices reflect both revised expectations about

future corporate earnings and revisions in the discount rate at 'which these

expected earnings are capitalized. Revisions in both of these variables may

be induced by the shocks impinging on output. Third, a number of authors
including Doan, Litterman and Sims (1983), report that stock returns are, in
fact, important indicators of movements in real output.

49

In estimating the VARs with asset returns, attention was restricted to the

post 1959 period, because Tables 5.1 and 5.2 suggest that this period was the

least likely to be consistent with RBC theories.

from four-variate VARs including

r,

Table 5.4 reports results

nMt+1) and (2nyt, r,

't+). In neither of the two sample periods can we reject at the five

percent level the null hypotheses H, H, or H. However, the rull
hypothesis HrS can be rejected at the one percent level for the period
1959,2-1979,12.

t'

Table 5.5 displays the results from four-variate VARs including (.Enyt',

r, t' lnMt+11) and (lnyt', r

Somewhat surprisingly, only

lagged values of iny helped predict future values of 2ny for the sample
periods examined.

Table 5.6 displays results from five-variate VARs including (Li.2nyt, r,

r, 1rt, £2nMt+1) and (.2nyt',r, r t' £n14+1). Only lagged values of inyt
help predict future values of 2yt at the one percent level. Similarly, only
lagged values of £nyt' help predict frLyt' at the one percent level.

However

there is some evidence that ex post real stock returns have predictive power
for both .2nyt and inyt' in the period 1959,2-1979,12. As with the trivariate

VARs, there is somewhat more evidence that nominal aggregates help predict
real variables when detrended data are used, but overall there is very little

evidence of predictive power for nominal variables.

Finally, Table 5.7

reports our results when real rates of return were replaced by first
differences of nominal rates of return and linearly detrended nominal returns.
The qualitative conclusions from these tests are essentially the same as those
from using real returns.

The runs with differenced data provide little support for the view that

50

monetary policy actions were important determinants of real txltput over the
sample periods considered.

The absence of Granger causality from money to

output suggests that exogenous policy shocks were not a major source of output
variability.

Overall, the pattern of results from the VARs are not

inconsistent with an RBC interpretation of the post war aggregate time series
data.

There is perhaps one puzzling feature of these results.

Recall from the

discussion in Section 4.B that nDnetary growth might be expected to Granger
cause output growth in an RBC nodel when the number of aggregate real shocks
impinging on the economy is large relative to the number of real variables in

Here we have found little evidence that &r1Mt÷1 Granger causes Eny in
several imiltivariate VARs including bivariate representations. At the same

time, stock returns evidently do Granger cause 2Yt' which suggests that
there were at least two significant aggregate real shocks impinging on the
post war economy.

Money is evidently rt proxying for unobserved taste or

technology shocks in these VARs even though the rximber of real shocks exceeds

the dimension of S .

These findings raise interesting cpestions about the

links between money and output in the U.S. economy that warrant further
investigation, and that are not easily addressed within the context of many
recent monetary models or the model in Section 3.

Proceeding under the null hypothesis that a real business rcle view is

correct, the variance decompositions of output re also calculated.

Sims'

method for orthogonalizing the error terms from the VAR was used, with real
variables appearing before the nominal variables in the vector St. Under this

ordering, the innovations in the real variables are interpreted as linear
combinations of the innovations to agents' preference and technology shocks.

51

In all of the decompositions we chose an ordering of variables in which output

appeared first. It su1d be equally consistent with the RBC model of Section
4.A to choose an ordering in which either of the two asset returns appeared

prior to output.

In practice, we icountered very little sensitivity to

permutations of the orderings within the real block S. In part this
reflects the fact that monthly data was used. For monthly data, the
contemporaneous correlations among the innovations in the VAR are small.

All reported variance decompositions are based on 48 month ahead forecast

errors. Table 5.1 reports the decomposition of the variance of .2ny based
upon trivariate VARs including £nyt,

and .2nMt+1.

The reported variance

decompositions of 2ny are sensitive to changes in the sample period.

For

example, in the sample period 1949,2-1979,12, the innovations to lnMt+i and t

account for 34 and 25 percent, respectively, of the error variance of .2ny.

When the sample period is 1952,1-1983,6 these percentages are 9 and 64,
respectively.

Most dramatically, in the sample period 1959,2-1979,12,

innovations in t account for 79 percent of the forecast error variance of
nyt, while nnetary innovations account for only 9 percent of the forecast
error variance in 2nyt.

The decompositions of the variance of output in Table 5.2, which are based

on trivariate VARs including 2ny', t' and £nM1, are also quite sensitive
to changes in the sample period.

Again innovations in the inflation rate

account for the largest proportion of the variance of output in the post 1959

period. However, comparing Table 5.1 and 5.2 it is seen that innovations in

the inflation rate play a relatively more important role in the variance

decomposition of output based on VARs estimated with rn-detrended data.
Nevertheless, nominal variables accounted for fairly large proportions of the

52

variance of 2ny' in all of the sample periods.

The decompositions of the variance of output reported in Table 5.3 are

based

on trivariate VARs which included 2nyt,

and tinMt÷1. These results

differ in two important respects from those reported in Tables 5.1 and 5.2.
First, the results display very little sensitivity to changes in the sample
period and the reported standard errors are smaller.

Second, innovations in

t and i2nMt÷1 account for only a small proportion of the error variance of

Yt• Overall the nost unfavorable sample periods from the point of view of
RBC theories are the post 1959 periods.

Consider next the decompositions of the variance of output based on VARs
which included asset return data.

As before, attention is restricted to the

post 1959 period. Table 5,4 displays the decomposition of the variance of

output based on four-variate VARs including (&2ny, r,

(Yt r,

Mt÷1} and

nMt÷1}. As in Table 53, the reported decompositions are

largely insensitive to changes in the sample period.

In both cases the

output innovations account for a large proportion of the variance of iny.

Innovations in r account for a very small proportion of the variance of
iny, while innovations in r account for approximately 25% of the variance

of wt.
Table 5.6 reports the variance decomposition of .2ny based on a
five-variate VAR including {..Enyt, r, r,

r1Mt+1). The results are

again insensitive to the choice of the sample period.

Together, innovations

in real variables account for over 90% of the variance of the growth rate in
output.

Innovations in

and nMt÷1 play an insignificant role in the

decomposition. Both Tables 5.4 and Table 5.6 indicate that ex post real stock
returns play a far more important role than ex post real Treasury bill returns

53

This is reflected both in the Granger

in the time series behavior of i2nyt.

causality tests and the decomposition of the variance of Lnyt.

Finally, Table 5.6 displays the decomposition of the variance of output

based on a five-variate VAR which included {inyt', r, r, t' nMt÷11}.
Innovations in itt' and £nMt+1' account for a significant proportion of the
variance of iny' .

However, the results are sensitive to the choice in the

sample period. For example,

2nMt÷i '

accounts for 46% of the variance of

£nyt' when the sample period is 1959,2-1983,6, but only 12% when the sample

period is

1959,2-1979,12.

A similar

instability of the variance

decompositions is displayed in Table 5.5 for the four-variate VARs including

t'

(iny, r, inir, 1n14÷1) and (2ny, r, 2nir, 1riM1), and in Table 5.7 for

the five-variate VARs which included (yt', R', ',

nMt+'). Not

surprisingly standard errors are larger for the decompositions based on
linearly detrended data than those based on the differenced data.

54

6. Concluding Remarks

A striking finding from our

empirical

analysis is that, for all sample

periods considered and for various nultivariate VARs, lagged values of the

monetary growth rate are not helpful in predicting the current and future
growth rates of
VARs.

txttput, after conditioning on the other variables in the

Interpreted within the context of the monetary model of Section 3,

these results suggest that exogenous shocks to the monetary growth rate were

not an important independent source of variation in output growth during the

post r period in the U.S.

More precisely, statistical representations of

the monetary growth rate suggest that the monetary policy rule involves
feedback on both lagged monetary growth and output. This observation, combined

with the dependence of output on monetary growth through our transactions
technology, suggest that if monetary shocks were an important source of output
variability, then monetary growth would have Granger caused the growth rate of

output in VARs,

Adding sticky wages and prices, overlapping nominal

contracts, or entering money directly in agents' utility functions seems
likely to reinforce the conclusion that monetary growth will Cranger cause
output growth if exogenous stocks to the money supply were an important source
of business cycle fluctuation.

We hasten to add that the design of our empirical analysis is such that
infrequent monetary shocks that had an important effect on output growth may

not have been detected by our statistical procedures.

All of the sample

periods examined covered several different political administrations and, in

several cases, there re significant changes in the structure of financial
institutions. Additionally, specific events that are widely viewed as being
monetary in nature occured during sample periods that may also have included

55

numerous real shocks.

Put differently, our results do not rule out the

possibility that particular movements in output were largely due to monetary

shocks. Our results only indicate that such shocks were rt sufficiently
frequent and large to be statistically significant over the entire sample
period. More thorough studies of specific events seems worthwhile.

There are several other considerations that we feel make a real business
cycle interpretation of our findings premature.

First, the empirical results

are not insensitive to the assumptions about the nature of trends.

The

virtual absence of Granger causality from noney to output s obtained when

both of these variables were first differenced. In contrast, when linear
deterministic trends were removed from the logarithms of output and money,
there was much more evidence that money Granger caused output.

Even with

linear trends, however, the evidence was mixed. For the sample period 1959,2

through 1983,6, and in a five-variate VAR including real stock and bond
returns, money innovations accounted for 46% of the variation in detrended
output. (Interestingly, this finding is not consistent with Sims' finding that
monetary shocks explain little of output variation in the presence of interest

rates.) For the sample period 1959,2 through 1979,12, imnetary innovations
accounted for 12% of the variation in detrended output. A comparison of the
results for these two sample periods suggests that monetary thocks may have

been important for 1tput fluctuation during the early 1980's. But the
standard errors for the estimated variance decompositions are quite large and

detrended money did not Granger cause detrended output for the longer sample
period. Also, recall that money accounted for an insignificant percentage of
the variation in output over both sample periods when these series were timedifferenced.

56

We wish to re-emphasize the potential importance of investigating the role

of technological factors in generating business cycles within

nodels that

explicitly incorporate monetary exchange. Market structures in monetary
economies are very different from the market structures that have been assumed

in the literature on real business cycle models.

Our example economies show

that one could be seriously mislead in characterizing the structure of a

monetary economy, despite obtaining a good statistical fit using a real
business cycle model.

Finally, it is perhaps possible to reconcile our empirical findings with
modern Keynesian or rxrn-Keynesian monetary business cycle theories.

However,

to accomplish this reconciliation, these models must be formulated so as to be

consistent with both the findings that output growth does rot Cranger cause
money

growth and

that noney growth depends on lagged output growth and noney

We conjecture that in constructing such models researchers will be
to re-examine the relative importance of various channels through which

growth.

lead

monetary

factors affect real economic activity. In particular, the importance

of financial institutions in the propogation of real shocks may be more
pronounced in nonetary nodels in which the structure of financial contracts
emerges from a more thorough treatment of frictions.

57

Footnotes

'After we completed this paper, Bennett McGallum pointed out to us that an

important implication of early Keynesian business cycle models with sticky

prices and a horizontal U function is that noney should rot Granger cause
iiominal income.

This implication is,

of course, counterfactual.

The

equilibrium real business cycle models that we examine do not have this
implication.

2See McCallum (1985) for a related criticism of the Kydland-Prescott
analysis.

31n solving for xt we have followed the common practice of not imposing

non-negativity constraints on the capital stock kt.

whether or not this

constraint is binding in practice will depend i the distribution of the
shocks and the particular realizations in the current period.

One way of

obtaining a solution for which the constraint never binds is to assume that in
equilibrium xt is proportional, to kt with the proportionality factor being in

the interval (0,1). This is the approach taken by Garber and King (1983) for

their real economy. It turns out that the two approaches yield the same law
of motion for xt for the real economy in the absence of taste shocks, but they

differ when taste shocks are present.

strictly correct for

In practice, neither solution may be

the chosen distributions of the shocks under a

non-negativity constraint, Fortunately, our key points about the properties
of real versus nonetary business cycle nodels emphasized subsequently are not
sensitive to which solution is studied.

4This relation is derived by introducing one-period bond holdings into the

consumer's budget constraint and deducing the first order conditions for this

58

modified optimum problem without assuming that the cash-in-advance constraint
is always binding.

5Throughout this paper the assumption that mEt is lognormally distributed

is made only for convenience; tone of our qualitative conclusions depend on
this assumption.

The expression for r÷1 implied by our model when the

distribution of 6

is

left unspecified is identical to the expression in the

text, except that exp(½o} is replaced by Et(et+1).

5Standard errors of all variance decompositions reported in this paper
were computed using the Monte Carlo procedure described in the RATS manual,

page 17-3. Let b denote the estimated VAR coefficient vector and let V
denote the estimated covariance matrix of the residuals in the VAR.

that the VAR disturbances are i.i.d. and tormally distributed.

Suppose

Then the

posterior distribution of (b,V) is Normal-Wishart (see Zeliner (1971)).

Two

hundred draws were taken from this distribution and the variance decomposition

of the 48-month ahead forecast error implied by each draw was calculated. The

reported standard error is the square root of the sample variance of the
estimated variance decompositions from the two hundred simulations.

59

References

Altug, S., "Gestation Lags and the Business Cycle: An Empirical Analysis,"
manuscript, University of Minnesota, 1985

Bernanke, B.S., "Alternative Explanations of the Money-Income Correlation,"
forthcoming, Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy, ed. by K.
Brunner and A. Meltzer, 1985.
Bernanke, B.S., and M. Gertler, "Banking in General Equilibrium," NBER Working
Paper No. 1647, 1985.

Blanchard, 0., and M. Watson, "Are Business Cycles All Alike," NBER Working
Paper No. 1392, 1984.
Cooley, T,F., and S.F. Leroy, "Atheoretical Macroeconometrics: A Critique,"
Journal of Monetary Economics 16 (1985), 283-308.
Doan, T., Litterinan, R., and C. Sims, "Forecasting and Conditional Projection
Using Realistic Prior Distributions," NBER Working Paper No. 1202, 1983.
Eichenbaum, M.S.,, Hansen, L.P., and K.J. Singleton, "A Time Series Analysis of

Representative Agent Models of Consumption and Leisure Choice Under
Uncertainty," manuscript, Carnegie-Mellon University, 1985.

Fischer, S. "Long-term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the Optimal Money
Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 85 (1977):191-205.

Fischer, S., and R.C. Merton, "Macroeconomics and Finance: The Role of the
Stock Market," in K. Brunner and A. Meltzer eds. Essays on Macroeconomic
Implications of Financial and Labor Markets and Political Processes,
Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy, Vol. 21 (l984):57-lO8.

Garber, P.M., and R.G. King, "Deep Structural Excavation? A Critique of Euler
Equation Methods," NEER Technical Working Paper, No. 31, 1983.

Hamilton, J.D., "Oil and the Macroeconomy since World War II," Journal

Political

of

Economy, Vol. 91 (1983): 228-248.

Hansen, G., "Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle,"
Economics, 16 (1985):309-328.

Journal

of Monetary

Kang, H., "The Effects of Detrending in Granger-Causality Tests," Journal of
Business and Economic Statistics, Vol. 3 (1985):344-349.

Kareken, J.H. and N. Wallace, eds. Models of Monetary Economies, Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 1980.

60

King, R., and C. Plosser, "Money, Credit, and Prices in a Real Business Cycle
Economy," American Economic Review, 74 (l984):363-380.
King, R. and C. Plosser, "Nominal Surprises, Real Factors and Propagation
Mechanisms," Department of Economics, University of Rochester, 1985.

Kydland, F.E., "Labor-Force Heterogeneity and the Business Cycle," in K.
Brunner and A. Meltzer eds. Essays on Macroeconomic Implications of
Financial and Labor Markets and Political Processes, Carnegie-Rochester
Series on Public Policy, Vol. 21 (1984):173-208.

Kydland, F.E., and E.F. Prescott, "Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,"
Econometrica, 50 (November 1982), 1345-1370.

R. and

L. Weiss, "Money, Real Interest Rates, and Output: A
Litterman,
Re-interpretation of Postwar U.S. Data," Econometrica, 53 (l985):129-156.
Long, J. and C. Plosser, "Real Business Cycles," Journal of Political Economy,
91 (1983):39-69.
Lucas, R. E., Jr., "Equilibrium in a Pure Currency Economy," Economic Inquiry,
Vol. 18 (1980):203-220.

Lucas, RoE., Jr., "Money in a Theory of Finance," in K. Brunner and A. Meltzer
eds. Essays on Macroeconomic Implications of Financial and Labor Markets
and Political Processes, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, Vol. 21 (1984):9-46.

Lucas, R.E., Jr., "Models of Business Cycles," manuscript, University of
Chicago, (1985).

Lucas, R.E., Jr., and N.L. Stokey, "Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in an

Economy without Capital," Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 12
(1983):55-93.

and N. L. Stokey, "Money and Interest in a Cash-in-Advance
Lucas, R.E., Jr.,
Economy," CMSEMS discussion paper No. 628, Northwestern University, 1984.

Mankiw, N.G., Rotemberg, J.J., and L.H. Summers, "Intertemporal Substitution
C
Journal
of
Vol.
Economics,
in Macroeconomics,"
kiarterly
(1985) :225-252.

McCallum, B.T., "Price-Level Stickiness and the Feasibility of Monetary
Stabilization Policy with Rational Expectations," Journal of Political
Economy, (1977) Vol. 85.
McCallum, B.T., "A Reconsideration of Sims' Evidence Concerning Monetarism,"
Economic Letters, 13 (1983a):l67-17l.

61

McCallum, B.T., "The Role of Overlapping-Generations Models in Monetary
Economics," in K. Brunner and A. Meltzer, Money, Monetary Policy and
Financial Institutions, Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy, Vol.
18 (1983b):9-44.
McCalluni, B.T., "On 'Real' and 'Sticky-Price' Theories of the Business Cycle,"
manuscript. Carnegie-Mellon University, 1985.

Mehra, R. and E.G. Prescott, "The Equity Premium: A Puzzle," Journal of
Monetary Economics, Vol. 15, (l985):145-l62.

Miron, J.A., "Seasonal Fluctuations and the Life Cycle-Permanent Income Model
of Consumption," manuscript, 1985.
Modigliani, F., "New Development on the Oligopoly Frontier," Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 66 (l958):215-33.
"The
F.,
Should we Forsake
Monetarist Controversy or,
Stabilization Policies?" American Economic Review, Vol. 67, No. 2

Modigliani,

(1977) : 1-19.

Nelson, C.R., and C.I. Plosser, "Trends and Random Walks in Macroeconomic Time
Series: Some Evidence and Implications," Journal of Monetary Economics,
10, (1982):129-l62.

Prescott, E.C., "Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement," forthcoming,
Carnegie Rochester Conference on Public Policy, ed. by A. Meltzer and
K.S. Brunner, 1985.

Sargent, T.J., "A Classical Macroeconometric Model for the United States,"
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 84 (l976):207-237.
Sims, C.A., "Comparison of Interwar and Postwar Business Cycles: Monetarism
Reconsidered," American Economic Review, 70 (l980a):25O-257.
Sims, C.A., "Macroeconomics and Reality," Econometrica, 48 (1980b):l-48.

Svensson, L.E.O., "Money and Asset Prices in a Cash-in-Advance Economy,"
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 93 (1985):9l9-944.

Taylor, J., "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts, Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 88 (l98O):1-23.
R.
"Asset Return
Townsend,
Anomalies: A Choice-Theoretic, Monetary
Explanation," manuscript, Carnegie-Mellon University, 1982.

Zellner, A., An Introduction to Bayesian Inference in Econometrics, New York:
Wiley, 1971.

62

Table 4.1

Decomposition of Variance of Alny.

49,2-83,6 52,1-79.12 52,1-83,6 59.)2-79,12 59,2-83,6
**

93
(4)

2

A1nM
(4)

94

92

92

87

(4)

(4)

(5)

(6)

6

8

8

13

(4)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Probability Values: Gr'anger causality of Alny:
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

A lnMt+j .158

.189

.185

.230

Probability

values: Granger causality of A

.035

.024

.025

.079

0.00
.029

.028

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
lnM+j 0.00
*
Entries give the percentage of the forecast error in the error variance
A

accounted for by the orthogonalized innovations in the listed variables. The

order of orthogonalization is as listed. Standard errors are displayed in
parentheses.

**Alnyt denotes the growth rate of industrial output at time t
and A ln M+i denotes the change in the growth rate of the stock of money
at time t.
.Probability values for the null hypothesis that the lagged coefficients of the
given variable in the regression equation for Alny are zero.
..Probability values for the null hypothesis that the lagged coefficients of the
given variable in the regression equation for A2lnM+j are zero.

Table 5.1
Decomposition of Variance of 1ny.

49,2-83,6 52,1-79,12 52,1-83,6 59,2-79,12 59,2-83,6
my

mM

41

27

28

12

20

(13)

(11)

(13)

(8)

(11)

25

64

59

79

67

(14)
34

(14)
9

(16)
13

(12)
9

(14)
13

(7)

(8)

(12)

(8)

(8)

Probability values for H,:

0.00

.414

lnM+j .003
*

0.00
.201
.019

0.00
.578
.017

0.00
.009
.032

0.00
.127
.006

Entries give the percentage of the forecast error in the error variance

accounted for by the orthogonalized innovations in the listed variables. The
order of orthogonalization is as listed. Standard errors are displayed in
parentheses.
denotes the inflation
**lny denotes the in of industrial output at time t,
rate tbetween time t-1 and time t, and lnM+j denotes the in of the stock of
money at time t.
.Probability values for the null hypothesis that the coefficients of lagged
are zero.
values of variable x in the regression equation for

Table 5.2
Decomposition of Variance of

49,2-83,6 52,1-79,12 52,1-83,6 59,2-79,12 59,2-83,6
83
(10)

my

62

29

42

(12)

(12)

(9)

(11)

36

22

48

25

(8)

(13)

(12)

(14)

(13)

11

19

17

23

33

(7)

(10)

(9)

(10)

6

mM

45

values for the null hypothesis H<:

Probability

lnMt+1

(10)

0.00
.912

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

.246

.703

.090

.342

.171

.010

.117

.004

.001

*Entries give the percentage of the forecast error in the error variance
accounted for by the orthogonalized innovations in the listed variables. The

order of orthogonalization is as listed. Standard errors are displayed in
parentheses.

denotes the detrended in level of industrial output at time t,
denotes the detrended rate of inflation between time t-1 and time t, and

-

denotes the detrended ln level of the stock of money at time t.

.Probability values for the null hypothesis that the coefficients of lagged
values of variable x in the regression equation for lny are zero.

Table 5.3

Decomposition of Variance of lny

zMnyt

49,2-83,6

52,1-79,12 52,1-83,6 59,2-79,12 59,2-83,6

93

92

93

86

85

(3)

(4)

(4)

(6)

(6)

1

3

1

8

5

(3)

(2)

(5)

(3)

(2)

lnMt+

(3)

5

6

6

Ii

(3)

(4)

(4)

(5)

Probability

values for HA,,:

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

.979

.937

.957

.197

.319

AlnM+i .314

.259

.421

.238

.724

give the percentage of the forecast error in

*Entries
accounted

the error variance

for by the orthogonalized innovations in the listed variables. The

order of orthogonalization is as listed. Figures in parentheses are
corresonding standard errors.

**lny denotes the growth rate of industrial output at time t,

denotes the growth rate in inflation rate at time t, and lnM+j denotes the
growth rate in the stock of money at time t.

•Probability values for the null hypothesis that the coefficients on lagged
values

of variable /x in the regression equation for lny are zero.

Table 5.4
Decomposition of Variance of

lny
rbt

59,2-79,12

81

80

70

66

(6)

(7)
11
(5)

(7)

(6)

24

27

(7)

(6)

3
(3)
12
(5)

lnM

*Entries

3

(4)

(4)

4

(2)

(3)

(3)

(3)

zlnM

Probability

lnM÷j

rS

3

6
(3)

lny

59,2-83,6 59,2-79,12

59,2-83,6

values for H:

lny
r

0.00

.005

.087

.004

.970

.758

.628

.127

lnM+j .633

.282

0.00
.765

0.00

.659
.108

.608

give the percentage of the forecast error in the error variance

accounted for by the orthogonalized innovations in the listed variables. The

order of orthogonalization is as listed.
corresponding standard errors.

Figures in parentheses are

**lnyt denotes the growth rate of industrial output at time t, 7r denotes
the growth rate in inflation rate at time t, lnM +1 denotes the growth rate
in the in of the stock of money at time t, r denotes the ex post real rate of

return on Treasury securities at time t, and r denotes the real rate of
return on stocks at time t.
.Probability values for the null hypothesis that the coefficients of lagged

values of variable zx in the regression equation for lny are
zero.

Table 5.5
Decomposition of Variance of lny

59,2-83,6

lny
rbt

27

(8)

4

27

(4)

(11)

(11)

mM

34

(8)

22

lnir

59,2-83,6 59,2-79,12

59,2-79,12

27

lnyf

(10)
14

r5t

(9)

20
(9)

48

19

(11)

mMt+i

(7)

17
(10)

7

21

(6)

(9)

52
(14)

39

1n7r

(12)

23

(14)

Probability values for
my

-

0.00

0.00

.111

.646

.096

.408
.060

my

-

0.00

0.00

.148

.061

.194
- .612
.060
lnM÷j .224
lnM+j .074
*Entries give the percentage of the forecast error in the error variance
accounted for by the orthogonalized innovations in the listed variables. The
order of orthogonalization is as listed. Figures in parentheses are
-

corresponding standard errors.

denotes the detrended in level of industrial output at time t,
denotes the detrended rate of inflation rate at time t,blnMt+1 denotes the
detrended in level of the stock of money at time t, r deiotes the ex post
real rate of return on Treasury securities at time t, and r denotes the real
rate of return on stocks at time t.
•Probability values for the null hypothesis that the coefficients of lagged
values of variable x in the regression equation for
are zero.

Table 5.6
Decomposition

of Variance of:

lnyt

lnyt
r5

lnyt

59,2-83,6
66

59,2-79,12

(7)

(6)

24

24

(6)

(5)

3

6

(3)

(5)

4

4

(3)

(3)

3

3

AinM

t+1(2)

64

(2)

Probability values for H:

59,2-83,6 59,2-79,12
my

-

r5

23

18
(6)

(6)

18

26

(9)

(10)

rb

3

23

irt

(4)

16

(11)
16

(9)

(7)

mM t+i 46

12

(11)

(7)

Probability values for H:
0.00

0.00

.011

.071

.013

.554

.800

.053

.217

.627

.857

.049

.067

lnM+j .493

.266

lnMt÷i .295

.047

Alny

r

0.00

.006

.051

lny

error variance
in the listed variables. The

Entries give the percentage of the forecast error in the

accounted

for by the orthogonalized innovations
of
orthogonalization
is as listed. Figures in parentheses are standard
order
errors.

denotes the growth rate of industrial

output at time t,

denotes

**lny
the growth rate in inflation rate at time t, lnMt+j denotes the growth rate

in the stock of money at time t, y denotes the detrended in level of
industrial output at time t, inM'÷j denotes the detrended in level of the
s,ock of money, ir denotes the detrended rate of inflation at time t,
denotes the ex post real rate of return in Treasury securities at time t,
denotes the detrended level of inflation., and r denotes the real rate of

return on stocks at time t.
•Probability values for the null hypotheses that the coefficients of lagged
values
inyt

of the variables zx and x in the regression equations for lny and

respectively are zero.

Table 5.7
Decomposition of Variance of:
inyt

Amy

59,2-83,6

59,2-79,12

75

72

(6)

12

(4)

(4)

7

7

(4)

(4)

4

4

(3)

(3)

4

AInMt+1 3

Rst

18
(6)

23

18

25

(9)

(8)
16
(8)

12

-

(9)

(6)

7

(6)

mM

(3)

Probability values for

AlnM+j .240

In y -

(6)

10

0.00
.641
.416
.463

59,2-83,6 59,2-79,12

t+1 46
(13)

(9)

12
(8)

Probability values for

0.00
.037
.348
.584
.238

0.00
.080
lrt

.049
.213
.295

0.00
.013
.218
.200
.047

*Entries give the percentage of the forecast error in the error variance

accounted for by the orthogonalized innovations in the listed variables. The

order of orthogonalization is as listed. Figures in parentheses are
corresponding standard errors.
**Alnyt denotes the growth rate of industrial output at time t, &r denotes

the growth rate in inflation rate at time t, lnM+i denotes the growth rate
in the stock of money at time t, my - denotes tte detrended in level ofindustrial output, r - denotes the dettrended level of inflation, mM +1
denotes the detrendec in level of the stock of money, ARt denotes the hrst
difference of the mont.hiy nominal return on Treasury securities at time t,
R denotes the detrendd monthly nominal rate of return on Treasury
securities at time t, AR denotethe first difference of the nominal rate of
return on stocks at time t and R denotes the monthly detrended nominal rate
of return on stocks at time t.
Probability values for the null hypotheses that the coefficients of lagged

values of the variables Ax and x in the regression equation for Alny and
respectively,

are zero.

